Journal of a Second Voyage for the Discovery of a North-West Passage, 1821–23 (William Edward Parry, 1824)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1824 John Murray first edition (https://archive.org/details/journalofsecondv01parr). Parry's second Arctic voyage — winters at Winter Island and Igloolik, first sustained contact with the Inuit of the central Arctic; landmark ethnography.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

V  \  •       *     ,    •    „  ,  v  ^    <-,w 


^«to^tf*sy^r*:» 


*»^**^^^ 


***l<Km^%m&':**£m'i!«miik^ 


•Z^aV'-JBm^^^^vM^+wK^K^-.^ismv&MwvassMBinmwsm 


^32^a?ijssi^sr 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  A 

NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE 

FROM  THE  ATLANTIC  TO  THE  PACIFIC; 

PERFORMED  IN  THE  YEARS  1821—22—23, 
IN  HIS  MAJESTY  S  SHIPS 

FURY    AND    HECLA, 

UNDER  THE  ORDERS  OP 


CAPTAIN  WILLIAM  EDWARD  PARRY,  R.N.,  F.R.S., 


AND    COMMANDER   OF    THE   EXPEDITION 


ILLUSTRATED    BY    NUMEROUS    PLATES 


PUBLISHED  BY  AUTHORITY  OF  THE  LORDS  COMMISSIONERS 
OF  THE  ADMIRALTY. 


LONDON : 


JOHN    MURRAY, 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  ADMIRALTY,  AND  BOARD  OF  LONGITUDE. 


MDCCCXXIV. 


. 


'*k*m.'JkME^Sd 


vm-.Tia^j^r' 


LORD    VISCOUNT    MELVILLE 

FIRST  LORD  COMMISSIONER  FOR  EXECUTING  THE  OFFICE  OF  LORD 
HIGH  ADMIRAL  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND,  4c.  4c  &c. 

THIS    VOLUME 


THE  JOURNAL  OF  A  SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE 
FROM  THE  ATLANTIC  TO  THE  PACIFIC, 

UNDERTAKEN  AND  EXECUTED  UNDER  THE  AUSPICES  OF  HIS  LORDSHIP, 

IS    INSCRIBED 
WITH  THE  GREATEST  RESPECT  AND  GRATITUDE, 

BY  HIS  OBLIGED  AND  FAITHFUL  SERVANT, 

WILLIAM  EDWARD  PARRY. 


London,  March,  1S24. 


?gms. 


■■.•aBTJiw^aww. 


^"J^  ^m-^-vvr  vita-  jjm^m^swi 


Introduction 

Explanation  of  Technical  Terms 

Official  Instructions 

CHAPTER  I. 

Passage  across  the  Atlantic— Removal  of  Stores  from  the  Nautilus  Transport,  at  the  margin 
of  the  Ice— Departure  of  the  Nautilus  for  England  -  Enter  the  Ice  in  Hudson's  Strait— 
Perilous  Situation  of  the  Hecla,  and  loss  of  her  Anchor- Meet  with  the  Hudson's-Bay 
ships— Passage  up  the  Strait,  and  communication  with  the  Natives  inhabiting  the  Northern 
shores— Pass  the  Trinity  Islands  of  Fox— Arrival  off  Southampton  Island,  where  the 
researches  of  the  Expedition  commence  .... 

CHAPTER  II. 

Review  of  the  geographical  Information  obtained  by  the  Researches  of  former  Navigators  on  the 
coast  of  the  American  Continent,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Wager  River— Discover  and 
enter  The  Duke  of  York's  Bay,  supposing  it  to  be  a  Passage  into  the  sea  called  The  Welcome 
—Leave  The  Duke  of  York's  Bay,  and  proceed  to  the  North- Westward— Passage  of  The 
Frozen  Strait  and  arrival  in  Repulse  .Bay— Continuity  of  Land  there— Observations  on 
Shore— Remarks  concerning  the  Geography,  Tides,  and  Natural  History  of  this  part  of 
the  Continental  Coast  ..•••• 

CHAPTER  III. 

Return  to  the  Eastward  through  the  Frozen  Strait— Discovery  of  Hurd  Channel- Examined 
in  a  Boat— Loss  of  the  Fury's  Anchor-Providential  Escape  of  the  Fury  from  Shipwreck 
—Anchor  in  Duckett  Cove— Further  Examination  of  the  Coast  by  Boats  and  Walking- 
Parties— Ships  proceed  through  Hurd  Channel— Are  drifted  by  the  Ice  back  to  South- 
ampton Island— Unobstructed  Run  to  the  Entrance  of  a  large  Inlet  leading  to  the  North- 
Westward-Ships  made  fast  by  Hawsers  to  the  Rocks— Further  Examination  of  the  Inlet 
commenced  in  the  Boats 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Hoppner's  Inlet  entered  and  Surveyed  by  the  Boats— Continuity  of  Land  there  determined— 
Proceed  to  examine  another  opening  leading  to  the  Westward— Favourable  Appearance 
of  a  continued  Passage  in  that  Direction-Meet  with  some  Esquimaux— Arrival  in  Ross 
Bay,  being  the  termination  of  Lyon  Inlet— Discovery  and  Examination  of  various  Creeks 
—Return  to  the  Ships,  after  finding  the  Land  entirely  continuous -Some  account  of  the 
Natural  History  of  this  part  of  the  Coast  .  •  •  • 


56 


82 


IXWI 


w* 


TQ 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  V. 


PAGE 


Further  Examination  in  the  Boats  for  the  purpose  of  connecting  the  Shores  of  Lyon  Inlet  with 
that  of  Gore  Bay— Detained  by  the  Ice— Reach  Gore  Bay — Continuity  of  the  Land  deter- 
mined— Fresh  detention  by  the  Ice — Boats   carried    over-land — Return  to    the   Ships 

Progress  out  of  the  Inlet  prevented  by  the  Ice— The  Fury  grounds  upon  a  Rock— Anchor 
in  Safety  Cove— Heavy  Easterly  Gales— Proceed  out  of  the  Inlet— Arrival  in  a  Bay  on  the 
South  side  of  Winter  Island — Ships  secured  in  Winter-Quarters  .  .  103 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Precautions  for  the  security  of  the  Ships  and  their  Stores — And  for  the  Health  and  Comfort  of 
the  Crews — Establishment  of  Theatrical  Entertainments  and  Schools — Erection  of  an  Ob- 
servatory and  House  on  Shore — State  of  Health  at  this  period — Partial  Disruption  of  the 
Ice  in  the  Bay — Anchors  and  Cables  taken  to  the  Shore — Gradual  Increase  of  Cold 
appearance  of  the  Aurora  Borealis  on  several  occasions,  and  various  other  Meteorological 
Phenomena  to  the  close  of  the  Year  1821  ...  jjq 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Many  Foxes  caught — Continued  Open  Water  in  the  Offing— Partial  disruption  of  the  Ice  in  the 
Bay — Meteorological  Phenomena  and  Temperature  of  Animals — Arrival  of  a  Tribe  of 
Esquimaux — First  Meeting  and  subsequent  Intercourse  with  them — Esquimaux  in  want  of 
Provisions — Supplied  with  Bread-dust — Some  account  of  a  Sealing  Excursion1  with  them 
— Fresh  disruption  of  the  Ice  in  the  Bay — Closing  of  the  Winter  Theatre—  Meteorological 
Phenomena  till  the  end  of  February  1822  .  .,  ,  j^q 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Charts  drawn  by  the  Esquimaux — Illness  among  them — A  Journey  performed  across  Winter 
Island — Sufferings  of  the  Party  by  Frost — Further  notice  of  the  Esquimaux  Charts De- 
parture of  some  of  these  People,  and  a  separate  Village  established  on  the  Ice Various 

-Okotook  and  his  Wife  brought  on  board — Anecdotes  relating 
-Ships  released  from  the  Ice  by  sawing 


Meteorological  Phenomena- 
to  them— 


183 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Increased  extent  of  open  Water  in  the  Offing — A  Travelling  Party  despatched  to  the  North- 
ward— Unsuccessful  attempt  to  raise  Vegetables  on  Shore — Decease  of  James  Pringle 
—  A  party   of  Esquimaux  build  Huts  near  the   Ships— Return   of  the  Travellers,  and 

account  of  their  Journey— First  appearance  of  the    Plants — Birds   become  numerous 

Commence  cutting  a  Canal  through  the  Ice  for  liberating  the  Ships— Illness  and  decease 
of  John  Reid  and  William  Souter — Breaking-up  of  the  Ice  in  the  Bay — Account  of  Winter 
Island — Abstract  of  Observations  made  there 

CHAPTER  X. 

Departure  from  Winter  Island— Meet  with  some  Esquimaux  travelling  to  the  Northward- 
Obstructions  and  danger  from  the  Ice  and  Tides— Discovery  of  the  Barrow  River,  and  its 


223 


o: 


■■.>U*.V»,«JIB  * 


CONTENTS. 

Fall— Favourable  Passage  to  the  Northward— Arrival   off  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and*^ 
Hccla— Progress  opposed  by  a  fixed  barrier  of  Ice— Communicate  with  the  Natives  of 
Igloolik— Unsuccessful  attempts  to  get  between  the  Ice  and  the   Land— Land  upon  the 
Calthorpe  Islands— The  Fury  drifted  by  the  Ice  between  two  Islands— Account  of  a  Jour- 
ney performed  in  Sledges  up  an  Inlet  to  the  Westward      .  .  .  .  249 

CHAPTER  XL 

Remarkable  instance  of  local  Attraction  on  the  Magnetic  Needles— Occasional  separation  of 
a  portion  of  the  fixed  Ice— A  Whale  killed— Other  Charts  drawn  by  the  Esquimaux- 
Account  of  a  Journey  to  the  Narrows  of  the  Strait— Discovery  of  the  Sea  to  the  West- 
ward—Total disruption  of  the  Ice  at  the  Eastern  entrance  of  the  Strait— A  second 
instance  of  local  Attraction  on  the  Compasses— Sail  through  the  Narrows,  and  again 
stopped  by  fixed  Ice— Account  of  several  land  Journeys  and  boat  Excursions— Observa- 
tions on  the  Tides — Continued  obstacles  from  fixed  Ice      .  .  296 

CHAPTER  XII. 

A  Journey  performed  along  the  South  Shore  of  Cockburn  Island— Confirmation  of  an  Outlet 
to  the  Polar  Sea— Partial  disruption  of  the  old  Ice,  and  formation  of  new— Return 
through  the  Narrows  to  the  Eastward— Proceed  to  examine  the  Coast  to  the  North-east- 
ward—Fury's Anchor  broken— Stand  over  to  Igloolik  to  look  for  Winter-quarters— 
Excursion  to  the  Head  of  Quilliam  Creek— Ships  forced  to  the  Westward  by  gales  of 
Wind— A  Canal  sawed  through  the  Ice,  and  the  Ships  secured  in  their  Winter  Station- 
Continued  visits  to  the  Esquimaux,  and  arrival  of  some  of  the  Winter-Island  Tribe Pro- 
posed plan  of  operations  in  the  ensuing  Spring                   .                 .  #  340 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Preparations  for  the  Winter— Various  Meteorological  Phenomena  to  the  close  of  the  year  1822 
— Sickness  among  the  Esquimaux— A  Hospital  built  near  the  Ships  for  their  accommoda- 
tion—Meteorological Phenomena  to  the  end  of  March -Abstract  of  the  comparative 
mean  Winter  temperature  at  Melville  Island,  Winter  Island,  and  Igloolik  .  .  375 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Various  Journeys  to  the  Esquimaux  Stations— Illness  and  decease  of  Mr.  Alexander  Elder- 
Preparations  for  the  Hecla's  return  to  England— Remarkable  Halos,  #c— Shooting  Parties 
stationed  at  Arlagnuk— Journeys  to  Quilliam  Creek— Arrival  of  Esquimaux  from  the 
Northward— Account  of  a  Journey  to  the  Westward  for  the  purpose  of  reaching  the  Polar 
Sea— The  Esquimaux  report  two  Fishing  Ships  having  been  wrecked— A  Journey  per- 
formed to  Cockburn  Island— Discovery  of  Murray  Maxwell  Inlet  .  .  423 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Extraordinary  disruption  of  Ice  in  Quilliam  Creek— Some  appearance  of  Scurvy  among  the 
Seamen  and  Marines— Account  of  a  Journey  with  Sledges  to  Cockburn  Island— Dis- 
covery of  Gifford  River— Commence  cutting  the  Ice  outside  the  Ships  to  release  them 
from  their  Winter-Quarters — Considerations   respecting  the  return  of  the  Expedition  to 


Pt 


I, 


CONTENTS. 


PAGE 


England— Unfavourable  state  of  the  Ice  at  the  Eastern  entrance  of  the  Strait— Proceed  to 
the  Southward— Ships  beset  and  drifted  up  Lyon  Inlet— Decease  of  Mr.  George  Fife — 
Final  release  from  the  Ice,  and  arrival  in  England— Remarks  upon  the  practicability  of  a 
North-West  Passage  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  459 

Some  further  Account  of  the  Esquimaux  of  Melville  Peninsula  and  the  adjoining  Islands ; 

more  particularly  Winter  Island  and  Igloolik        -...:.  492 


Vocabulary  of  Esquimaux  Words,  §-c. 


561 


DIRECTIONS  TO  THE  BINDER  FOR  INSERTING  THE  PLATES.        t 


Situation  of  His  Majesty's  Ships  Fury  and  Hecla 

at  Igloolik,  1822-23  .         .  Frontispiece 

Canoe  of  the  Savage  Islands,  Hudson's  Strait,  to 

face  page .14 

Plan  of  Duke  of  York  Bay  .        .        .         .48 

Plan  of  Hurd  Channel  .  .  .  .  .74 
Cutting  into  Winter  Island,  October,  1821  .  118 
Interior  of  an    Esquimaux    Snow-hut,    Winter 

Island,  1822 160 

Groupe  of  Esquimaux,  1822  ....  163 
An  Esquimaux  watching  a  Seal  .  .  .  171 
Manner  of  holding  the  line  when  a  Walrus  is  struck  172 
Esquimaux  listening  at  a  Seal-hole,  &c.  .        173 

An  Esquimaux  watching  a  Seal-hole  .         .     172 

An  Esquimaux  creeping  into  the  Passage  of  a 

Snow-hut 187 

Esquimaux  Chart,  No.  I.  .         .        .        .197 

Ditto      ditto,  No.  II.  .  ...         19S 

Arnaneelia,  a  native  of  Winter  Island,  1822     .      207 

Esquimaux  Chart,  No.  III.        ....  252 

Fall  of  the  Barrow 236 

Summer  Tents  of  the  Esquimaux.  Igloolik,  1822,  271 
An  Esquimaux  of  Igloolik,  in  a  bird's-skin  jac- 
ket, §-c 274 

Sledges  of  the  Esquimaux  .         ' .        .        290 


Western  outlet  of  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla  351 
Esquimaux  House  built  of  ice  358 

Takkeelikkeeta,  an  Esquimaux  of  Igloolik,  1823  391 
Groupe  of  Esquimaux  at  Igloolik  .  .  .  403 
Groupe  of  Esquimaux  at  Igloolik,  1823  .  .418 
Nakahu  and  his  Wife  Oomna  .         .         .    436 

Esquimaux  building  a  Snow-hut  .  .  ',  499 
Esquimaux  killing  Deer  in  a  Lake  .         .     50S 

Esquimaux  Children  Dancing,  Igloolik,  1823  530 
Esquimaux  Implements,  Weapons,  &c.(Fig.  1  to 

12.) 548 

Ditto  ditto  (Fig.  13  to  27.)  .      559 

The  Charts,  fyc,  at  the  end  of  the  hook  to  he  placed 
in  the  following  order  : 

General  Chart,  shewing  the  track  of  the  Fury  and 

Hecla,  &c.  &c. 
Chart  of  the  Northern  Shore  of  Hudson's  Strait,  kc.&zc. 
Chart  of  the  North-eastern  Coast  of  America,  &c.  from 

Lat.  64|°  to  67°  40'. 
Ditto  from  Latitude  67°  40'  to  70o  15'. 
Appearances  of  Lands,  No.  1. 
Ditto,        ,      .  .  No.  2. 

Ditto,  .  .  No.  3. 

Ditto,  ,  .  No.  4. 


<:vMBmwsmrjMvv**m*snma* 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE  discoveries  made  by  the  Expedition  to  the  North-west  in  the 
years  1819-20,  being  such  as  to  afford  a  strong  presumption  in  favour  of 
the  existence  of  a  passage  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  in  that  direc- 
tion, while  they  served  also  to  point  out  the  most  probable  means  of  its 
accomplishment,  His  Majesty,  on  the  representation  of  Lord  Viscount 
Melville,  commanded  another  attempt  to  be  made  to  effect  that  object ; 
and  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty  were  pleased  once 
more  to  honour  me  with  the  command  of  an  Expedition,  to  be  equipped 
at  Deptford  for  that  purpose.  The  Hecla  having  been  found  well 
adapted  to  this  service,  a  second  ship  of  precisely  the  same  class  was 
now  selected,  and  I  received  my  commission  for  His  Majesty's  ship  the 
Fury,  of  three  hundred  and  seventy-seven  tons  burthen,  on  the  30th 
of  December  1820.  The  Hecla  was  re-commissioned  by  Captain 
George  Francis  Lyon,  on  the  4th  of  January  following. 

The  officers  who  accompanied  the  former  Expeditions  having  volun- 
teered their  services,  their  Lordships  were  pleased  to  re-appoint  such 
as  the  present  establishment  would  admit.  The  same  preference  was 
likewise  given  to  such  of  the  former  crews  as  were  considered  fit  for 
this  service ;  and  a  great  number  of  other  seamen  also  coming  forward 
to  enter,  the  ships  were  speedily  well  manned.  The  Reverend  George 
Fisher,  who  had  accompanied  the  Expedition  to  Spitzbergen  in  1818, 
was  now,  at  the  recommendation  of  the  President  and  Council  of  the 
Royal  Society,  appointed  Astronomer ;  and  it  being  in  every  respect 
desirable  that  a  Chaplain  should  form  a  part  of  our  establishment, 


k,^kivTW«'X'V\,^*!^'»,VT1*'1^».,k>n.T>> 


RANK, 


INTRODUCTION. 


Mr.  Fisher  also  received  an  order  to  act  in  that  capacity.  A  second 
Lieutenant,  two  able  seamen,  and  a  corporal  of  marines,  were  added 
to  the  former  complement ;  and  the  distribution  of  the  whole  on  board 
each  ship  will  be  seen  in  the  annexed  Table. 


Commander 

Chaplain  and  Astronomer     . 

Lieutenants         .         .         -j 

Surgeon  .... 
Purser  .... 
Assistant  Surgeon 


Midshipmen 

Assistant  Surveyor 

Clerk 

Gunner 

Boatswain 

Carpenter    . 

Greenland  Master 

Greenland  Mate 


OS  BOARD  THE  FURY. 


Officers'  Names. 


No. 


ON  BOARD  THE  HECLA. 


Officers'  Names. 


Cook 

Leading-Men 
Quarter-Master  . 
Gunner's-Mate  . 
Boatswain's-Mate 
Carpenter's-Mate 
Armourer's-Mate 
Saihnaker  . 
Able  Seamen 

Marines. 


William  Edward  Parry 
George  Fisher 
Joseph  Nias 
Andrew  Reid 
John  Edwards 
Willis  m  Harvey  Hooper 
James  Skeoch 
John  Henderson 
Francis  Rawdon  M 
James  ('lark  Ross 
(in  Fury  only)  John 
James  Halse  . 
James  Scallon 
William  Smith 
George  Fiddis 
John  Allison  . 
George  Crawford 


Crozier 


Bushnan 


John  Spackman 


Total 


1 
1 

1 
1 
1 
1 

1 

4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
24 

] 
1 
5 

1 

60 


George  Francis  Lyon 

v  Henry  Parkyns  Hoppner 
{Charles  Palmer 
Alexander  Fisher 
John  Jermain 
Allan  M'Laren 
Joseph  Sherer 
Charles  Richards    . 
William  Nelson  Griffiths 
Edward  Bird 
William  Mogg 
Joseph  Macklin 
Joseph  Lilley 
Charles  Purfer 
George  Fife     . 
Alexander  Elder     . 


Charles  Wise 


No. 


1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 

1 

4 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
24 

1 
1 
5 


58 


■r--  i»MBi  fcfcgWJiKM^.^-  •  TAtrm  ^m^ ;  vr  ra-  •^smanrw^mm 


rBWXO^vWv         'V.y*.  vrsy»».\i-  ->«.ry 


INTRODUCTION. 


111 


The  mode  of  doubling  and  fortifying  the  ships  differed  in  no  niaterial 
circumstance  from  that  before  employed,  which  was  found  to  have 
afforded  the  greatest  degree  of  strength,  consistently  with  the  requisite 
attention  to  the  stowage  and  sailing  qualities,  of  which  perhaps  any 
ship  is  capable.  In  the  exterior  equipment  of  the  hulls,  the  only  alte- 
rations worthy  of  notice  consisted  in  increasing  the  thickness  of  the 
doubling  to  six  inches,  to  give  the  ships  some  additional  stability  ;  and 
in  making  the  rudder-cases  much  larger,  in  order  to  allow  the  rudders 
more  room  for  shipping  and  unshipping,  whereby  that  operation  is 
much  facilitated.  The  ships  were  barque-rigged  as  before ;  but  in 
order  to  increase  our  resources  in  stores  of  every  kind,  it  was  suggested 
by  my  friend,  Captain  George  Cheyne,  that  it  would  be  advantageous  to 
adopt  the  plan  of  "  equalized"  fore-masts  and  main-masts,  which  had 
of  late  been  partially  introduced  into  our  naval  service,  at  the  recom- 
mendation of  Vice-Admiral  Sir  Thomas  Byam  Martin,  Comptroller 
of  His  Majesty's  Navy.  An  advantage  somewhat  less  obvious  than 
that  just  mentioned,  was  the  appointment  of  two  ships  of  exactly 
the  same  size  in  every  respect.  The  idea  usually  entertained  of 
the  necessity  of  having  one  of  the  two  vessels  thus  employed,  a 
small  one  for  the  purpose  of  going  into  shoaler  water,  is  in  my 
opinion  an  erroneous  one.  The  examination  of  shoal  and  uncertain 
passages  is  best  conducted  in  boats,  which  may  be  equipped  and 
despatched  at  five  minutes'  warning,  while  a  small  vessel  intended 
more  expressly  for  this  purpose  will,  after  all,  draw  as  much  water 
as  the  larger  one  within  two  or  three  feet,  which  difference  is  in  reality 
but  a  trifling  one.  Allowing,  however,  that  some  benefit  may  be 
derived  in  this  way  from  the  services  of  a  smaller  vessel,  it  is  by  no 
means  to  be  put  into  competition  with  the  inevitable  disadvantages 


g 


a  2 


i 


v  jzh**:  *■*?*' <*-*■  •*  vex?,* 


IV 


INTRODUCTION. 


arising  from  her  confined  stowage,  and  her  incapacity  to  receive  the 
crew  of  the  other  vessel  in  case  of  serious  and  irreparable  injury  hap- 
pening to  the  latter.  Any  vessel  unable  to  carry  every  item  of  her 
own  resources,  must  at  some  period  or  other  of  the  voyage  become  a 
burthen,  and,  in  case  of  separation,  helpless  and  inefficient;  a  contin- 
gency which  there  is  no  necessity  for  risking.  If  to  what  has  just 
been  stated  be  added  the  advantages,  which  every  seaman  will  readily 
appreciate,  of  each  ship  being  enabled  to  furnish  her  consort,  on  any 
occasion  of  loss  or  damage,  with  stores  of  a  size  and  nature  exactly 
suited  to  her  wants,  no  doubt  can,  I  think,  exist  of  the  expediency  of 
having  the  two  ships  precisely  similar. 

So  rigidly  was  this  principle  adhered  to  in  the  equipment  of  the 
present  Expedition,  that,  taking  into  consideration  the  improbability  of 
both  ships  sustaining  losses  in  the  same  articles,  our  supply  of  stores 
might  almost  be  considered  as  doubled  by  this  arrangement.  Thus, 
for  instance,  the  fore-masts  and  main-masts  were  not  only  "  equalized  " 
in  each  ship,  but  the  dimensions  of  these,  and  of  every  thing  belonging 
to  them,  were  precisely  alike  in  both,  so  that  any  article  belonging  to 
either  of  these  four  masts  might  be  transferred  from  ship  to  ship,  and 
at  once  applied  to  its  proper  use,  without  selection,  trial,  or  alteration 
of  any  kind.  In  the  course  of  the  following  Narrative,  it  will  be  seen 
what  essential  service  was  derived  from  this  plan  in  the  indispensable 
article  of  anchors,  on  which  the  safety  of  a  ship  so  often  and  so  entirely 
depends.  I  have  been  thus  explicit  in  stating  some  of  the  advantages 
-of  this  arrangement,  from  a  conviction  of  the  absolute  necessity  of 
resorting  to  it  in  the  equipment  of  two  ships  that  must  necessarily  be 
dependent  solely  on  their  own  resources,  for  a  long  and  uncertain 
period  of  time. 


>-  • ,  YA*m  *sm^  v  >t  ya»-  awawan 


**XfK£A\itt?: 


INTRODUCTION.  v 

Some  material  alterations  were  made  in  the  interior  arrangements, 
which  experience  suggested  as  necessary  to  the  accommodation,  health, 
and  comfort  of  the  officers  and  men.     One  of  the  principal  of  these 
consisted  in  applying  a  thick  close  lining  of  cork  all  round  the  ships' 
sides,  and  on  the  under  part  of  the  upper  decks,  fore  and  aft.     Shut- 
ters and  plugs  of  the  same  material  were  also  fitted  to  every  window, 
sky-light,  and  illuminator,  so  as  completely  to  surround  the  inhabited 
parts  of  the  ships,   during   the  winter  months,  with  this  substance. 
Care  being  thus  taken   to  prevent  the  rapid  escape  of  the  warmth, 
recourse  was  also  had  to  the  most  effectual  means  of  producing  and 
distributing  it.     With  this  view,  an  apparatus  was  fixed  on  the  orlop 
deck  of  each  ship,  between  the  sail-room  and  the  main  hatchway,  on  a 
plan  proposed  and  executed  by  Mr.  Sylvester,  for  conveying  a  current 
of  heated  air  into  the  several  inhabited  apartments.     It  is  described 
by  Mr.  Sylvester  to  "  consist  of  a  wrought-iron  vessel,  about  twenty- 
two  inches  square,  placed   upon  pillars  resting  on  a  cast-iron  frame 
upon  the  beams  of  the  orlop  deck.     This  vessel,  or  cockle,  was  four 
feet  high,  close  at  the  top,  having  an  opening  in  front  for  the  ash- 
pit  and  feeding-door,  and   another  behind  for  the  discharge  of  the 
smoke  into  a  perpendicular  iron  tube.     The  fire-place  is  within  this 
vessel,  and  the  heat  is  given  to  its  interior  surface.     On  the  outside 
is  an  iron  covering  containing  tubes,  which  approach,  nearly  at  right 
angles,  to  the  surface  of  the  cockle ;  these  are  divided  into  two  por- 
tions, one  below  to  receive    the  cold  air,  which  impinges  upon   the 
cockle;  the  other  above,  for  the  discharge  of  the  warm  air.     These 
two  cavities  are  separated  from  each  other  by  a  second  casing  about 
four  feet  square  below,  for  the  cold  air,  and  terminating  in  two  feet 
square   at  the   upper-deck,  where   a  part  of   the   warm  air  is  dis- 


av»««>Maa 


VI 


INTRODUCTION. 


1 1 


:    ■ 


charged;  the  rest  is  conveyed  by  flues  on  each  side  the:  ship  to  the 
cabins  of  the  commander  and  other  officers.    The  velocity  of  the  warm 
air  current  through  an  aperture  two  feet  square  is  about  five  or  six 
feet  per  second."     This  stove  was  intended  by  the  inventor  to  con- 
sume only  five  pecks,  or  a  bushel  and  a  quarter  of  coals,  by  a  constant 
fire  throughout  the  twenty-four  hours ;   but  even  this  quantity  was 
found  more  than  sufficient,  except  during  the  most  severe  part  of  the 
second  winter.     The  galley-fire  was  turned  with  its  face  aft,  which 
served   to  impart   much   more  warmth,   as  well   as  a  more  cheerful 
appearance,  to  the  lower  deck.    This  plan  had  not  been  before  adopted 
because  it  was  understood  that  the  fire  would  not  draw  so  well ;  but 
the  reverse  of  this  was,  on  trial,  found  to  be  the  case. 

I  must  not  here  omit  to  notice  a  simple,  ingenious,  and  effectual 
contrivance,  now  first  adopted,  for  melting  snow  for  our  consumption 
as  water,  during  the  winter  months,  without  any  additional  expense  of 
fuel.  The  smoke  issuing  from  the  galley-fire,  and  indeed  its  heat 
generally,  does  little  or  no  service  beyond  the  ordinary  purposes  of 
cooking  to  which  it  is  applied.  It  occurred  to  Messrs.  Lambe  and 
Nicholson  to  occupy  a  portion  of  the  aperture  through  which  the 
smoke  ascends,  by  a  metallic  vessel  or  tank  of  considerable  capacity, 
allowing  the  smoke  to  pass  freely  up  on  each  side  of  it,  and  thus  to 
communicate  a  constant  heat  to  the  vessel.  In  the  top  of  the  tank  is 
a  large  circular  hole  for  supplying  it  with  snow  from  the  upper  deck, 
and  in  the  lower  part  is  inserted  a  cock  for  drawing  off  the  water. 
This  apparatus,  which  was  so  little  in  the  way  that  it  could  not  even 
be  seen,  produced  without  any  increase  of  fuel,  and  with  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  external  atmosphere  nearly  at  Zero,  sixty-five  gallons  of 
pure  water  from  morning  till  night;  a  quantity,  of  course,  more  than 


>m^»^y/>|    j  |  1 1|  |   ■    j  ||  |  f  I 


AM&f*;\Jii;yt*9?3'<W'fs*:'¥& 


INTRODUCTION. 


vn 


sufficient  for  our  whole  consumption,  had  there  been  any  occasion  to 
limit  the  expense  of  an  article  so  conducive  to  health  and  comfort. 

In  the  account  of  the  preceding  voyage,  it  has  been  stated  that  a 
serious  annoyance  arose,  during  the  winter,  from  the  accumulation  of 
moisture  and  ice  produced  by  the  condensation  of  the  breath  and  other 
vapours  in  the  ships'  companies'  bed-places.  It  was  determined,  there- 
fore, on  the  present  occasion,  to  do  away  with  these  both  for  the 
officers  and  men,  substituting  for  the  former  cots,  and  hammocks  for 
the  latter.  This  change  proved  extremely  beneficial,  by  increasing  the 
ventilation,  and  promoting  the  more  uniform  circulation  of  warm  air, 
which  had  before  been  materially  impeded  by  the  number  and  close- 
ness of  the  bulkheads. 

In  the  victualling  of  the  ships  several  alterations  were  likewise  made, 
which  the  experience  of  the  last  voyage  suggested.  The  principal 
object  being  to  stow  as  much  as  possible,  a  considerably  larger  supply 
than  before  of  the  meat  preserved  in  tin  cases  by  Messrs.  Gamble 
and  Co.,  was  now  furnished,  amounting  to  two  pounds  per  week  a 
man,  together  with  a  quart  of  vegetable  or  concentrated-meat  soups, 
for  a  period  of  three  years.  For  the  same  reason,  the  spirits  were 
supplied  at  thirty-five  per  cent,  above  proof,  to  be  reduced,  when 
issued,  by  means  of  a  hydrometer,  to  the  strength  of  that  usually  fur- 
nished to  the  navy  ;  by  which  expedient  the  stowage  was  economized 
in  the  proportion  of  an  increase  of  forty  gallons  on  every  hundred. 
For  one-half  of  the  proposed  supply  of  biscuit,  kiln-dried  flour  of  the 
best  quality  was  substituted,  to  be  baked  into  bread  during  the  winters ; 
three  hundred-weight  of  flour  occupying  only  the  same  space  as  one 
hundred-weight  of  biscuit.  A  considerable  portion  of  the  fore-hold 
was   also   partitioned  off  into   two   large   binns  or  bread-rooms,  for 


h 


y^A 


:>g>':/S7Nar>ogT 


a  <^vw#<^^^>-^j>^r-^(fef 


vm 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  stowage  of  biscuit  in  bulk,  which  method  would  have  been  more 
extensively  adopted,  but  from  the  fear  of  thus  incurring  loss  by 
damage.     The  rest  of  the  provisions  were  stowed  in  new  water-tight 

casks. 

The  whole  of  the  vinegar  was  concentrated  to  one-seventh  of  the 
ordinary  bulk,  as  well  for  economy  in  stowage,  as  to  avoid  loss  by 
freezing.      In  this   last  respect,  we   had   also   before   experienced  a 
serious  loss  in  the  still  more  important   article  of  lemon-juice,  in 
consequence  of  the  bottles  bursting  in  the  hold.     To  obviate  this, 
it  was  now  stowed  in  small  five-gallon  kegs  charred  within,  not  quite 
filled,  and  sufficiently  strong  to  resist  the  expansion  of  the  acid  in 
freezing.     The  whole  of  the  juice  was   squeezed  from  fresh  lemons 
for  our  use,  and  a  small  quantity  of  rum  added  to  each  keg  to  assist 
in  keeping    it    fluid  at  a  low  temperature.      In  addition  to  lemon- 
juice  and  sugar,  which  form  a  part  of  the  ordinary  diet  in  His  Majesty's 
Navy,  a  number  of  other  valuable  anti-scorbutics  were  liberally  sup- 
plied, consisting  of  carrots  preserved  in  tin  cases  by  Messrs.  Gamble 
and  Co.,  crystallized  lemon  acid,  cranberries,  lemon  marmelade,  tama- 
rinds, pickled  walnuts  and  cabbage,  essence  of  malt  and  hops,  essence 
of  spruce  with  molasses,  dried  herbs  for  tea,  and  a  quantity  of  the  seed 
of  mustard  and  cress  to  be  grown  as  circumstances  required.     A  large 
supply  of  potatoes  and  beet-root  was  also  furnished,  which  kept  tolera- 
bly well  for  the  first  two  or  three  months  after  leaving  England.     As 
we  had  found,  after  living  on  salt  provisions  for  some  time,  that  beef 
became  less  palatable,  and  was  also  less  digestible  than  pork,  we  now 
dispensed  with  carrying  any  salt  beef,  except  a  few  casks  corned  ex- 
pressly for  our  use  as  soon  as  the  fresh  meat  should  be  expended. 
When  these  arrangements  had  been  completed,  for  which  I  am  very 


l»g«^'»>W«MCT« 


I        O^^O^'^N  '.*>*  > 


INTRODUCTION. 


IX 


materially  indebted  to  the  suggestions  of  my  friend  Mr.  Hooper,  purser 
of  the  Fury,  the  ships  were  effectually  victualled  and  stored  for  a 
period  of  three  years.  During  the  progress  of  their  equipment  they 
were  occasionally  visited  by  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty 
and  the  Comptroller  of  the  Navy,  and  subsequently  by  Lord  Viscount 
Melville,  who  was  pleased  to  express  his  approbation  of  the  various 
arrangements.  As  however  the  ships,  when  completely  stowed,  were 
found  to  be  very  deep  in  the  water,  it  was  deemed  advisable,  to  prevent 
the  possibility  of  risk,  that  the  Expedition  should  be  accompanied  by 
a  transport  as  far  as  the  margin  of  the  ice,  in  order  to  relieve  them  of 
a  part  of  their  lading  in  crossing  the  Atlantic  ;  and  the  Nautilus,  of 
four  hundred  and  five  tons,  Lieutenant  William  Scrymgour  agent,  was 
appointed  by  the  Navy-Board  for  this  purpose.  A  portion  of  the 
weight  was  accordingly  removed  on  board  the  Nautilus  till  the  ships 
were  considered  to  be  in  safe  trim ;  and  some  extra  stores  were  also  put 
into  the  transport,  to  enable  us  to  complete  the  Expedition  to  the  time 
of  her  leaving  us.  Of  these  perhaps,  twenty  live  bullocks  and  a  quan- 
tity of  coals  (making  our  whole  supply  in  each  ship  one  hundred  and 
eighteen  chaldrons)  were  not  the  least  important. 

A  number  of  valuable  chronometers  and  instruments,  of  which  a 
list  is  here  subjoined,  were  embarked  on  board  each  ship ;  and  a  variety 
of  useful  experiments,  for  which  the  requisite  materials  were  provided, 
were  suggested  by  the  Council  of  the  Royal  Society,  to  be  conducted 
by  Mr.  Fisher  as  circumstances  might  permit  in  the  course  of  the 
voyage : — 


List  of  Instruments,  &c,  embarked  on  board  each  Ship, 


Astronomical  Clock,  by  Barrett,  the  property  of  Mr.  Fisher 

Chronometers 

0f  which,  three  of  those  on  board  the  Fury  were  the  property  of  Mr.  Fisher, 

one  belonging  to  Captain  Parry,  and  four  sent  on  trial  by  their  respective 

makers.     (See  Account  of  Chronometers  in  the  Appendix.) 
Portable  Observatory 
Transit  Instrument  .         .         . 

Forty-inch,  triple-object  glass,  achromatic  Telescope,  by  Dollond 
Repeating-circle  .        ' .         .  .  .         .         .         . 

Circular  Transit,  the  property  of  Mr.  Fisher 
Dipping-Needle,  by  Dollond 

Do.         do.     by  Troughton 

Do.         do.      by  Jones 
Variation  Transit 
Variation  Needle 

Instrument  for  determining  the  Magnetic  Force,  (Captain  Kater's) 
Azimuth  Compasses         .  ....         do. 

Do.  do.  .         ...         .         (Walker's) 

Magnets 

Spirit-levels  for  Eater's  compasses 
Dip-Sectors,  (Dr.  Wollaston's) 
Macrometer  .         do. 

Altitude-Instruments  (Captain  Kater's) 
Quadrant  with  level 


•   Friry.- 

13 


KSESSRSa 


Hecia, 


Circular  Protractors  .  .  .    •      . 

Station-Pointer  ..         .         ...         , 

Beam-compasses         .         . 

Together  with  every  other  requisite  material  for  surveying  and  drawing. 

Artificial  Horizons,  with  mercury 

Thermometers 

Self-registering  do.  (Six's)  with  iron  cases     .... 
Pyrometer,  by  Carey  .         .         .  .         .         . 

Hygrometers,  (De  Luc's)  . 

Do.  (Mr.  Leslie's) 


1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
I 
1 
1 

i 
i 

4 
1 
2 
6 
2 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
2 


1 
1 

4 
24 
6 
1 
1 
1 


16 
9 


L*te« 


hrri» 


^V»*AF»a 


INTRODUCTION. 

Fury. 

Photometers  (Mr.  Leslie's,)        .         .         .        .   -     ;        .  '       .  .  2 

Hydrometers               .         .         .         .         .                  •         •  •".,.  .  3 

H)rdrostatic  Balances,  one  being  the  property  of  Mr.  Fisher           .  .  2 

Water-bottles,  (Dr.  Marcet's)     .         .         .         .         .         ,         .'  .  2 

Two-feet  telescopes  .  .  . 

Electrometers,  with  copper-chains         .         .                   .         .         .  .  2  sets 

Air-Pump          .          .          .         .          .          .          .          .          .          .  '    .  1 

A  case  of  chemical  materials  for  Mr.  FisKer's  Experiments     .         .  . 


I  cannot  conclude  this  account  of  our  preparations  without  expressing 
my  sincere  thanks  to  Sir  Thomas  Byam  Martin,  Comptroller  of  the  Navy, 
Commissioner  Cunningham,  and  Captain  Hill,  Comptroller  of  the  Vic- 
tualling Depdt  at  Deptford,  for  the  readiness  with  which  they  acceded 
to  and  even  anticipated  my  wishes  in  every  thing  relating  to  our  com- 
plete equipment.  To  the  Navy  and  Victualling-Boards  generally  I  also 
feel  most  highly  indebted  for  the  very  obliging  manner  in  which  they 
were  pleased,  on  various  occasions,  to  refer  to  me  with  a  view  at  once 
most  effectually  to  execute  the  commands  of  the  Lords  Commissioners 
of  the  Admiralty,  and  at  the  same  time  to  consult,  whenever  it  lay  in 
their  power,  the  wishes  of  the  Officer  commanding  the  Expedition.  Nor 
can  I  omit  to  offer,  on  my  own  part,  as  well  as  that  of  the  Officers  under 
my  command,  our  best  acknowledgments,  once  more  so  justly  due,  to 
the  Officers  of  Deptford  Dock- Yard  for  the  kind  assistance  received 
from  them  in  those  numberless  minor  points  belonging  to  their  seve- 
ral departments,  on  which  the  comfort  and  accommodation  of  persons 
employed  on  this  service  so  materially  depend. 

On  the  return  of  the  Expedition  to  England  the  journals,  charts,  and 
drawings  furnished  by  every  individual  in  the  course  of  the  voyage  were 

b  2 


V4  $-  £Ol*V: 


«i\W 


SaldiS«*S»#/Ji^Ll.-,Jt;Mft*RA 


xn 


INTRODUCTION. 


put  into  my  hands,  with  directions  to  publish,  under  the  authority  of 
the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty,  an  official  narrative  of  our 
late  proceedings.  To  prevent  the  delay  before  occasioned  by  waiting 
for  the  publication  of  the  details  relating  to  geography  and  natural 
history,  I  determined  on  reserving  the  whole  of  these  for  an  Appendix, 
to  form  a  separate  volume.  The  following  account  is  principally  taken 
from  my  own  journal;  but  I  am  indebted  to  the  other  officers,  and 
especially  to  Captain  Lyon,  for  numerous  interesting  extracts  which 
are  distinguished  by  inverted  commas. 

The  charts  accompanying  this  Narrative  were  carefully  constructed 
under  my  inspection  on  board  the  Fury  by  Mr.  Bushnan,  assistant- 
surveyor.  The  original  charts,  which  are  on  a  much  larger  scale,  and 
on  which  the  angles  used  in  their  construction  are  laid  down,  have  been 
deposited  in  the  Hydrographical  Office  at  the  Admiralty,  together  with 
the  surveying-books  and  other  documents  of  that  kind  containing  more 
in  detail  the  materials  used  in  the  survey. 

The  survey  of  the  coast  was  entirely  carried  on  as  before  by  astro- 
nomical bearings,  the  geographical  position  of  the  various  stations  being 
fixed  by  the  mean  of  the  observations  of  several  individuals.  From  the 
number  and  excellence  of  the  chronometers  embarked  on  board  the 
Fury,  and  the  variety  of  observations  used  in  the  occasional  correction  of 
their  rates,  it  is  hoped  that  the  geography  of  that  portion  of  the  North- 
Eastern  Coast  of  America,  which  has  been  discovered  and  surveyed 
by  this  Expedition,  will  be  found  to  be  fixed  with  considerable  accu- 
racy. For  a  more  detailed  statement  of  the  methods  employed,  in  the 
performance  of  this  essential  part  of  my  duty,  as  well  as  for  some  notices 
respecting  the  geography  of  this  hitherto  unknown  corner  of  the 
globe,  I  must  refer  to  the  account  of  the  going  of  the  chronometers, 


*KA;vi*£Xttw:>t  vj*,\  >         ?  Yr» 


INTRODUCTION. 


xm 


the  tables  of  the  several  observations,  and  the  memorandum  relating 
to  the  charts  in  the  Appendix.  With  the  hope  of  making  the  charts 
in  some  degree  interesting  to  the  geologist,  as  well  as  to  the  sea- 
man and  geographer,  I  have  inserted  in  them  a  brief  notice  of  the 
geological  character  of  the  lands  we  had  an  opportunity  of  examining ; 
and  some  pains  have  been  taken  to  deduce  and  delineate,  from  the 
numerous  Esquimaux  sketches,  such  parts  of  the  coast  as  those  people 
are  acquainted  with,  but  to  which  our  own  efforts  have  not  hitherto 
enabled  us  to  obtain  access.  It  having  been  suggested  that  the  deline- 
ation of  ice  upon  a  chart  gives  it  a  confused  appearance,  while  it  con- 
veys the  idea  of  a  fixed  rather  than  of  a  constantly  moving  body,  it 
has  now  been  altogether  omitted,  except  in  one  or  two  instances,  where 
the  description  given  of  its  position  in  the  Narrative  may  by  this 
means  be  illustrated  and  explained. 

The  sketches  of  lands  were  principally  made  by  Mr.  Bushnan,  such 
views  being  selected  by  myself  as  appeared  most  striking,  or  best  cal- 
culated to  elucidate  the  descriptions  given  of  the  coast.  Some  were, 
however,  taken  by  Captain  Lyon,  to  whom  the  Public  is  indebted  for 
all  the  other  drawings  of  every  description.  Of  the  merit  of  these 
interesting  performances  it  would  be  presumptuous  in  me  to  offer  an 
opinion  ;  but  I  cannot  deny  myself  the  pleasure  of  bearing  testimony 
to  the  obliging  readiness  with  which  Captain  Lyon  has  always  attended 
to  my  suggestions  on  this  subject,  as  well  as  to  the  eagerness  and  assi- 
duity with  which  he  seized  on  every  opportunity  of  exercising  his 
pencil,  which  so  monotonous  and  unpicturesque  a  voyage  presented. 
The  drawings  were  soon  after  our  arrival  put  into  the  hands  of 
Mr.  Edward  Finden,  with  whose  abilities  as  an  artist  the  Public  is 
already  well  acquainted ;  it  is  hoped  that  the  manner  in  which  they 


ft 


\f  4  -J 


y&fgz^m*  os^i  affM* 


7T5S:* .4T>'^» . '^  fcstfK* 


SF* 


XIV 


INTKOBETCTION. 


have  been  engraved  will  sufficiently  shew  the  care  which  has  been  taken 
in  their  execution. 

No  opportunity  has  been  omitted  of  procuring  and  preserving  spe- 
cimens in  the  several  departments  of  Natural  History,  of  which  a  con- 
siderable collection  has  been  made  in  each  ship,  and  which  will  be 
described  in  their  proper  places  in  the  Appendix.  The  necessary 
smallness  of  our  establishment  rendering  it  expedient  to  dispense  with 
the  appointment  of  a  professional  Naturalist,  who  has  usually  formed  a 
part  of  expeditions  of  this  nature,  the  sole  responsibility  in  this  de- 
partment of  science  naturally  devolved  upon  myself.  As  however  I 
can  lay  no  claim  to  any  of  the  qualifications  requisite  in  a  naturalist, 
and  yet  have  hopes  that  our  collections  will  not  be  altogether  wanting 
in  interest,  I  consider  it  incumbent  upon  me,  with  a  view  to  do  justice  to 
the  individuals  who  have  assisted  me  in  this  way,  to  give  some  account 
of  the  manner  in  which  that  part  of  my  instructions  has  been  executed. 

The  collections  made  on  board  each  ship  were  purposely  kept  sepa- 
rate, with  the  intention  of  providing  against  accidents  happening  to 
either  ;  except  on  one  or  two  occasions,  where  only  a  single  specimen  of 
any  animal  was  obtained,  in  which  case  it  was  transferred  to  the  Fury. 
The  collection  of  the  animal  kingdom  formed  by  Captain  Lyon  has 
afforded  additional  interest  from  the  drawings  that  accompanied  them, 
wherein  the  colours  most  liable  to  fade  were  faithfully  delineated  from 
specimens  just  killed.  For  the  specimens  obtained  on  board  the  Fury 
I  am  necessarily  indebted  to  the  zeal  and  industry  of  the  several 
Officers  of  that  ship,  who  have  at  all  times  rendered  me  their  best 
assistance  in  promoting  this  object .  I  must  however  particularly  ex- 
press the  acknowledgments  which  I  consider  due  to  Mr.  Boss  who,  from 
the  commencement  of  the  voyage,  undertook  in  addition  to  his  other 


»A*m^»^.»i 


INTRODUCTION. 


xv 


duties,  to  superintend  the  preservation  of  stuffed  specimens  of  birds 
and  other  animals  ;  a  task  requiring  a  degree  of  taste  as  well  as  of  skill 
and  attention,  which  perhaps  persons  accustomed  to  these  matters  can 
alone  duly  appreciate.  The  public  collection  of  plants  and  minerals 
on  board  the  Fury  has  been  in  great  part  made  and  entirely  arranged 
by  Mr.  Halse,  to  whose  industry  and  attention  in  these  departments 
for  several  years  past  I  am  particularly  desirous  to  do  justice.  So 
general  however  have  the  taste  for  collecting  and  the  skill  in  pre- 
serving become,  among  the  individuals  employed  on  these  Expeditions, 
that  much  additional  interest  has  been  derived  from  an  examination 
of  the  distinct  collections  of  plants  and  minerals  made  by  several  of 
the  officers,  and  particularly  from  that  of  Mr.  Edwards,  whose  notes  on 
the  Natural  History  of  these  regions  have  added  much  valuable  infor- 
mation on  this  subject.  Some  skeletons  of  animals  have  been  prepared 
for  the  Museum  of  the  College  of  Surgeons  by  Mr.  Skeoch,  among 
which  those  of  a  wolf  and  an  Esquimaux  dog  will  perhaps  not  be 
considered  the  least  interesting,  as  shewing  the  comparative  anatomy 
of  those  two  animals.  Soon  after  the  arrival  of  the  ships  in  the  river 
Thames,  the  public  Collections  of  Subjects  of  Natural  History  were 
put  into  the  hands  of  three  gentlemen  well  qualified  to  describe  them. 
I  need  only  mention  the  names  ofJProfessor  Jameson,  Professor  Hooker, 
and  Br.  Richardson,  to  assure  the  public  how  much  justice  will  be 
done  to  their  description  ;  hut  I  cannot  omit  this  opportunity  of  offer- 
ing my  warmest  thanks  to  these  gentlemen  for  the  kind  and  handsome 
manner  in  which  they  did  me  the  favour  to  undertake  this  task. 

A  monthly  Abstract  of  the  Meteorological  Register  is  inserted  in  its 
proper  order  in  the  course  of  the  narrative,  that  method  having  been 
considered  most  convenient  for  reference,  on  a  subject  necessarily 


I 


m™ 


XVI 


INTRODUCTION. 


!     i 


i  i 


forming  so  large  and  constant  a  portion  of  the  interest  of  a  polar 
voyage.  In  the  journal  from  which  these  abstracts  were  made,  the 
temperature  of  the  air  and  of  the  sea-water  was  noted  every  two  hours, 
and  the  height  of  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  every  four  hours, 
throughout  the  voyage  ;  and  the  abstracts  were  carefully  and  separately 
arranged  by  Lieutenant  Nias  and  Mr.  Ross*.  The  whole  of  the  tem- 
peratures were  registered  by  Fahrenheit's  thermometer,  and  the  signs  + 
and  -  signify  above  or  below  zero  of  that  scale.  When  neither  of  these 
signs  is  attached,  the  temperature  is  to  be  understood  as  positive,  or 
above  zero,  except  in  those  columns  of  the  abstracts  where  a  continued 
series  of  low  temperatures  occurs.  To  avoid  needless  repetition  also 
in  the  course  of  the  Narrative,  it  may  here  be  added  that  the  whole 
of  the  bearings  are  the  true  ones,  the  Dips  of  the  Magnetic  Needle 
North,  the  Latitudes  North,  and  the  Longitudes  West  of  the  meridian 
of  Greenwich,  unless  otherwise  expressly  noticed  at  the  time. 

The  temperature  of  the  sea  below  the  surface  was  sometimes  ob- 
tained by  Six's  self-registering  thermometer  attached  to  the  deep-sea 
lead;  but  more  commonly  (in  consequence  of  the  frequent  failure  of 
that  instrument  when  exposed  to  sudden  changes)  by  bringing  up 
some  water  in  the  bottle  contrived  by  Dr.  Marcet,  and  already  de- 
scribed '  in  the  Introduction  to  the  Narrative  of  the  former  Voyage. 
This  simple  and  useful  apparatus  was  now  somewhat  improved  by  a 
strong  spring  enclosed  within  the  box,  and  obliging  the  bolt,  in  what- 
ever position  it  might  be  placed,  to  close  the  apertures  as  soon  as  the 
catch  was  released,  instead  of  trusting  to  its  own  weight  as  before. 

*  I  omitted  to  mention,  in  my  account  of  the  Voyage  of  1819-20,  that  the  Meteorolo- 
gical Register  was  then  kept  in  a  similar  manner. 


V^»"       -  ****»  «^-^  .  »t  v^i   ^ 


a,u&«xsj^a\**^     /-;v«,Mw.M^«.t->iw 


INTRODUCTION. 


xvn 


In  describing  the  Esquimaux  inhabiting  the  sequestered  and  hitherto 
unknown  corner  of  the  American  Continent,  which  we  have  recently 
visited,  I  have  aimed  rather  at  faithfulness  of  delineation  than  at 
height  of  colouring,  studiously  avoiding  the  mention  of  any  fact  of 
whose  accuracy  the  slightest  doubt  remained  upon  my  mind.  Of  the 
latter  class  are  numerous  pieces  of  information  obtained  in  a  cursory 
way  from  the  Esquimaux,  which,  however,  our  imperfect  knowledge 
of  their  language  did  not  enable  us  thoroughly  to  understand,  and 
which  almost  daily  experience  of  our  former  misapprehensions  subse- 
quently taught  us  to  receive  with  greater  caution  and  distrust.  In 
attempting  a  description  of  the  manners,  disposition,  and  general  cha- 
racter of  these  people,  it  has  been  my  anxious  desire  "  nothing  to 
extenuate,  nor  set  down  aught  in  malice,"  but  to  present,  as  far  as  it 
goes,  a  faithful  and  impartial  sketch;  divested  on  the  one  hand  of  the 
too  nattering  impression  at  first  received  from  the  extreme  quietness 
of  their  demeanour,  and  on  the  other,  of  the  feelings  of  annoyance 
occasioned  by  our  subsequent  acquaintance  with  the  less  favourable 
features  in  their  character.  In  the  more  important,  though  less  diffi- 
cult task  of  relating  the  proceedings  of  the  Expedition,  with  reference 
to  its  primary  objects,  my  endeavours  have  been  exclusively  directed  to 
the  attainment  of  accuracy  and  plainness,  omitting  nothing,  however, 
which  appeared  to  me  likely  to  afford  interest  or  information,  and 
avoiding  every  minute  detail  but  what  seemed  absolutely  necessary  for 
explaining  my  views,  or  otherwise  elucidating  the  subjects  under  con- 
sideration. 

That  our  efforts  have  not  hitherto  been  crowned  with  greater  suc- 
cess, cannot  fail  to  be  a  matter  of  extreme  disappointment,  as  well  as 
of  sincere  though  unavailing  regret ;  but  I  feel  it  a  duty  to  state,  that 


* 


■\v*|  $■ 


m  bJ* 


ZF* 


xvm 


INTRODUCTION. 


%. 


, 


had  our  progress  been  in  any  degree  proportionate  to  the  exertions  of 
those  under  my  command,  there  would  ere  this  have  been  nothing 
left  to  regret,  and  but  little  to  accomplish ;  and  I  am  happy  therefore 
thus  publicly  to  express  the  high  sense  I  entertain  of  the  laudable 
zeal  and  strenuous  exertions  uniformly  displayed  by  Captain  Lyon, 
the  officers,  seamen,  and  marines,  of  both  the  ships  engaged  in  this 
service.  Of  the  exemplary  conduct  of  the  men  it  has  been  my  good 
fortune  to  command  on  this  occasion,  I  cannot  indeed  speak  too 
highly ;  it  has  been  a  happiness  to  their  officers  and  a  credit  to  them- 
selves. It  was  highly  gratifying  to  observe  the  eager  assiduity  with 
which,  during  two  successive  winters  of  long  and  tedious  confinement, 
they  followed  up  the  more  sedentary  occupations  of  learning  to  read 
and  write,  with  which  they  were  furnished ;  and  it  is,  I  confess,  with 
no  ordinary  feelings  of  pleasure  that  I  record  the  fact,  that  on  the 
return  of  the  Expedition  to  England,  there  was  not  an  individual 
belonging  to  it  who  could  not  read  his  Bible. 

Of  the  value  of  Mr.  Fisher's  labours  in  those  departments  of  science 
to  which  his  attention  was  particularly  directed,  I  cannot  pretend  to 
form  a  competent  opinion,  and  his  account  of  them  now  preparing  in 
the  Appendix  will,  I  doubt  not,  speak  for  itself ;  but  I  have  the  most 
sincere  pleasure  in  offering  my  testimony  to  the  unabated  zeal  and 
perseverance  with  which,  under  circumstances  of  no  ordinary  diffi- 
culty from  climate,  and  in  spite  of  frequent  ill  health,  he  continued 
to  pursue  every  object  which  could  tend  to  the  improvement  of  Astro- 
nomy and  Navigation,  and  to  the  interests  of  Science  in  general. 


EXPLANATION  OF  TECHNICAL  TERMS 

PECULIAR  TO  THE  NAVIGATION  AMONG  ICE; 

And  occasionally  made  use  of  in  the  course  of  the  following  Narrative,  where  they  are  distinguished 

by  inverted  commas. 


BAY-ICE. — Ice  newly-formed  upon  the  surface  of  the  sea. 

Beset. — The  situation  of  the  ship  when  closely  surrounded  by  ice. 

BlGHT. — An  indentation  in  a  floe  of  ice,  like  a  bay,  by  which  name  it  is  sometimes  called. 

BLINK. — A  peculiar  brightness  in  the  atmosphere,  often  assuming  an  arch-like  form ,  which 
is  generally  perceptible  over  ice  or  land  covered  with  snow.  The  blink  of  land,  as 
well  as  that  over  large  quantities  of  ice,  is  usually  of  a  yellowish  cast. 

BORE. — The  operation  of  "  boring11  through  loose  ice  consists  in  entering  it  under  a  press  of 
sail,  and  forcing  the  ship  through  by  separating  the  masses. 

CALF. — A  mass  of  ice  lying  under  a  floe  near  its  margin,  and  when  disengaged  from  that 
position,  rising  with  violence  to  the  surface  of  the  water.     See  TONGUE. 

SleAB  Water. — Any  part  of  the  sea  unincumbered  with  ice. 

CROWES-NEST. — A  small  circular  house  like  a  cask,  fixed   at  the  mast-head , in  which  the 

look-out  man  sits,   either  to  guide  the   ship  through  the  ice,  or  to  give  notice  of 

whales. 

DOCK. — In  a  floe  may  be  natural  or  artificial ;  the  former  being  simply  a  small  "  bightj,  m 
which  a  ship  is  placed  to  secure  her  from  the  danger  of  external  pressure,  and  the 
latter,  a  square  space  cut  out  with  saws  for  a  similar  purpose. 

FIELD. — A  sheet  of  ice  generally  of  great  thickness,  and  of  too  great  extent  to  be  seen  over 
from  a  ship's  mast-head. 

FLINCHING. — The  operation  of  stripping  a  sea-animal  of  its  skin  and  blubber. 

FLOE. — The  same  as  a  field,  except  that  its  extent  can  be  distinguished  from  a  ship's  mast- 
head.    A  "  bay-floe11  is  a  floe  of  ice  newly  formed. 

A  HOLE  or  POOL  of  water. — A  small  space  of  "  clear  water,"  when  the  rest  of  the  sea  is 

covered  with  ice. 
LAND-ICE. — Ice  attached  to  the  land,  either  in  floes  or  in  heavy  grounded  masses  lying  near 

the  shore. 


rr» 


XX 


EXPLANATION    OF   TECHNICAL   TERMS. 


I 


LEAD. — A  channel  through  the  ice.  A  ship  is  said  to  "  take  the  right  lead-"  when  she  fol- 
lows a  channel  conducting  her  into  a  more  navigable  sea,  and  vice  versa. 

MAKING-OFF  blubber. — The  operation  of  putting  it  into  casks. 

Nipped. — The  situation  of  a  ship  when  forcibly  pressed  by  ice. 

Pack. — A  large  body  of  ice  consisting  of  separate  masses  lying  close  together,  and  whose 
extent  cannot  be  seen . 

PANCAKE-ICE. — Newly  formed  ice,  assuming  the  peculiar  conformation  of  numberless 
patches  of  "  sludge,"  and  giving  the  surface  of  the  sea  the  appearance  of  a  hand- 
some pavement. 

PATCH  of  Ice. — The  same  as  a  pack,  but  of  small  dimensions. 

SAILING-ICE. — Ice  of  which  the  masses  are  so  much  separated  as  to  allow  a  ship  to  sail  among 
them. 

SALLYING  a  ship. — The  operation  of  causing  her  to  roll,  by  the  men  running  in  a  body  from 
side  to  side,  so  as  to  relieve  her  from  the  adhesion  and  friction  of  the  young  ice 
around  her. 

SLUDGE.— Ice  of  the  consistence  of  thick  honey,  offering  little  impediment  to  a  ship  while 
in  this  state,  but  greatly  favouring  the  formation  of  a  "  bay -floe." 

STREAM. — A  long  and  narrow,  but  generally  continuous  collection  of  loose  ice. 

TONGUE. — A  mass  of  ice  projecting  under  water,  from  an  iceberg  or  floe,  and  generally  dis- 
tinguishable at  a  considerable  depth  in  smooth  water.  It  differs  from  a  "  calf  in 
being  fixed  to,  or  a  part  of,  the  larger  body. 

WATER-SKY. — A  dark  appearance  in  the  sky,  indicating  "  clear  water"  in  that  direction,  and 
formino-  a  striking  contrast  with  the  "  blink"  over  land  or  ice. 

YOUNG-ICE. — Nearly  the  same  as  "  bay-ice,"  but  generally  applied  to  ice  more  recently 
formed  than  the  latter. 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 


By  the  Commissioners  for  executing  the  Office  of  Lord  High. 
Admiral  of  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and 
Ireland,  #-c.  fy-c. 


LORD  Viscount  Melville  having  communicated  to  the  King  the 
proceedings  of  the  late  Expedition  into  the  Arctic  Seas,  and  His 
Majesty  having  been  graciously  pleased  to  express  his  commands  that 
a  further  Expedition  should  be  fitted  out,  for  the  purpose  of  renewing 
the  attempt  to  discover  a  passage  by  sea  between  the  Atlantic  and 
Pacific  Oceans,  and  of  ascertaining  the  geography  of  the  Northern 
boundaries  of  the  American  Continent,  we  have  thought  proper  to 
appoint  you  to  the  command  of  the  Expedition  ;  and  you  are  hereby 
required  and  directed  to  put  to  sea  in  His  Majesty's  ship  Fury 
under  your  command,  together  with  His  Majesty's  ship  Hecla,  whose 
commander  has  been  placed  under  your  orders,  and  taking  also  with 
you  the  Nautilus  Transport,  which  we  have  directed  the  Navy  Board 
to  place  at  your  disposal  (for  the  purpose  of  carrying  a  proportion  of 
your  provisions  and  stores  across  the  Atlantic  and  Davis'  Strait,)  you 
are  to  proceed  as  quickly  as  may  be  consistent  with  every  precaution  to 
avoid  any  risk  of  your  parting  company  from  either  the  one  ship  or  the 
other,  towards,  or  into,  Hudson's  Strait,  until  you  shall  meet  with  the 


ST*" 


fe/V 


xxu 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 


m 


ice,  when  you  are  to  take  the  first  favourable  opportunity  of  clearing 
the  Nautilus  Transport  of  the  provisions  and  stores  she  is  charged  with 
for  the  Fury  and  Hecla  ;  and  having  so  done  you  are  to  send  the  said 
transport  back  to  England,  so  as  to  prevent  her  incurring  any  risk  of 
receiving  injury  amongst  the  ice,  reporting  by  that  opportunity  your 
proceedings  to  our  Secretary  for  our  information. 

After  having  so  cleared  and  despatched  the  Transport  you  are,  with  the 
two  ships  of  His  Majesty  under  your  orders,  to  penetrate  to  the  westward 
through  Hudson's  Strait,  until  you  reach,  either  in  Eepulse  Bay  or  on 
other  part  of  the  shores  of  Hudson's  Bay,  to  the  north  of  Wager  Kiver, 
some  part  of  the  coast  which  you  may  feel  convinced  to  be  a  portion  of 
the  Continent  of  America.  You  are  then  to  keep  along  the  line  of  this 
coast  to  the  northward,  always  examining  every  bend  or  inlet  which 
may  appear  to  you  likely  to  afford  a  practicable  passage  to  the  westward, 
in  which  direction  it  is  the  principal  object  of  your  voyage  to  endea- 
vour to  find  your  way  from  the  Atlantic  into  the  Pacific  Ocean. 

In  the  event  of  your  having  consumed  the  open  weather  in  the  exa- 
mination of  the  northern  boundaries  of  Hudson's  or  Cumberland's 
Straits,  and  of  your  having,  at  the  close  of  the  season,  returned  into 
Davis'  Strait  or  Baffin's  Bay;  or  if  you  should  have  made  no  consider- 
able progress  to  the  westward  or  northward  in  any  inlet  you  may  have 
found,  it  will  be  for  you  to  consider,  under  all  the  circumstances  of 
the  case,  whether  it  may  not  be  expedient  that  you  should  return  to 
England  to  replenish,  refit,  and  refresh,  rather  than  winter  on  a  part 
of  the  coast  which  you  might  reach  again  next  season  as  early  as 
would  be  necessary  for  prosecuting  your  further  inquiries.  The  judg- 
ment which  you  have  shewn  in  the  conduct  of  the  late  Expedition 
and  the  experience  which  you  have  acquired,  induce  us  to  trust  this 


VVV     :  »*»  ■'  "  V     V  ■■'" 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 


xxm 


point  to  your  own  discretion,  on  a  view  of  all  the  different  circum- 
stances which  may  exist  at  the  time  when  your  determination  is  to  be 
formed. 

Should  you  be  so  successful  as  to  find  a  practicable  passage  from  the 
one  sea  to  the  other,  you  are  to  make  the  best  of  your  way  in  accom- 
plishing that  object  without  stopping  to  examine  the  north  coast  of 
America,  or  for  any  other  object  not  of  imperious  importance;  but 
when  the  ships  are  checked  in  their  progress  by  ice,  or  other  una- 
voidable circumstances,  you  will  take  every  opportunity  of  examining 
the  coasts  you  may  be  near,  and  making  all  useful  observations  relating 
thereto. 

Should  you  happily  reach  the  Pacific  you  are  to  proceed  to  Kams- 
chatka,  (if  you  think  you  can  do  so  without  risk  of  being  shut  up  by 
the  ice  on  that  coast,)  for  the  purpose  of  delivering  to  the  Kussian 
Governor  duplicates  of  the  journals  and  other  documents  which  the 
passage  may  have  supplied,  with  a  request  that  they  may  be  forwarded 
over  land  to  St.  Petersburgh,  to  be  conveyed  from  thence  to  London. 

From  Kamschatka  you  will  proceed  to  the  Sandwich  Islands  or 
Canton,  or  such  other  place  as  you  may  think  proper,  to  refit  the 
ships  and  refresh  the  crews ;  and  if  during  your  stay  at  such  place  a 
safe  opportunity  should  occur  of  sending  papers  to  England,  you 
should  send  duplicates  by  such  conveyance.  And  after  having  refitted 
and  refreshed,  you  are  to  lose  no  time  in  returning  to  England  by  such 
route  as  you  may  deem  most  convenient. 

It  may  happen  that  your  progress  along  the  north  coast  of  the 
American  Continent  may  be  so  slow  as  to  render  it  desirable  that,  if 
you  should  not  be  able  to  accomplish  your  passage  into  the  Pacific 
earlier  than  the  autumn  of  1824,  you  should  be  assured  of  finding  a 


"w|  $  ^kO^>^ 


Ti  Ik! 


S5BRS 


XXIV 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 


Win 


■!ii 


dep6t  of  provisions  at  that  period  in  the  most  advanced  situation  to 
which  they  can  safely  be  conveyed.  In  the  event  then  of  our  not 
receiving  from  you  such  intelligence  as  may  render  the  measure  unne- 
cessary, we  shall,  about  the  close  of  the  year  1823,  direct  the  Com- 
mander-in-Chief on  the  South  American  station  to  despatch  a  vessel 
with  a  supply  of  provisions  and  stores,  so  as  to  be  at  Behring's  Strait 
about  August  or  September,  1824.  The  commander  of  this  vessel 
will  be  directed  to  make  the  best  of  his  way  round  Cape  Prince  of 
Wales,  where  he  may  expect,  as  we  are  informed,  to  find  an  inlet  in 
latitude  68°  30',  in  which  Captain  Kotzebue  is  stated  to  have  found 
anchorage  a  few  years  since.  He  will  be  directed  to  lie  in  that  ancho- 
rage, or  in  the  nearest  good  anchorage  he  may  find  to  that  latitude ; 
and  he  will  be  ordered  to  erect,  in  the  most  prominent  and  visible 
situation,  a  flagstaff  for  your  direction.  As  it  is  possible  that  you 
may  touch  at  the  Sandwich  Islands,  this  Officer  will  be  directed  to  call 
at  Owhyhee,  in  order  that  if  you  should  have  passed  to  the  southward, 
he  may  not  be  put  to  the  inconvenience  of  going  on  to  Cape  Prince  of 
Wales. 

Whenever  the  season  shall  be  so  far  advanced  as  to  make  it  unsafe 
to  navigate  the  ships,  on  account  of  the  long  nights  having  set  in,  and 
the  sea  being  impassable  on  account  of  ice,  you  are,  if  you  should  not 
return  to  England,  to  use  your  best  endeavours  to  discover  a  sheltered 
and  safe  harbour,  where  the  ships  may  be  placed  in  security  for  the 
winter,  taking  such  measures  for  the  health  and  comfort  of  the  people 
under  your  command,  as  the  materials  with  which  you  are  supplied  for 
housing  in  the  ships,  or  hutting  the  men  on  shore,  may  enable  you  to 
do.  And  when  you  find  it  expedient  to  resort  to  this  measure,  if  you 
should  meet  with  any  inhabitants,  either  Esquimaux  or  Indians,  near 


;il!5lllil 


the  place  where  you  winter,  you  are  to  endeavour,  by  every  means  in 
your  power,  to  cultivate  a  friendship  with  them,  by  making  them  pre- 
sents of  such  articles  as  you  may  be  supplied  with,  and  which  may  be 
useful  or  agreeable  to  them.  You  will,  however,  take  care  not  to  suffer 
yourself  to  be  surprised  by  them,  but  use  every  precaution,  and  be 
constantly  on  your  guard  against  any  hostility. 

You  will  endeavour  to  prevail  on  them  by  such  reward,  and  to  be 
paid  in  such  manner  as  you  may  think  best  to  answer  the  purpose,  to 
carry  to  any  of  the  settlements  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  or  North- West 
Companies,  an  account  of  your  situation  and  proceedings,  with  an 
urgent  request  that  it  may  be  forwarded  to  England  with  the  utmost 
possible  despatch. 

We  deem  it  right  to  caution  you  against  suffering  the  two  vessels 
placed  under  your  orders  to  separate,  except  in  the  event  of  accident 
or  unavoidable  necessity ;  and  we  desire  you  to  keep  up  the  most 
unreserved  communications  with  the  Commander  of  the  Hecla,  placing 
in  him  every  proper  confidence,  and  acquainting  him  with  the  general 
tenor  of  your  orders,  and  with  your  views  and  intentions,  from  time  to 
time,  in  the  execution  of  them ;  that  the  service  may  have  the  full 
benefit  of  your  united  efforts  in  the  prosecution  of  such  a  service,  and 
that,  in  the  event  of  unavoidable  separation,  or  of  any  accident  to 
yourself,  Captain  Lyon  may  have  the  advantage  of  knowing,  up  to  the 
latest  practicable  period,  all  your  ideas  and  intentions  relative  to  a 
satisfactory  completion  of  the  undertaking. 

We  also  recommend  that  as  frequent  an  exchange  take  place  as  con- 
veniently may  be,  of  the  observations  made  in  the  two  ships ;  that  any 
scientific  discovery  made  by  the  one  be  as  quickly  as  possible  communi- 
cated for  the  advantage  and  guidance  of  the  other,  in  making  their 

d 


I 


ii 


XXVI 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 


future  observations,  and  to  increase  the  chance  of  the  observations  of 
both  being  preserved. 

We  have  caused  a  great  variety  of  valuable  instruments  to  be  put  on 
board  the  ships  under  your  orders,  of  which  you  will  be  furnished  with 
a  list,  and  for  the  return  of  which  you  will  be  held  responsible;  and 
we  have  also,  at  the  recommendation  of  the  President  and  Council  of 
the  Royal  Society,  ordered  to  be  received  on  board  the  Fury  the  Rev. 
Mr.  Fisher,  who  is  represented  to  us  as  a  gentleman  well  skilled  in 
Astronomy,  Mathematics,  and  various  branches  of  knowledge,  to  assist 
you  in  making  such  observations  as  may  tend  to  the  improvement 
of  Geography  and  Navigation,   and   the  advancement  of  science  in 

general. 

Amongst  other  subjects  of  scientific  inquiry,  you  will  particularly 
direct  your  attention  to  the  variation  and  inclination  of  the  magnetic 
needle,  and  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  force;  you  will  endeavour  to 
ascertain  how  far  the  needle  may  be  affected  by  the  atmospherical 
electricity,  and  what  effect  may  be  produced  on  the  electrometic  and 
magnetic  needles  on  the  appearance  of  the  Aurora  Borealis.  You  will 
keep  a  correct  register  of  the  temperature  of  the  air,  and  of  the  sea  at 
the  surface,  and  at  different  depths.  You  will  cause  frequent  observa- 
tions to  be  made  for  ascertaining  the  refraction,  and  what  effect  may 
be  produced  by  observing  an  object,  either  celestial  or  terrestrial,  over 
a  field  of  ice,  as  compared  with  objects  observed  over  a  surface  of 
water :  together  with  such  other  meteorological  remarks  as  you  may 
have  opportunities  of  making.  You  are  also  to  attend  particu- 
larly to  the  height,  direction,  and  strength  of  the  tides,  and  to  the  set 
and  velocity  of  the  currents ;  the  depth  and  soundings  of  the  sea,  and 
the  nature  of  the  bottom,  for  which  purpose  you  are  supplied  with  an 


^vv^r--  -  miiw^wmW 


'^U^v^Js  I    Y-»>>X\&J     ->*M 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS.  xxvii 

instrument  better  calculated  to  bring  up  substances  than  the  lead 
usually  employed  for  this  purpose. 

And  you  are  to  understand,  that  although  the  finding  a  passage 
from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific  is  the  main  object  of  this  Expedition, 
and  that  the  ascertaining  the  Northern  boundary  of  the  American 
Continent  is  the  next,  yet  that  the  different  observations  you  may  be 
enabled  to  make,  with  regard  to  the  magnetic  influence,  as  well  as  such 
other  observations  as  you  may  have  opportunities  of  making  in  Natu- 
ral History,  Geography,  #c.  in  parts  of  the  globe  so  little  known, 
must  prove  most  valuable  and  interesting  to  science  ;  and  we  therefore 
desire  you  to  give  your  unremitting  attention,  and  to  call  that  of  all  the 
Officers  under  your  command,  to  these  points,  as  being  objects  of  the 
highest  importance.  And  you  are  to  direct  Mr.  Fisher  to  be  particu- 
larly careful  to  keep  an  accurate  register  of  all  the  observations  that 
shall  be  made,  precisely  in  the  same  forms,  and  according  to  the  same 
arrangement,  that  were  followed  by  Captain  Sabine  on  the  late  voyage  ; 
—into  whose  charge  are  also  to  be  given  the  several  chronometers  with 
which  you  have  been  supplied. 

And  although,  as  already  specified,  you  are  not  to  be  drawn  aside 
from  the  main  object  of  the  service  on  which  you  are  employed,  as  long 
as  you  may  be  enabled  to  make  any  progress,  yet,  whenever  you  may 
be  impeded  by  the  ice,  or  find  it  necessary  to  approach  the  coasts  of  the 
continent  or  islands,  you  are  to  cause  views  of  bays,  harbours,  head- 
lands, Sfc.  to  be  carefully  taken,  the  better  to  illustrate  the  charts  you 
may  make,  and  the  places  you  may  discover,  on  which  duty  you  will  be 
more  particularly  assisted  by  Captain  Lyon  and  Mr.  Bushnan,  Assistant 
Surveyor. 

You  are  to  make  use  of  all  the  means  in  your  power  to  collect  and 

d  2 


... 


fgggrm 


i,V 


s^E 


XXVlll 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 


preserve  such  specimens  of  the  Animal,  Mineral,  and  Vegetable  King- 
doms, as  you  can  conveniently  stow  on  board  the  ships ;  salting  in 
casks  the  skins  of  the  larger  animals,  as  well  as  causing  accurate  draw- 
ings to  be  made  to  accompany  and  elucidate  the  descriptions  of  them ; 
in  this,  as  well  as  in  every  other  part  of  your  scientific  duty,  We  trust 
that  you  will  receive  material  assistance  from  Mr.  Fisher,  and  the  other 
Officers  under  your  command. 

In  the  event  of  any  irreparable  accident  happening  to  either  of  the  two 
ships,  you  are  to  cause  the  Officers  and  Crew  of  the  disabled  ship  to  be  re- 
moved into  the  other,  and  with  her  singly  to  proceed  in  prosecution  of  the 
voyage,  or  return  to  England,  according  as  circumstances  shall  appear  to 
require ;  understanding  that  the  Officers  and  Crews  of  both  ships  are 
hereby  authorized  and  required  to  continue  to  perform  their  duties 
according  to  their  respective  ranks  and  stations,  on  board  either  ship  to 
which  they  may  be  so  removed,  in  the  event  of  an  occurrence  of  this  na- 
ture. Should  unfortunately  your  own  ship  be  the  one  disabled,  you  are 
in  that  case  to  take  the  command  of  the  Hecla ;  and  in  the  event  of  any 
fatal  accident  happening  to  yourself,  Captain  Lyon  is  hereby  authorized 
to  take  the  command  of  the  Expedition,  either  on  board  the  Fury  or 
Hecla,  as  he  may  prefer,  placing  the  Officer  who  may  then  be  next  in 
seniority  to  him,  in  command  of  the  second  ship ;  also  in  the  event  of 
your  inability,  by  sickness  or  otherwise,  to  continue  to  carry  these  In- 
structions into  execution,  you  are  to  transfer  them  to  Captain  Lyon,  or 
to  the  surviving  Officer  then  next  in  command  to  you,  employed  on 
the  Expedition,  who  is  hereby  required  to  execute  them  in  the  best 
manner  he  can  for  the  attainment  of  the  several  objects  in  view. 

His  Majesty's  Government  having  appointed  Captain  Franklin  to 
the  command  of  an  Expedition  to  explore  the  northern  coast  of  North 


**:*<& wxum^k\*?H         >  i':*y*x*&>nxfr*ijt  * 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 


XXIX 


America,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Coppermine  Kiver  of  Hearne,  east- 
ward, it  would  be  desirable,  if  you  should  reach  that  coast,  that  you 
should  mark  your  progress  by  erecting  a  flagstaff  in  a  few  of  the  most 
convenient  and  distinguishable  points  which  you  may  successively  visit, 
and  you  are  to  bury  at  the  foot  of  each  staff  a  bottle,  containing  such 
information  as  may  be  useful  to  Captain  Franklin,  and  such  further 
particulars  respecting  your  own  proceedings  as  you  may  think  proper 
to  add ;  corresponding  instructions  having  been  given  to  Captain  Frank- 
lin to  leave  a  similar  notice  at  any  convenient  part  of  the  coast  which 
he  may  discover  between  the  mouth  of  the  said  river  and  the  eastern 
part  of  North  America.  And  in  the  event  of  your  getting  to  the 
westward  of  Hearne's  river,  you  should,  occasionally  do  the  same  with 
a  view  to  multiply  the  chances  of  our  hearing  of  your  progress.  In 
the  event  of  your  finding  Captain  Franklin  and  his  party  on  any  part 
of  the  coasts  of  America,  (which  being  possible,  you  should  look  out 
for  and  attend  to  any  signals  that  may  be  displayed  on  the  shores,)  you 
are,  if  he  should  wish  it,  to  receive  him  and  his  party  into  His  Majesty's 
ships  under  your  command,  bearing  them  as  supernumeraries  for  vic- 
tuals until  your  return,  or  you  have  other  means  of  forwarding  them  to 
England. 

You  are,  whilst  executing  the  service  pointed  out  in  these  instruc- 
tions, to  take  every  opportunity  that  may  offer  of  acquainting  our 
Secretary,  for  our  information,  with  your  progress :  and  on  your  arrival 
in  England,  you  are  immediately  to  repair  to  this  office,  in  order  to 
lay  before  us  a  full  account  of  your  proceedings  in  the  whole  course  of 
your  voyage ;  taking  care,  before  you  leave  the  ship,  to  demand  from 
the  Officers,  Petty  Officers,  and  all  other  persons  on  board,  the  logs  and 
journals  they  may  have  kept,  together  with  any  drawings  or  charts 


P'" 


'V>4f  $ 


fi  ^ 


XXX 


OFFICIAL  INSTRUCTIONS. 


they  may  have  made,  which  are  all  to  be  sealed  up  ;  and  you  will  issue 
similar  orders  to  Captain  Lyon  and  his  Officers,  Sfc. ;  the  said  logs, 
journals,  or  other  documents  to  be  thereafter  disposed  of  as  we  may 
think  proper. 

Given  under  our  hands  this  27th  of  April,   1821. 


(Signed) 


G.  Cockburn, 

H.    HOTHAM, 

G.  Clerk. 


By  Command  of  their  Lordships, 

(Signed)         J.  W.  Croker. 


To 


William  Edward  Parry,  Esq.,  Com- 
mander of  His  Majesty's  Vessel  the 
Fury,  at  Deptford. 


Ii  ' 


■  ll»  ^- >..  ...v«  ^J— ™»»^ 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


i  i   lomiii  ■■■■< 


VOYAGE    FOB,   THE    DISCOVERY 


NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

PASSAGE  ACROSS  THE  ATLANTIC REMOVAL  OF  STORES  FROM  THE  NAUTILUS  TRANSPORT, 

AT  THE  MARGIN  OF  THE  ICE — DEPARTURE  OF  THE  NAUTILUS  FOR  ENGLAND ENTER 

THE  ICE  IN  HUDSON'S  STRAIT PERILOUS  SITUATION  OF  THE  HECLA,  AND  LOSS  OF  HER 

ANCHOR MEET  WITH  THE  HUDSON'S-BAY  SHIPS — PASSAGE  UP  THE  STRAIT,  AND  COM- 
MUNICATION   WITH    THE    NATIVES    INHABITING    THE    NORTHERN    SHORES PASS    THE 

TRINITY  ISLANDS  OF     FOX ARRIVAL   OFF    SOUTHAMPTON     ISLAND,    WHERE    THE    RE- 
SEARCHES OF  THE  EXPEDITION    COMMENCE. 

1  HE  Fury,  Hecla,  and  Nautilus  Transport,  were  completed  for  sea  towards 
the  latter  part  of  the  month  of  April,  and,  on  the  29th,  at  10  A.M.,  the  wind 
being  from  the  eastward,  writh  every  appearance  of  its  continuing,  the  Fury 
was  taken  in  tow  by  the  Eclipse  steam-boat,  which  vessel  had  before  taken 
us  down  the  river  on  a  similar  occasion.  At  two  P.M.,  the  Fury  was  moored 
to  the  buoy  at  Northfleet,  and  the  Eclipse  returned  to  Deptford  for  the  other 
ships.  The  Hecla  reached  the  moorings  on  the  following  day,  and  the  Nau- 
tilus on  the  1st  of  May.  The  guns  and  ordnance-stores  were  here  received 
on  board,  after  which  the  ships  immediately  proceeded  to  the  Little  Nore 
where  they  anchored  on  the  3d.  I  received  my  final  instructions  from  the 
Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty  on  the  4th,  and  set  out  for  Sheerness 
on  the  following  day.  On  the  7th,  the  ships  were  visited  by  Rear- Admiral 
Sir  John  Gore,  from  whom  we  had,  on  this,  as  on  the  former  occasion,  re- 
ceived every  attention  and  assistance,  which  the  greatest  personal  kindness, 


Mon.  7. 


tfal  $-  ^jkC^Y: 


^\'vr^^%;4gjiA^^.>v^^:^. 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


m\- 


1821. 

May. 


\*y**j 


Tues.  8. 


1l"(i'i' 


and  the  most  lively  interest  in  our  success,  could  suggest.  On  the  same  day, 
the  ships'  companies  received  their  arrears  of  river-pay,  and  three  months' 
wages  in  advance  ;  after  which  they  provided  themselves  with  a  large  stock 
of  warm  clothing,  according  to  a  list  previously  given  out.  The  crews  were, 
however,  so  well  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  service  on  which  they 
were  about  to  be  employed,  that  they  took  good  care  to  provide  an  abundant 
supply  of  every  thing  of  that  kind. 

Previously  to  leaving  the  Nore,  I  furnished  Captain  Lyon  Avith  a  complete 
copy  of  my  Instructions  from  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty, 
accompanied  by  an  order  containing  some  general  regulations ;  and  I  also 
appointed  certain  places  of  rendezvous,  to  ensure  the  meeting  of  the  three 
ships  at  the  margin  of  the  ice,  in  case  of  unavoidable  separation  in  crossing 
the  Atlantic. 

On  the  8th,  at  half-past  three  A.M.,  we  weighed  from  the  Little  Nore,  and, 
being  favoured  with  a  fresh  breeze  from  the  southward  and  westward,  passed 
through  Hoseley  Bay  at  noon,  when,  the  weather  becoming  thick,  I  was 
induced  to  run  out  at  the  back  of  the  sands,  lest  we  should  not  be  able 
to  distinguish  the  lights  clearly  at  night.  The  wind  soon  after  backing 
more  to  the  westward,  prevented  our  getting  in  with  the  land,  for  the  pur- 
Wed.  16.  pose  of  sending  away  our  pilots,  till  the  16th  when,  being  off  Buchaness, 
they  were  put  into  a  sloop  bound  to  Leith,  and  our  despatches  and  let- 
ters forwarded  by  the  same  opportunity. 
Frid.  18.  On  the  morning  of  the  18th,  being  off  Copinsha,  one  of  the  Orkney 
Islands,  and  the  wind  continuing  fresh  from  the  northward,  which  prevented 
our  getting  round  them  in  that  direction,  pilots  were  taken  on  board  to  run 
the  ships  through  the  Pentland  Firth.  In  the  course  of  the  afternoon, 
however,  while  standing  through,  the  wind  backed  to  the  westward  of 
north,  with  heavy  squalls,  which  would  not  have  allowed  us  to  clear  the 
land  with  the  ebb-tide.  I  determined,  therefore,  on  anchoring  in  Widewall 
harbour,  which  Ave  did  at  four  P.M.,  in  six  fathoms,  and  immediately  set 
Sat.  19.  about  completing  our  Avater.  On  the  following  day,  I  addressed  a  letter  to 
the  Secretary  of  the  Admiralty,  acquainting  him  with  the  proceedings  of  the 
Expedition  up  to  this  date. 
Tues.  22.  The  Avind  remaining  nearly  in  the  same  quarter  for  several  days  after 
our  arrival,  it  was  not  until  the  22d  that  we  were  enabled  to  Aveigh  and 
stand  to  the  Avestward,  through  the  Firth.  As  Ave  proceeded,  hoAvever,  the 
Avind  gradually  veered  to  the  N.W.,  Avith  a  considerable  head-SAvell,  Avhich 


lii'lJi'T 


ft*i»ir-~Mifiiv«yni 


kX<*2 


' 


>  3  ^.  -u.-../< rsv»,».vt. ':•.>«.. y 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


prevented  our  clearing  the  land  ;  we  accordingly  bore  up  and  reached  the  1821. 
harbour  of  Long-Hope  about  midnight.  We  were  here  once  more  detained  v^-y>1/ 
by  strong  and  unfavourable  winds,  which  continued  with  little  intermission 
till  the  morning  of  the  30th,  when  a  light  air  springing  up  from  the  east- 
ward, we  weighed,  at  8.20  A.M.,  and  ran  between  the  islands  to  the  north- 
ward. At  one,  P.M.,  the  pilots  left  us  off  Hoy  Head,  when  all  sail  was 
made  to  the  westward. 

The  latitude  of  the  Martello  Tower  upon  Hackness  Point,  at  the  entrance 
of  Long-Hope  harbour,  is,  by  our  observations,  58°  48'  51" ;  its  longitude, 
by  chronometers,  3°  00'  09"  W. ;  and  the  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle, 
26°  58'  30",  westerly.  The  holding-ground  is  here  excellent :  this  indeed 
is  one  of  the  best  harbours  in  the  Orkneys,  and  perhaps  in  the  world,  being 
capable  of  containing  a  very  large  fleet  of  ships  in  perfect  security.  In 
Widewall  harbour,  which  is  small  and  affords  less  shelter,  we  found  the 
ground  more  loose ;  it  is  probably  in  some  parts  rocky,  as  our  anchors 
came  up  so  covered  with  weeds,  that  we  could  with  difficulty  fish  them. 
The  latitude  of  the  south  point  of  the  entrance,  by  a  single  observation,  is 
58°  48' 25";  the  longitude  by  chronometers,  2°  55' 27";  and  the  variation, 
27°  32'  08",  westerly. 

At  ten  P.M.,  we  passed  two  miles  to  the  southward  of  the  remarkable 
islets  called  the  Stack  and  Skerry,  having  steered  N.W.  by  W.,  by  compass, 
(or  N.  88°  W.  true,)  from  Hoy  Head,  from  which  headland  they  are  certainly 
distant  fourteen  or  fifteen  leagues,  instead  of  ten,  as  laid  down  in  most  of 
the  charts.  Passing  in  sight  of  the  islands  of  Bara  and  Rona,  we  continued 
our-  course,  with  a  fresh  and  favourable  breeze,  to  the  westward. 

On  the  7th  of  June,  being  in  lat.  57°  30',  long.  34°  29',  we  tried  the  ^™'7 
current,  by  a  boat  moored  in  the  usual  manner  with  an  iron  pot,  but  none 
was  perceptible.  On  this  and  the  preceding  day  we  saAV,  for  the  first 
time,  large  flocks  of  Shearwaters,  (procellaria  puffinus,)  called  by  the  Green- 
land sailors  Cape  hens,  as  being  usually  met  with  only  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Cape  Farewell.  The  birds  we  met  with  about  the  Cape  were, 
besides  shearwaters  which  disappeared  immediately  after  passing  it,  the 
fulmar  petrels,  ('procellaria  glacialisj  kittiwakes,  (lams  rissa,)  looms,  (uria 
brunichii,)  dovekies,  (colymbus  grylle,)  rotges,  (aha  alle,)  a  few  terns, 
(sterna  MrundoJ  and  a  flock  or  two  of  ducks,  of  which  the  species  was 
uncertain. 

On  the  8th  at  noon,   being  in  lat.  57°  33',  long.  37°  48',  the  tempera-    Frid.  8. 

B   2 


'V4i  $ 


111 


1821. 
June. 


Sat.  9. 


4  SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 

ture  of  the  sea-water,  at  four  hundred  and  sixty  fathoms  below  the  sur- 
face, was  found,  by  Six's  thermometer,  to  be  40°. 7,  that  of  the  surface 
being  45±°,  and  of  the  air,  46|°.  A  number  of  bottle-nose  whales  were 
about  the  ships. 

On  the  9th,  we  saw  a  bird  much  resembling  a  fulmar  petrel  in  shape,  but 
differing  in  plumage  from  any  we  had  before  remarked,  its  general  colour 
being  a  dark-brown,  with  a  white  stripe  extending  completely  across  the 
wings,  along  the  tips  of  the  wing-covers,  both  above  and  below. 

After  entering  Davis'  Straits,  we  had  for  several  days  variable  and  un- 
settled weather,  the  wind  blowing  principally  from  the  southward,  with  a 
Thur.  14.  heavy  swell  from  the  same  quarter.     On  the  14th,  we  met  with  the  first  ice- 
berg, being  in  lat.  60°  48',  long.  53°  13'.     On  the  following  day,  the  tem- 
perature of  the  sea,  at  the  depth  of  four  hundred  and  sixty  fathoms,  was 
found,  by  Six's  thermometer,  to  be  40°,  that  of  the  surface  being  40|°,  and  of 
the  air  41  ±°.     While  in  the  entrance  of  Davis'  Strait,  we  met  with  two  or  three 
small  pieces  of  drift-wood  on  different  days ;  they  appeared  to  be  of  fir, 
and  to  have  been  a  considerable  time  in  the  water,  though  not  at  all  worm- 
eaten. 
Mon.  18.      Soon  after  daylight,  on  the  18th,  we  passed  a  quantity  of  loose  ice,  such  as 
usually  occurs  at  a  little  distance  from  the  main  body.     We  came  to  the  edge 
of  the  "  pack"  in  the  course  of  the  forenoon  and,  finding  here  a  consider- 
able swell,  tacked  off  and  on  till  the  water  should  become  smoother,  being 
at  noon  in  lat.  60°  50'  12",  long.  62°  08'  30".     On  the  day  before  we  made 
the  ice,  we  had  observed  a  great  number  of  looms  as  well  as  fulmar  petrels 
about  the  ships.     On  reaching  its  margin,  we  found,  besides  these,  large 
flocks  of  phalaropes,  (phalaropus  platyrinchmj  rotges,  dovekies,  and  one  or 
two  of  snow-buntings,  (emberiza  nivalis,)  the  latter  attended  by  their  enemy 
the  hawk,   (fako  peregrinusj.     The  temperature  of  the  sea-water  had  de- 
creased pretty  gradually  from  40°  on  the  morning  of  the  17th,  to  34°  on  that 
of  the  18th,  previously  to  our  making  the  ice  ;  after  which  it  soon  fell  to  32° 
and  30°,  being  its  usual  standard  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  body  of  ice, 
during  the  summer  months. 

Having  now  reached  the  situation  in  which  I  was  directed,  by  my  instruc- 
tions, to  clear  the  Nautilus  of  our  stores,  I  was  desirous  immediately  to 
commence  this  work,  in  order  to  be  ready  for  the  opening  of  the  ice  in 
Hudson's  Strait,  which  might  be  expected  to  occur  in  a  few  days.  There 
being  a  number  of  bergs  in  sight,  I  determined  to  anchor   the  ships  to 


^s&mMiammwjmBmKm. 


1821. 
July. 


Sun.  1. 


6  SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

one  of  them  for  this  purpose,  whenever  the  wind  and  weather  would  permit. 
So  unfavourable,  however,  did  these  prove,  and  so  often  were  we  interrupted 
by  the  closing  of  the  ice  upon  the  ships,  that  little  progress  could  be  made  in 
our  work  for  several  days.  The  difficulty  of  accomplishing  this  was  consider- 
ably increased  by  the  attention  necessary  to  keep  the  Nautilus  from  injury, 
which,  however,  the  strenuous  exertions  of  Lieutenant  Scrymgour  and  his 
people  happily  effected,  and  the  removal  of  the  stores  was  completed  by  the 
evening  of  the  30th  ;  when,  having  sent  our  despatches  and  letters  on  board 
the  Nautilus,  and  made  every  other  arrangement,  I  gave  Lieutenant  Scrym- 
gour his  instructions  to  return  to  England ;  and  at  one  A.M.  on  the  1st  of 
July,  he  parted  company,  while  the  Fury  and  Hecla  stood  in  towards  the 
ice.  A  whaler,  deeply  laden,  and  apparently  homeward  bound,  was  at  this 
time  in  sight  to  the  eastward. 

Towards  noon  we  made  the  ice,  being  in  lat.  62°  08'  37",  long.  62°  22'  49", 
and  ran  along  its  edge,  keeping  as  much  to  the  westward  as  the  trending 
of  it  would  allow.  We  thus  continued  to  run  through  "  sailing  ice  "  all 
Mon,  2.  night,  till,  having  by  the  chronometers  nearly  reached  the  longitude  as- 
signed to  Resolution  Island,  and  the  weather  becoming  thick,  we  hove  to 
on  the  morning  of  the  2d,  to  await  the  fog's  clearing  away,  that  we  might 
see  the  land.  Finding  soon  afterwards  that  the  ships  drifted  considerably, 
the  wind  being  fresh  from  the  eastward,  or  directly  towards  the  shore,  we 
made  fast  to  an  iceberg  for  better  security.  On  the  weather  clearing  up  about 
noon,  we  found  ourselves  close  to  Resolution  Island,  which  bore  from  S.  21°  E. 
to  S.  77°  W.  a  very  remarkable  piece  of  land  called  by  our  fishermen,  on 
account  of  its  peculiar  appearance,  the  "  Black  Bluff,"  being  distant  from  us 
five  or  six  miles.  Our  latitude  by  account,  at  this  time,  was  61°  59' 49", 
and  long.  64°  47'  50",  the  soundings  being  one  hundred  and  sixty-four 
fathoms,  on  a  rocky  bottom.  The  greater  part  of  this  land  was  now  clear 
of  snow,  which,  however,  still  filled  jmany  of  the  valleys,  and,  together  with 
the  fog  that  hung  over  it,  rendered  the  scene  before  us  indescribably  dreary 
and  disagreeable.  It  requires  a  few  days  to  be  passed  amidst  scenes  of  this 
nature,  to  erase,  in  a  certain  degree,  the  impressions  left  by  more  animated 
landscapes ;  and  not  till  then,  perhaps,  does  the  eye  become  familiarized, 
and  the  mind  reconciled,  to  prospects  of  utter  barrenness  and  desolation  such 
as  these  rugged  shores  present. 

Some  clear  water  appearing  to  the  southward,  we  made  sail  along  the 
island  in  that  direction,  passing  a  great  many  ice-bergs,  of  which  Captain 


amr" 


*  M  wxWi^  vA*j  *  i  \r  / ./  v  :y:»^Vv  7 


OF  A  NORTH  WEST  PASSAGE. 


1821. 
July. 


Lyon  counted  fifty-four  in  sight  at  one  time.  Some  of  these  were  of  large 
dimensions,  their  height  above  the  sea  being  not  less  than  two  hundred 
feet.  In  passing  one  of  them,  which  was  aground,  at  three  P.M.,  we  ob- 
served the  flood  running  past  it  to  the  W.  S.W.,  at  the  rate  of  two  or  two 
and  a  half  knots.  At  six  o'clock  the  ice  became  so  close  that  we  could  no 
longer  make  any  progress,  and  the  tide  carrying  us  soon  after  towards  a 
large  berg  aground  in  ninety  fathoms,  while  the  drift  ice  threatened  to 
enclose  us  betwixt  them,  we  ran  under  the  lee  of  the  berg  and,  by  great 
exertion  in  the  boats,  succeeded  in  getting  a  line  fast  to  it.  The  eddies  and 
Avhirlpools,  however,  caused  by  the  tide  running  at  the  rate  of  four  or  five 
knots,  rendered  the  ships  perfectly  unmanageable,  and  the  ice  closing  round 
us  before  a  hawser  could  be  run  out,  the  line  was  soon  snapped,  and  the  ships 
carried  towards  the  land,  the  boats  having  with  difficulty  been  got  on  board 
and  hoisted  up. 

We  lay  closely  beset,  though  drifting  rapidly  about  with  the  tides,  during  Tues.  3. 
the  night ;  and,  early  on  the  morning  of  the  3d,  the  ice  gradually  slack- 
ing about  us,  we  succeeded  in  getting  into  clear  water,  and  continued  our 
progress  without  obstruction,  at  the  distance  of  ten  or  twelve  miles  from 
the  land.  Within  this  the  ice  was  closely  packed  in  one  impenetrable  body 
the  whole  way  to  the  shore,  and  the  same  to  the  southward  and  eastward, 
leaving  a  navigable  channel,  four  or  five  miles  in  breadth,  leading  towards 
the  entrance  of  Hudson's  Strait. 

These  favourable  appearances, however,  continued  only  till  seven  P.M.,  when 
the  ice  opposed  our  further  progress  to  the  westward,  covering  the  whole 
sea  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  in  that  direction ;  the  ships  were,  there- 
fore, of  necessity  hove  to,  in  order  to  await  some  change  in  our  favour.  The 
tide  appeared  to  have  been  setting  to  the  eastward  from  noon  till  six  P.M., 
about  which  time  it  turned  in  the  opposite  direction,  and,  soon  after  we  had 
hove  to,  the  ships  were  carried  by  it  into  the  ice  which  formed  their  present 
impediment,  at  the  rate  of  more  than  three  miles  an  hour,  and  were  quickly 
beset  by  other  pieces  of  ice  drifting  in  upon  them  from  the  eastward.  The 
ice  here  consisted  principally  of  large,  though  loose,  masses  of  broken  floes, 


none 


covering 


more  than  a  quarter  of  an  acre,  and  few  so  much,  but 
having  many  high  hummocks,  and  drawing  a  great  deal  of  water.  We 
counted  also  above  thirty  bergs  in  sight  at  one  time,  and  observed  that 
many  of  them  were  carried  about  by  the  tides  with  great  rapidity. 

At  a  quarter  past  midnight  the  westerly  tide  slackened  ;  and  the  ice,  soon 


f  ,1 


■■'  % 


iM 


1821. 
July. 


hi  in 


8  SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

after,  began  to  drift  back  in  an  E.N.E.  direction  at  the  same  rate  as  before. 
We  remained  beset  the  whole  of  this  day,  driving  very  near  some  bergs  which 
lay  in  our  way,  but  unable  to  move  the  ships  in  any  direction.  We  were,  at 
noon,  in  lat.  61°  13'  05",  longitude  by  chronometers  64°  05'  10".  The  wea- 
ther being  foggy,  no  land  was  in  sight.  Besides  the  above  observations,  some 
were  also  obtained  for  the  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle,  which  was  83°  58'  51", 
and  for  the  irregularities  occasioned  by  local  attraction  ;  these  are  inserted  in 
the  Appendix.  Abundance  of  fine  fresh  water  was  found  upon  the  large  pieces 
of  floe-ice  to  which  the  ships  were  fast,  and  this  opportunity  was,  as  usual, 
taken  to  fill  as  much  as  we  required,  as  well  as  to  wash  the  ships'  com- 
panies' clothes. 
Thurs.  5.  A  fresh  breeze  from  the  W.S.W.  springing  up  on  the  morning  of  the  5th, 
accompanied  by  clearer  weather,  we  cast  off  to  try  what  could  be  done,  and 
succeeded  in  pushing  the  ships  in-shore,  where  we  found  a  "  lane"  of  tolerably 
open  water,  owing  to  the  ebb-tide  having  set  the  ice  off  in  a  body.  As  this 
tide  was  now  a  lee  one,  however,  we  could  Avith  difficulty  keep  the  ships  to 
windward  under  a  press  of  sail ;  and,  as  soon  as  we  had  come  to  the  end  of 
the  lane,  were  under  the  necessity  of  driving  back  to  the  eastward,  the 
little  distance  we  had  gained.  We  had  now  only  advanced  within  five  or  six 
miles  of  the  south  point  of  Resolution  Island,  which,  by  our  observations, 
lies  in  lat.  61°  20'  40",  long.  64°  55'  15".  The  former  of  these,  which 
is  the  result  of  several  meridian  altitudes,  is  eight  miles  to  the  southward  of 
the  position  usually  assigned  to  this  headland  in  the  charts.  A  league  or 
two  to  the  eastward  of  this,  we  observed  two  openings  having  the  appear- 
ance of  harbours,  which  I  should  have  been  glad  to  examine,  but  that  I  had 
found  the  flood-tide  always  set  directly  in  towards  the  land  for  the  first  or 
second  quarter.  As  this  was  now  about  to  make,  it  became  necessary  to 
the  safety  of  the  ships  to  gain  an  offing,  in  order  to  interpose  some  ice  be- 
tween them  and  the  shore.  We  accordingly  stood  off  for  a  few  miles,  and 
then  made  fast  to  a  floe-piece,  just  as  the  ice  came  crowding  back  from  the 
eastward  with  the  flood-tide.  The  stream  of  the  ebb  ran,  in  the  offing,  till 
seven  o'clock  this  evening,  and  we  could  perceive  that  it  remained  slack  for 
a  very  short  time. 
Frid.  6.  The  wind  shifted  to  the  south-eastward  in  the  course  of  the  night,  with  a 
strong  breeze  and  heavy  rain ;  and,  on  the  following  morning,  when  the 
ebb-tide  opened  the  ice  a  little,  a  considerable  swell  was  admitted  from  the 
sea,  causing  the  ships  to  strike  violently  and  almost  constantly  on  the 


• 


Jtt* 


'*M.fc.\  \>*.Y 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


1821. 
July. 


\^y"*^ 


masses  of  ice  alongside  of  them.  In  this  situation  they  continued  for  seve- 
ral hours  so  completely  beset  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  extricate  them, 
and  drifting  about  at  random  with  the  tides.  The  Hecla  was,  by  a  different 
set  of  the  stream,  separated  five  or  six  miles  from  the  Fury,  while  both 
ships  were  equally  hampered. 

The  effects  to  be  apprehended  from  exposure  to  the  swell  of  the  main 
ocean  constitute  the  peculiar  danger  of  first  entering  the  ice  about  the 
mouth  of  Hudson's  Strait,  which  is  completely  open  to  the  influence  of  the 
whole  Atlantic.  A  very  inconsiderable  quantity  of  loose  ice  is  sufficient  to 
shelter  a  ship  from  the  sea,  provided  it  be  closely  packed ;  but  when  the 
masses  are  separated  by  wind  or  tide,  so  as  to  admit  the  swell,  the  concus- 
sions soon  become  too  violent  for  a  ship,  strengthened  in  the  ordinary  way, 
to  Avithstand  for  any  length  of  time.  On  this  account,  it  is  prudent  not  to 
enter  the  ice  without  a  fair  prospect  of  getting  seven  or  eight  leagues  within 
the  margin.  For  the  same  reason,  also,  when  likely  to  be  beset  near  the  sea, 
it  is  better  to  make  a  ship  fast  to  small  than  to  large  pieces,  in  order  to  avoid 
the  heavier  concussions  occasioned  by  the  latter. 

A  thick  fog  prevailed  during  most  of   the  day,   with  only   occasional 
intervals  of  clear  weather.     Soon  after  noon,  we  suddenly  found  ourselves 
close  to  a  large  berg,  of  which  there  were  many  about  us,  and  Avhich  are 
dangerous  neighbours  in  so  rapid  a  tide-way.     The  ice  near  us  being  fortu- 
nately slack  at  this  time,  a  light  air  of  wind,  with  the  boats  a-head,  enabled 
us  to  get  clear  of  it.     Those  bergs  which  were  not  aground  we  observed  to 
drift  to  and  fro  with  each  tide,  fully  twice  as  fast  and,  consequently,  twice 
as  far  as  the  masses  of  field-ice ;  which  circumstance  seems  to  shew  that  the 
stream  must  extend  very  far  below  the  surface,  many  of  these  immense 
bodies  being  from  fifty  to  ninety  feet  above  the  surface  of  the   sea  and 
reaching,  probably,  almost  as  many  fathoms  below  it.     The  bergs  which  thus 
drive  about  are,  however,  less  dangerous  to  approach  than  those   aground, 
against  which  a  ship  is  liable  to  be  carried  with  the  whole  force  of  the  tide. 
The  fog  suddenly  clearing  away,  at  6  P.M.,   we  found  ourselves  close 
under  Resolution  Island,  though  we  could  obtain  no  soundings  with  one 
hundred  and  ten  fathoms  of  line.     In  standing  off  we  were  soon  again  en- 
veloped in  fog  and,  being  once  more  beset  as  soon  as  the  flood-tide  made, 
were  drifted  about  during  the  night,  without  knowing  in  what  direction  we 
went.     The  weather  again  clearing  up  for  a  short  time,  on  the  evening  of 
the  7th,  we  found,  to  our  great  surprise,  that  the  Hecla  had  drifted  eleven  Sat.  7. 


10 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
July. 


:|»jr 


0 


or  twelve  miles  to  the  westward  of  us,  though  still  beset  in  the  ice.  This 
circumstance  appeared  the  more  extraordinary,  as  the  ships  had  been  close 
together  only  a  few  hours  before,  and  shews  in  a  very  striking  manner 
the  irregularity  of  the  tides  in  this  neighbourhood.  In  the  afternoon  an 
attempt  was  made  to  join  the  Hecla  ;  but  a  gale  coming  on  from  the  south- 
ward and  westward,  with  the  same  thick  Aveather  as  before,  we  were  soon 
set  fast  again  among  heavy  masses  of  floe-ice.  The  soundings  were  from 
one  hundred  and  forty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty-five  fathoms,  upon  a  hard 
rocky  bottom,  at  the  distance  of  about  three  leagues  from  the  land.  Some 
water  brought  up,  in  the  course  of  the  day,  from  one  hundred  and  ninety 
fathoms,  was  at  the  temperature  of  32°,  that  of  the  surface  being  31°,  and  of 
the  air  33|°. 

Sun.  8.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  an  opportunity  offered  of  getting  into  a 
lane  of  clear  water,  which  here,  from  the  rapidity  of  the  tides,  often  forms 
and  disappears  again  with  astonishing  quickness.  On  standing  towards  the 
Hecla,  which  was  still  beset,  I  was  informed  by  telegraph  that  she  had 
suffered  no  material  injury,  except  in  the  loss  of  a  bower  anchor,  which  was 
broken  off  in  the  shank  by  a  heavy  blow  from  a  mass  of  ice.  In  the  course  of 
this  day,  however,  she  narrowly  escaped  a  much  more  serious  disaster,  being 
carried  by  the  ice  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  shore,  and  close  to 
several  rocks  lying  off  it,  and  nearly  swept  into  a  dangerous  inlet.  In 
this  situation,  all  that  could  be  done  was  to  endeavour  to  warp  round  the 
large  floe  piece  to  which  she  was  attached ;  but  this  attempt  Avas  completely 
frustrated  by  the  floe  always  turning  as  soon  as  any  strain  was  thus  put  upon 
it.  In  this  perilous  situation  she  remained  for  several  hours,  after  which, 
by  great  exertions,  she  succeeded  in  getting  out  of  the  ice,  and  rejoined  us 
in  the  evening.  The  weather  was  beautifully  clear  during  the  whole  of  this 
day,  though  the  wind  was  from  the  southward,  and  sometimes  a  point  or 
two  to  the  eastward  of  south.  For  the  first  time,  also,  since  Ave  came 
off  Hudson's  Strait,  for  Ave  had  scarcely  yet  entered  it,  a  large  space  of 
Avater  remained  open  during  the  Avhole  of  the  flood-tide,  so  that  Ave  Avere 
enabled  to  advance  a  league  or  tAVo  farther  to  the  Avestward  than  before. 

Mon.  9.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  however,  the  ice  again  closed  in  upon 
us,  and  Ave  remained  immoveably  beset  for  a  Aveek,  during  which  time, 
to  prevent  separation,  the  ships  were  made  fast  to  the  same  floe-piece, 
and  Avere  found  to  drift  from  one  to  four  or  five  miles  to  the  southward 
daily,  and  rather  to  the  westAvard.     It  Avas,  hoAvever,  a  matter  of  agreeable 


mi   ■!  nun  ill*  ■■■ 


A'J'A'W 


■^i'.-W.v^V-.  >s&v 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE.  11 

surprise  to  us  to  find  the  masses  of  ice  so  quiet  among  themselves  as  to  give  us 
no  disturbance  ;  a  circumstance  that  seemed  to  indicate  a  greater  regularity 
in  the  set  of  the  tides  near  the  centre  of  Hudson's  Strait,  carrying  the 
whole  of  the  ice  along  in  one  body,  instead  of  producing  the  violent 
cross-sets  which  we  had  experienced  in-shore.  In  the  middle  of  the  strait 
we  could  obtain  no  soundings  with  three  hundred  fathoms  of  line.  The 
sea- water  was  frequently  brought  up  in  Dr.  Marcet's  bottle  from  different 
depths  below  the  surface,  when  its  temperature  was  found  to  be  as  follows  : 


DAY. 

Time. 

Depth 

in 

_Fathoms. 

Temp. 

Surface 

Water. 

Air 

in 

Shade. 

Air 
in 
Sun. 

July     9 

8  A.M. 

253 

32  8 

31 

34 



„    10 

Noon. 

243 

34 

321 

37 

60 

„     12 

Noon. 

320 

33 

30.7 

401 

44 

„     13 

4  P.M. 

310 

33 

31 

42 

82 

„     14 

8  P.M. 

313 

31 

31 

35 

— 

„     17 

8  A.M. 

315 

32.8 

31 

35 

— 

„     19 

11.30  A.M. 

118 

32 

34 

45 

— 

„     21 

4  P.M. 

106 

314 

34 

44 

— 

On  the  13th,  both  ships'  companies  were  exercised  in  firing  at  a  target  Frid.  13. 
on  the  ice,  as  well  for  the  purpose  of  giving  them  occupation,  as  of 
finding  out  who  were  our  best  shots.  On  the  same  afternoon,  we  saw 
two  ships  beset  to  the  northward,  which  we  supposed  to  be  those  bound 
to  the  Hudson's  Bay  factories.  They  were  joined  the  next  day  by  a  Sat.  14. 
third  ship,  which  afterwards  proved  to  be,  as  we  conjectured,  the  Lord 
Wellington,  having  on  board  settlers  for  the  Red  River.  The  ice  being 
somewhat  more  slack  about  the  ships  on  the  15th,  we  cast  off  and  made  Sun.  15. 
sail  at  nine  P.M.;  but  after  running  with  difficulty  about  a  mile  to  the 
W.bN.,  we  were  obliged  to  make  fast  to  a  small  berg  near  us.  Here  we 
remained  till  eleven  P.M.,  the  wind  blowing  a  gale  from  the  N.E.,  when 
the  ice  closing  in  suddenly  and  violently  to  leeward  of  the  berg,  forced 
the  ships  against  it,  and  was  near  carrying  away  the  Hecla's  bowsprit  by 
the  pressure.  The  Fury  also  received  a  heavy  "  nip,"  which,  lifting  her 
abaft,  made  her  timbers  crack  a  good  deal  about  the  quarters,  but  no  material 
injury  was  sustained.  To  avoid,  however,  a  repetition  of  this  occurrence, 
we  cast  off,  and  allowed  the  ships  to  take  their  chance  among  the  loose 
ice  for  the  rest  of  the  night,  which  was  dusky  about  midnight. 

The  ice  being  rather  less  close  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  we  made  sail 

c  2 


12 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821.  to  the  westward,  at  7.45  A.M.,  and  continued  "boring"  in  that  direction 
J^J  the  whole  day,  which  enabled  us  to  join  the  three  strange  ships.  They 
Mon.  l6.proVed  to  be,  as  we  had  supposed,  the  Prince  of  Wales,  Eddystone,  and 
Lord  Wellington,  bound  to  Hudson's  Bay.  I  sent  a  boat  to  the  former,  to 
request  Mr.  Davidson,  the  master,  to  come  on  board,  which  he  immediately 
did.  From  him  we  learned  that  the  Lord  Wellington,  having  on  board 
one  hundred  and  sixty  settlers  for  the  Red  River,  principally  foreigners, 
of  both  sexes  and  every  age,  had  now  been  twenty  days  among  the  ice, 
and  had  been  drifted  about  in  various  directions  at  no  small  risk  to  the 
ship.  Mr.  Davidson  considered  that  he  had  arrived  here  rather  too  early 
for  advancing  to  the  westward,  and  strongly  insisted  on  the  necessity 
of  first  getting  to  the  northward,  or  in-shore,  before  we  could  hope  to  make 
any  progress ; — a  measure,  the  expediency  of  which  is  well  known  to  all 
those  accustomed  to  the  navigation  of  icy  seas.  By  the  Prince  of  Wales 
we  sent  our  last  letters  for  our  friends  in  England ;  and  I  took  the  same 
opportunity  to  acquaint  the  Secretary  of  the  Admiralty  with  the  proceedings 
of  the  Expedition  up  to  this  date. 
Tues.  17.  On  the  17th,  the  weather  was  beautifully  fine  and  warm  with  very  little 
wind.  A  thermometer  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays  on  board  stood,  at  noon, 
as  high  as  81°;  on  a  pole  on  the  ice  it  was  at  60°;  and  in  the  shade  from 
41°  to  43°.  The  horizon  was  very  much  distorted  by  refraction  in  all  direc- 
tions, causing  the  ice  to  assume  a  great  variety  of  fantastic  shapes,  but 
generally  appearing  like  a  high  wall,  consisting  of  innumerable  perpendicu- 
lar columns,  and  completely  surrounding  us.  Our  latitude  observed  at 
noon  was  61°  09'  17";  the  longitude,  by  chronometers,  being  67°  11'  10"; 
and  we  had  soundings  in  three  hundred  and  forty  fathoms  on  a  rocky  bottom. 
Grass  or  Green  Island  time,  bore  from  S.  27°  W.,  to  S.  46°  W.,  its  distance 
being  from  three  to  five  leagues,  but  uncertain,  on  account  of  the  extra- 
ordinary appearance  given  to  it  by  refraction.  The  state  of  the  ice  being 
rather  more  favourable  in  the  afternoon,  we  made  sail  to  the  northward 
Wed.  18.  in  company  with  the  Hudson's  Bay  ships,  and  had,  on  the  following  day, 
made  some  progress  towards  a  remarkable  headland  called  the  East  Bluff. 
A  few  leagues  to  the  westward  of  this  is  a  smooth  part  of  the  land,  rather 
higher  than  that  in  its  neighbourhood  and,  for  an  extent  of  one  or  two 
miles,  completely  covered  with  snow.  The  snow  remains  upon  it,  as  Mr. 
Davidson  informed  us,  the  whole  summer,  as  they  find  the  land  presenting 
the  same  appearance  on  their  return  through   the   strait  in   the  autumn. 


li'iHii 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


13 


This  circumstance,  which  has  obtained  for  it  the  name  of  "Terra  Nivea"    1 821 1 
upon  the  charts,  I  do  not  know  how  to  account  for,  as  the  height  of  the  land  ^^J 
above  the  level  of  the  sea  cannot  certainly  much  exceed  a  thousand  feet. 

At  eight  A.M.,  on  the  20th,  we  cast  off  and  made  sail,  the  ice  consisting  Frid.  20. 
of  heavy  loose  masses,  generally  open  enough  to  allow  a  ship  to  sail  be- 
tween them,  if  favoured  by  a  commanding  breeze.  The  tides  here  gave  us 
no  sort  of  disturbance,  nor  could  we  perceive  exactly  in  what  direction 
they  set.  The  weather  was  extremely  clear  and  the  atmosphere  warm  and 
comfortable.  A  thermometer,  freely  suspended  in  the  sun,  at  two  P.M., 
stood  at  74°;  when  placed  upon  some  black-painted  lead,  on  deck,  at  116°; 
and  in  the  shade,  at  45°. 

Proceeding  slowly  to  the  westward,  we  had  reached  at  noon  on  the  21st  Sat.  21. 
the  lat.  of  61°  50'  13",  long.,  by  chronometers  67°  07'  35".  In  this  situation 
several  islands  were  in  sight  to  the  northward  and  westward,  and,  among  the 
rest,  a  remarkable  one  called  Saddle-back  on  account  of  its  shape.  The  wind 
backing  to  the  westward  in  the  afternoon,  we  anchored  the  ships  to  the 
largest  floe-piece  we  could  find,  there  not  being  room  to  beat  to  windward. 
While  thus  employed  we  heard  voices  in-shore,  which  we  soon  knew  to  be 
those  of  some  Esquimaux  coming  off  to  us.  Shortly  after,  several  canoes  made 
their  appearance  ;  and  seventeen  of  these  people  came  alongside  the  Fury. 
Having  hauled  their  kayaks  (canoes)  upon  the  floe,  they  began  to  barter 
their  commodities,  consisting  of  seal  and  whale  blubber,  whale-bone,  spears, 
lines,  and  the  skins  of  the  seal,  bear,  fox,  deer,  and  dog.  Our  first  endea- 
vour was  to  procure  as  much  oil  as  possible,  of  which,  as  we  had  been  in- 
formed by  the  Hudson's  Bay  ships,  several  tons  are  thus  almost  annually 
obtained  from  these  people.  We  soon  found  that  they  had  been  well 
accustomed  to  bargain-making,  for  it  was  with  some  difficulty  that  we 
could  prevail  upon  them  to  sell  the  oil  for  any  thing  of  reasonable  value. 
They  frequently  gave  us  to  understand  that  they  wanted  saws  and  har- 
poons in  exchange  for  it,  and  as  these  were  articles  which  Ave  could  not 
spare,  it  Avas  not  Avithout  trouble  that  Ave  obtained,  in  the  course  of  the  even- 
ing, two  barrels  of  blubber  in  exchange  for  several  knives,  large  nails,  and 
pieces  of  iron  hoop,  Avhich  Avas  certainly  a  dear  bargain  on  our  side.  If  they 
saw  more  than  one  of  these  at  a  time,  they  would  try  hard  to  get  the  Avhole 
for  the  commodity  they  were  offering,  though,  when  Ave  had  for  some  time 
persisted  in  refusing,  they  Avould  not  only  accept  Avhat  Avas  offered,  but  jump 
for  joy  at  having  obtained  it.     They  ahvays  licked  the  articles  given  them, 


14 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 

July. 


■■w 


and  in  one  instance  only  did  we  notice  any  inclination  to  break  the  contract 
after  this  process  had  been  gone  through. 

Shortly  after  these  men  had  arrived,  a  large  oomiaJc,  or  women's  boat,  made 
its  appearance,  containing  six  or  seven  females  and  four  men,  the  oldest  of 
the  latter,  as  seemed  usual  among  them,  steering  the  boat  with  a  rude  oar 
of  wood.  The  women  could  not  be  induced  to  land  upon  the  floe,  but  held 
up  skins  and  small  narrow  strips  of  well-tanned  leather  to  exchange,  loudly 
vociferating  pilletay  (give  me)  the  whole  time.  There  were  in  this  boat  seve- 
ral skins  of  oil  and  blubber,  which  I  tried  hard  to  purchase,  but  nothing- 
could  induce  the  old  man  to  part  with  more  than  one  skin  of  it ;  for  what 
reason  I  could  not  tell,  except  that  he  hoped,  by  perseverance,  to  obtain  a 
higher  price.  On  my  desiring  our  men  to  hand  out  a  second  skin  of  oil,  as 
an  equivalent  for  which  I  put  into  the  old  man's  hand  a  second  knife,  he  re- 
sisted most  vehemently,  pushing  our  men  aside  in  the  boat  with  a  violence  I 
have  never  seen  the  Esquimaux  use  on  any  other  occasion.  One  of  the 
younger  men  then  came  forward  and  Avas  lifting  up  the  stretcher  of  their 
boat  to  strike  our  people,  who  were  good-humouredly  laughing  at  the  old 
man's  violence  ;  when  I  thought  it  high  time  to  interpose,  and,  raising  a  boat- 
hook  over  the  head  of  the  Esquimaux,  as  if  about  to  strike  them,  soon  brought 
them  into  a  cooler  mood  ;  after  which,  to  prevent  further  altercation,  I  or- 
dered our  people  out  of  the  boat.  We  had,  by  this  time,  succeeded  in  pur- 
chasing all  the  oil  brought  by  the  first  canoes,  and  as  the  old  fellow,  who  was 
commanding  officer  of  the  oomiak,  obstinately  persisted  in  his  refusal  to  sell 
his,  I  ordered  him  away,  when  he  immediately  rowed  to  the  Hecla  and„  as 
I  was  afterwards  informed  by  Captain  Lyon,  sold  his  oil  for  less  than  he 
might  have  obtained  at  first.  Four  other  oomiaks  afterwards  came  from  the 
shore,  from  which  we  were  distant  five  or  six  miles.  Each  of  these  contained 
from  fourteen  to  twenty-six  persons,  the  majority  being  females  and  young 
children.  Upon  the  whole,  not  less  than  one  hundred  of  the  natives  visited 
the  ships  in  the  course  of  the  evening. 

These  people  possessed  in  an  eminent  degree  the  disposition  to  steal  all 
they  could  lay  their  hands  on,  which  has  almost  universally  been  imputed 
to  every  tribe  of  Esquimaux  hitherto  visited  by  Europeans.  They  tried,  more 
than  once,  the  art  of  picking  our  pockets,  and  were  as  bold  and  unembar- 
rassed as  ever,  immediately  after  detection.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  the 
horribly  disgusting  manner  in  which  they  sat  down,  as  soon  as  they  felt 
hungry,  to  eat  their  raw  blubber,  and  to  suck  the  oil  remaining  on  the  skins 


^---,  .A.»»^-.  ^- .  *i  ^,™  ^— ^»^—  - 


lAM&fxto .     .  v**j>      ■o/v:y.»^vwSiA>^vi.*.vt.v  ..>* 


• 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


15 


we  had  just  emptied,  the  very  smell  of  which,  as  well  as  the  appearance,    1821. 


was  to  us  almost  insufferable.     The  disgust  which  our  seamen  could  not 


July. 


help  expressing  at  this  sight  seemed  to  create  in  the  Esquimaux  the  most 
malicious  amusement ;  and  when  our  people  turned  away  literally  unable 
to  bear  the  sight  without  being  sick,  they  would,  as  a  good  joke  among 
themselves,  run  after  them  holding  out  a  piece  of  blubber  or  raw  seal's 
flesh,  dripping  with  oil  and  filth,  as  if  inviting  them  to  partake  of  it.  Both 
the  men  and  women  were  guilty  of  still  more  disgusting  indecencies,  which 
seemed  to  afford  them  amazing  diversion.  A  worse  trait  even  than  all 
these  was  displayed  by  two  women  alongside  the  Hecla,  who,  in  a  manner 
too  unequivocal  to  be  misunderstood,  offered  to  barter  their  children  for 
some  article  of  trifling  value,  beginning  very  deliberately  to  strip  them  of 
their  clothes,  which  they  did  not  choose  to  consider  as  included  in  the  in- 
tended bargain. 

Upon  the  whole,  it  Avas  impossible  for  us  not  to  receive  a  very  unfavourable 
impression  of  the  general  behaviour,  and  moral  character,  of  the  natives  of 
this  part  of  Hudson's  Strait,  who  seem  to  have  acquired,  by  an  annual  inter- 
course with  our  ships  for  nearly  a  hundred  years,  many  of  the  vices  which 
unhappily  attend  a  first  intercourse  with  the  civilized  world,  without  having 
imbibed  any  of  the  virtues  or  refinements  which  adorn  and  render  it  happy. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  22d,  a  number  of  canoes  repeated  their  visit  Sund.22. 
to  us,  the  Esquimaux  having  hauled  them  upon  a  piece  of  ice  to  lodge  for  the 
night.  In  the  forenoon,  an  oomiak  also  came  from  the  shore,  and  as  no  in- 
tercourse with  them  was  permitted  till  after  divine  service,  they  became  very 
impatient  to  barter  their  commodities,  and  walked  on  the  ice  alongside  the 
ship,  with  a  number  of  trifling  things  in  their  hands,  vociferating  "  pilletay  " 
to  such  a  degree  that  we  could  hardly  hear  ourselves  speak.  Some  more  oil 
was  obtained  in  exchange  for  pieces  of  iron  hoop,  and,  at  a  quarter  before 
noon,  the  wind  coming  more  to  the  southward  and  the  ice  being  somewhat 
less  close  than  before,  we  cast  off  and  made  sail  up  the  strait. 

The  wind  and  ice  combined  to  favour  us  more  and  more  as  we  proceeded., 
the  former  both  in  strength  and  direction,  and  the  latter  by  opening  into 
loose  streams ;  so  that,  for  the  first  time  since  we  entered  Hudson's  Strait, 
we  were  now  enabled  to  set  all  the  studding-sails,  with  some  prospect 
of  deriving  advantage  from  them.  The  Hudson's  Bay  ships  remained  at 
anchor  some  time  after  we  made  sail,  and  in  the  course  of  the  evening  we 
finally  lost  sight  of  them.     From  this  circumstance,  as  well  as  from  the 


'** 


m 


"^ 


\ 


fel  *  %Cff^- 


! 


1821. 
July. 


16 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


unimpeded  progress  we  had  just  began  to  make  to  the  westward,  it  was  now 
only  that  we  considered  our  voyage  as  having  fairly  commenced. 

At  five  P.M.,  Ave  were  abreast  of  Saddleback,  which  we  make  in  lat.  62°  11', 
long.  67°  43' ;  but,  having  no  observations  when  in  its  immediate  neighbour- 
hood, it  is  thus  laid  down  by  our  dead-reckoning  only.  The  small  cluster 
of  islands  to  which  this  belongs  is  called  in  the  charts  the  middle  Savage 
Islands  ;  a  name  by  which  Mr.  Davidson  did  not  know  them,  nor  can  I  find 
any  authority  for  it,  but  which  may  serve  to  distinguish  them  as  well  as  any 
other.  Though  there  appeared  to  be  several  small  openings  as  if  between 
islands  along  this  coast,  yet  we  saw  none  of  any  magnitude  like  that  marked 
"  Jackman's  Sound,"  in  Mr.  Arrowsmith's  chart,  which  we  must  have  plainly 
noticed  had  it  existed  as  there  laid  down.  The  fact  is,  that  the  inlet,  so 
called  by  Sir  Martin  Frobisher  in  the  year  1576,  has  its  only  known  entrance 
on  the  south  shore  of  the  strait  bearing  the  name  of  that  navigator,  its  com- 
munication with  Hudson's  Strait  being  a  matter  of  very  doubtful  conjecture. 
I  believe,  indeed,  we  may  safely  consider  the  land,  by  whatever  name  it  may 
be  designated,  as  continuous  the  whole  way  from  the  East  Bluff,  as  far  west- 
ward as  North  Bay.  When  abreast  of  Saddleback,  at  the  distance  of  five  or 
six  miles,  we  had  from  fifty  to  sixty  fathoms'  water.  At  half-past  four  P.M., 
the  tide  mark  upon  the  grounded  ice-bergs  was  about  ten  feet,  and  the 
stream,  being  that  of  ebb,  was  setting  strong  to  the  eastward. 

On  the  morning  of  the  24th,  we  found,  on  standing  in-shore,  that  we  were 
off  the  great  opening  called  North  Bay,  the  largest  and  highest  of  the  Upper 
Savage  Islands*,  forming  the  western  point  of  its  entrance.  The  North 
Bluff,  a  remarkable  promontory,  being  the  eastern  point  of  the  large  portion 
of  nameless  land  lying  immediately  above  the  Savage  Islands,  appears  very 
conspicuous  when  standing  in  from  the  S.S.E.  From  this  headland  the 
Hudson's  Bay  ships  not  unfrequently  take  their  departure,  and  strike  off 
more  to  the  westward  towards  the  entrance  of  the  bay  ;  though  this  depends, 
in  some  measure,  on  the  situation  of  the  ice,  which  is  somewhat  different  at 
the  same  period  of  different  seasons.  It  is,  however,  a  general  rule  with 
them  to  keep  close  along  the  northern  shores  of  the  strait,  till  the  openness 

*  Under  these  Islands  ("  the  easternmost  saving  one")  Baffin  anchored  A.  D.  1615, 
and  named  them  the  Savage  Islands.  He  describes  them  as  "  having  a  great  sound  or 
indraught  between  the  north  shore  and  them,"  and  lays  down  his  anchorage  in  latitude 
62°  30',  long.,  "  near  72°."  Our  observations  place  it  2§  miles  to  the  northward,  and 
1°  52'  to  the  eastward  of  that  position. 


L£JU 


UAV 


V2ZA\*X-(  '.v  *  ■>  1  y*^^^  ^ ,  fe _ ,     f  .^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


17 


of  the  sea  offers  a  prospect  of  making  a  fair  run  to  the  westward.  Mr.  Da- 
vidson informed  me  that,  after  leaving  this  shore,  they  seldom  meet  with  any 
very  serious  obstruction,  except  from  a  body  of  ice  which  they  usually  have 
to  penetrate  near  Charles's  Island,  and  which,  from  the  frequency  of  its  oc- 
currence in  that  situation,  has  obtained  the  name  of  "  Charles's  Patch." 
Long  experience  has  brought  those  who  frequent  this  navigation  to  the  con- 
clusion that,  in  most  seasons,  no  advantage  is  to  be  gained  by  attempting  to 
enter  Hudson's  Strait  earlier  than  the  first  week  in  July,  the  annual  disruption 
of  the  ice  which  occupies  the  upper  and  middle  parts  of  the  strait  being  sup- 
posed not  to  take  place  till  about  this  time.  In  the  course  of  our  single  year's 
experience  in  these  parts,  we  have  seen  nothing  to  recommend  a  practice  dif- 
ferent from  that  at  present  pursued  by  the  ships  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company. 
In  the  afternoon,  having  a  contrary  wind,  against  which  little  progress  could 
be  made,  I  landed,  at  half-past  four,  upon  the  easternmost  of  the  Savage 
Islands,  accompanied  by  several  of  the  officers,  and  was  shortly  after  joined 
by  Captain  Lyon.  The  lower  parts  of  this  island  are  composed  of  gneiss  and 
granite,  and  the  upper  part  of  mica  slate  in  thin  laminse,  and  containing  gar- 
nets in  some  specimens.  At  the  foot  of  the  cliffs,  which  rise  from  four  to  five 
hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  many  huge  separate  masses  of  granite 
occurred,  in  which  the  red  feldspar,  white  quartz,  and  plates  of  dark-coloured 
mica  were  large  and  distinct.  Veins  also  of  white  quartz,  eight  or  ten  inches 
wide,  and  nearly  in  a  vertical  position,  traverse  the  rocks  in  some  parts  of  the 
island.  After  making  the  usual  observations  for  the  longitude  and  variation, 
we  ascended  to  the  highest  part  of  the  island,  which  is  from  six  to  eight  hun- 
dred feet  above  the  sea,  in  order  to  take  an  eye-sketch  and  angles  of  the 
surrounding  lands.  We  here  counted  eleven  islands,  which  may  properly 
be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  group  called  the  Upper  Savage  Islands, 
occupying  nearly  the  whole  space  between  that  on  which  we  stood,  the 
largest  and  highest  of  the  whole,  and  the  western  shore.  The  south  point 
of  this  island  is  comparatively  low,  and  appeared  to  have  shoal  water  off  it 
to  the  distance  of  half  a  mile.  Captain  Lyon  here  noticed  the  remains  of 
some  Esquimaux  habitations,  consisting,  as  usual,  of  small  rude  circles  of 
rough  stones*  ;  and  one  human  skull  was  also  found  there.     We  met  with  a 

*  These  circles  are,  in  the  Narrative  of  the  former  Voyage,  erroneously  called  "  huts," 
as  we  then  took  them  to  be  the  remains  of  the  winter  habitations  of  the  Esquimaux  ; 
whereas,  they  are  exclusively  used  for  extending  the  skins  composing  their  summer  tents. 


1821. 
July. 


'^ 


■I 


■SK^ 


18 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


»■■:.■.  | 


':!  !;' 


1821.  few  pieces  0f  drift  fir-wood,  some  of  which  having  been  sawed  and  others 
,  ^w  chipped,  shewed  that  these  people  were  not  in  want  of  wood,  since  they 
could  thus  afford  to  leave  it  behind  them  in  no  inconsiderable  quantity.  The 
only  animals  seen  were  one  hare,  which  was  very  dark  on  the  back,  a  single 
grouse,  a  bird  like  a  snipe,  and  some  flocks  of  snoAV  buntings  ;  but  the  dung 
of  hares  Avas  abundant.  There  was  in  some  places  a  good  deal  of  vegeta- 
tion, and  among  the  specimens  collected,  were  several  of  those  we  had  be- 
fore met  with  in  the  polar  regions,  especially  the  sorrel,  (rumex  digynus), 
scurvy-grass,  poppy,  Cpapaver  midicaulej  saxifrage,  (saxifraga  oppositifoliaj, 
dwarf  willow,  and  andromeda  tetragona,  the  latter  being  in  flower,  and  growing 
in  great  abundance  on  the  higher  parts  of  the  island.  On  the  hills  were 
some  large  ponds  of  water,  which  poured  their  streams  down  the  cliffs  into 
the  sea,  through  arches  formed  under  the  snow  with  which  the  sides  of  the 
hills  were  still  covered. 

The  latitude  of  our  place  of  observation  is  62°  31'  30",  its  longitude,  by 
chronometers,  69°  57'  17",  and  the  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle  52°  37'  04" 
westerly.  When  we  landed,  at  forty  minutes  after  four,  P.M.,  the  tide  had 
ebbed  about  two  feet  and  a  half ;  and  at  twenty  minutes  after  seven  when  we 
left  the  island,  it  had  fallen  thirteen  feet  more  ;  from  which  the  whole  fall  of 
this  tide,  though  at  the  dead  of  the  neaps,  may  be  considered  as  above  twenty- 
nine  feet.  We  had  hauled  our  boats  up  on  a  smooth  inclined  rock,  but,  on 
our  return  from  the  hills,  had  to  lower  them  down  ten  or  twelve  feet  perpen- 
dicular. By  these  observations  it  was  concluded  that  the  time  of  high  water  at 
full  and  change,  was  about  thirty-five  minutes  past  seven  o'clock.  The  current, 
by  a  boat  moored  in  the  offing,  was  found  to  set  S.S.E.  \  E.,  three  quarters  of  a 
mile  per  hour,  and  as  it  appears  to  have  been  running  in  the  same  direction 
during  the  whole  time  that  we  were  on  shore,  it  may  be  presumed  that  the 
ebb  tide  comes  down  the  bay,  or  from  the  northward  and  westward.  The  time 
of  high  water,  deduced  from  our  observations,  is  about  two  hours  earlier  than 
that  usually  marked  in  the  charts.  This  discrepancy  may  partly  arise  from  an 
actual  difference  to  that  amount,  betAveen  the  time  of  high  Avateron  shore, 
and  that  of  the  change  of  tide  in  the  offing,  Avhere  it  is  most  common,  as  well 
as  most  useful,  for  seamen  in  general  to  observe  it. 

From  the  top  of  the  hill  Ave  could  see  land  nearly  all  round  the  bay ;  but 
in  the  middle  it  Avas  so  distant  as  by  no  means  to  give  us  an  idea  of  its  entire 
continuity.     Had  it  been  our  business  to  explore  it,  the  further  examination 


! 


;        i 


.    A 


■*fXiJZZA\*-  i  *  •J'»>n\£iA> s  v» ■  •  ,\t - \  •  > «. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE.  19 

would  have  been  attended  with  no  great  difficulty,  as  it  was  entirely  free  from    ^21. 
ice,  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  except  one  or  two  bergs,  and  those  of  no  <-*v^ 
very  large  dimensions.     These  bodies  of  ice  became  less  and  less  numerous 
as  we  advanced  up  the  strait  from  Resolution  Island,  and  none  were  seen  after 
we  had  proceeded  a  few  leagues  beyond  our  present  station. 

As  soon  as  we  returned  on  board,  all  sail  was  made  to  windward,  the 
breeze  being  still  from  the  westward  and  the  sea  almost  free  from  ice.  On 
the  25th  we  had  fog  occasionally  which,  however,  cleared  away  in  the  after-  Wed.  25. 
noon,  and  at  eight  P.  M.,  in  stretching  to  the  southward,  we  saw  the  hills  on 
the  Labrador  coast,  from  which  our  estimated  distance  was  eight  leagues. 
Having  then  tacked  and  stood  to  the  northward  fifteen  miles  and  a  half  by 
the  patent  log,  we  considered  ourselves  eight  or  nine  miles  from  the  north 
shore  ;  so  that  the  distance  across  the  strait  in  this  part,  which  is  the  nar- 
rowest, appears  to  be  very  correctly  laid  down  at  about  sixteen  leagues  in 
Mr.  Arrowsmith's  chart. 

We  continued  to  stand  off  and  on,  according  to  the  tides,  during  the  night,  Thur.26. 
which  was  clear  and  fine  ;  and  found  in  the  morning  that  we  had  gained  a 
great  deal  of  ground  to  the  westward,  which  we  continued  to  do  throughout 
the  day,  though  the  wind  blew  steadily  against  us.  The  latitude,  by  observa- 
tion at  noon,  was  62°  32'  27",  the  longitude,  by  chronometers,  being  71°  36'  30". 
In  the  afternoon  we  stood  well  in  to  the  land,  in  order  to  obtain  good 
angles  for  the  survey.  There  are,  on  this  part  of  the  coast,  several  islands 
and  small  inlets,  one  of  the  latter  appearing  like  a  harbour,  a  little  to  the 
eastward  of  which  we  had  ninety -four  fathoms  at  the  distance  of  two  miles 
and  a  half  from  the  shore.  A  few  miles  to  the  westward  of  this  inlet  lies  a 
high  and  craggy  island,  remarkable  on  account  of  its  yellow  sand-like  colour, 
by  which  it  may  be  distinguished  from  any  of  the  rest  of  the  numerous 
islands.  We  saw  no  ice  this  day,  except  a  few  streams  here  and  there,  but 
the  smoothness  of  the  water  indicated  our  near  approach  to  a  larger  body 
of  it. 

On  the  27th,  we  continued  to  gain  a  great  deal  of  ground,  the  ebb-tides  Frid.  27. 
appearing  to  obstruct  us  very  little.  Indeed,  from  the  very  entrance  of 
Hudson's  Strait,  but  more  especially  to  the  westward  of  the  Lower  Savage 
Islands,  it  was  a  matter  of  constant  surprise  to  find  our  dull-sailing  ships 
make  so  much  progress,  when  beating  against  a  fresh  wind  from  the  west- 
ward ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  of  the  accuracy  of  the  remark  made  by  our 

D  2 


fr 


20 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


J!,!:!!!' 


mi.    ear]y   navigators,  that  the   flood-tides  run  stronger  than  the   ebbs  on  this 

v^-y-k/  coast*. 

A  light  air  at  length  springing  up  from  the  south-eastward  enabled  us  to' 
make  way  through  the  ice,  which  noAV  once  more  occurred  in  great  quantities 
in  every  direction,  but  the  pieces  were  so  loose  as  easily  to  allow  the  passage 
of  a  ship  with  a  free  wind.  This  ice,  much  of  which  was  covered  with  sand, 
was  so  honey-combed  and  "  rotten,"  that  it  appeared  in  a  fair  way  of  being 
entirely  dissolved  in  the  course  of  a  few  Aveeks.  The  current  was  found  to 
run  S.E.  b.E.,  three  quarters  of  a  mile  per  hour,  at  nine  A.M.,  or  about  the 
middle  of  the  ebb-tide.  For  the  last  week,  we  had  scarcely  seen  a  living 
animal ;  a  glaucous  gull,  a  boatswain,  and  a  few  looms,  constituting  the 
whole  that  are  mentioned  in  our  journals.  At  two  P.M.,  a  thermometer 
in  the  sun  stood  at  87°,  and  in  the  shade  at  50°.  In  the  evening,  the 
land  abreast  of  us,  in  lat.  63|°,  long.  72°,  became  much  lower  than 
before,  and  without  snow  upon  any  part  of  it. .  The  unevenness  of  its  gene- 
ral outline  gave  to  it,  at  times,  the  appearance  of  islands,  of  which  there 
are,  in  reality,  a  great  number  hereabouts,  though  I  have  little  doubt  of  the 
continuity  of  the  land   at  the  back.     We  continued  to  run  all  night  through 

Sat.  28.  the  same  kind  of  ice  as  before,  and,  at  forty  minutes  A.M.  on  the  28th, 
were  abreast  of  five  remarkable  hillocks  or  undulations  of  the  land,  of  which 
the  appearance  was  sketched  by  Mr.  Bushnan.  We  sounded  frequently  at 
the  depth  of  eighty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  fathoms,  the  bottom  being 
extremely  irregular.  It  rained  hard  for  several  hours,  after  which  the  wea- 
ther cleared  up,  and  the  wind  came  from  the  northward.  The  ice  being 
now  too  close  to  sail  through  with  any  but  a  leading  wind,  the  ships  were 
made  fast  to  a  floe-piece.  For  two  days  past,  Ave  had  observed  consider- 
able ripplings  on  the  Avater,  as  if  occasioned  by  a  strong  tide,  and  the 
masses  of  ice  were  frequently  set  in  motion  on  a  sudden,  AAithout  any  apparent 
cause. 

*  This  fact  was  noticed  as  early  as  the  time  of  Luke  Fox,  who,  in  the  journal  of  his 
voyage  of  1631,  frequently  and  particularly  alludes  to  it.  His  account  is  confirmed  in  a 
highly  valuable  manuscript  journal  kept  by  a  person  of  the  name  of  Yourin,  who  served, 
it  seems,  as  "  one  of  the  officers  on  board  the  Charles,  Captain  Luke  Fox,"  on  that 
voyage.  This  journal,  which  is  no  less  remarkable  for  its  perspicuity  and  accuracy  than 
for  the  neatness  with  which  it  is  penned,  is  in  the  possession  of  Lord  Mountnorris.  By 
his  Lordship's  permission  a  copy  of  this  journal  was  obtained  by  Captain  Sabine,  to  whom 
I  am  indebted  for  it. 


ill!  (till 


Afii 


amr 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


21 


On  the  29th  we  were  off  a  point  of  land,  having  several  islands  near  it, 
and  exactly  answering  the  description  of  that  called  by  Baffin,  in  the  year 
1615,  Broken  Point,  "  it  being,  indeed,  a  point  of  broken  isles."  This  head- 
land is  memorable  on  account  of  a  lunar  observation  made  off  it  by  this  able 
and  indefatigable  navigator,  giving  the  long.  74°  05',  which  is  not  a  degree  to 
the  westward  of  the  truth.  Here  the  land  turns  more  to  the  northward,  leav- 
ing a  considerable  opening  in  that  direction. 

A  very  light  wind,  from  the  wrong  quarter,  rendered  all  our  exertions 
to  get  in  shore  fruitless,  a  close  barrier  still  intervening  between  us  and 
the  open  sea.  During  the  first  part  of  the  forenoon,  we  observed  the  ships 
to  be  carried  with  the  whole  body  of  ice  considerably  towards  the  land,  but  at 
noon,  having  moored  the  small  boat  to  the  bottom  in  one  hundred  and  thirty 
fathoms,  the  tide  was  found  to  run  S.  b.  E.,  one  mile  per  hour.  Our  latitude 
observed  was  63°  51'  44",  longitude,  by  chronometers,  74°  02'  10".  In 
the  evening,  our  prospect  of  an  immediate  release  appearing  more  and  more 
hopeless,  we  were  under  the  necessity  of  making  fast,  when  we  obtained  azi- 
muths on  the  ice,  which  gave  the  variation  54°  51'  58"  westerly*.  The  ice 
was  found  to  have  too  much  motion  in  azimuth  for  obtaining  the  dip,  which 
phenomenon  now  began  to  acquire  great  interest.  At  eight  P.  M.,  we  once  more 
made  sail  and,  after  four  hours'  labour,  the  harassing  nature  of  which  cannot 
well  be  described  or  imagined,  succeeded  in  getting  into  good  sailing  ice  at 
midnight.  The  weather  being  now  fine,  and  the  wind  becoming  more  eas- 
terly as  well  as  freshening,  we  steered  under  all  sail  to  the  W.  N.  W. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th,  however,  a  fog  came  on,  so  thick  that, 
independently  of  the  danger  of  continuing  to  run  upon  a  coast,  little  if  at 
all  explored  before,  we  also  incurred  the  frequent  risk  of  taking  the  wrong 
"  leads"  among  the  ice  ;  which  becoming  closer  obliged  us  to  heave  to,  soon 
after  six  o'clock,  and  make  the  ships  fast  to  a  floe-piece.  At  nine  A.M. 
the  fog  clearing  off  sufficiently  to  allow  us  to  see  a  mile  or  two  around, 
we  cast  off  with  a  fresh   breeze  from  the  S.E.  b.  S.,  and  ran  to  the  north- 


mi. 
July... 

Sun.  29. 


Mon.  30. 


*  This  result,  however,  which  is  deduced  from  several  observations  made  by  different 
observers,  is  probably  about  three  degrees  more  than  the  truth,  an  error  having  been 
occasioned  by  the  attraction  of  the  ship,  at  the  distance  of  132  yards  from  the  compasses. 
The  observations  are  given  in  the  Appendix,  merely  to  shew  the  regularity  with  which 
an  alteration  took  place  in  this  error,  occasioned  by  the  motion  of  the  floe  to  which  the 
ship  was  attached,  and  the  consequent  change  of  the  angle  at  which  the  ship's  attrac- 
tion acted  on  the  needles. 


'ill  i  ' 


v  4»  $ 


.,,,, 


w 


1821. 
July. 


Tues.31 


August, 
Wed.  1. 


22 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY 


ward  and  westward,  steering  towards  the  land  last  seen,  which  again  hove 
in  sight  at  half-past  ten  A.  M.,  consisting  of  several  islands,  though  the 
thickness  of  the  weather  might  have  prevented  our  seeing  any  continuous 
lineof  coast'  at  the  back  of  them.  Being  at  noon  in  lat.  64° 07',  and  longitude, 
by  account,  75°  11',  we  hauled  more  to  the  westward,  along  the  land,  as 
soon  as  the  ice  would  allow.  In  passing  the  westernmost  of  the  islands, 
all  of  which  are  quite  low,  we  carried  a  depth  of  from  forty-nine  to  thirty- 
nine  fathoms,  at  the  distance  of  six  or  seven  miles.  In  standing  out  to 
the  southward,  the  water  deepened,  though  very  irregularly,  to  eighty-four 
fathoms,  at  the  distance  of  four  leagues  from  the  land,  where  it  was  necessary 
for  us  to  heave  to,  the  fog  coming  on  again  thicker  than  before,  and 
continuing  throughout  the  night.  A  number  of  seals  and  one  sea-horse  were 
seen  in  the  course  of  the  day,  as  well  as  some  fish  jumping  out  of  the  water, 
which  the  look-out  man  in  the  crow's-nest  took  to  be  salmon. 

The  weather  gradually  clearing,  on  the  morning  of  the  31st,  we  again  saw 
the  land  to  the  northward,  which  still  appeared  to  consist  principally  of 
islands,  along  which  our  course  was  now  directed.  At  noon,  being  in  latitude, 
by  account,  64°  01'  30",  and  long.  75°  48'  50",  we  had  a  near  and  distinct  view 
of  several  of  these,  at  the  back  of  which  there  still  ran  a  continuous  line  of 
coast.  The  islands  seemed  to  form  several  fine  inlets,  and  the  tide  in  the 
offing  was  extremely  strong,  as  appeared  by  the  numerous  ripplings  on  the 
surface  of  the  water,  and  by  our  making  very  little  progress  for  some  hours 
with  a  favourable  breeze.  As  the  fog  cleared  away  from  the  south-western 
horizon,  we  obtained  the  first  glimpse  of  Salisbury  Island  in  that  quarter.  In 
the  afternoon,  Captain  Lyon  discovered  and  made  the  signal  for  an  Esquimaux 
oomiak  coming  off  from  the  shore  under  sail,  accompanied  by  eight  canoes. 
We  tacked  to  meet  them,  and  lay  to  for  half  an  hour,  for  the  purpose  of  adding 
to  our  stock  of  oil.  In  this  boat  were  sixteen  persons,  of  which  number  two 
only  were  men,  an  old  and  a  young  one,  and  the  rest  women  and  children. 
In  the  features,  dress,  and  implements  of  these  people,  we  saw  nothing 
different  from  those  of  the  Esquimaux  last  described  ;  but  they  were  better 
behaved  than  the  others,  with  whom  our  ships  have  had  more  frequent  in- 
tercourse. 

We  continued,  on  the  1st  of  August,  to  beat  to  the  westward,  between 
Nottingham  Island  and  the  North  Shore,  the  distance  between  which  is 
about  four  leagues,  and  the  latter  fringed  with  numerous  islands.  In  the 
course  of  the  morning,  several  canoes  and  one  oomiak  came  off  from   the 


UUtBf 


'JtCM#SXi*iZA\*.     n  J       ■WfcATsv*,*.^.  *.•>«., 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Sea 

,  during 

the  Month  of  July,  1821. 

Day 

Place. 

Temperature  of  Air 
in  Shade. 

a  3? 

S  2 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

'Prevailing 
Weather. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity 

1 

+31| 

O 
+29 

+30.50 

0 

32.58 

inches. 

30.11 

inches. 

29.83 

inches. 
29.980 

North 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow  at 
times 

2 

32 

29§ 

30.71 

30.01 

29.80 

29.70 

29.717 

North 

light 

hazy 

3 

34 

30 

30.08 

30.21 

29.69 

29.62 

29.670 

North 

light 

hazy 

4 

35 

30 

32.87 

30.71 

29.56 

29.36 

29.463 

AM.  NbE 
PM.  SSW 

light 

hazy 

5 

36 

32 

33.46 

30.25 

29.72 

29.39 

29.582 

SWbW 

modt. 

hazy 

6 

37 

33 

35.18 

30.71 

29.58 

29.30 

29.460 

AM.  SSE 
PM.  WbS 

light 

thick  fog  and  rain 

7 

'3 

37 

31 

34.58 

30.46 

29.60 

23.36 

29.440 

AM.  NE 
PM.  WbS 

modt. 

thick  fog  and  rain 

8 

n 

36 

31 

33.42 

30.71 

29.91 

29.69 

29.827 

AM.  SSW 
PM.  SSE 

modt. 

fine  and  clear 

9 

0 

09 

40 

32 

35.42 

30.96 

29.91 

29.85 

29.880 

Southerly 

light 

cloudy 

10 

s 

38 

31 

35.58 

31.71 

39.00 

29.92 

29.978 

SWbS 

light 

fine  and  clear 

11 

0 

42 

33 

35.17 

30.75 

29.96 

29.78 

29.867 

EbN 

light 

fine  and  clear 

12 

40«- 

32 

35.96 

30.92 

29.95 

29.70 

29.848 

AM.  East 
PM.  SW 

modt. 

hazy  and  rain 

13 

"3 

0) 

48 

30 

35.96 

30.62 

30.21 

30.00 

30.102 

SbW 

light 

fine  and  clear 
fine  and  clear 

14 

f-4 

3S 

30 

34.46 

30.42 

30.21 

30.10 

30.177 

Easterly 

light 

15 

36 

33 

34.83 

30.54 

30.08 

29.94 

39.000 

NE 

fresh 

cloudy  and  rain 

16 

35 

31 

33.42 

31.00 

29.91 

29.80 

29.892 

NEbN 

fresh 

hazy  and  rain 

17 

43 

33 

36.83 

31.54 

29.99 

29.91 

29.942 

AM.  NNE 
PM.  West 

light 

fine  and  clear 

18 

43 

34 

36.92 

31.17 

30.00 

29.97 

29.985 

West 

modt. 

fine  and  clear 

19 

45 

32 

39.25 

31.87 

29.95 

29.93 

29.940 

»       Ca 

lm 

fine  and  clear 

20 

45 

34 

39.17 

32.50 

29.99 

29.  S6 

29.917 

S  Easterly 

light 

fine  and  clear 

21  ■ 

22  ■ 

47 
39 

34 
32 

38.83 
35.50 

33.58 
32.04 

29.84 
29.77 

29.73 
29.62 

29.767 
29.722 

From  East  round 
by  Nto  VVNW 

AM.WbN 
PM.  EbS 

light 
fresh 

fine  and  clear      ! 
cloudy 

23 

'8 

41 

36 

38.54 

30.67 

29.66 

29.56 

29.607 

NW 

modt. 

hazy  and  rain 

24 

«m  0 

39 

35 

36.50 

35.67 

29.81 

29.72 

29.773 

NWbW 

modt. 

cloudy 

25 

O    « 

•a  S 

36 

33 

34.29 

33.29 

29.84 

29.82 

29.828 

NWbW 

fresh 

cloudy 

26 
27 

si 

39 
50 

35 
35 

36.83 
39.83 

33.25 
33.92 

29.97 
29.99 

29.87 
29.90 

29.937 
29.938 

NNW 

AM.  NW 
PM.  SE 

modt. 
light 

fine 
fine  and  clear 

28 

3  * 

41 

33 

35.83 

33.00 

29.86 

29.79 

29.818 

AM.  SEbS 
PM.  North 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

29 

*•  a 

42 

32 

37.58 

31.62 

29.81 

29.66 

29.752 

NEbN 

light 

fine  and  clear 

30 

3s 

O 

37 

32 

34.58 

31.42 

29.64 

29.39 

29.520 

SE 

fresh 

foggy 

31 

•2 

38 

33 

34.71 

32.21 

29.52 

29.31 

29.43S 

Northerly 

light 

thick  fog 

50 

29 

35.38 

31.82 

30.21 

29.30 

29.799 

_ 

+*\ 


:Ly^J,k 


24 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
August. 


mainland,  containing  about  twenty  persons,  more  than  half  of  whom  were 
women  and  children.  They  brought  a  little  oil,  some  skin  dresses,  and 
tusks  of  the  walrus,  which  they  were  desirous  of  exchanging  for  any  trifle 
we  chose  to  give  them.  They  had,  also,  a  number  of  toys  of  various  kinds, 
such  as  canoes  with  their  paddles,  spears,  and  bows  and  arrows,  all  on  a  very 
small  scale.  Many  of  the  jackets  of  these  people,  and  particularly  those  of 
the  females,  were  lined  with  the  skins  of  birds,  having  the  feathers  inside  ; 
and  they  had,  also,  in  the  boat  several  other  skins  in  a  prepared  state, 
taken  from  the  throat  of  the  cblymbus  glacialis,  which  splendid  bird,  though 
we  had  twice  found  its  skin  in  possession  of  the  Esquimaux,  we  had  yet 
not  met  with  ourselves. 

Being  desirous  of  ascertaining  the  time  and  direction  of  the  tides,  which 
run  strong  between  Nottingham  Island  and  the  northern  land,  the  current 
was  tried  several  times  to-day,  about  mid-channel,  by  a  small  boat  moored 
to  the  bottom,  and  found  to  set  as  follows  : 


i 


At  8  A.M.,  E.b.S.,    1  mile  per  hour. 

—  9.40,       E.b.S.,  T6g  mile. 
—11.15,       Slack  (low  ? )  water. 

—  Noon,      W.N.W.,  1 1  mile  per  hour. 


The  wind  backing  to  the  southward  in  the  afternoon,  we  had  a  fine  run 
along  the  land,  and  about  ten  P.M.  had  nearly  lost  sight  of  Nottingham 
Island,  being  abreast  of  three  small  black-looking  islands,  which  answer 
to  the  Trinity  Islands  of  Fox.  Immediately  to  the  westward  of  these,  the 
land  trends  very  much  to  the  northward,  leading  towards  the  "  Farthest" 
of  that  navigator ;  so  that,  our  business  lying  to  the  westward,  and  being 
still  favoured  with  a  navigable  sea  and  a  fair  breeze,  we  soon  lost  sight 
of  that  shore  altogether.  Some  dusky  clouds,  which  appeared  upon  the 
southern  horizon  this  evening,  were  probably  hanging  over  the  Mill  Islands. 
After  a  run  of  forty  miles,  during  the  night,  almost  without  seeing  any 
Thurs.  2.  ice»  we  came,  on  the  morning  of  the  2d,  to  a  body  of  it  so  closely  "  packed," 
that  we  could  make  no  further  progress,  while  the  masses 'on  the  outer 
edge  were  moving  so  rapidly  in  various  directions,  as  to  occasion  us  much 
trouble  and  many  violent  blows  before  we  could  get  clear  of  them.  The 
latitude  observed  at  noon  was  64°  59'  24",  and  the  longitude,  by  chrono- 
meters, 79°  40'.  The  soundings  were  one  hundred  and  three  fathoms,  on 
a  bottom  of  hard  rock  and  shells  ;  but  the  depth  varied,  very  frequently  and 


+  *mmi*rn. 


i— ai 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


25 


suddenly,  from  forty-two  to  one  hundred.  The  tide  was  tried  twice  in  the  i82i. 
course  of  the  day;  at  11.30  A.M.,  it  set  S.S.W.,  nearly  a  knot;  and  at  ^^)- 
1.10  P.M.,  N.  50°  W.,  a  mile  and  a  half  an  hour;  but  the  direction  of  it 
was  so  irregular,  that  the  ships  were  frequently  hampered,  and  received 
several  heavy  blows  from  the  ice  in  consequence.  After  standing  several 
miles  to  the  northward,  along  the  edge  of  the  ice,  without  meeting  with  an 
openino-,  it  began  to  lead  us  so  much  to  the  eastward  that  we  tacked  and 
stood  back  to  the  W.S.W.,  to  try  what  could  be  done  by  patience  and 
perseverance  in  that  quarter. 

The  Expedition  being  now  about  to  enter  upon  ground  not  hitherto  ex- 
plored, it  became  necessary  for  me  to  decide  upon  the  route  it  would  be 
most  advantageous  to  pursue,  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  principal  ob- 
jects pointed  out  in  my  instructions.  This  route  being,  in  a  certain  de- 
gree, left  to  my  own  discretion,  I  must  here  interrupt,  for  a  moment,  the 
narrative  of  our  proceedings,  as  well  to  explain  the  grounds  on  which 
my  determination  rested,  as  to  establish  and  elucidate  the  connexion 
between  the  researches  of  the  present  Expedition,  and  those  of  former 
navigators. 


%k\ 


CHAPTER  II. 

REVIEW  OF  THE  GEOGRAPHICAL  INFORMATION  OBTAINED  BY  THE  RESEARCHES  OF 
FORMER  NAVIGATORS  ON  THE  COAST  OF  THE  AMERICAN  CONTINENT,  IN  THE  NEIGH- 
BOURHOOD   OF    WAGER    RIVER DISCOVER    AND    ENTER    THE  DUKE  OF  YORK'S  BAY, 

SUPPOSING     IT    TO    BE    A    PASSAGE    INTO    THE  SEA    CALLED    THE  WELCOME — LEAVE 

THE  DUKE  OF  YORK'S  BAY,    AND  PROCEED  TO    THE    NORTH-WESTWARD PASSAGE   OF 

THE  FROZEN  STRAIT  AND  ARRIVAL    IN  REPULSE  BAY CONTINUITY  OF   LAND  THERE 

OBSERVATIONS  ON  SHORE REMARKS  CONCERNING    THE    GEOGRAPHY,    TIDES,  AND 

NATURAL   HISTORY    OF    THIS   PART    OF    THE    CONTINENTAL  COAST. 


vcsMS&mmamstmmHiismi 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821.  My  instructions  directed  me  to  "  penetrate  to  the  westward,  through 
^^L  Hudson's  Strait,  until  I  reached,  either  in  Repulse  Bay,  or  on  some  other  part 
of  the  shores  of  Hudson's  Bay,  to  the  north  of  Wager  River,  a  part  of  the  coast 
which  I  should  feel  convinced  to  be  a  portion  of  the  continent  of  North 
America."  "  Then  to  keep  along  the  line  of  this  coast  to  the  northward, 
always  examining  every  bend,  or  inlet,"  &c*.  It  became,  therefore,  my  first 
business  to  inquire  to  what  point  the  examination  of  the  eastern  coast  of 
North  America  had  already  been  carried,  and  its  continuity  satisfactorily 
determined. 

The  proceedings  of  the  Expedition  under  the  command  of  Captain 
Middleton,  in  his  Majesty's  ship  the  Furnace  in  the  year  1742,  together  with 
the  inquiry  instituted  by  the  Admiralty  on  his  return,  in  consequence  of  the 
representation  of  Mr.  Dobbs,  furnish  the  principal  materials  for  judging  of 
this  question.  The  disputes  between  Mr.  Dobbs  and  Captain  Middleton, 
which,  like  most  other  contests  of  a  similar  nature,  gave  rise  to  much  personal 
animosity  and  virulent  invective,  have  at  least  served  the  useful  purpose  of 
pointing  out,  with  all  the  minuteness  which  the  most  determined  hostility 
could  suggest,  the  particular  parts  of  Captain  Middleton's  conduct,  which  his 

*  Official  Instructions. 


accusers  considered,  as  lying  open  to  censure  or  animadversion.  It  appears,  1821- 
from  the  documents  laid  before  the  public  at  the  time  by  the  respective  kJy*<J 
parties*,  that  Captain  Middleton  was  chargeable  with  neglect,  in  having 
quitted  certain  parts  of  the  coast  traversed  by  him,  and  which  seemed 
likely  to  afford  some  outlet  to  the  westward,  Avithout  determining  the 
continuity  of  the  land  by  actual  examination.  The  first  and  principal  of 
these  was  Wager  Inlet,  to  which  Captain  Middleton  gave  the  appellation  of 
a  river,  as  subsequent  examination  has,  in  fact,  proved  it  to  be,  and  Mr. 
Dobbs  that  of  a  strait,  leading,  as  he  believed,  in  the  desired  direction, 
towards  the  Pacific  Ocean.  Wherever  the  strict  and  entire  examination  of 
a  coast  has  been  neglected,  so  as  still  to  leave  a  doubt  respecting  its  conti- 
nuity, the  mind  naturally  has  recourse  to  all  the  indications  that  can  be 
collected  to  supply  the  place  of  facts.  In  the  present  instance,  the  direction 
of  the  tides,  the  degree  of  saltness  in  the  sea- water,  the  presence  of  whales, 
and  other  circumstances  of  minor  importance,  constituted  the  chief  grounds 
upon  which  the  disputants  rested  their  respective  arguments.  The  direction 
of  the  flood-tide  has,  indeed,  constantly,  and  to  a  certain  extent,  justly  been 
considered  as  affording  an  indication  of  some  weight  in  forming  a  judgment 
on  the  spot,  respecting  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  a  westerly  passage. 
To  this  the  attention  of  Captain  Middleton  was  strongly  directed  in  his  official 
instructions,  which,  in  two  different  places,  point  out  to  him  the  propriety  of 
"  meeting  the  flood-tide,"  in  order  to  accomplish  the  proposed  object.  And 
in  his  subsequent  endeavour  to  vindicate  his  conduct  "  from  the  aspersions 
of  Arthur  Dobbs,  Esq.,"  it  is  upon  arguments  deduced  from  this  phenomenon 
that  he  has  principally  laboured  to  convince  the  public  of  the  absurdity  of 
expecting  to  find  a  passage  to  the  westward,  through  Wager  Inlet.  In  some 
parts  of  the  channel  which  separates  Southampton  Island  from  the  coast  of 
America,  and  to  which,  though  erroneously,  the  name  of  the  Welcome  has, 
of  late  years,  been  applied,  it  was  understood  that  the  flood-tide  set  from  the 
northward;  and  it  became,  therefore,  a  matter  of  real  interest  to  ascertain, 
by  "meeting"  it,  from  what  sea  it  flowed.  Now,  here  it  was  that  Captain 
Middleton  and  Mr.  Dobbs  were  most  at  issue  ;  the  former  asserting  that,  in 
his  discovery  of  the  "  Frozen  Strait,"  through  which  he  actually  saw  the 
tide  of  flood  coming  into  the  Welcome,  the  question  was  solved  in  a  manner 


*  A  Vindication  of  the  Conduct  of  Captain  Middleton,  &c,  London,  1743. 
Abstract  of  Captain  Middletorfs  Journal,  &c,  London,  1744. 


Dqbbs's 


E  2 


*+i 


*\ 


Ji. 


I\ 


28 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


m 


llfl    jilil 


1821.  highly  conclusive  to  every  unprejudiced  mind ;  while  the  latter,  fully  im- 
*-*V"«fc/  pressed  with  a  conviction  that  the  story  of  the  "  Frozen  Strait  was  all  a 
chimera,  as  well  as  every  thing  that"  Captain  Middleton  had  said  "  con- 
cerning that  part  of  the  voyage,"  confidently  insisted  on  the  probability 
of  the  tide  finding  its  way  in  through  Wager  River,  or,  at  least,  through  some 
arm  of  the  sea  communicating  with  that  inlet  from  the  westward.  The 
fallacy  of  this  latter  opinion  was  amply  proved  by  the  researches  of  the  next 
Expedition  under  Captains  Moor  and  Smith,  who,  being  sent  out  for  the 
avowed  purpose  of  contradicting  or  confirming  the  report  of  Middleton, 
traced  Wager  Inlet  in  their  boats,  till  it  was  found  to  terminate  in  two  incon- 
siderable and  unnavigable  rivers. 

On  leaving  the  Wager,  Captain  Middleton  proceeded  to  the  northward, 
keeping  both  the  American  coast  and  that  of  Southampton  Island  in  sight,  and 
noting  their  bearings  and  distance  frequently  and  minutely  in  his  log,  as  far  as 
Cape  Hope,  in  which  space  no  doubt  has  ever  been  entertained,  either  by  Mr. 
Dobbs  or  by  any  other  person,  of  the  complete  continuity  of  the  land  on  the 
American  side.  I  felt,  perfectly  satisfied,  therefore,  that  Cape  Hope  formed 
a  portion  of  the  continent,  and  that  the  examination  of  the  coast  to  the  south- 
ward of  it  would  be  a  needless  and  unprofitable  occupation  of  our  time. 

To  the  northward  of  Cape  Hope,  the  land  is  described  by  Captain  Middle- 
ton  as  having  been  observed  to  turn  short  round  to  the  westward ;  but  the 
joy  and  encouragement  afforded  by  this  circumstance  are  said  to  have  been 
soon  clouded  by  finding  they  had  reached  a  close  bay,  which  prevented 
their  further  progress  in  that  direction,  and  which,  in  consequence,  obtained 
the  appropriate  name  of  Repulse  Bay.  It  is  worthy  of  particular  remark, 
that  even  this  part  of  the  coast  has  not  drawn  from  Captain  Middleton's 
accusers,  who,  as  well  as  their  commander,  had  the  advantage  of  bein«- 
eye-witnesses  of  the  whole  transaction,  a  single  expression  implying  a  doubt 
of  the  continuity  of  the  land  in  Repulse  Bay.  But  the  imputation  of  negli- 
gence or  fraud,  to  which,  in  particular  instances,  he  appears  to  have  laid 
himself  open,  has,  by  a  construction  not  uncommon,  been  extended  to  his 
general  conduct,  throwing  an  unmerited  degree  of  doubt  and  uncertainty  on 
every  part  of  his  labours.  On  this  account,  as  well  as  from  its  geographical 
position,  which  seemed  so  favourable  for  the  termination  of  the  American 
continent  to  the  north-eastward,  has  an  importance  been  attached  to  Repulse 
Bay,  even  by  those  who  are  not  the  most  sanguine  on  the  subject  of  the 


mm 


<m 


-_ri 


'  ■  mA 


U> 


North-West  Passage,  which  subsequent  investigation  has  proved  it  not  to 

deserve. 

Having,  on  the  considerations  detailed  above,  decided  on  taking  up  the 
examination  of  the  continental  coast,  from  Cape  Hope  northwards,  it  became 
a  question  of  scarcely  less  importance  to  determine,  in  the  next  place,  by 
what  route  the  Expedition  would  most  quickly  be  enabled  to  reach  that 
point,  so  as  to  occupy  as  much  as  possible  of  the  present  summer,  upon 
ground  not  hitherto  explored;  and,  if  practicable,  to  get  fairly  on  our  way 
to  the  westward,  along  the  northern  coast  of  America,  before  the  close  of 
the  navigable  season.  Here  it  was  necessary  for  me  still  more  carefully  to 
balance  in  my  own  mind  the  ocular  evidence  of  Captain  Middleton  against 
the  speculative  reasoning  of  Mr.  Dobbs,  the  former  having  asserted  that  he 
had  actually  seen  a  strait  intervening  between  Southampton  Island  and  the 
shore  to  the  northward  of  it,  though  apparently  impracticable  on  account  of 
ice;  while  the  latter  had  written  half  a  volume  to  prove  the  strait  in  question 
a  fabrication,  invented  by  the  Captain  for  the  purpose  of  deceiving  Govern- 
ment, and  of  favouring  the  supposed  views  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company, 
his  former  employers.  If  Mr.  Dobbs's  suspicions  were  well  founded,  it 
would  be  necessary  for  us,  by  pursuing  the  known  but  circuitous  route 
round  the  south  end  of  Southampton  Island,  to  sail  a  distance  of  one 
hundred  and  seventy  leagues  from  our  present  station,  and  above  two  hun- 
dred, in  case  of  failure  at  the  Frozen  Strait,  in  order  to  reach  the  point 
where  our  operations  were  to  commence ;  Avhereas,  on  the  supposition  of 
the  existence,  and,  of  course,  the  practicability,  of  that  passage,  the  distance 
would  scarcely  exceed  fifty  leagues ;  a  difference  of  no  small  moment  in  the 
icy  seas.  After  the  most  anxious  consideration  of  all  this  contradictory 
evidence,  I  came  to  the  resolution  of  attempting  the  direct  passage  of  the 
Frozen  Strait;  though,  I  confess,  not  without  some  apprehension  of  the  risk 
I  was  incurring,  and  of  the  serious  loss  of  time  which,  in  case  of  failure 
either  from  the  non-existence  of  the  strait  or  from  the  insuperable  obstacles 
which  its  name  implies,  would  thus  be  inevitably  occasioned  to  the  Ex- 
pedition. 

On  standing  back  to  the  west  south-Avest  the  ice  was  found  as  impenetrable 
as  before,  and  the  ships  were  therefore  made  fast  in  the  best  manner  we 
could,  to  await  some  alteration  in  our  favour.     On  the  morning  of  the  3d,  Frid.  3. 
Ave  had  some  heavy  rain,    although  the    Avind   Avas  Avesterly;  but,  on  its 
veering  to  the  nortliAvard,  the  weather  cleared  up,  and  continued  beautifully 


W  i 


30 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


i 


August  fine  foi  tlie  rest  of  the  day'     With  tlie  hoPe  of  gainin?  some  ground  we 
v— v^^  cast  off,  but  found  it  impossible  to  make  any  progress  through  the  ice,  which, 

though  its  general  body  continued  closely  packed,  was,  in  some  parts,  run- 
ning about  in  various  and  even  opposite  directions,  at  the  rate  of  two  or 
three  miles  an  hour,  so  as  frequently  to  come  in  forcible  contact  with  the 
ships,  without  the  possibility  of  our  avoiding  it  by  sailing  out  of  its  way. 
The  rapidity  and  irregularity  of  the  tides  in  this  neighbourhood  were  parti- 
cularly remarked  by  our  early  navigators,  and,  indeed,  gave  the  name  to 
Mill  Islands,  "  by  reason  of  grinding  the  ice."  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  this  irregularity  is  principally  occasioned  by  a  meeting  of  the  tides 
hereabouts,  for  there  is  tolerable  evidence  of  the  flood  coming  from  the 
northward  down  the  great  opening  leading  to  Fox's  Farthest,  and  which  I 
have  called  Fox's  Channel*.  This  tide,  meeting  the  rapid  stream  which  sets 
from  the  eastward  through  Hudson's  Strait,  must,  of  necessity,  produce  such 
a,  disturbance  as  has  here  been  noticed.  The  current  was  tried  at  noon, 
this  day,  and  found  to  set  north  by  west,  three  quarters  of  a  mile  an  hour, 
and  at  thirty  minutes  past  nine,  P.M.,  it  was  running  to  the  south-east  one 
mile  per  hour,  but  which  of  these  was  the  flood  tide  we  had  no  means  of 
determining. 
Sat.  4.  At  ten  A.M.,  on  the  4th,  we  saw  an  appearance  of  land,  much  raised  and 
distorted  by  refraction,  though  the  weather  was  fine,  and  the  atmosphere 
apparently  clear,  from  N.  82°  E.  to  S.  53°  E.,  being  part  of  the  coast  dis- 
covered by  Baffin,  in  the  year  1615,  and  more  minutely  traced  by  Fox,  in 
1631.  At  noon  we  observed  in  lat.  65°  00' 17",  the  longitude,  by  chro- 
nometers, being  79°  56'  55".  At  this  time,  the  prospect  to  the  westward 
appeared  from  the  crow's-nest  as  unpromising,  on  account  of  the  closeness 
and  extent  of  the  ice,  as  I  ever  remember  to  have  seen  it.  Shortly  after- 
wards, hoAvever,  the  sea  gradually,  or  rather  suddenly,  became  navigable 
in  that  direction,  the  ice  separating  and,  in  fact,  disappearing  in  so  rapid 
and  extraordinary  a  manner  as  to  astonish  even  those  among  us  who  had 
been  the  longest  accustomed  to  this  navigation,  and  affording  a  striking- 
example  of  those  sudden  changes  which,  in  icy  seas,  almost  teach  us  never 
to   despair   of  making  progress,  even  under  circumstances  apparently  the 

*  Baffin  particularly  insists  on  this  being  the  case,  both  near  Trinity  Islands,  and  off 
Southampton  Island ;  and,  I  think,  notwithstanding  a  contrary  opinion  held  by  Fox  and 
Yourin,  our  observations  on  the  tides  in  this  neighbourhood,  and  subsequently  at  Winter 
Island,  serve  to  confirm  those  of  Baffin. 


*»  n 


most  unfavourable.     We  did  not  fail  to  take  advantage  of  this  alteration,    ™^t 
and,  standing  under   all   sail   to   the   westward,  soon  made  Southampton 
Island.     At  midnight  we  had  deepened  the  water  to  one  hundred  and  five 
fathoms. 

After  an  unobstructed  run  of  between  thirty  and  forty  miles,  we  were  Sun-  5 
again  stopped,  and  obliged  to  make  fast,  on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  the 
ice  becoming  gradually  closer,  and  occurring  in  heavy  and  extensive  floes. 
After  divine  service  had  been  performed,  we  again  made  sail,  being  in 
lat.  65°  22'  50",  and  longitude,  by  chronometers,  81°  24'.  By  dint  of  a 
good  deal  of  "  boring,"  and  after  receiving  a  number  of  very  violent 
blows,  we  succeeded  in  forcing  our  way  about  ten  miles  nearer  the  land, 
which  appearing  not  to  be  continuous  in  one  part,  I  concluded  we  were 
near  the  eastern  entrance  of  the  Frozen  Strait.  But  the  haze  or  fog-bank 
which,  in  these  regions,  even  on  days  apparently  the  clearest,  often  gives 
a  distorted  appearance  to  objects  at  the  distance  of  four  or  five  leagues, 
prevented  our  making  it  out  distinctly.  As  it  was  now  impracticable  to 
make  any  further  progress,  we  were  under  the  necessity  of  submitting 
to  that  suspense  which  the  increasing  interest  of  our  situation  naturally- 
excited. 

Some  of  the  floes  in  this  neighbourhood  measured  at  least  half  a  mile 
each  way,  being  the  largest,  except  one  or  two,  that  we  had  yet  met  with. 
They  were  all    covered  with  innumerable  "  hummocks,"    between    which 
were  pools  of  water,  some  fresh,  and  others  communicating  Avith  the  sea 
below.     Though  we   subsequently  witnessed  the  formation  of  one  kind  of 
"  hummocky"  floes,  by  means  of  the  doubling  occasioned  by  pressure,  these 
were    evidently   produced   in   a  different   way.     From  their  appearance  it 
would  seem  that  they  are  formed  of  numerous  detached  masses  of  ice,  left 
floating  on  the  sea  at  the  setting  in  of  the  winter's  frost;  which,  facilitating 
the  production  of  a  new  sheet,  are  enclosed  and,  as  it  were,  soldered  to- 
gether by  it ;  thus,  increasing  to  several  feet  in  thickness  in  the  course  of 
the  winter,    and  receiving  a  covering  of  snow  upon  its  upper   surface,   it 
becomes  one  firm  and  compact  body.     The  height  of  the  hummocks,  which 
were  here  five  or  six  feet  above  the  general  level  of  the  floe,  depends,  of 
course,  on  the  size  of  the  masses  remaining  undissolved  at  the  close  of  the 
summer;  and,  in  most  parts  of  Baffin's  Bay,  where,  I  believe,  little  or  none 
of  the  former  year's  ice  would  be  found  at  the  setting  in  of  the  frost,   the 
floes  are  level  and  regular,  like  those  which   Ave  know  to   be   produced 


Mm 


'jt^mmm* 


32 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1.821. 
August. 


annually  in  almost  all  undisturbed  situations.  When  the  thawing  commences, 
the  water  lodges  in  the  cavities  formed  on  floes  by  the  hummocks,  making  the 
numerous  pools  we  see  in  the  summer,  gradually  finding  its  Avay  com- 
pletely through  the  ice,  and  thus,  at  length,  serving  again  to  separate  the 
original  masses,  or  hummocks.  This  is  one,  among  the  many  instances,  in 
which  Nature  may  be  observed  wonderfully  to  adapt  her  means  of  dissolving 
the  ice  to  those  she  employs  in  its  production,  thereby  preventing  any 
undue  accumulation  of  it  in  the  polar  regions  of  the  earth. 

While  on  this  subject,  I  may  offer  a  few  remarks  respecting  the  stones,  sand, 
shells,  and  weed,  found  upon  the  surface  of  all  the  ice  in  this  neighbourhood. 
The  quantity  in  which  these  substances  here  occurred  Avas  really  surprising, 
and  puzzled  us  extremely  to  account  for  the  manner  in  which  they  found 
their  way  upon  the  floes.  This  circumstance  has  been  generally  explained 
by  simply  attributing  it  to  the  whole  floe  having  been  in  immediate  contact 
with  the  land,  enabling  the  streams  to  wash,  or  the  winds  to  blow,  these 
substances  into  the  situation  in  Avhich  they  are  found,  in  the  same  manner 
as  they  are  deposited  on  bergs  formed  on  the  shore.  But  to  those  who  have 
been  eye-witnesses  of  the  fact,  to  the  extent  in  Avhich  it  here  occurred,  this 
mode  of  explaining  it,  hoAvever  plausible  at  first  sight,  is  by  no  means  satis- 
factory ;  for  masses  of  rock,  not  less  than  a  hundred  pounds  in  Aveight,  are 
sometimes  observed  in  the  middle  of  a  floe,  measuring  half  a  mile,  or  more 
each  Avay,  and  of  Avhich  the  Avhole  surface  is  more  or  less  covered  Avith 
smaller  stones,  sand,  and  shells.  To  suppose  the  Avind  strong  enough  to 
Moav  these  substances  such  a  distance  Avould  be  absurd  ;  nor  is  the  supposi- 
tion of  their  having  been  Avashed  there  scarcely  more  probable,  for  as  a  floe 
of  ice  must  float  considerably  above  the  surface  of  the  sea,  it  is  not  easy  to 
conceive  hoAv  it  can  be  overfloAved,  and  much  less  how  heavy  stones  can  be 
carried  half  a  mile  along  it.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  floe  may  be 
held  doAvn  by  its  firm  cementation  to  the  shore,  Avhile  the  water  from  the 
land  above  it  rushes  in  a  torrent  along  its  upper  surface.  This,  hoAvever, 
is  contrary  to  experience,  Avhich  shews  that,  long  before  the  streams  on  the 
land  are  sufficient  to  effect  this,  the  ice  next  the  shore  is  completely  thawed, 
and  detached  from  the  beach,  and  therefore  at  liberty  to  float  in  the  natural 
way. 

The  only  explanation  of  this  fact  that  I  can  suggest  is,  that  as  it  is  generally 
found  to  be  the  case  to  the  greatest  extent  upon  the  "  hummocky"  floes,  the 
substances  may  have  been  deposited  upon  each  mass  of  ice  Avhen  separate, 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


33 


and  eventually  brought  into  the  middle  of  a  large  floe  by  the  process  detailed  A182L 


above.  This  explanation,  however,  goes  but  a  little  Avay  towards  clearing 
up  the  difficulty  ;  for,  besides  the  necessity  of  supposing,  in  this  case,  that 
each  mass  of  ice  has  in  its  turn  been  brought  into  close  contact  with  the 
shore,  we  have  never  seen  an  instance,  in  any  bay  or  harbour,  where  ice  so 
brought,  even  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances,  has  received  any 
such  deposit.  In  whatever  manner  it  may  be  effected,  it  is  certain  that 
these  substances  act  an  essential  part  in  the  dissolution  of  the  ice,  as 
even  the  smallest  stone  or  collection  of  sand,  may  always  be  observed  to 
have  formed  a  pool  of  water  around  it,  in  consequence  of  the  radiation 
of  heat  from  its  surface.  The  stones  now  found  upon  the  ice  were  granite, 
gneiss,  feldspar,  and  lime,  the  latter  being  most  abundant ;  indeed,  all  the 
earthy  matter  found  in  the  holes  effervesced  with  sulphuric  acid.  There 
were  also  several  kinds  of  shells,  among  which  was  the  species  of  anomia 
first  discovered  in  Barrow's  Strait,  and  found  both  in  the  shell  and  the  fossil 
state  in  the  course  of  the  former  voyage. 

The  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle  was  here  55°  05'  30"  westerly.  At 
seven  P.M.  the  tide  set  E.b.S,  at  the  rate  of  half  a  mile  an  hour,  the  ice 
being  remarkably  still,  and  the  strength  of  the  tides  certainly  much  less 
than  farther  to  the  eastward  ;  a  circumstance,  which,  added  to  our  subsequent 
observations,  confirmed  the  remark  of  Baffin,  that  there  was  "  less  shew  of 
tide"  in  this  part.  Having  succeeded  in  forcing  the  ships  two  miles  farther 
in-snore,  we  again  made  fast,  having  deepened  the  water  to  one  hundred  and 
fifty  fathoms. 

At  noon  on  the  6th,  Ave  observed  in  lat.  65°  28' 15",  being  two  miles  Mon.  6. 
and  a  quarter  to  the  northward  of  that  in  Avhich  Bylot,  with  Avhom  Baffin  sailed 
as  pilot,  left  off  his  search  of  a  passage  to  the  Avestward  in  1615.  The 
reasons  Avhich  induced  him  to  relinquish  the  enterprise  at  this  place  were, 
the  increased  quantity  of  ice,  the  Avater  becoming  less  deep,  and  his  seeing 
land  bearing  N.E.b.E.  from  him ;  circumstances  Avhich  led  him  to  conclude 
that  he  Avas  at  the  mouth  of  a  large  bay.  The  same  land,  AArhich  Ave  had 
noAv  in  sight,  proved  to  be  one  of  several  islands,  and  I  gave  it  the  name 
of  Baffin  Island,  out  of  respect  to  the  memory  of  that  able  and  enterprising 
navigator.  The  south-easternmost  land  in  sight  Avas  that  about  Cape 
Comfort,  Avhich  Baffin  considered  in  lat.  65°,  long.  85°  20'.  Our  angles 
and  observations  place  it  in  64°  54',  and  82°  57'.  BetAveen  Baffin  Island  and 
the  high  land  of  Southampton  Island,  from  Avhich  points  the  discoveries  of  the 


% 


:"V 


■ 


-*% 


t\    I 


34 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821.    present  Expedition  commence,  there  was  a  considerable  interval  to  the  north- 
August. 

v^y-n--  ward  and  westward,  where  no  land  had  as  yet  appeared.  We  could  not,  there- 
fore, but  entertain  very  sanguine  hopes  that  this  opening  would  be  found  to 
communicate  with,  and  even  to  be  a  continuation  of,  the  Frozen  Strait,  as 
Middleton  himself  had  suggested.  In  the  evening,  the  sky  became  overcast, 
the  wind  being  southerly ;  and  between  eleven  P.M.  and  midnight,  several 
vivid  flashes  of  lightning  were  seen  to  the  westward,  and  succeeded  by  hard 
rain  for  some  hours. 

Our  progress  was  now  so  slow,  owing  to  constant  interruption  by  ice,  that 
Thurs.  9.  on  the   9th,   at  noon,    we  had  only   reached  the  lat.  of  65°  34'  28",  and 
long.  82°  24'  12",  our  soundings  being  one  hundred  and  fifty  fathoms  muddy 
bottom.      The   northern  land  in  sight,  which  now  first  seemed  to  consist 
of  islands,   appeared  low  in   comparison   with  the    coast  of  Southampton 
Island,  the  latter  rising  to  a  considerable  height  above  the  sea,  and  having 
two  hills  very  conspicuous  from  the  eastward,  forming  a  sort  of  saddle,  not 
unlike  that  of  the  Mormond  Hills  over  Buchaness.      In  the  afternoon   we 
once  more  entered  the  ice,  which  favoured  us  by  opening  more  and  more  as 
we  advanced ;  so  that  we  succeeded  in  making  several  miles  to  the  westward, 
and  were  enabled  to  keep  the  ships  under  way  and  in  open  water  during  the 
night,  tacking  off  and  on  near  a  small  rocky  islet.      Three  miles  to  the  south  j 
east  of  this,  we  had  one  hundred  and  one  fathoms,  and  could  detect  no  cur- 
rent by  a  boat  moored  to  the  bottom. 
Frid.  10.      The  necessity  of  carrying  easy  sail  on  account  of  the  islet,  which,  for 'two 
or  three  hours,  it  was  too  dark  to  distinguish,  prevented  our  making  any 
progress  to  the  westward  during  the  night.      In  passing  to  the  southward 
and  eastward  of  the  rocky  islet,  we  had  thirty  fathoms  at  the  distance  of 
a  mile  and  a  half,  and  the  boats  being  sent  to  sound  on  its  southern  and 
western  side,  no  bottom  was  found  with  thirty-five  fathoms  at  about  the  same 
Sat,  11.   distance.     Towards  the  evening  of  the  11th,  we  succeeded  in  getting  in  with 
the  northern  land,  and  at  twenty  minutes  after  nine  P.M.,  being  close  to  a 
small  rock  or  islet,  which  lies  about  a  mile  and  a  half  off  the  shore,  1  landed 
upon  it,  accompanied  by  a  large  party  of  officers,  who  volunteered  to  man  the 
boat.     We  found  it  to  be  about  one-fifth  of  a  mile  across,  consisting  entirely 
of  gneiss-rock,  rounded  on  the  surface,  and  with  a  little  moss  and  a  very  few 
other  plants  growing  in  crevices  where  water  had  lodged.     We  saw  the  tracks 
of  deer  upon  some  moist  sand,  and  a  rude  circle  of  stones,  being  probably 
the  remains  of  an  Esquimaux  summer  habitation.   From  twenty  minutes  after 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE, 
nine  till  ten  P.M.,  the  tide  rose  one  foot,  the  stream  setting  to  the  westward    1821- 

•  •  i  f        t  August. 

in  the  offing,  as,  indeed,  it  had  done  about  the  same  time  tor  the  two  pre- 
ceding tides,  so  that  little  doubt  could  be  entertained  of  the  flood-tide  coming 
from  the  eastward  in  this  place.  At  eleven  P.M.,  soon  after  we  returned  on 
board,  a  fresh  gale  suddenly  came  on  from  the  north-west,  obliging  us  to 
make  the  ships  fast  to  the  largest  floe-piece  that  happened  to  be  near  us,  as 
the  best  means  of  holding  our  ground. 

On  the  morning  of  the  12th,  the  good  effects  of  the  north-westerly  gale  Sun.  12. 
were  very  apparent ;  for,  although  we  had  drifted  two  or  three  leagues  back  to 
the  eastward,  the  main  body  of  the  ice,  consisting  mostly  of  pieces  smaller 
than  that  to  which  we  were  attached,  had  gone  much  faster,  leaving  a  large 
space  of  clear  water  for  us  to  work  in.  It  may  here  be  observed  that,  in  the 
course  of  our  endeavours  to  get  to  the  westward,  as  well  in  this  voyage,  as  in 
that  of  1819-20,  a  westerly  wind,  though  blowing  directly  against  us,  was 
always  found  ultimately  to  be  the  most  favourable  to  our  purpose,  as  it 
brings  away  large  bodies  of  ice  from  that  quarter,  and  consequently  leaves 
a  considerable  interval  of  open  water.  The  most  precious  opportunity  to 
seize,  therefore,  in  this  navigation,  is  at  the  springing  up  of  an  easterly 
breeze  after  a  gale  from  the  opposite  quarter,  at  which  time,  if  a  ship  be 
fortunately  unhampered,  considerable  progress  may  generally  be  made. 
Not  a  moment  of  this  favourable  interval  must  be  lost,  as  the  ice  invariably 
closes  again  in  a  few  hours  after  the  change  of  wind,  which  is  besides  usually 
attended  by  thick  weather. 

The  gale  having  somewhat  moderated  at  noon,  we  cast  off  and  made  sail ; 
and,  after  carrying  a  press  of  canvass  during  the  day,  had  made  considerable 
progress  by  the  evening,  when  the  ice  becoming  close  obliged  us  to  make  fast; 
in  doing  which  the  Hecla  narrowly  escaped  a  heavy  "  nip,"  by  the  sudden 
meeting  of  two  floes.  The  weather  was  beautifully  clear,  giving  us  a  fine 
view  of  the  land,  which  now  began  to  excite  in  us  more  and  more  in- 
terest, almost  at  every  step  of  our  progress.  A  headland,  bearing  from  us 
S.  87°  W.,  and  named,  by  Mr.  Hooper's  desire,  Cape  Welsford,  appeared 
very  decidedly  to  form  the  northern  termination  of  Southampton  Island, 
leaving  an  opening  of  a  league  or  two  in  width,  but  broken  by  two 
or  three  islands  between  it  and  some  high  land  to  the  northward ;  a  pro- 
montory on  this  shore,  forming  the  northern  point  of  the  Strait,  was  named 
after  Mr.  Deas  Thomson,  one  of  the  commissioners  of  His  Majesty's  Navy. 
This  land,  however,   did  not  appear  to  join   that  which  we  had  lately 

F  8 


r 


v' 


i 


i>  if  *"""* 


^A^ctx^w 


v  f ,    iJ 


!■'■' 1| 


i  "T'Hf 


■!^j 


!|fc|d 


1821 
August. 


Mon.  13 


36 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


left  to  the  north-east  of  us,  there  being  between  them  a  very  wide  open- 
ing in  which  nothing  but  a  sea  incumbered  with  ice  was  visible  from  the 
mast-head.  The  accounts  given  by  Captain  Middleton  of  the  latitude  of 
the  western  entrance  of  the  Frozen  Strait  are  so  confused,  and  even  contra- 
dictory *j  that  the  present  appearance  of  the  land  perplexed  me  extremely  in 
deciding  whether  or  not  Ave  had  arrived  at  the  opposite  end  of  the  opening 
to  which  he  had  given  that  name.  That  immediately  before  us  to  the  west- 
ward, though  it  agreed  in  latitude  within  five  or  six  miles  with  the 
southernmost  parallel  he  has  assigned  to  it,  appeared  much  too  narrow  to 
answer  his  description  of  the  passage  we  were  in  search  of.  Upon  the  whole, 
however,  I  thought  it  most  probable  that  this  was  the  strait  in  question  ;  and 
as,  at  all  events,  the  opening  between  Southampton  Island  and  the  land  to 
the  northward  of  it,  in  whatever  latitude  it  might  be  found  and  whether  wide 
or  narrow,  was  the  passage  through  which  it  was  our  present  object  to  pene- 
trate into  Repulse  Bay,  I  decided  on  using  our  utmost  exertions  to  push 
through  the  narrow  strait  now  before  us. 

The  wind  moderating  in  the  evening,  and  the  ice  after  sunset  once  more 
opening,  enabled  us  to  make  another  mile  or  two  to  the  westward,  after  which 
we  lay  to  for  the  night.  A  great  number  of  narwhals  were  playing  about 
the  ship  during  the  night,  but  they  were,  as  usual,  so  wary  that  our  boats 
could  not  approach  them.  We  remarked  that  scarcely  in  any  part  of  the 
polar  regions  previously  visited,  had  we  seen  fewer  birds  than  for  some 
days  past ;  a  solitary  glaucous  gull,  a  hawk,  and  a  boatswain  being  all  that 
had  been  noticed.  The  moon,  in  rising  this  evening,  was  curiously  distorted 
by  refraction  into  the  irregular  shape  of  a  shrivelled  orange.    « 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th  the  ships  were  pushed  as  far  into  the  ice  as  the 
closeness  of  it  would  allow,  which  brought  us  within  ten  or  twelve  miles  of 
the  narrow  part  of  the  strait  before  us;  and,  as  we  could  still  see  no  land 
from  the  masthead  when  looking  directly  through  it,  we  were  naturally  con- 
firmed in  the  supposition  that  this  was  the  Frozen  Strait,  beyond  which  we 

*  As  an  instance  of  this,  in  the  Furnace's  log  of  August  the  8th,  Captain  Middleton  gives 
the  latitude  of  his  ship  by  observation,  65°  38'  to  65°  41',  when  close  off  the  western  entrance 
of  the  Frozen  Strait,  which,  from  its  south-easterly  trending,  is,  also,  the  northernmost  part 
of  it.  In  his  letter  to  Mr.  Dobbs,  however,  he  says  it  is  in  66°  40',  and,  just  before,  that  it  is 
near  the  sixty-seventh  degree  of  latitude.  Neither  the  one  nor  the  other  has  proved  correct; 
but  I  have  here  quoted  them,  to  explain  the  doubts  which  these  contradictory  statements 
led  me  to  entertain  at  this  juncture. 


should  have  immediate  access  to  the  northern  part  of  the  Welcome.  We  J^J. 
observed  something  very  like  smoke  rising  from  about  Cape  Welsford,  which, 
being  confined  to  one  spot,  was  thought  likely  to  be  occasioned  by  the  fires 
of  natives.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  fineness  of  the  weather  about  this 
time  ;  the  climate  was,  indeed,  altogether  so  different  from  that  to  which  we 
had  before  been  accustomed  in  the  icy  seas,  as  to  be  a  matter  of  constant 
remark.  The  days  were  temperate  and  clear,  and  the  nights  not  cold, 
though  a  very  thin  plate  of  ice  was  usually  formed  upon  the  surface  of  the 
sea  in  sheltered  places,  and  in  the  pools  of  water  upon  the  floes.  After 
sunset  we  descried  land,  appearing  very  distant,  through  the  middle  of  the 
strait,  which  we  considered  to  be  that  on  the  American  side  of  the  Welcome. 
At  this  time,  also,  we  observed  some  ice  in  the  centre  of  the  strait,  heavier 
than  that  Avhich  covered  the  rest  of  the  sea,  and  apparently  aground  in  shoal 
water,  as  afterwards  proved  to  be  the  case. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th,  the  ice  continued  almost  as  close  as  before  Tues.  14. 
about  the  ships,  but  the  wind  being  easterly  and  some  clear  water  beginning 
to  appear  in  the  direction  of  the  strait,  we  were  encouraged  to  make  an 
attempt  to  move.  The  signal  was,  therefore,  made  to  warp  with  lines  and 
hawsers,  but  we  met  with  no  success  to  repay  our  endeavours,  the  Hecla 
having  rather  lost  than  gained  ground  in  the  course  of  the  day,  and  the  Fury, 
though  favoured  by  slacker  ice,  not  having  advanced  one  mile  after  nine 
hours'  labour.  We,  therefore,  made  fast  to  a  floe  three  quarters  of  a  mile  in 
length,  and  almost  as  much  across,  our  soundings  being  one  hundred  and 
ninety-two  fathoms,  at  the  distance  of  seven  miles  from  a  high  island  which 
occupies  a  large  portion  of  this  passage  on  its  northern  side.  A  great  variety 
of  coral,  shells,  and  marine  insects  were  here  brought  up  from  the  bottom, 
which  will  be  described  in  another  place. 

The  wind  shifted  to  the  westward  and  increased  to  a  strong  breeze  in  the 
night,  in  consequence  of  which  Ave  had,  on  the  morning  of  the  15th,  un-Wed.  15 
avoidably  drifted  back  five  or  six  miles  to  the  eastward.  This  temporary  loss 
of  ground  was,  however,  as  usual,  more  than  compensated  by  a  large  space 
of  clear  water  now  seen  in-shore,  into  which,  after  several  hours'  exertion,  we 
succeeded  in  getting  the  Fury,  at  three  P.M.  We  were  here  within  a  league 
of  a  remarkable  headland  on  Southampton  Island,  which  I  named  Cape 
Bylot,  as  being  probably  the  westernmost  land  seen  by  that  navigator  in  1615. 
In  the  meantime,  the  Hecla,  still  continuing  very  closely  beset,  had,  in  spite 
of  every  exertion,  drifted  back  with  the  ice  several  miles  to  the  northward 


v' 


■41  •' 


X 


'\ 


\ 


^*  'irXsy^ 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


i 


a!i8  ult   and  eastward'   so  tnat'  in  tlle  course  of  the  evening,  we  lost  sight  of  her 

v-*-y^w  altogether.     This  latter  circumstance  was,  however,  owing  in  great  measure 

to  the  extraordinary  refraction  upon  the  horizon,  making  terrestrial  objects 

at  the  distance  of  six  or  seven  miles  appear  flattened  down  or  depressed,  as 

well  as-otherwise  much  deformed. 

At  six  P.M.,  having  beat  up  within  five  or  six  miles  of  the  entrance  of 
the  strait,  and  being  anxious  to  sound  the  channel,  which  appeared  narrow 
but  without  any  ice   in  it  to  offer  us  obstruction,  I  left  the  ship  in   the 
gig,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Ross,  for  this  purpose.      The  current  appeared 
to  be  setting  to  windward,  or  to  the  westward,  but  the  fresh  breeze  was 
unfavourable  for  ascertaining  its  exact  direction  or  velocity.     Besides  the 
high  island  before  mentioned,  are   two  smaller  ones  to  the  southward  of 
it,  which  contract  the  channel  still  more  between  it  and  the  south  shore. 
These  islands  I  named  after  Lieutenant  Nias.     The  heavy  ice  which  had 
before  been  observed  from  the  masthead,  now  formed  a  very  conspicuous 
object,  the  rest  having  drifted  out  of  the  strait ;  we  therefore  rowed  directly 
towards  this,  as  it  seemed  to  form  the  northern  boundary  of  the  navigable 
part  of  the  channel.     Reaching  it  at  thirty  minutes  after  nine,  we  found  it 
aground  as  we  had  conjectured,  two  of  the  black  rocks  on  which  it  rested 
being  now  just  above  water,  and  a  tide  of  a  knot  and  a  half  setting  past 
them  to  the  eastward.     These  dangerous  rocks  lie  nearly  midway  between 
the  smallest  island  and  Cape  Welsford,  being  rather  to  the  westward  of  the 
narrowest  part.     Within  fifty  yards  of  the  dry  part  of  them  was  a  depth  of 
ten  to  twelve  fathoms,  and  from  five  to  seven  at  half  that  distance.     As  it 
was  not  possible  to  complete  the  examination  of  the  channel  in  time  to  beat 
the  ship  through  till  the  morning,  I  made  the  appointed  signal  for  the  Fury  to 
stand  off  and  on  during  the  few  hours  of  dusk,  and  determined  on  taking  up 
our  quarters  on  shore  at  Cape  Welsford,  in  order  to  re-commence  our  exa- 
mination as  early  as  possible  in  the  morning.     In  standing  across  to  the  Cape, 
we  could  find  no  bottom  with  thirty-five  fathoms  of  line,  and,  indeed,  in  the 
whole  of  this  part  the  water  was  subsequently  found  to  be  very  deep. 

The  part  of  Southampton  Island  on  which  we  landed  is  about  a  thousand 
feet  high,  and  composed  of  gneiss.  Every  here  and  there,  along  the  shore, 
between  the  projecting  points  of  rocks,  is  a  small  cove  or  bay,  having  a 
beach  composed  of  small  pieces  of  limestone,  which  make  the  water  almost 
as  white  as  milk.  Landing  in  one  of  these  coves,  we  carried  the  boat 
above  high- water  mark ;  and,  making  a  tent  of  her  sail,  lay  very  comfortably 


:!«!! 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


39 


during  the  night.  When  the  boat  first  touched  the  beach,  we  observed  an  182i. 
innumerable  quantity  of  the  little  fish  called  sillocks,  swimming  about,  se-  August. 
veral  of  which  were  killed  by  the  boat-hooks  or  taken  in  the  hand.  A  great 
number  of  white  whales,  seals,  and  narwhals,  were  also  playing  about  near 
the  beach  during  the  night.  The  Avhite  whales  were  the  most  numerous ; 
the  noise  these  animals  made  resembled  a  hoarse  low-toned  barking  more  than 
any  other  to  which  I  can  compare  it ;  and  we  remarked  that  their  colour  was 
whiter  than  any  we  had  before  seen. 

The  weather  continued  clear  and  fine,  enabling  us  to  obtain  good  observa- 
tions by  the  moon  and  stars.  The  latitude  by  two  meridian  altitudes  was 
65°  28'  13";  the  longitude,  by  chronometers  84°  40'  07"  ;  and  the  variation  of 
the  magnetic  needle  50°  18'  26"  westerly.  The  aurora  borealis  was  visible 
during  the  whole  of  the  night,  consisting  of  many  luminous  patches,  or 
nebulce,  having,  when  viewed  together,  a  tendency  to  form  an  arch,  and  ex- 
tending from  south  by  east  to  south-Avest  and  sometimes  to  west,  its  height 
in  the  centre  being  15°.  Prom  this  arch  pencils  of  rays  shot  upwards  towards 
the  zenith.  It  differed  from  any  other  phenomenon  of  this  kind,  that  I  have 
seen,  in  being  at  times  of  a  beautiful  orange  colour. 

As  soon  as  it  was  daylight,  Mr.  Ross  and  myself  ascended  the  hill  above  Thur.  16. 
our  sleeping-place,  from  whence  we  could  perceive  land  stretching  round  to 
the  westward  and  northward,  so  as  apparently  to  leave  no  opening  in  that 
quarter.  We  were  much  surprised  at  the  low  and  yellowish  appearance  of 
this  land,  both  of  which  circumstances  we  were  at  a  loss  to  reconcile  with 
Captain  Middleton's  description  of  the  bold  shore  of  the  American  conti- 
nent, on  the  western  side  of  the  Welcome  about  this  latitude.  It  was 
pleasing,  however,  to  observe  a  large  expanse  of  sea  wholly  unencumbered 
with  ice,  in  the  direction  we  were  now  about  to  pursue ;  and  we,  therefore, 
hastened  to  the  beach  to  continue  the  survey  of  the  strait,  that  no  time 
might  be  lost  in  taking  advantage  of  this  favourable  circumstance.  We  here 
noticed  several  Esquimaux  circles  of  stones,  but  all  very  old  ones,  nor  could 
we  discover  any  recent  traces  of  inhabitants,  notwithstanding  the  smoke 
which  we  thought  we  had  observed  from  the  ships,  at  no  great  distance  from 
this  spot.  In  the  fissures  and  holloAVS  between  the  rocks,  the  moss,  sorrel, 
ground  willow,  and  a  few  other  plants  were  abundant,  and  specimens  of 
every  kind  were  brought  on  board.  On  our  return  to  the  beach  we  found 
the  boat's  crew  amusing  themselves  in  catching  sillocks,  of  which  they  had 
discovered  great  numbers  left  by  the  tide  in  pools  upon  the  rocks,  and  had 


■ 


\u 


■•"t 


WL^iV""* 


V'A  I 


40 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


if 


1821  already  caught  more1  than  a  large  bucket  full.  They  proved  most  excellent 
August,  eating  and,  although  we  were  not  badly  off  for  fresh  provision,  were  con- 
sidered by  us  a  very  agreeable  variety.  Every  possible  care  was  taken  in 
observing  the  time  and  direction  of  the  tides  in  this  place,  that  phenomenon 
having  now  assumed  a  more  than  ordinary  interest.  It  has  already  been 
remarked  that,  at  half  past  nine  the  preceding  evening,  we  had  found  a  tide 
setting  to  the  eastward  past  the  Black  Rocks,  at  the  rate  of  a  knot  and  a 
half.  At  ten  P.M.,  when  we  landed,  the  tide  was  rapidly  rising  and  con- 
tinued to  do  so  till  two  in  the  morning,  during  the  whole  of  which  time  a 
few  pieces  of  ice  were  occasionally  driving  to  the  eastward  through  the  chan- 
nel. From  these  observations  it  was  not  unreasonable  to  surmise  that  the 
flood-tide  came  from  the  westward,  though  subsequent  experience,  as  Avill 
presently  appear,  proved  this  conjecture  to  be  erroneous.  If  the  intervals 
between  the  tides  be  regular,  the  time  of  high  water  on  full  and  change  days 
of  the  moon,  at  Cape  Welsford,  would  appear  to  be  a  quarter  past  twelve. 
The  perpendicular  fall  of  the  water  at  this  morning's  tide,  which  was  a  spring- 
tide, the  moon  being  two  days  old,  was  sixteen  feet  seven  inches. 

After  completing  our  observations  and  examination  of  the  channel,  we 
reached  the  ship  by  eight  A.M.,  the  Fury  having,  Avith  great  attention,  been 
kept  close  off  the  entrance  of  the  strait  during  the  night.  The  Hecla  had  at 
this  time  just  hove  in  sight  under  a  press  of  sail  to  the  eastward,  having  at 
length,  with  much  difficulty,  succeeded  in  getting  into  clear  water.  While 
engaged  in  beating  through  the  channel  with  a  considerable  tide  against  us, 
I  despatched  Mr.  Crozier  to  bring  on  board  sand  for  the  decks,  and  provided 
him  also  with  nets  for  catching  sillocks,  of  which  he  procured  enough  to 
serve  the  messes  of  the  officers  and  ships'  company  for  two  dinners. 
•:  In  beating  through  this  channel,  the  breadth  of  which  is  a  mile  and  three 
quarters  from  Cape  Welsford  to  the  Black  Rocks,  we  discovered  no  danger 
on  the  south  side,  where  we  had  ninety  fathoms  at  two-thirds  of  a  cable's 
length  from  the  shore,  nor  any  on  the  northern  side  except  the  rocks  them- 
selves, which  are  completely  covered  at  high  water.  No  soundings  could  be 
obtained  with  one  hundred  fathoms  of  line  anywhere  near  the  middle  of  the 
channel,  though  the  water  is  remarkably  light- coloured  at  a  considerable  dis- 
tance from  the  shore,  owing  probably  to  the  same  cause  as  that  I  before 
noticed,  as  occurring  near  the  beach  in  all  the  little  bays  along  this  coast. 

As  soon  as  Ave  Avere  through  the  passage,  I  despatched  Mr.  Bushnan  to  the 
Hecla,  in  the  small  boat,  Avith  a  plan  of  the  channel,  and  some  directions 


:ll,,ih, 


.>*.* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


41 


to  be  attended  to  in  coming  through,  for  Captain  Lyon's  guidance,  and  then  ^^ 
stood  on  to  the  westward,  in  order  to  make  out  the  land  in  that  quarter,  v^^/ 
The  appearance  of  this  land  continued  to  perplex  us  more  and  more  as  we 
advanced,  as,  instead  of  any  opening  corresponding  to  Wager  River,  which 
lies  about  this  latitude,  and  the  high  shores  by  which  it  is  bounded,  we  soon 
discovered  before  us  a  continuous  line  of  low  yellow-looking  coast,  extending 
all  round  so  as  to  meet  the  high  land  of  Southampton  Island  to  the  south, 
as  well  as  that  to  the  north,  and  leaving  no  perceptible  outlet  by  which  we 
could  find  our  way  to  the  westward.  In  standing  across  we  frequently 
observed  a  treat  rippling  on  the  water,  and  a  boat  was  sent  to  sound  ;  but  we 
could  find  no  bottom  with  forty  to  fifty  fathoms  of  line,  till  within  five  or  six 
miles  of  the  low  shore,  when  we  rather  suddenly  obtained  soundings  in  twenty- 
fathoms,  on  a  gravelly  bottom.  We  then  kept  away,  in  a  line  with  this  shore, 
to  the  northward,  and  at  length  perceived  something  like  a  small  opening  in 
the  north-eastern  corner  of  what  otherwise  appeared  a  large  bay.  The  wind 
veering  to  the  southward,  however,  with  rain,  and  every  appearance  of  a 
dirty  night,  and  the  Hecla  not  having  yet  got  through  the  strait,  in  conse- 
quence of  light  and  baffling  winds,  I  considered  it  most  prudent  to  run  in 
under  the  western  shore,  and  to  anchor  for  the  night,  which  we  accordingly 
did  at  thirty  minutes  after  sevenP.M.,in  thirteen  fathoms,  on  a  bottom  of  mud 
and  shells,  at  the  distance  of  one  mile  from  the  beach.  The  navigation  was 
here  perfectly  unobstructed  by  ice,  of  which  none  was  to  be  seen,  except 
here  and  there  a  straggling  piece  which  appeared  to  have  been  lately  de- 
tached from  the  shore.  A  great  number  of  white  whales  were  observed  in  the 
course  of  the  day,  and  the  cackling  of  geese  was  heard  on  shore  the  whole 
night.  The  Hecla,  having  succeeded  in  getting  through  the  strait,  joined  us 
an  hour  before  midnight.   ■ 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th,  the  weather  being  too  foggy  to  move,  parties  Frid.  17. 
from  both  ships: went  on  shore  to  examine  the  country  and  to  procure 
specimens  of  its  natural  productions.  We  landed  on  a  flat  and  very  rough 
beach,  principally  composed  of  sharp  masses  of  limestone,  over  which,  at  low 
Avater,  it  was  difficult  to  drag  the  boats.  Mixed  with  these  were  some  pieces 
of  gneiss  and  granite,  but  the  lime  is  by  far  the  most  abundant.  This  land, 
which  rises  gradually  from  the  beach,  but  is  in  no  part  more  than  sixty  or 
seventy  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  was  full  of  ponds  of  fresh  water,  and 
in  almost  all  the  intermediate  parts  there  was  abundance  of  fine  vegetation, 
consisting  of  grass,  moss,  and  various  other  plants,  of  which  specimens  were 

G 


|!|  |d 


42 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


v«*"Y"N»> 


nihil 


.':|.ij, 


1821.  bought  on  board.  A  splendid  specimen  of  the  colymbus  arcticus,  and  also  a 
red-throated  diver  (colymbus  septentrionalis,)  were  obtained  by  the  gentlemen 
of  the  Hecla.  The  former  though  very  wild  were  numerous,  as  were  also 
plovers  of  two  kinds,  the  charadrius  pluvialis,  and  hiaticula.  Nine  or  ten  deer, 
of  which  several  were  fawns,  with  a  large  buck  as  usual  bringing  up  the  rear 
of  the  herd,  were  met  with  by  some  of  our  people,  but  they  would  not  suffer 
themselves  to  be  approached  within  gun-shot.  A  great  number  of  fine  black 
whales  were  playing  about  near  the  beach,  and,  from  the  total  absence  of 
ice,  would  have  afforded  a  rich  and  easy  harvest  to  a  fishing  ship.  Several 
seals  were  also  seen,  and  we  were  in  hopes  of  finding  some  sillocks  near  the 
shore,  but  had  no  success  with  the  seine,  which  was  twice  hauled  upon  the 
beach.  We  met  with  the  remains  of  several  Esquimaux  habitations  in 
different  places  along  the  shore,  and  in  one  spot  a  conspicuous  mark 
had  been  left  by  these  people,  consisting  of  several  stones  placed  one  over 
the  other.  The  beach  being  favourable  for  measuring  a  base,  we  ran 
off  one  above  a  mile  in  length,  and  obtained  the  necessary  angles  for  the 
survey,  together  with  the  usual  observations  for  fixing  our  geographical 
position.  The  latitude  of  our  landing-place  was  65°  27'  37",  the  longitude,  by 
chronometers,  85°  15'  35",  the  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle  87°  27'  52",  and  the 
variation  47°  34'  05"  westerly.  It  was  low  water  by  the  shore  at  forty-three 
minutes  past  eight  in  the  morning,  by  which  and  the  preceding  night's  ob- 
servation, the  time  of  high  Avater  on  full  and  change  days  of  the  moon 
appears  to  be  about  twenty  minutes  past  twelve.  The  perpendicular  fall 
of  tide  this  morning  measured  rather  more  than  sixteen  feet,  so  that  the 
highest  spring  tides  will  probably  amount  to  eighteen. 

The  weather  having  gradually  cleared  up  as  the  sun  got  higher,  we 
returned  on  board  at  half  past  nine  and,  getting  immediately  under  way, 
stood  under  all  sail  to  the  N.N.E.,  where  alone,  as  on  the  preceding  even- 
ing, there  appeared  the  smallest  chance  of  finding  any  outlet.  Our  late 
excursion  on  shore  had  served,  among  other  objects  of  interest,  to  furnish 
some  clue  to  the  mystery  respecting  the  place  into  which  we  had  found  our 
way,  and  which  had  evidently  never  before  been  visited  by  Europeans.  Our 
parties  who  went  farthest  inland  reported  that  they  could  see  no  termination 
to  this  kind  of  shore  to  the  westward,  nor  any  appearance  of  highland  beyond 
it.  It  was  now  evident,  therefore,  that  this  low  shore  was  the  same  as  that 
which  Captain  Middleton  described  as  "  a  low  shingly  beach,  like  Dun- 
geness,"  and  along  the  western  side  of  which  he  sailed  up  the  Welcome, 


■\\ 


— — -' 


without  suspecting  its  disjunction,  in  any  part,  from  the  high  land  of  South- 
ampton Island  at  the  back,  which,  indeed,  he  could  not  have  discovered 
without  travelling  several  leagues  inland  from  that  side,  until  he  had  reached 
the  shore  of  the  bay  we  had  lately  entered. 

In  approaching  a  low  point,  which  forms  one  side  of  the  apparent  opening 
to  the  N.N.E.,  before  alluded  to,  and  which  I  subsequently  named  after 
Mr.  Henderson,  we  gradually  shoaled  the  water  from  eighteen  fathoms, 
which  we  had  soon  after  leaving  our  anchorage,  to  eight.  After  rounding 
the  point,  it  seemed  doubtful  whether  there  was  any  passage  to  the  north- 
ward, the  interval  between  the  two  lands  being  now  contracted  to  two 
miles,  and  becoming  more  and  more  narrow  as  we  advanced.  After 
passing  the  point,  where,  at  two  P.M.,  we  found  the  flood-tide  setting  to 
the  northward,  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  and  a  half  an  hour,  we  again  deepened 
the  water  to  ten  and  twelve  fathoms  ;  but,  in  continuing  our  course  half 
an  hour  longer,  again  shoaled  it  gradually  to  five  and  four  fathoms,  and 
tacked  in  eighteen  feet.  The  ship  was  unusually  slack  in  stays,  owing, 
perhaps,  to  her  hanging  in  the  long  tangle-weed,  of  which  great  quan- 
tities were  always  floating  about  here.  At  this  time  the  two  lands  seemed 
to  approach  within  a  mile  of  each  other,  with  a  number  of  little  low 
stony  islands  occupying  a  great  part  of  that  space,  and  shelving  points  on 
each  side,  so  that  there  seemed  little  chance  of  finding  a  passage  for  ships 
in  that  direction.  Having  sent  a  boat  to  sound,  we  tacked,  and  again 
ran  in  till  we  had  shoaled  the  water  to  four  fathoms,  and  then  once 
more  stood  to  the  southward.  Finding,  by  the  signals  made  from  the  boat, 
that  nothing  could  be  done  till  the  channel,  if  there  were  any,  had  been 
regularly  examined  and  buoyed  off,  I  directed  the  ships  to  be  anchored  as 
soon  as  we  had  got  into  twelve  fathoms ;  and  at  four  P.M.,  left  the  Fury, 
accompanied  by  Mr.  Henderson,  and  by  Lieutenant  Hoppner  in  a  second 
boat  from  the  Hecla,  in  order  to  conduct  the  intended  examination.  This 
did  not,  however,  occupy  so  much  time  as  we  expected,  for  in  less  than  two 
hours  we  had  ascertained,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  no  practicable  passage  for 
ships  existed  in  this  direction.  The  tide  was  here  so  strong,  that,  with 
sails  and  oars,  we  could  scarcely  stem  it ;  and  as  we  approached  the  nar- 
rowest part,  it  was  running  more  than  six  knots,  obliging  us  to  pull  in-shore, 
into  the  eddy  of  the  point,  before  we  could  make  the  smallest  progress.  We 
then  with  difficulty  rowed  to  an  islet,  about  which  fresh  rocks  and  shoals 
were  almost  every  minute  shewing  themselves,  as  the  tide  fell ;  so  that,  at 

G  2 


)  MJ& 


*4 


ihlll 


!*li 


44 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


si 


,|:i|IS 

l! 


1821-  half-past  six,  when  it  was  very  little  more  than  half  ebb  by  the  shore,  there 
sjJ?s*J  were,  in  every  direction,  numberless  shoals  and  islets,  past  which  the  tide 
was  rushing  with  all  the  violence  and  irregularity  of  a  race,  except  in  a 
small  channel,  which,  in  the  only  part  where  a  ship  could  have  floated, 
did  not  exceed  three  hundred  yards  in  width.  In  such  a  channel,  rendered, 
as  it  was,  doubly  dangerous,  by  the  rapid  tide  which  rushed  through  it,  and 
which  would  render  a  ship  perfectly  unmanageable,  it  would  have  been 
highly  imprudent  to  risk  a  passage  ;  and  as,  under  these  circumstances,  it 
would  have  been  a  mere  loss  of  time  to  continue  the  examination  of  this 
place,  whatever  curiosity  we  might  feel  to  ascertain  its  communications,  I 
determined  to  return  on  board,  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  the  remaining 
part  of  the  ebb-tide,  it  being  our  next  object  to  endeavour  to  find  a  passage 
into  the  Welcome,  round  the  south  side  of  the  low  land  to  the  westward  of 
us.  I  cannot,  therefore,  decidedly  say,  whether  there  exists  a  passage  of 
any  kind  through  to  the  northward  in  that  place  or  not,  but  it  is  possible 
enough  that  there  may  be  one,  though  very  narrow  and  shoal. 

The  whole  of  the  bottom  here  consists  of  a  flat  gneiss-rock,  over  which, 
as  well  as  on  the  shoals  and  islets,  lie  innumerable  fragments  of  limestone, 
of  a  white  colour.  A  mark,  consisting  of  stones  piled  up,  had  been  set  on 
each  side  of  the  narrow  channel,  as  if  for  the  purpose  of  pointing  out  the 
safest  part  for  canoes,  when  the  points  are  covered  by  high  spring  tides.  By 
deep  wading,  for  the  nature  of  the  bottom  and  the  rapid  fall  of  tide  did 
not  allow  us  to  risk  the  grounding  of  the  boats,  we  got  to  the  islet,  where 
we  found  two  jaw-bones  of  a  whale  placed  erect  on  a  pile  of  stones, 
together  with  a  quantity  of  whalebone;  the  whole  structure  being  so  con- 
trived, when  viewed  at  a  little  distance,  that  it  bore  a  striking  resem- 
blance to  the -figure  "of  a  man  holding  the  blades  of  bone  in  his  hands. 
Among  the  numerous  marks  of  the  kind  which  Ave  afterwards  met  with 
in  various  parts  of  the  sea-coast,  it  was  not  uncommon  to  observe  some 
which  evidently  appeared  to  have  reference  to  the  same  whimsical  in- 
tention, and  which,  till  habit  had  rendered  them  familiar,  we  often  mis- 
took for  men.  Being  in  want  of  whalebone  for  making  brooms,  we  took  a 
few  of  the  blades,  leaving  as  an  equivalent  a  boarding-pike  stuck  upright 
in  the  pile  ;  we  then  returned  to  the  ships,  which  we  reached  at  eight  P.M. 
The  wind  having  now  become  very  light  and  variable,  and  the  navigation  of 
this  place  requiring  the  utmost  command  of  the  ships,  I  was  reluctantly 
compelled  to  defer  moving  till  the  morning  tide.     It  was  low  water  at  a 


f'lltl 


quarter  past  nine  this  evening,  after  which  time  the  tide  began  almost  im-  A*8:^t 
mediately  to  run  to  the  northward.     Several  rein-deer  were  seen  on  the 
western  or  low  shore  in  the  course  of  the  day. 

The  weather  was  cloudy  and  nearly  calm  during  the  night,  and  a  thick  fog 
came  on  the  following  morning.  We  weighed,  however,  at  high  water  and  Sat.  18. 
beat  to  the  southward  with  a  light  air  from  that  quarter,  regulating  our  course 
by  the  lead  Avhich  is  here  a  faithful  guide.  At  nine  A.M.,  the  wind  shifted 
to  the  N.W.,  and  the  fog  was  succeeded  by  rain  for  an  hour  or  two,  after 
which  the  weather  became  dry,  clear,  and  pleasant.  As  soon  as  the  favourable 
breeze  sprung  up  we  stood  under  all  sail  for  what  at  first  appeared  to  be  the 
south-eastern  extreme  of  the  low  land,  more  of  which,  however,  came  in  sight 
as  we  advanced  and  as  the  weather  became  clearer ;  till  at  length,  at  one 
P.M.,  it  was  but  too  evident  that  we  were  once  more  embayed,  the  low 
beach  running  quite  round  to  Southampton  Island,  about  nine  or  ten  miles 
to  the  southward  of  us.  I  therefore  ordered  the  ships  to  be  anchored, 
being  in  thirteen  fathoms,  on  a  bottom  of  mud  and  shells,  at  the  distance 
of  two  miles  and  a  quarter  from  the  high  or  eastern  land,  and  about  four 
from  the  other :  and  in  order  to  leave  no  doubt  of  the  continuity  of  land, 
as  it  appeared  from  the  ships,  I  despatched  a  boat  from  each  under  the 
command  of  Lieutenant  Reid,  with  directions  to  row  close  to  the  beach, 
completely  round  the  bay,  making  such  hydrographical  and  other  remarks 
as  circumstances  would  permit. 

In  the  mean  time  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  went  on  shore  to  the  east- 
ward, in  order  to  obtain  from  the  hills  a  view  of  the  surrounding  lands.  It 
may  here  be  observed  that,  on  this  eastern  side  of  the  bay,  there  is  a  strip 
of  low  and  lightish-coloured  land  a  mile  or  two  in  breadth,  extending  from  , 
the  foot  of  the  hills  to  the  sea.  On  landing  we  found  this  low  shore  to 
consist  of  whitish  limestone  in  schistose  fragments,  alternating  with  narrow 
strips  of  verdure,  and  some  ponds  of  water ;  while  the  rocks  at  the  back, 
which  rise  eight  or  nine  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  are 
composed  of  gneiss,  with  here  and  there  a  quantity  of  limestone  in  heaps, 
and  in  many  places  large  masses  of  quartz,  mica,  and  red  feldspar,  lying 
detached  upon  the  surface.  Near  the  top  of  the  hill  we  also  met  with 
a  considerable  quantity  of  magnetic  ironstone.  We  saw  no  living  animal 
but  three  small  birds.  Stones  placed  erect  in  different  parts,  and  even  at 
the  very  top  of  the  hill,  shewed  that  the  Esquimaux  had  visited  these  shores, 
but  we  observed  no  recent  traces  of  them. 


w& 


)eat 


m?: 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
August. 


'«o.'4i  )|| 


I! 


|:iii 


Lieutenant  Reid  returned  on  board  at  eleven  P.M.,  having  determined 
the  continuity  of  land  all  round  the  bay,  by  rowing  close  in-shore  the  whole 
way.  With  a  view  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  the  breadth  of  the  low  land, 
by  which  the  geographical  position  of  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  Welcome 
in  this  latitude  might  have  been  laid  down,  Lieutenant  Reid  went  on  shore 
near  the  head  of  the  bay  ;  but  it  proved  so  level,  extensive,  and  low,  that 
he  was  unable  to  obtain  any  view  to  the  westward.  He  considered  the 
southern  boundary  of  the  bay  to  be  ten  miles  from  the  station  of  the  ships. 
The  soundings  are  regular,  and  the  anchorage  good  in  every  part  which  our 
boats  visited,  making  this,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  secure  and  extensive 
harbours  in  the  known  world.  Scarcely  a  piece  of  ice  was  seen  in  any  part 
of  it,  and  the  appearance  of  the  beach,  on  which  were  no  heavy  grounded 
masses,  shewed  that  here,  as  in  all  other  well-sheltered  harbours  or  inlets  in 
the  polar  seas,  little  or  none  had  ever  found  access,  except  that  which  is 
formed  in  it,  and  which  the  annual  process  of  dissolution  has  usually 
destroyed  before  this  period.  In  the  examination  of  any  inlet  in  these  regions 
there  is,  indeed,  no  indication  more  unpromising,  and  which,  if  any  thing 
short  of  absolute  examination  could  be  admitted,  might  be  considered  so 
conclusive  against  the  existence  of  a  passage,  as  the  absence  of  "old"  ice, 
or,  at  least,  of  those  traces  of  it,  which  are  evident  upon  every  shore  to 
which  it  has  occasionally  a  ready  access.  Of  this  fact,  the  remaining  part  of 
the  present  season's  navigation  will  afford  a  striking  proof. 

This  magnificent  bay,  possessing  so  many  advantages  that  would  render  it 
invaluable  in  a  more  temperate  climate,  the  officers  honoured  with  the  name 
of  the  Duke  of  York's  Bay,  in  consequence  of  the  Expedition  having  first 
entered  it  on  the  birth-day  of  His  Royal  Highness. 

It  being  now  evident  that  the  inlet  into  which,  in  the  course  of  our  en- 
deavours to  penetrate  to  the  westward,  we  had  unavoidably  been  led,  would 
afford  us  no  passage  in  that  direction,  I  gave  orders  for  weighing  at  the  turn 
of  tide ;  being  determined  at  once  to  run  back  through  the  narrow  channel  by 
which  we  had  entered,  and  to  push  to  the  northward  without  delay,  in 
search  of  some  more  favourable  opening.  The  tide,  in  our  present  anchor- 
age, flowed  to  the  southward  and  ebbed  to  the  northward ;  and  it  now  be- 
came apparent  that,  notwithstanding  the  care  taken  to  ascertain  the  direc- 
tion of  the  flood-tide  in  the  entrance  to  this  bay,  we  had  been  mistaken  in 
supposing  it  to  come  from  the  westward.  For,  as  the  tide  of  ebb  unquestion- 
ably ran  to  the  southward  about  Point  Henderson,  and  no  opening  occurs 


any  where  else,  it  follows  that  the  flood  must  of  necessity  come  in  from  the 
eastward.  The  comparative  slowness  of  its  rate  of  running  through  the 
narrow  passage  is  easily  accounted  for  by  the  depth  of  the  channel  through 
which  it  flows,  (exceeding  one  hundred  fathoms,)  compared  with  the  bay  it 
has  to  fill,  and  which  is  shallow  in  many  parts.  The  error  into  which  I  had 
fallen  on  this  occasion  has  been  here  particularly  noticed,  as  furnishing 
another  instance  of  the  difficulty  of  ascertaining  the  true  direction  of  the 
flood-tide,  without  any  knowledge  of  those  local  circumstances  which  pro- 
duce, on  many  coasts,  what  seamen  call  a  "  tide  and  half-tide,"  or  "  tide 
and  quarter-tide,"  and  which  one  or  two  cursory  and  unconnected  ob- 
servations cannot  always  detect.  In  the  present  instance  it  appeared 
that  the  stream  of  ebb  was  still  running  past  the  Black  Rocks,  one 
hour  and  three  quarters  after  the  time  of  low  water  by  the  shore  ;  how 
much  longer  than  this  it  continued  to  run  we  had  not  an  opportunity  of 
ascertaining. 

The  weather  was  overcast  during  the  night,  and  a  calm  prevailed  till  half- 
past  six  on  the  morning  of  the  19th,  at  which  time  we  weighed  with  a  light  Sun.  19. 
air  from  the  N.W.,  and  stood  towards  the  passage.  At  half  past  eight,  we 
discovered  a  shoal,  dry  at  half-tide,  which  lay  almost  directly  in  our  way, 
and  soundings  were  found  by  a  boat,  from  twelve  to  fourteen  fathoms,  at  the 
distance  of  a  mile  on  its  eastern  and  south-eastern  sides  ;  but  the  wind  again 
falling  just  as  we  got  between  the  shoal  and  the  land,  and  the  ebb-tide 
having  just  done,  we  anchored  at  ten  A.M.  in  twelve  fathoms  and  a  half, 
being  about  the  middle  of  the  channel,  which  is  here  between  three  and 
four  miles  in  breadth.  Mr.  Fisher  and  myself  then  landed  on  the  shoal,  of 
which  the  position  was  favourable  for  making  observations,  and  for  the  inter- 
section of  the  other  angles  obtained  for  the  survey  of  the  bay.  We  found  it 
to  be  thirty  or  forty  yards  in  length  at  low  water,  and  composed  of  rounded 
lumps  of  lime,  (many  of  which  contained  fossil  remains,)  a  specimen  or  two 
of  black  marble,  and  some  pieces  of  granite  and  gneiss.  The  latitude  ob- 
served was  65°  20'  56" ;  the  longitude,  by  chronometers,  84°  57'  04". 5  ;  and 
the  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle,  by  the  sun's  azimuth  at  noon,  46°  25', 
westerly.  While  we  were  waiting  for  the  meridian  altitude,  Captain  Lyon, 
who  had  joined  us  in  his  own  boat,  employed  his  people  in  sounding  round 
the  shoal  which  is  in  most  parts  bold.  We  built  a  pile  of  stones  on  the 
middle  of  it,  but  this  was  altogether  covered  about  one  P.M.,  or  at  half-flood. 
In  the  mean  time,  a  number  of  our  gentlemen  had  landed  on  Southampton 


'     4 


•"* 


48 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


•■>■■ 


:l|l!|, 


li!BMfi|ilii 


1821.  Island,  bringing  off  specimens  of  the  plants  and  minerals,  which  were  much 
\^-y-%J  the  same  as  those  collected  the  preceding  evening.  Some  of  the  party  con- 
fidently reported  that  they  had  heard  the  shouting  of  natives,  though  they 
could  not  meet  with  them.  From  this  circumstance,  as  well  as  from  the 
smoke  which  had  before  been  observed  near  this  place,  we  thought  it  likely 
that  some  Esquimaux  were  not  far  off,  but  that,  never  having  before 
communicated  with  Europeans,  they  had  perhaps  been  scared  at  our 
approach. 

A  breeze  from  the  S.W.,  which  sprung  up  at  two  P.M.,  enabled  us  to  weigh 
before  high  water;  when,  having  picked  up  our  boats,  we  made  all  sail  for 
the  channel,  through  which  we  passed  at  half  past  four  with  a  strong  breeze. 
The  Black  Rocks  were  at  this  time  totally  concealed,  and  the  ice  quite 
washed  away  from  them  by  the  last  spring-tides,  so  that,  had  we  not  before 
known  their  situation,  lying,  as  they  do,  almost  in  mid-channel,  we  might 
perhaps  have  run  directly  upon  them.  The  mark  for  being  abreast  of  them 
is  shewn  in  the  accompanying  plan,  and  to  any  ship  visiting  this  bay  will  be 
useful  with  a  turning  wind.  When  the  breeze  is  free,  the  only  direction 
necessary  is  to  keep  about  three-fourths  over  from  the  small  islet  to  the  high 
southern  shore,  which  is  bold  quite  close  to  the  rocks.  On  hauling  to  the 
northward  we  found  the  position  of  the  ice  very  unfavourable  to  our  pro- 
gress in  that  direction,  and  the  wind  increasing  to  a  strong  breeze,  with 
every  appearance  of  bad  weather,  we  reefed  our  sails,  for  the  purpose  of 
standing  off  and  on  during  the  night,  with  the  hope  that  this  wind  would  in 
a  few  hours  clear  the  shore  along  which  it  was  now  our  object  to  sail.  After 
dark  it  began  to  blow  stronger  with  rain  and  some  sea  out  of  the  bay,  obliging 
us  to  carry  a  press  of  canvass,  and  to  keep  all  hands  on  deck,  to  enable  us 
to  weather  the  ice  under  our  lee. 
Mon.  20.  After  midnight  the  weather  moderated  a  little,  and  the  wind  drew  more  to 
the  southward,  giving  us  some  shelter  under  the  lee  of  the  land  till  daylight, 
when  Ave  found  that  the  breeze  had  done  us  all  the  service  we  had  anticipated, 
by  opening  a  wide  passage  between  the  land  and  the  ice  to  the  northward. 
Not  a  moment  was  lost  in  availing  ourselves  of  this  opportunity,  and  we  ran  ra- 
pidly and  almost  without  obstruction  along  the  land,  passing  numerous  islands 
and  bays  with  which  this  shore  abounds.  Piles  of  stones  were  seen,  as  usual, 
in  various  places  along  the  coast.  The  eastern  shore  of  this  new  strait  still  ap- 
peared continuous,  and  both  lands  began  to  trend  more  to  the  westward.  In  the 
course  of  the  afternoon  we  passed  several  streams  of  ice,  much  of  which  was 


f,l!;| 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


'.>*       < 


:\ 


covered  with  sand,  but  the  late  south-west  breeze  having  drifted  the  main  ,1821- 

.  August. 

body  of  it  over  to  the  opposite  coast,  we  met  with  no  material  impediment.   <-*-,-**/ 

At  a  quarter  before  five,  P.M.,  in  passing  within  an  island,  to  which  from 

subsequent  occurrences  the  name  of  Passage  Island  was  afterwards  given, 

a  violent  rippling  was  observed  a-head.      The  boats  were  instantly  lowered 

to  sound  the  channel,  and  the  ships   put  about  till  it  was  ascertained  that 

there  was  no  shoal  water ;  when  we  again  tacked,  keeping  the  boats  a-head, 

and  continuing  under  easy  sail  till  past  the  rippling,  but  having  no  less  than 

twenty-five  fathoms  in  any  part. 

Passage  Island,  which  is  blackish  in  its  appearance,  has  a  small  rocky  islet 
of  a  yellow  colour  on  its  eastern  side,  with  which  we  afterwards  as  unex- 
pectedly as  unwillingly  became  better  acquainted.  There  are  also  two  or 
three  small  islands  lying  nearly  abreast  of  it,  off  the  Southampton  Island 
shore,  and  as  we  proceeded  several  others  were  brought  in  sight,  lying  in  a  bay 
near  the  west  extreme,  Avhich  we  passed  in  the  evening,  having  before  us  a  sea 
entirely  clear  of  ice  and,  we  were  willing  to  hope,  of  land  also.  Hazy  weather, 
however,  such  as  had  prevailed  during  the  greater  part  of  the  day,  with  occa- 
sional rain,  is  very  favourable  to  such  hopes,  and  often,  therefore,  brings 
much  disappointment.  At  seven  o'clock  we  plainly  distinguished  land,  with 
a  fog-bank  hanging  over  it,  to  the  westward,  and,  as  far  as  the  thickness  of 
the  weather  would  permit  us  to  see,  leaving  no  opening  before  us  except  for 
about  two  points  in  the  north-western  quarter.  As  the  nights  became  dark 
for  several  hours  at  this  season,  and  we  were  wholly  unacquainted  with  the 
land  beyond  us,  the  boats  were  despatched  to  look  for  anchorage  under  the 
southern  shore,  where,  however,  the  ground  proved  so  irregular,  and  the  bottom 
so  rocky,  that  I  determined  to  keep  under  way  during  the  night.  As  soon  as 
the  boats  were  hoisted  up,  we  stood  to  the  westward  under  easy  sail,  and 
deepened  the  water  gradually  to  one  hundred  and  five  fathoms,  on  a  hard 
bottom.  Our  uncertainty  respecting  the  true  situation  of  the  Frozen  Strait, 
together  with  the  want  of  observations  during  the  day,  left  us,  at  this  time, 
in  doubt  whether  we  had  already  penetrated  through  that  passage,  or  had  still 
to  encounter  the  difficulties  which  the  former  accounts  of  it  had  led  us  to  an- 
ticipate. 

The  wind  was  squally,  with  dark  cloudy  weather,  during  the  night,  and  a 
calm  succeeded  on  the  morning  of  the  21st,  with  fog  and  rain.     At  forty  Tues.  21. 
minutes   after  eight,  A.M.,   the  tide    was   found  to  be   setting  W.S.W., 
half  a  mile  per  hour,  and  there  was,  during  the  forenoon,  some  swell  from  the 

H 


i±ktoG£>¥ 


50 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


n     a 


•li'ilai 


i;!j    i! 


August.  soutnward>  which  seemed  to  intimate,  as  was  in  fact  the  case,  that  we  had 
v^-rw  passed  the  Frozen  Strait,  and  had  the  Welcome  open  to  us  in  that  direction. 
A  northerly  breeze  at  length  springing  up  gave  us  hopes  of  speedily  clearing 
up  all  our  doubts  on  this  subject,  and  a  press  of  sail  was  carried  to  the 
westward.  The  northern  land,  which  now  again  came  in  sight,  appeared  to 
be  continuous,  and  we  shortly  after  distinguished  the  opening  between  this 
-and  the  western  shore  seen  the  preceding  evening,  and  for  which  our  course 
was  now  directed.  In  the  afternoon,  however,  the  wind  increased  consider- 
ably, and  the  weather  became  so  extremely  thick  with  snow,  which  fell  in 
unusually  large  flakes,  that  for  five  or  six  hours  we  ran  almost  entirely  by  the 
lead,  which  indicated  deep  water.  Now  and  then,  indeed,  we  caught  an  in- 
distinct glimpse  of  the  land  on  each  side  of  us,  which  was  sufficient  to  shew 
the  extreme  caution  necessary  in  running  under  such  circumstances.  The 
land  to  the  southward  seemed  high  in  its  western  part,  and  low  to  the  east- 
ward, and  that  to  the  northward  still  appeared  continuous  and  unbroken  ex- 
cept by  islands'.  At  thirty  minutes  after  five,  P.M.,  the  weather  being  still 
very  thick,  the  land  was  suddenly  discovered  a-head,  and  we  tacked  in  seventy 
fathoms,  on  a  rocky  bottom.  During  the  whole  of  this  run,  we  scarcely 
saw  a  piece  of  ice,  except  one  stream  through  which  we  passed  at  three  P.M. 
At  seven  o'clock,  there  was  still  every  appearance  of  a  dirty  and  therefore 
of  an  anxious  night,  if  we  should  be  obliged  to  keep  the  ships  under  way  ; 
and  it  was  on  that  account  my  intention  to  stand  in  towards  the  northern 
shore,  and  endeavour  to  get  sight  of  it,  so  as  to  secure  an  anchorage  for  the 
night ;  but  at  a  quarter  before  eight  the  weather  suddenly  cleared  up,  when 
we  found  ourselves  completely  surrounded  by  land  from  E.N.E.  round  by 
north  to  S.b.E.,  having  unconsciously  entered  Repulse  Bay,  in  which  not  apiece 
of  ice  was  to  be  seen  that  could  obstruct  us  in  its  thorough  examination.  I 
made  the  signal  to  stand  off  and  on  during  the  night,  which  proved  extremely 
clear  and  fine,  and  directed  the  boats  of  each  ship  to  be  in  readiness  for 
landing  in  the  morning.  The  latitude,  by  the  meridian  altitude  of  a  cygni, 
was  66°  27',  which  confirmed  me  in  the  belief  of  our  being  in  Repulse  Bay, 
though  it  afforded  some  ground  for  suspecting  the  accuracy  of  Captain  Mid- 
dleton's  latitude. 

We  stood  up  the  bay  towards  daylight,  and  at  seven  A.M.,  I  left  the  Fury, 
accompanied  by  a  large  party  of  officers,  having  by  signal  requested  Captain 
Lyon  to  join  us.  At  the  same  time  I  directed  another  boat  to  be  despatched 
from  the  Hecla,  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Palmer,  to  row  round  a 


Wed.  22. 


ftUUU 


li   «/_*» 


\>*r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


51 


August. 


small  bight  which  appeared  in  the  north-west  corner  of  the  bay,  where  alone,  182' 
from  one  or  two  points  overlapping  each  other,  the  slightest  doubt  of  the  con- 
tinuity of  land  could  exist.  We  landed  upon  a  point  just  to  the  eastward  of 
this  bight,  in  which  neighbourhood  are  several  little  islands  and  coves  pro- 
bably affording  good  anchorage,  but  which  the  more  immediate  objects  we 
had  in  view  did  not  permit  us  to  examine.  Upon  the  point  we  found  the  re- 
mains of  no  less  than  sixty  Esquimaux  habitations,  consisting  of  stones  laid 
one  over  the  other  in  very  regular  circles,  eight  or  nine  feet  in  diameter,  be- 
sides nearly  a  hundred  other  rude  though  certainly  artificial  structures,  some 
of  which  had  been  fire-places,  others  store-houses,  and  the  rest  tolerably  built 
walls  four  or  five  feet  high,  placed  two  and  two,  and  generally  eight  or  nine 
feet  apart,  which  these  people  use  for  their  canoes,  as  well  as  to  keep  the 
dogs  from  gnawing  them.  A  great  many  circles  of  stones  were  also  seen 
more  inland.  About  three  miles  to  the  N.  N.W.  of  our  landing-place  our 
people  reported  having  seen  fifteen  others  of  the  same  kind,  and  what 
they  took  to  be  a  burying-ground,  consisting  of  nine  or  ten  heaps  of  large 
stones,  three  feet  in  diameter  and  as  many  in  height.  Under  these  were 
found  a  variety  of  little  implements,  such  as  arrow  or  spear-heads  tipped 
with  stone  or  iron,  arrows,  small  models  of  canoes  and  paddles,  some  rough 
pieces  of  bone  and  wood,  and  one  or  two  strips  of  asbestos  which,  as 
Crantz  informs  us,  is  used  by  the  natives  of  Greenland  for  the  wick  of  their 
lamps,  and  for  applying  hot,  in  certain  diseases,  to  the  afflicted  part*. 
Under  these  articles  were  found  smaller  stones,  placed  as  a  pavement,  six 
or  seven  feet  in  length,  which,  in  the  part  not  concealed  by  the  larger 
stones,  was  covered  with  earth.  Our  men  had  not  the  curiosity  or  incli- 
nation to  dig  any  deeper,  but  a  human  skull  was  found  near  the  spot.  Our 
people  also  reported  that,  several  miles  inland  of  this,  they  observed  stones 
set  up  as  marks,  many  of  which  we  also  met  with  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  point.  Of  these  marks,  which  occur  so  abundantly  in  every  part  of  the 
American  coast  that  we  visited,  we  could  not  then  conjecture  the  probable 
use,  but  we  afterwards  learned  that  the  Esquimaux  set  them  up  to  «-uide 
them  in  travelling  from  place  to  place,  when  a  covering  of  snow  renders  it 
difficult  to  distinguish  one  spot  from  another.  We  found  among  the  stones 
some  seals'  bones,  with  the  flesh  still  upon  them,  which  seemed  to  indicate 

*  Crantz,  I.  236.     The  Esquimaux  on  this  part  of  the  coast  use  it  only  as  sticks  for  trim- 
ming their  lamps. 

H   2 


I 


k^-J*MXmi 


52 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


ill 


1821. 
August. 


11,1 1, 


™.„ 


«  i .. 


that  the  natives  had  occupied  this  station  during  a  part  of  the  same  season ; 
and  judging  from  the  number  of  circles  collected  in  this  place,  and  still  more 
from  our  subsequent  knowledge  of  these  people,  it  is  probable  that  not  less 
than  one  hundred  and  twenty  persons  had  taken  up  their  residence  here 
at  the  same  time. 

The  land  on  the  northern  and  western  sides  of  Repulse  Bay  does  not 
exceed  six  or  seven  hundred  feet  in  height,  while  that  on  the  south  rises, 
perhaps,  full  a  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  shore  on 
which  we  landed  is  composed  of  gneiss  rock,  traversed  by  broad  veins  of  red 
feldspar  running  in  almost  every  direction.  Quartz  and  mica  also  occurred 
in  separate  masses,  as  well  as  white  limestone  lying  in  loose  fragments 
on  the  surface.  Before  we  landed  in  the  morning  the  snow  which  fell 
the  preceding  day  had  quite  disappeared  from  the  north  shore,  and  by 
noon  the  land  all  round  the  bay  had  resumed  its  dark  appearance.  We 
saw  several  rein-deer  and  hares,  some  ducks,  dovekies,  knots,  (tringa 
cinerea,)  snow  buntings,  and  a  white  owl.  An  ermine,  (erminea  mustela,) 
a  few  ptarmigans,  and  a  hare,  were  killed.  Mice,  (mus  hudsonius,)  were 
very  abundant,  particularly  among  the  stones  of  the  Esquimaux  tents.  I 
do  not  know  whether  the  seals'  flesh  remaining  on  some  of  the  bones  was 
any  attraction  to  them,  but  it  is  certain  that  two  of  them  being  put  to- 
gether into  a  cage,  the  larger  killed  the  other  and  eat  a  part  of  it.  Several 
black  whales  were  seen  in  the  bay  in  the  course  of  the  day.  There  was  here 
no  want  of  vegetation,  which  indeed  was  in  many  parts  extremely  luxu- 
riant ;  and  specimens  of  every  plant  were  carefully  preserved  by  our  nume- 
rous collectors. 

The  latitude  observed  on  shore  was  66°  30'  58",  being  the  first  observation 
we  had  yet  obtained  so  near  the  Arctic  Circle,  but  far  to  the  southward  of 
that  given  by  Captain  Middleton  *.  The  longitude,  by  chronometers,  was 
86°  30'  20" ;  the  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle,  88°  07'  28"  ;  and  the  variation 
48°  32'  57"  westerly  ;  being  only  a  degree  and  a  half  less  than  that  observed 
by  Middleton  in  1742.     In  observations  formerly  made  upon  the  variation  of 

*  The  difference  amounts  to  about  twenty  miles.  It  is  but  justice,  however,  to  the  me- 
mory of  Captain  Middleton  to  add,  that  several  miles  of  this  error  may  have  been  occasioned 
by  the  imperfection  of  nautical  instruments  in  his  day,  combined  with  the  unavoidable  inac- 
curacy of  observations  made  by  the  horizon  of  the  sea,  when  encumbered  with  much  ice. 
On  this  latter  account,  as  well  as  from  the  extraordinary  terrestrial  refraction,  no  observation 
can  be  here  depended  upon,  unless  made  with  an  artificial  horizon. 


A^V-fXl*^  *>*   M/JKt     v  v 


k~^%    tk     *.».        w*. 


\>*r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


53 


the  needle  in  this  neighbourhood,  a  considerable  error  may  have  been  occa- 
sioned by  the  effects  of  local  attraction,  produced  by  the  iron  in  the  ship,  a 
phenomenon  of  which  navigators  were  not  then  aware.  If  the  magnetic 
pole  were  at  that  time  situated  near  its  present  position,  a  difference  of  no 
less  than  four  or  five  points  of  the  compass  may  have  arisen  in  consequence 
of  a  change  in  the  direction  of  the  ship's  head  from  east  to  west,  as  was  now 
the  case  with  us.  No  accurate  deduction  therefore  can  possibly  be  made, 
respecting  the  change  which  the  variation  has  undergone,  from  observations 
made  on  board  a  ship  at  an  early  period,  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
either  of  the  magnetic  poles  of  the  earth  *-. 

The  phenomena  we  had,  for  some  time  past,  observed  in  the  traversing  of 
the  compasses  on  board  the  ships,  were  similar  to  those  noticed  on  the  pre- 
ceding voyage,  though  they  had  not  as  yet  occurred  to  so  great  an  extent. 
In  proceeding  to  the  westward,  up  Hudson's  Strait,  where,  by  a  gradual 
approach  to  the  magnetic  pole,  the  dip  of  the  needle  regularly  increases,  a 
proportional  increment  in  the  effects  of  local  attraction  was  also  found  to 
take  place,  displaying  itself  as  well  in  the  amount  of  what  has  been  termed 
the  deviation,  as  by  the  sluggishness  with  which  the  compasses  tra- 
versed. About  the  time  of  our  making  Southampton  Island,  the  card  of 
Walker's  azimuth  compass  which,  on  account  of  its  graduated  metal  rim,  is 
more  heavy  than  the  others,  became  too  sluggish  to  depend  upon.  Those  of 
Alexander,  which  were  the  lightest  and  best  of  our  steering  compasses  on  the 
common  construction,  began  also  to  require  constant  tapping  or  shaking.  Cap- 
tain Kater's  excellent  azimuth  compasses,  which  unite  lightness,  sensibility, 
and  accuracy,  required,  though  in  an  infinitely  smaller  degree,  the  same 
precautions  to  assist  them  in  traversing.  These  phenomena,  the  observa- 
tions on  which  are  given  in  detail  in  the  Appendix,  had  for  the  present  sea- 
son attained  their  maximum,  Repulse  Bay  being  the  nearest  approach 
that  can  be  made  to  the  magnetic  pole,  by  sea,  in  this  direction.     Accord- 

*  Middleton  has,  in  his  published  log,  set  down  the  variation  in  Repulse  Bay  as  50°  west, 
and  at  Cape  Frigid  45°,  making  a  difference  of  five  degrees  in  a  distance  of  eleven  or  twelve 
leagues.  Rapid  as  the  changes  in  the  variation  are  here,  this  difference  appears  to  me  too 
great  to  attribute  to  any  thing  but  a  change  in  the  Furnace's  course  ;  and  I  cannot  but  con- 
sider it  as  extremely  creditable  to  Middleton  to  have  faithfully  recorded  a  fact,  of  which,  at 
that  time,  no  probable  explanation  could  be  given,  and  which  might,  therefore,  have  sub- 
jected him  to  a  charge  of  inaccuracy  or  misrepresentation. 


1821. 

Ausrust. 


'""■Hi 


pj 

54 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


!M'" 


■  '■'  1 1 


1821. 
August. 


mgly  we  here  found  a  more  than  ordinary  degree  of  sluggishness  in  the 
*  compasses,  both  on  board  the  ships  and  on  shore.  The  Fury's  head  was  to- 
day  constantly  north-west  on  one  tack  and  north-east  on  the  other,  the 
wind  remaining  steadily  fixed  in  the  northern  quarter ;  and  in  making  obser- 
vations for  the  dip  on  shore,  it  was  with  considerable  difficulty  that  the  true 
direction  of  the  magnetic  meridian  could  be  determined,  the  small  horizon- 
tal needle  attached  to  the  instrument  for  that  purpose  having  become  alto- 
gether useless,  and  one  of  Kater's  differing  several  degrees  in  two  or  three 
succeeding  observations. 

From  our  place  of  observation  on  shore  we  had  a  distinct  view  of  Cape 
Hope,  which  is  high  and  bluff,  as  well  as  of  the  land  to  the  eastward  of  it 
running  towards  Beach  Point,  which  becomes  lower,  as  described  by  Cap- 
tain Middleton.      Indeed  the  whole  account  he  has  given  of  this  bay    with 
the  exception  of  its  geographical  position,  is  in  general  very  accurate,  par- 
ticularly in  the  appearance  of  the  lands,   their  relative   situation,  and   in 
the    nature  and  depth   of  the    soundings.       With  respect  to    the  Frozen 
Strait,    through  which  we   passed  with   less  difficulty    than   usual   in  the 
navigation  of  those  seas,-thus,   for  the  first  time,  determining  by  actual 
examination   the  insularity  of  that  portion  of  land  which  by  anticipation 
has  long  been  called  Southampton  Island,-there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
account  Middleton  has  givea  of  its  appearance,  as  seen  from  Cape  Frigid  is 
in  the  main  a  faithful  one.     In  that  view  it  would  seem  to  be  «  almost  full  of 
ong  small  islands  ;»  nor  is  there  any  improbability  of  its  having  been,  at  the 
time  of  his  visit,  covered  with  ice,  which  might  appear  to  be  «  fast  to  both 
shores,''  presenting  to  a  person  so  situated  a  hopeless  prospect  of  penetrating 
through  it  to  the  northward.     Above  all,  the  accuracy  of  Captain  Middleton 
is  manifest  upon  the  point  most  strenuously  argued  against  him  by  Mr.  Dobbs ; 
for  our  subsequent  experience  has  not  left  the  smallest  doubt  of  Repulse 
Bay  and  the  northern  part  of  the  Welcome  being  filled  by  a  rapid  tide  flowing 
into  it  from  the  eastward  through  the  Frozen  Strait. 

From  twenty-two  minutes  after  seven  A.M.  till  twelve  minutes  past  one 
P  M  when  we  left  the  shore,  the  tide  was  constantly  ebbing,  and  fell  seven 
feet  three  inches  m  that  time,  from  which  I  concluded  the  time  of  high  water 
this  morning  to  have  been  about  ten  minutes  past  seven,  and  a  quarter  after 

during  tl  fo  T,G  day"      ThG  tWe  WaS  Med  °n  h™d  ™»  h<™ 

during  the  forenoon,  and  found  to  set  as  Mows  : 


rid,..- 


Soon  after  we  got  on  board,  Lieutenant  Palmer  returned  from  the  exa- 
mination of  the  north-western  bight,  which  he  named  Gibson's  Cove,  and  of 
which  he  delivered  to  me,  together  with  his  report,  a  sketch  shewing  its 
soundings  and  general  outline  and,  what  alone  was  very  important,  the 
continuity  of  land  all  round  it.  Lieutenant  Palmer's  report  stated  that  he 
had  rowed  close  in-shore  all  round  the  bay,  and  had  found  it  "  terminate 
in  a  small  cove,  having  a  deep  ravine  running  into  it  on  the  western  side." 
Thus  was  the  question  settled  as  to  the  continuity  of  land  round  Repulse 
Bay,  and  the  doubts  and  conjectures,  which  had  so  long  been  entertained 
respecting  it,  set  at  rest  for  ever. 


RETURN    TO    THE    EASTWARD    THROUGH    THE     FROZEN     STRAIT — DISCOVERY    OF    HURD 

CHANNEL EXAMINED    IN    A  BOAT — LOSS   OF   THE    FURY'S    ANCHOR — PROVIDENTIAL 

ESCAPE    OF    THE    FURY    FROM     SHIPWRECK  — ANCHOR    IN    DUCKETT  COVE — FURTHER 

EXAMINATION    OF    THE    COAST    BY    BOATS    AND    WALKING-PARTIES SHIPS    PROCEED 

THROUGH  HURD  CHANNEL ARE  DRIFTED  BY  THE  ICE  BACK  TO  SOUTHAMPTON  ISLAND 

UNOBSTRUCTED  RUN  TO  THE  ENTRANCE  OF  A  LARGE  INLET  LEADING  TO  THE  NORTH- 
WESTWARD— SHIPS  MADE  FAST  BY  HAWSERS  TO  THE  ROCKS — FURTHER  EXAMINATION 
OF  THE  INLET  COMMENCED  IN  THE  BOATS. 

Having  now  satisfactorily  determined  the  non-existence  of  a  passage  to  the 
Wed.  22.  westward  through  Repulse  Bay,  to  which  point  I  was  particularly  directed 
in  my  Instructions,  and  which,  for  the  reasons  detailed  in  the  commence- 
ment of  the  preceding  Chapter,  I  had  confidently  considered  as  part  of 
the  American  continent,  it  now  remained  for  me,  in  compliance  with  my 
orders,  to  "  keep  along  the  line  of  this  coast  to  the  northward,  always  ex- 
amining every  bend  or  inlet  which  might  appear  likely  to  afford  a  practicable 
passage  to  the  westward."  It  was  here,  indeed,  that  our  voyage,  as  regarded 
its  main  object,  may  be  said  to  have  commenced,  and  we  could  not  but  con- 
gratulate ourselves  on  having  reached  this  point  so  early,  and  especially  at 
having  passed  almost  without  impediment  the  strait  to  which,  on  nearly  the 
same  day*  seventy-nine  years  before,  so  forbidding  a  name  had  been  applied. 
As  soon  as  the  boats  were  hoisted  up,  all  sail  was  made  along  shore  to  the 
eastward,  the  wind  being  light  off  the  northern  land ;  and  we  could  plainly 
perceive  the  low  shore  which  runs  to  the  southward  and  eastward  of  Cape 
Hope,  as  far  as  the  latitude  of  66°  14',  from  whence  the  researches  of  the 
<  present  Expedition  on  the  coast  of  the  American  continent  are,  therefore,  to 
be  considered  as  commencing.  We  also  saw  the  land  on  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Welcome,  about  Cape  Frigid,  but  as  we  had  no  opportunity  of  closely 

*  Middleton  discovered  the  Frozen  Strait  on  the  20th  of  August,  1743,  according  to  the 
New  Style. 


Jt^S    <4/JKt 


\>*r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


57 


examining  those  parts,  the  breadth  of  this  passage  into  the  Welcome,  as  well  ]821- 
as  the  general  outline  of  both  coasts  to  the  southward  of  this,  are  laid  down  v-r^ 
in  the  chart,  from  Captain  Middleton's  account  of  their  relative  position,  but 
with  their  latitudes  and  longitudes  corrected  by  our  observations.  Of  the 
exact  situation  of  Cape  Frigid  there  will  perhaps  always  remain  some  doubt ; 
but  from  an  attentive  examination  of  Captain  Middleton's  account,  I  believe 
that  we  cannot  be  far  from  the  truth  in  considering  it  as  the  northern  extreme 
of  Southampton  Island,  near  which  we  tried  for  anchorage  on  the  evening  of 
the  20th.  After  clearing  Repulse  Bay  we  came  to  some  ice  that  the  wind 
was  now  drifting  off  the  northern  shore,  which  had  before  been  loaded  with 
it  by  a  breeze  from  the  opposite  quarter,  so  that  we  were  once  more  fortunate 
in  finding  a  tolerably  clear  sea.  At  the  back  of  this  is  a  bay  of  considerable 
size,  which  I  named  after  the  Reverend  James  Haviland,  of  Bath.  The 
wind  continued  moderate  at  night,  but  with  dark  cloudy  weather,  obliging 
us  to  heave-to  for  several  hours,  lest  any  small  islands  with  which  Ave  were 
unacquainted  should  lie  in  our  way. 

All  sail  was  made  at  daylight  on  the  23d  along  the  northern  shore  of  the  Thur.  23. 
Frozen  Strait,  which  here  continues  about  the  same  height  as  that  of  Repulse 
Bay,  and  was  at  this  time  quite  free  from  snow.  At  nine  A.M.  the  weather 
became  squally  with  thick  snow,  which  rendered  great  caution  necessary  in 
running.  Soon  after  noon  we  perceived,  during  the  intervals  of  clearer  weather 
which  occasionally  took  place,  that  the  land  we  were  approaching  was  some- 
what broken,  and  in  one  place  appeared  to  consist  only  of  islands,  between 
which  no  land  was  visible  at  the  back.  There  was  something  in  the  appear- 
ance of  this  part  of  the  coast  which  held  out  so  favourable  a  prospect  of  a 
direct  passage  to  the  northward,  that  I  determined  more  closely  to  examine  it. 
Having  beat  up  to  the  mouth  of  an  opening  which,  the  nearer  we  approached, 
assumed  a  more  and  more  favourable  appearance,  we  found  that  a  body  of  ice 
occupied  the  greater  part  of  the  channel,  rendering  it  impracticable  then  to  enter 
it  either  with  the  ships  or  the  boats.  The  only  mode  left,  therefore,  of  examin- 
ing it  without  loss  of  time,  was  to  despatch  a  party  equipped  for  travelling  by 
land,  to  ascertain  enough  of  its  extent  and  communications  to  enable  me  to 
decide  as  to  our  farther  progress.  'As,  however,  in  their  present  situation,  I 
did  not  feel  myself  justified  in  leaving  the  ships,  I  requested  Captain  Lyon 
to  undertake  this  service.  He  was  accompanied  by  Mr.  Bushnan  and  two 
seamen  from  each  ship,  and  was  furnished  with  a  tent,  blankets,  and  four 
days'  provisions.     In  the  mean  time,  as  there  was  very  little  ice  near  us 

i 


Sim 


ifi  is 


^.'#Vft^ 


58 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


M  " 


-  i 


V*f, 


A^fust  excePt  wnat  was  *n  tne  moutn  of  ^e  inlet,  and  that  appeared  to  be  coming 
y*rv>J  quickly  out  with  the  wind,  I  thought  the  safest  way  for  the  ships,  as  well  as 
to  secure  the  quick  return  of  Captain  Lyon  and  his  party,  Avould  be  to  anchor, 
which  we  did  in  thirteen  fathoms,  upon  a  hard  bottom,  at  the  distance  of 
one  mile  from  the  shore.  As  soon  as  the  anchors  were  dropped,  we  found 
that  the  tide  came  out  of  the  inlet,  and  then  set  to  the  westward,  at  the  rate 
of  a  mile  an  hour  ;  and  as  we  had  reason  to  believe,  as  indeed  it  afterwards 
proved,  that  this  was  the  flood-tide,  our  hopes  of  here  finding  a  passage  to 
the  northward,  so  as  at  least  to  save  us  the  necessity  of  pursuing  the  more 
circuitous  route  round  the  lands  we  had  left  to  the  southward  and  eastward, 
received  great  encouragement. 

Shortly  after  Captain  Lyon  left  us,  the  loose  though  heavy  ice,  which  had 
at  first  blocked  up  the  mouth  of  the  inlet,  began  to  drive  towards  the  Fury, 
coming  at  times  with  considerable  force  against  the  bows  and  across  the 
chain-cable.  By  attending  to  the  helm  and  watching  the  ice  carefully,  we 
contrived  at  first  to  avoid  the  heavier  masses,  and  I  was  in  hopes  that  it 
would  in  a  short  time  have  drifted  past  us,  while  the  northerly  breeze  would 
prevent  its  return  with  the  ensuing  tide.  In  this  hope  I  was,  however,  disap- 
pointed, for  after  three  hours  that  the  inlet  had  thus  been  pouring  out  its  ice,  it 
became  more  abundant  as  well  as  heavier  than  at  first,  and  at  seven  o'clock  we 
could  no  longer  avoid  frequent  and  violent  shocks.  At  half  past  seven  when, 
by  the  time  of  high  water  in  Repulse  Bay,  we  had  reason  to  expect  the  tide 
would  begin  to  slacken,  it  had  on  the  contrary  increased  its  velocity  to  two 
miles  an  hour ;  and  some  large  pieces  of  ice  coming  athwart-hawse  brought 
the  anchor  home,  causing  it  to  drag  along  the  ground  with  a  harsh  grinding 
sound.  The  Hecla  having  anchored  a  little  to  the  westward  of  us  happened 
to  be  just  out  of  the  stream  of  this  tide,  so  that  the  greater  part  of  the  ice 
passed  without  touching  her.  As  however  there  was  reason  to  apprehend 
that  some  turn  or  eddy  might  also  endanger  her,  I  made  Lieutenant  Hoppner's 
signal  to  weigh,  having  already  begun  to  do  so  on  board  the  Fury.  This 
was  not  easily  accomplished,  for  on  heaving  at  the  cable  it  was  found  to  have 
cut  its  way  into  a  heavy  mass  of  ice  Avhich  hung  across  it,  and  which  it 
required  more  than  half  an  hour's  labour  to  clear,  and  when  we  had  done  so 
another  piece  immediately  fixed  itself  in  the  same  manner,  dragging  the 
anchor  with  renewed  violence  along  the  rocky  ground.  As  soon  as  this  had 
been  disengaged  the  anchor  Avas  hove  up  Avith  the  utmost  alacrity,  and  Avould 
have  been  saved  if  the  most  strenuous  exertions  of  the  officers  and  men  could 


%•**   t  o 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


59 


have  effected  it,  but  I  was  much  mortified  to  find  on  its  coming  to  the  bows  ^^ 
that  both  flukes  were  broken  off,  the  iron  stock  being  polished  quite  bright  by  v^v^* 
rubbing  against  the  rocks.     The  Hecla  succeeded  in  purchasing  her  anchor 
without  its   sustaining  any  injury,  after  which  we  made  fast  to  two  floe- 
pieces  during  the  night,  and  the  Hecla  kept  company  by  means  of  our  light, 
the  weather  being  dark  and  cold  with  much  sleet  and  rain. 

I  expected  to  have  been  unavoidably  driven  far  to  the  southward  and  east-  Frid.  24. 
ward  by  the  fresh  north-west  wind  which  was  now  blowing,  and  was  therefore 
not  a  little  surprised  to  find  at  daylight  that  we  had  scarcely  lost  any  ground, 
being  still  off  the  inlet  which  Captain  Lyon  was  examining.  This  circum- 
stance I  particularly  notice,  because  it  was  the  first  of  several  instances  that 
occurred  of  our  observing  the  flood-tide  to  set  stronger  to  the  north-west  than 
the  ebb  to  the  south-east  in  the  Frozen  Strait,  which  on  this  occasion  must 
have  been  the  case,  to  balance  the  effects  of  a  fresh  north-westerly  wind. 
Soon  after  daylight  we  made  sail  and  stood  in  towards  the  inlet,  but  the 
wind  failing  us  we  were  before  noon  driven  seven  or  eight  miles  to  the  west- 
ward. The  day  proved  extremely  thick  and  wet,  being  as  uncomfortable  for 
our  shore  party,  as  unfavourable  for  the  prosecution  of  their  object.  At 
thirty  minutes  after  three  P.M.,  we  were  off  a  small  rocky  islet,  lying  at  the 
distance  of  two  miles  and  a  half  from  the  land,  and  near  the  mouth  of  a 
second  inlet,  six  or  seven  miles  to  the  westward  of  the  other,  and  which  as 
we  afterwards  found  makes  an  island  of  the  intervening  land.  We  here 
found  the  tide  of  ebb  setting  us  between  the  islet  and  the  main  land,  and 
towards  the  inlet  withal.  The  wind  being  very  light  we  were  obliged  to 
let  the  ships  drive  through  within  the  islet,  having  from  thirteen  to  twenty- 
five  fathoms,  at  the  distance  of  one-third  of  a  -mile  from  it.  By  keeping 
all  the  boats  a-head  for  several  hours  we  then  towed  the  ships  off-shore 
before  dark. 

The  wind  was  too  light  to  enable  us  to  keep  our  station  during  the  night,  and  Sat.  25. 
at  daylight  on  the  25th  we  found  ourselves  as  usual  several  miles  to  the  west- 
ward. A  breeze  springing  up  soon  afterwards  from  the  northward  enabled 
us  to  stand  along  the  land,  but  such  was  the  strength  of  the  flood-tide  against 
us,  though  almost  at  the  dead  of  the  neaps,  that  when  sailing  three  knots 
and  a  half  through  the  water,  we  did  not  advance  to  the  eastward  above  a  mile 
an  hour  and  at  times  much  less  than  this.  In  the  course  of  the  forenoon  the 
quantity  of  ice  in  sight  increased  so  much  that  the  strait  was  almost  covered 
with  it,  and  the  wind  afterwards  becoming  scant  we  were  gradually  led  off  the 

I  2 


a 


T3K 


60 


K'  lilltll 


1821. 
August. 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Wd,  in  spite  of  every  endeavour  to  regain  the  mouth  of  the  inlet.  In  the  after- 
noon the  ice  became  so  close,  though  the  masses  were  constantly  and  rapidly 
in  motion  among  themselves,  that  it  was  impracticable  any  longer  to  keep 
under  way,  and  we  were  just  about  to  make  the  Fury  fast  to  a  large  floe- 
piece  when  I  was  informed  that  our  boat  was  coming  off  from  the  shore,  from 
which  we  were  then  distant  eight  or  nine  miles.  At  four  P.M.  Captain  Lyon 
and  his  party  disembarked  on  the  opposite  side  of  a  broad  stream  of  ice  which 
intervened  betwixt  us,  and  some  fresh  hands  being  despatched  to  assist  in 
dragging  the  boat  over  the  ice,  they  soon  arrived  safely  on  board.  The 
account  of  Captain  Lyon's  excursion  and  of  his  discoveries  within  the 
inlet,  on  which  the  future  operations  of  the  Expedition  principally  depended, 
I  need  offer  no  apology  for  giving  in  his  own  words. 


Thur.23,  »  On  leaving  the  Fury,  we  pulled  to  the  eastern  point  of  the  high  land 
which  formed  the  western  boundary  of  the  inlet,  and  in  half  an  hour  landed 
on  a  steep  rocky  point,  near  which  much  heavy  ice  lay  aground.  We  then 
with  our  tent  and  baggage  proceeded  to  a  high  barren  hill  to  the  northward, 
from  whence  we  clearly  perceived  that  we  were  on  an  island  of  about  five 
miles  in  length,  and  two  or  three  in  breadth.  To  the  northward  and  east- 
ward lay  a  broad  strait,  (which,  at  the  part  nearest  us,  was  above  a  mile 
across,)  running  east  and  west.  Previous  to  descending  the  hill,  Mr.  Bushnan 
and  myself  took  such  bearings  as  the  weather  would  permit,  and  as  it  was 
dark  by  the  time  we  arrived  at  the  boat,  I  determined  on  remaining  where 
we  were  for  the  night ;  we  therefore  pitched  our  tent  on  the  rocks,  and 
lay  down  until  the  morning.  During  the  night,  the  ice  set  out  past  the 
point  we  lay  on,  at  the  rate  of  at  least  four  knots,  and  the  pressure  occa- 
sioned it  to  break  with  loud  and  sharp  reports,  as  it  passed  the  low  rocks 
and  grounded  pieces,  over  which  it  became  piled  in  many  places  to  a  great 
height. 

"  Much  rain  fell  during  the  night,  which  was  dark  and  cold  with  a  light 
wind.  At  two  A.M.,  before  the  day  began  to  break,  we  found  that  it 
was  slack  water,  but  the  eastern  entrance  was  literally  packed  with  ice, 
through  which  a  passage  was  impossible.  The  grounded  pieces,  however, 
being  very  heavy,  afforded  us  an  occasional  channel  of  clear  water  between 
them  and  the  rocks.  We  therefore  launched  our  boat,  and  by  tracking  and 
rowing,  succeeded,  after  nearly  two  hours'  labour,  in  reaching  the  northern 


Frid.  24. 


V    .       .  4.  ^  ~\     «. 


■J* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


61 


point  of  the  island,  (which  I  named  after  Mr.  Bushnan,)  and  finding  tole-  ™M^ 
rably  open  water,  we  then  crossed  the  strait  in  the  direction  of  a  high  bluff,  s^^u 
which  we  had  seen  from  Bushnan's  Island. 

"About  halfway  across  the  strait  we  passed  a  rocky  island,  of  about  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  in  extent.  On  rounding  a  small  bluff,  on  which  were  great 
numbers  of  the  larus  argentatus  and  their  young,  we  saw  some  deer  feeding ; 
and  a  little  farther  on,  a  she-bear  and  her  cub  ran  close  to  the  water,  appa- 
rently watching  us.  I  named  the  place,  Bear  Island.  Crossing  the  inlet, 
(whose  breadth  at  this  part  may  be.  estimated  at  three  miles,)  we  landed  on 
a  steep  point,  up  which  we  immediately  hauled  the  boat.  From  this  point, 
which  I  called  Cape  Montagu,  I  observed  the  strait  still  to  trend  to  the 
eastward,  and  the  north  side  appeared  bounded  by  land  at  about  seven 
miles.  We  left  the  boat  and  proceeded  to  a  high  and  remarkable  hill  called 
Brooks's  Bluff,  which  was  but  indistinctly  seen,  owing  to  the  continued  and 
heavy  rain.  We  had  scarcely  arrived  on  the  summit,  when  a  very  heavy 
snow  storm  set  in  and  in  a  short  time  covered  the  mountain,  and  limited  our 
sight  to  a  few  yards.  We  therefore  took  a  hasty  breakfast,  and  after  some 
difficulty  and  no  little  danger  again  descended. 

"At  nine  A.M.,  the  weather  cleared  up  a  little  and  the  snow  ceased,  but 
rain  continued  to  fall.  From  Brooks's  Bluff  a  valley  runs  to  the  eastward, 
and  is  nearly  occupied  by  a  lake  of  about  three  miles  in  circumference. 
Along  the  bank  of  this  lake  we  pursued  our  route  and,  on  leaving  it, 
passed  many  smaller  ones  and  crossed  several  valleys.  At  about  an  hour 
before  noon,  after  having  passed  several  rocky  and  barren  hills  of  granite 
which  bounded  and  intersected  the  valleys,  we  arrived  unexpectedly  on  a 
high  cliff,  which  looked  down  to  a  small  strait  at  its  foot,  trending  N.b.W. 
and  S.b.E.,  and  at  this  part  about  a  good  mile  in  breadth,  Our  farther  pro- 
gress eastward  being  now  stopped,  I  decided  on  following  the  strait  to  the 
northward  as  far  as  the  day  would  permit.  Mr.  Bushnan  and  one  man  accom- 
panied me,  and  the  other  three  remained  behind  to  pitch  the  tent  and  endea- 
vour to  light  a  fire  of  moss. 

"  In  our  walk  we  passed  the  remains  of  many  Esquimaux  habitations,  but 
none  of  them  appeared  to  have  been  inhabited  for  many  years.  We  also  pro- 
cured a  mountain  marmot,  (arctomys  alpina,)  which  we  chased  under  a  large 
stone,  but  were  unable  to  take  alive.  After  having  walked  about  six  miles  from 
our  first  setting  out,  we  arrived  at  the  end  of  this  little  strait,  which  termi- 


,;■■  i 


"■iiini  i 
hi  t,f || 

l! 

I1 

|h|.|!'S 

i; 

!"ln,i»i 


h  ,ii 


in 


-■N'lin1. 


Lii 


i'  I 


! 


62 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Sat.  21 


Augus't.  nated  m  a  larSe  sPace  of  open  water,  having  land,  apparently  an  island  or 
-~  islands,  at  about  four  miles  to  the  northward,  beyond  which  the  continued 
thick  weather  permitted  us  to  see  no  horizon.  In  the  evening  the  rain 
ceased  for  the  first  time  since  our  leaving  the  ships,  and  we  contrived  to 
make  a  fire.  As  the  rocks  were  covered  with  wet  spongy  moss,  we  paved 
our  tent  with  rough  stones,  and  by  means  of  our  fire  were  enabled  to  dry 
some  of  the  andromeda  tetragona,  which,  with  the  addition  of  ashes,  made 
a  most  comfortable  bed. 

"  During  the  night  much  snow  fell,  and  in  the  morning  we  found  the  rocks 
covered  with  it.  At  five  A.M.,  we  proceeded  over  the  hills  to  the  southward. 
In  an  hour's  walk  in  that  direction,  we  arrived  at  a  small  bay  about  a  mile  in 
extent,  in  which  some  very  heavy  ice  was  lying  aground.  A  bluff  point  on 
the  south  side  terminated  the  small  inlet,  which  here  opens  into  the  larger 
strait.  We  coasted  the  large  strait  westerly,  as  nearly  as  the  nature  of  the  shore 
would  permit,  in  a  strait  line,  and  arrived  at  Cape  Montagu  a  little  before  nine 
A.M.  On  the  shore  and  the  rocks  which  overhang  it  were  several  remains 
of  Esquimaux  settlements,  many  of  which  had  soot  still  on  their  fire-places. 
We  also  saw  several  very  perfect  little  store-rooms  for  their  provisions,  con- 
structed of  rough  stones,  and  about  six  feet  by  three  in  extent.  Some  of  the 
ground-plans  of  the  huts  differed  from  those  seen  in  Repulse  Bay,  and  one  in 
particular  was  remarkable,  being  thus  formed  : 


'  The  extent  was  about  twenty-five  feet  by  fifteen,  and  at  either  end  the 
ground  was  a  little  raised  as  if  for  sleeping-places.  We  also  passed  a  singular 
assemblage  of  flat  stones,  set  up  edgeways,  each  about  three  yards  apart,  and 
extending  at  least  for  five  hundred  yards,  down  to  a  small  lake  situated  in 
a  grassy  valley. 


If  I  J 

1  ill 

: 

',  I'l  -I  li  1 


.>*;> 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


63 


Ili  il 


"  We  observed  from  Cape  Montagu  that  the  eastern  entrance  was  quite 
blocked  up  with  ice.  Bear  Island  was  also  surrounded  by  immense 
masses,  and  others  were  carried  past  it  at  the  rate  of  about  four  miles  per 
hour  by  the  tide.  At  a  little  past  ten  A.M.,  the  ice  having  slackened  so  as 
to  allow  of  our  going  over  to  Bear  Island,  we  soon  reached  it,  from  whence 
we  could  observe  and  take  advantage  of  any  open  water.  We  found  that 
although  at  half  tide  this  was  an  island,  three  distinct  isles  are  formed  at 
high  water.  At  twenty  minutes  past  ten  A.M.  it  was  high  water,  which  was 
an  extremely  interesting  fact  to  have  ascertained,  as  it  removed  any  doubt 
respecting  the  direction  of  the  tide. 

"  Finding  the  ice  was  at  this  time  tolerably  tranquil,  we  picked  our  way 
through  it,  and  in  about  two  hours  and  a  half  reached  a  small  islet  half  a 
mile  to  the  southward  of  Bushnan's  Island.  On  this  we  landed  and  saw  one 
ship  eight  or  ten  miles  to  the  S.S.W.  We  remained  here  one  hour  to  dine  ; 
and  by  a  pole,  which  we  had  set  up  on  landing,  found  the  tide  to  have 
ebbed  three  feet.  We  then  proceeded  towards  the  ship,  having  fitted  a 
blanket  as  a  sail  for  our  boat,  and  most  fortunately  arrived  at  night-fall  near 
the  Fury.  The  ice  which  lay  in  the  Frozen  Strait  being  in  very  rapid  motion, 
we  could  not  approach  the  ship  ;  but  after  making  what  way  we  could  amongst 
the  loose  pieces,  we  at  length  came  to  a  large  floe,  near  which  the  Fury  had 
made  fast  in  a  thick  fog  which  then  came  on.  Captain  Parry  sent  his  peo- 
ple to  haul  our  boat  over  the  ice  to  the  ship,  which  was  close  beset,  and  I 
remained  on  board  her  for  the  night,  my  own  ship  being  separated  from  her 
by  the  ice.  Unsatisfactory  as  our  short  journey  had  been,  on  account  of  the 
badness  of  the  weather,  there  was  still  sufficient  to  cause  the  most  lively 
interest,  and  give  strong  hopes  of  the  existence  of  some  passage  to  the  north- 
east of  the  small  inlet  I  had  examined." 


1821. 
August. 


"iil 


A  thick  fog  coming  on  immediately  after  Captain  Lyon's  arrival,  we  could 
not  but  consider  ourselves  fortunate  in  having  picked  our  party  up  so 
opportunely.  The  Hecla  having  in  the  course  of  the  day  been  separated 
from  us  seven  or  eight  miles,  in  consequence  of  the  ice  carrying  her  to  the 
westward,  Captain  Lyon  remained  on  board  the  Fury  during  the  night, 
when  the  plan  of  our  future  operations  was  determined  on.  The  result 
of  the  late  examination,  imperfect  as  it  necessarily  was  on  account  of  the 
extremely  unfavourable  state  of  the  weather,  was  sufficient  to  excite  the 


"iHJbli 


I'll 


tWtiiiii.ii; 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
August. 


strongest 


beliei 


some   communication, 


indirect, 


exist 


I    :  ir- 


<Wv 


between  the  Frozen  Strait  and  a  sea  to  the  northward  and  eastward  of  it ; 
and  it  was  determined,  therefore,  to  leave  nothing  undone  to  ascertain  and 
follow  up  this  communication.  As,  however,  the  narrowness  of  the  chan- 
nels, together  with  our  present  ignorance  of  their  depth,  the  strength  of  the 
tides,  and  the  quantity  of  ice  with  which  the  sea  was  loaded,  rendered  the 
attempt  extremely  hazardous  without  further  examination,  the  first  and 
most  important  object  appeared  to  be,  to  find  near  one  of  the  entrances,  (of 
which  Captain  Lyon  recommended  the  western,)  a  secure  anchorage  for  the 
ships  during  the  time  necessary  for  prosecuting  this  examination.  I,  there- 
fore, proposed  to  Captain  Lyon  that  whenever  the  situation  of  the  ice 
would  permit,  he  should  proceed  in  a  boat  to  the  western  entrance,  to 
endeavour  to  find  such  an  anchorage,  directing  his  attention  solely  to  this 
object  and  reserving  all  further  examination  till  the  ships  should  be  there 
secured.  This  service  Captain  Lyon  gladly  undertook  to  perform,  and 
Mr.  Bushnan  was  again  appointed  to  accompany  him.  An  event  was,  how- 
ever, about  to  occur  which  threatened  very  seriously  as  well  as  unex- 
pectedly to  interfere  with  these  arrangements. 

At  eight  P.M.  having  shoaled  the  water  from  sixty  to  forty,  and  then  to 
thirty-two  fathoms,  and  the  weather  still  continuing  extremely  thick,  I  sus- 
pected that  the  tide  was  taking  us  too  close  to  Passage  Island,  which  was  the 
nearest  land  when  the  fog  came  on.  As  the  water  seemed  tolerably  clear  for 
a  few  hundred  yards;  which  was  the  extent  of  our  view,  I  ordered  the  ship 
to  be  got  under  sail  in  order  to  be  in  greater  readiness  for  acting  as  circum- 
stances might  require.  The  ice,  however,  once  more  became  so  thick  about  us 
that,  with  the  light  wind  then  blowing,  it  was  found  impracticable  to  force 
the  ship  through  it.  While  we  were  thus  employed  the  fog  suddenly  cleared 
away,  and  we  found  ourselves  within  three-quarters  of  a  mile  of  the  east  end 
of  the  island.  A  large  space  of  open  water  was  at  .this  time  not  more  than  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  distant  from  us  in  the  opposite  direction,  but  before  the  ship 
could  be  moved  by  warps  or  by  any  other  means  within  our  power,  the  tide 
was  observed  to  be  setting  her  directly  between  the  island  and  the  little 
yellow-looking  rock  I  have  before  mentioned  as  lying  on  its  eastern  side. 
Seeing  that  every  exertion  of  ours  was  fruitless  to  prevent  driving  with  the 
tide,  which  was  setting  at  about  the  rate  of  a  mile  and  a  half  an  hour,  it  be- 
came expedient  to  relinquish  that  attempt,  and  to  endeavour  only  to  keep  the 
ship  as  nearly  as  possible  in  mid-channel.    The  anchors  were  kept  ready  to 


• ■      x     •  '  /   V 


\>*r* 


^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


65 


1821. 
August. 


drop  in  an  instant  should  the  ship  drive  into  shoal  water  ;  for  had  we  grounded, 
and  the  heavy  masses  of  ice  continued  to  drive  upon  us,  little  less  than  the  total 
destruction  of  the  ship  was  to  be  apprehended.  The  natural  direction  of  the 
stream,  however,  effected  for  us  that  which,  hampered  as  we  Avere,  our  own 
exertions  must  have  failed  in  accomplishing  ;  the  ship  drove  through,  at 
the  distance  of  one  hundred  yards  from  the  rock  and  about  one  hundred  and 
forty  from  Passage  Island,  having  no  less  than  twelve  fathoms  ;  and  soon  after 
deepened  the  water  to  thirty-five  and  forty,  and  then  to  no  bottom  with 
ninety. 

After  this  providential  escape,  we  lay-to  within  the  island,  in  order  to  drift 
to  the  northward  and  westward  of  it  with  the  flood-tide,  which  runs  stronger 
here  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  Frozen  Strait.  The  night  was  fine  but 
extremely  dark,  so  that  after  ten  o'clock  we  could  not  distinguish  where  the 
land  lay,  and  the  compasses  could  not  be  depended  on.  After  an  ineffectual 
attempt  to  push  through  the  ice  towards  the  middle  of  the  Strait,  in  order  to 
avoid  the  danger  of  being  entangled  among  the  numerous  islands  lying  off 
this  shore,  we  were  literally  obliged  to  let  the  ship  take  her  chance,  keeping 
the  lead  going  and  the  anchors  in  readiness. 

I  have  never  yet  been  able  to  conjecture  on  which  side  of  the  island  the 
Fury  was  afterwards  drifted  out.  The  soundings,  however,  continued  deep 
and,  at  day-light  on  the  26th,  after  a  most  anxious  night,  we  found  ourselves  Sat.  26 
about  the  middle  of  the  Strait,  and  as  usual  drifted  by  the  tide  some  distance 
to  the  northward  and  westward.  A  breeze  which  at  this  time  sprung  up  from 
that  quarter  enabled  us  nearly  to  fetch  the  western  inlet,  where  we  now  pro- 
posed to  search  for  an  anchorage.  The  Hecla  having  got  clear  of  the  ice  the 
preceding  evening,  and  narrowly  escaped  an  adventure  similar  to  that  which 
we  had  experienced,  rejoined  us  early  in  the  morning,  when  Captain  Lyon 
returned  to  her  to  prepare  a  boat  for  his  intended  excursion.  We  then  stood 
in  under  all  sail  for  the  land,  and  at  eleven  A.M.  Captain  Lyon  left  the  Hecla, 
while  the  ships  tacked  off  and  on  to  await  his  return.  The  day  was  fine  and 
clear;  and  as  the  ice  occasioned  us  no  disturbance  we  were  enabled  to  give 
the  people  several  hours'  rest,  of  which,  from  the  exertions  of  the  preceding 
night,  they  stood  much  in  need.  At  nine  P.M.  Captain  Lyon  returned, 
acquainting  me  that  he  had  met  with  a  small  bay  having  no  stream  of  tide, 
and  being  at  present  clear  of  ice,  he  thought  it  might  answer  our  purpose, 
but  he  wished  me  to  see  it  before  the  ships  were  taken  in. 


she: 


66 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


I 


1821.        We    continued  lying    to,  therefore,  for   the    rest  of  the  nidit ;  and   at 
August* 
v-*^-^  five   A.M.    on  the    27th,  I  left  the    Fury,    taking   with  me  Mr.   Bushnan 

'  to  point  out  the  place  in  question.  On  reaching  the  bay,  we  found  that 
the  ice  had  during  the  night  almost  entirely  filled  it ;  but  on  ascending  a 
hill  we  observed  another  and  apparently  a  secure  cove,  on  the  opposite  or 
north  shore,  to  which  we  immediately  proceeded.  Having  placed  a  flag  on 
a  mass  of  grounded  ice,  near  a  shoal  point  at  the  entrance,  and  sounded 
every  part  of  the  cove,  which  was  found  to  afford  good  anchorage,  we  rowed 
out  to  the  ships. 

Returning  on  board  at  eleven  A.M.,  I  found  that  the  state  of  the  weather 
had  prevented  any  observation  of  the  eclipse  of  the  sun  which  took  place 
this  morning;  and  Mr.  Fisher  could  only  just  perceive  the  penumbra  passing 
over  it.  Having  despatched  Mr.  Bushnan  to  the  Hecla  as  a  pilot,  all  sail  was 
immediately  made  for  the  inlet,  as  I  was  anxious  to  save  the  flood-tide  in 
case  of  the  ships  grounding.  A  strong  breeze  was  now  blowing  from  the 
north-west,  which  carried  the  Fury  through  the  Avater  at  the  rate  of  seven 
knots,  notwithstanding  which  she  did  not  advance  above  three  miles  an 
hour  over  the  ground  when  in  the  strength  of  the  tide,  and  in  mid-channel. 
On  rounding  the  shoal  point  on  which  the  flag  had  been  placed,  I  was  sur- 
prised to  find  the  water  shoal  to  four,  three,  and  two  and  three  quarter 
fathoms  ;  but  a  press  of  canvass  giving  the  ship  a  considerable  heel,  she  for- 
tunately did  not  touch  the  ground.  As  soon  as  we  had  anchored,  I  found 
that  this  circumstance  had  arisen  from  the  mass  of  grounded  ice  having- 
shifted  its  position  by  floating  with  the  rise  of  tide.  A  boat  was  therefore 
despatched  to  lie  off  the  reef,  as  a  guide  to  the  Hecla ;  and  Captain  Lyon 
reached  the  anchorage  in  safety  at  one  P.M.  We  lay  here  in  twelve  to 
fifteen  fathoms  at  low  water,  on  a  bottom  of  tough  mud,  affording  excellent 
holding-ground.  Indeed  on  almost  every  part  of  this  coast  we  found  the 
ground  equally  good,  at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  cables'  lengths  from  the 
shore,  whereas  it  is  almost  invariably  rocky  in  the  deeper  water  of  the  offing. 

A  boat  from  each  ship  being  immediately  prepared,  Captain  Lyon  and  my- 
self left  the  cove  at  three  P.M.  to  proceed  on  the  proposed  examination.  We 
separated  at  Point  Cheyne,  Captain  Lyon  having  pointed  out  to  me  the  broad 
eastern  channel  from  which  the  tide  appeared  to  come,  and  which  it  was  my 
intention  to  examine,  while  he  directed  his  attention  to  the  smaller  passage  he 
had  described  as  leading  to  the  northward.      It  was  agreed  that  we  should 


« 


h.,,, 


' 


J*  'V. 


•.>*;> 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


67 


return  to  the  ships  with  as  little  delay  as  was  consistent  with  the  object  we  1821- 
had  in  view,  namely,  to  ascertain  through  which  of  the  two  channels  it  was  \^r>*> 
expedient  or  practicable  to  bring  the  ships. 

I  found  that  the  northern  shore  near  which  there  was  no  ice,  and  which  is 
here  separated  from  the  other  to  the  distance  of  two  or  three  leagues,  was 
that  to  which  our  course  should  be  directed,  in  order  to  obtain  a  distinct  view 
of  the  neighbouring  lands.  We  therefore  steered  for  the  highest  hill,  which 
rises  perhaps  from  twelve  to  fourteen  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea.  The  wind  freshening  up  to  a  gale  from  the  westward,  we  reached  the 
beach  at  seven  P.M.,  having  obtained  no  soundings  with  fourteen  to  twenty 
fathoms  of  line  in  the  course  of  our  run.  We  found  a  good  deal  of  surf  upon 
the  beach,  which  is  a  rough  and  stony  one,  requiring  some  caution  to  prevent 
swamping  or  staving  the  boat.  While  the  men  were  carrying  up  the  things 
and  pitching  the  tents,  Mr.  Ross  and  myself  were  occupied  in  taking  the 
angles  for  the  survey,  it  being  too  late  to  set  out  on  our  intended  excursion  to 
the  hills.  We  found  our  tents,  drenched  as  they  were  by  the  sea,  extremely 
comfortable.  They  were  of  the  kind  called  horsemen's  tents  and  made  of 
canvass  instead  of  blanketing.  The  shelter  they  afford  when  aided  by  the 
warmth  of  a  blanket  made  into  a  bag,  and  a  dry  suit  of  clothes  for  sleeping  in, 
give  no  bad  accommodation,  so  long  as  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere 
does  not  fall  more  than  two  or  three  degrees  below  the  freezing  point. 

The  breeze  moderated  soon  after  our  landing  and  a  fine  clear  night  suc- 
ceeded. At  four  in  the  morning,  Mr.  Ross  and  myself  ascended  the  Tues.  28. 
nearest  hill,  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to  satisfy  ourselves  respecting  the 
existence  of  a  passage  for  the  ships,  in  at  least  one  direction.  I  therefore 
directed  the  tents  to  be  struck  and  every  thing  to  be  in  readiness  for  moving 
on  our  return.  On  reaching  the  summit  of  the  first  hill,  however,  we  found, 
as  is  not  unfrequently  the  case,  that  our  view  was  but  little  improved,  and  that 
no  prospect  could  be  obtained  to  the  northward,  without  ascending  the  higher 
hill  seen  the  preceding  evening,  and  which  we  now  found  still  several  miles 
beyond  us.  As  therefore  no  satisfactory  information  could  be  gained  without 
giving  up  the  day  to  this  object,  we  immediately  returned  to  the  tents  to  breakfast, 
with  the  intention  of  then  setting  out,  accompanied  by  two  of  the  men. 
While  preparing  for  this,  I  felt  so  much  indisposed  with  a  sick-head  ach 
that,  being  apprehensive  of  laying  myself  up  at  a  time  wheit  I  could  least 
afford  to  do  so,  I  determined  to  intrust  the  proposed  service  to  Mr.  Ross,  in 
whose  zeal  and  ability  to  accomplish  it  I  felt  the  utmost  confidence.     Mr.  Ross 

k  2 


;:   -n 


nK^mniPRH 


68 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
August. 


Fllii 


;l'l-'ll.l 


■HI  ill 


h4U\  I 


and  his  party  accordingly  set  out  for  the  hill  at  six  A.M.  During  their 
absence  I  employed  myself  in  obtaining  the  usual  observations  and  in  notic- 
ing the  height,  direction,  and  time  of  the  tides.  By  observing  the  motion 
of  the  fragments  of  ice  I  found  that,  although  there  was  on  this  shore  a 
considerable  rise  of  the  water,  there  was  little  or  no  perceptible  current 
on  either  tide,  except  within  a  mile  or  two  of  the  high  southern  land  where 
it  ran  very  strong,  the  flood  to  the  westward,  and  the  ebb  in  the  opposite 
direction.  This  belt  of  tide,  as  it  were,  ran  between  a  considerable  opening 
to  the  south-east,  and  that  through  which  we  had  come  from  the  ships,  and 
it  was  only  in  this  space  that  any  ice  was  at  present  to  be  seen.  These  circum- 
stances tended  to  strengthen  the  opinion  I  had  at  first  formed,  that  the  main 
outlet  into  the  sea  from  whence  this  ice  came  would  be  found  by  following 
the  ebb-tide,  which  unquestionably  ran  to  the  eastward.  I  was  still  in  hopes, 
however,  that  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  ice,  and  of  any  perceptible 
stream  of  tide,  in  the  more  northerly  channel  which  Captain  Lyon  was  ex- 
amining, some  more  direct,  though  perhaps  narrower,  communication  might 
be  found,  that  would  save  us  much  time  and  trouble.  The  appearance  of  the 
land,  which  seemed  to  consist  of  a  large  assemblage  of  islands,  greatly  favoured 
this  hope  ;  nor  was  it  discouraged  by  the  accounts  received  in  the  evening  on 
the  return  of  our  party  from  the  hills.  Mr.  Ross  reported  that  having  reached 
a  commanding  hill,  he  found  himself  overlooking  a  sea  of  considerable  extent 
to  the  eastward,  and  washing  the  foot  of  the  hill  on  which  he  stood.  This  sea 
appeared  to  have  some  islands  scattered  about  it,  and  was  much  encumbered 
with  ice.  To  the  south-eastward  there  seemed  to  be  several  openings  between 
islands,  of  which  the  land  we  stood  then  upon  appeared  to  form  one,  the  sea 
sweeping  round  to  the  northward  and  westward,  as  if  to  join  the  strait  dis- 
covered by  Captain  Lyon.  Mr.  Ross  described  the  country  over  which  he 
passed  as  much  intersected  by  lakes,  some  of  them  not  less  than  two  or  three 
miles  in  length,  and  having  in  their  neighbourhood  abundance  of  grass,  moss, 
and  other  fine  feeding  for  the  deer.  The  report  of  Mr.  Ross  accompanied  by 
an  eye-sketch  made  upon  the  spot  left  no  doubt  of  the  existence  of  an  outlet 
to  the  eastward,  and  enabled  me  to  decide  without  hesitation  upon  attempting 
the  passage  of  the  narrows  with  the  ships,  leaving  our  subsequent  route  to  be 
determined  on  according  to  the  report  of  Captain  Lyon. 

The  rocks  upon  this  coast,  as  well  as  those  in  the  interior,  are  composed  of 
gneiss,  traversed  occasionally  by  veins  of  quartz  and  feldspar,  and  having 
intermixed  with  it  much  of  a  green  substance  which  we  took  to  be  epidote, 


'; 


V     . 


>*ry 


\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


69 


and  which  we  had  not  met  with  so  abundantly  anywhere  else.  On  the  sur-  1821- 
face  of  the  ground,  but  most  especially  near  the  beach,  were  many  loose  ^-r>J 
pieces  of  limestone  of  a  white  colour  and  quite  sharp-edged.  On  the  banks 
of  the  lakes  the  vegetation  was  quite  luxuriant,  giving  them  when  viewed 
from  an  eminence  and  assisted  by  bright  sunshine  a  cheerful  and  picturesque 
appearance.  There  was  no  snow  upon  the  land,  except  here  and  there  a 
broad  thick  patch  in  the  hollows,  where  it  may  probably  remain  year  after  year 
undissolved  ;  but  with  the  exception  of  these  patches,  there  was  nothing  in  the 
appearance  of  the  country  to  remind  one  of  being  near  the  polar  circle. 
Piles  of  stones  and  the  remains  of  Esquimaux  habitations,  were  everywhere 
to  be  seen,  and  Mr.  Ross  met  with  their  marks  even  on  the  highest  hills  ;  but 
none  appeared  of  recent  date.  The  rein-deer  were  here  very  numerous. 
Mr.  Ross  saw  above  fifty  in  the  course  of  his  walk,  and  several  others  were 
met  with  near  the  tents.  A  large  one  was  shot  by  one  of  the  men,  Avho 
struck  the  animal,  as  he  lay  on  the  ground,  a  blow  on  the  head  with  the 
butt-end  of  his  piece,  and  leaving  him  for  dead  ran  towards  the  tents  for  a 
knife  to  bleed  and  skin  him  ;  when  the  deer  very  composedly  got  on  his  legs, 
swam  across  a  lake,  and  finally  escaped.  A  small  fawn  was  the  only  one 
killed.  Three  black  whales  and  a  few  seals  were  playing  about  near  the 
beach. 

Our  people  being  somewhat  fatigued  with  walking  were  allowed  to  rest 
till  half  past  one  on  the  morning  of  the  29th,  when  it  being  high  water  the  Wed.  29. 
tents  were  struck  and  the  boat  loaded.  The  morning  was  beautifully  clear 
and  tranquil,  and  the  Aurora  Borealis  was  faintly  visible  at  break  of  day  in 
the  south-west  quarter  of  the  heavens.  Leaving  the  shore  before  two  o'clock, 
we  steered  for  an  island  in  the  direction  of  Point  Cheyne,  and  landed  to 
breakfast  on  a  rock  off  its  eastern  end.  The  water  is  very  shoal  on  the  north 
and  east  sides  of  this  island  ;  the  southern  side  is  bold,  the  whole  surface 
rocky,  and  composed  entirely  of  gneiss.  Proceeding  towards  Point  Cheyne, 
we  first  began  to  perceive  the  influence  of  a  stream  of  tide,  as  we  approached 
some  heavy  ice  about  a  mile  from  the  point,  which  we  found  to  be  aground 
upon  a  shoal  in  twelve  to  seventeen  feet,  lying  abreast  of  an  island  called 
by  Captain  Lyon,  Rouse  Island.  Over  this  shoal  the  ebb-tide  was  running 
from  the  N.N.W.,  at  the  rate  of  three  miles  an  hour,  to  join  the  main 
stream  which  sets  to  the  eastward  along  the  south  shore.  After  taking 
marks  for  the  shoal,  which  lies  rather  in  the  way  of  a  ship  coming  through 
this  channel,  we  rowed  over  to  the  point.     The  strength  of  the  tide  gradu- 


al 


,i0** 


Ube. 


*z¥sr. 


WilHj 


70 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
August. 


'■    Mil 


ally  increased  as  we  approached  the  narrows,  where  it  was  running  full  six 
miles  an  hour  in  the  middle  of  the  stream,  it  being  now  about  the  height  of 
the  springs.  We  landed  for  a  short  time  on  Point  Cheyne  to  obtain  sights 
for  the  chronometer,  and  some  essential  angles  for  the  survey  ;  the  boat's 
crew  in  the  mean  time  warming  and  amusing  themselves  in  hunting  an 
ermine  which,  by  the  quickness  of  its  turning  and  the  shelter  afforded  by 
the  stones,  escaped  from  them  at  last.  Having  placed  a  flag  on  this  point,  as 
a  mark  for  the  ships,  no  time  was  lost  in  setting  out  for  the  cove  which, 
after  taking  all  the  soundings  and  marks  which  the  strength  of  the  tide  would 
permit,  we  reached  at  a  quarter  before  ten  A.M.  I  found  that  Captain  Lyon 
had  returned  on  board  the  preceding  evening,  having  accomplished  his 
object  in  a  shorter  time  than  was  expected.  Captain  Lyon's  account  of  his 
excursion  is  here  subjoined  : 


!'NH 


i:i:.:!i:i: 


"  Separating  from  Captain  Parry  at  Point  Cheyne,  Mr.  Bushnan  and  myself 
proceeded  to  the  examination  of  the  sea  to  the  northward  of  the  little  channel 
before  discovered,  at  which  we  arrived  in  three  hours  from  the  time  of  our 
leaving  the  ships ;  and,  on  reaching  the  bar  already  mentioned,  we  saw  the 
bottom  all  across ;  it  appeared  rocky,  and  some  large  fish  were  swimming 
over  it,  which  our  people  supposed  to  be  salmon.  The  breadth,  it  being 
dead  low  water,  we  estimated  at  one  cable's  length,  and  the  depth  we  found  to 
be  twenty-four  feet.  As  we  traced  the  northern  part  of  the  inlet  we  found 
a  long  rolling  ground-swell  setting  in;  it  broke  occasionally,  and  caused 
the  boat  to  pitch  nearly  bows  under.  This  was  remarkable,  as  being  the 
first  sea  of  the  kind  we  had  met  with  since  leaving  the  Atlantic,  and  therefore 
excited  considerable  hope  that  we  should  find  some  outlet  to  the  northward. 
The  depth  of  water  was  here  thirteen  fathoms. 

"  In  consequence  of  our  inability  to  round  the  extreme  point,  we  landedjust 
within  it,  and  from  the  unaccommodating  form  of  the  rocks,  were  under  the 
necessity  of  carrying  the  boat  on  our  backs  above  three  hundred  yards  be- 
fore we  could  place  her  in  safety.  On  the  north  side  of  the  point  we  found  a 
regularly  shelving  beach,  covered  with  rounded  shingle,  on  which  a  heavy 
surf  was  breaking,  the  wind  being  strong  from  the  northward.  We  now  saw 
the  land  all  round  us,  forming  an  immense  bay,  and  took  the  requisite  bear- 
ings of  remarkable  points.  We  observed  that,  notwithstanding  the  swell 
I  have  mentioned,  there  was  no  perceptible  stream  of  tide.     The  night  was 


Lil'M) 


i.       fh:v 


— — — 


" 


>*r* 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


'71 


fine  and  we  pitched  our  tent  on  some  smooth  gravel,  evidently  so  levelled  by  1821- 
the  Esquimaux.  At  midnight  two  large  black  whales  came  from  the  south-  v^vO 
ward  and  passed  into  the  bay.  As  the  wind  continued  fresh  from  the  north- 
ward and  the  surf  was  heavy,  we  did  not  take  advantage  of  the  morning  tide 
on  the  28th,  but  decided  on  waiting  until  afternoon.  In  the  mean  time 
Mr.  Bushnan  and  myself  took  fresh  bearings  and  obtained  good  sights  for 
longitude,  which  we  found  to  be  84°  30'  05". 

"  The  tide  had  fallen  to  its  lowest  ebb  at  six  A.M.,  sixteen  feet.     As  the 
land  appeared  continuous  to  the  westward,  we  ascended  some  mountains  at 
about  three  miles  in  that  direction,  in  order  to  look  out  for  a  course  for  our 
boat,  when  we  should  be  able  to  float  her.     From  hence  we  saw  the  northern 
land  assume  the  appearance  of  a  noble  bay,  having  in  it  a  few  low  islands. 
To  the  eastward  we  saw  a  large  opening  to  the  sea,  which  was  distant  about 
five  leagues,  and  was  the  direction  in  which  Captain  Parry  had  proceeded. 
It  was  also  evident  that  the  land  bounding  the  small  strait,  in  that  direction, 
was  insular,  and  I  therefore  named  it  Georgina  Island.     We  took  new  bear- 
ings and,  having  erected  a  conspicuous  pile  of  stones  to  serve  as  the  termi- 
nation of  a  base  for  our  survey,  we  again  descended  to  the  point.     At  noon 
we  obtained  a  good  meridian  altitude,  which  gave  the  latitude  66°  12'  23". 
We  caught  a  large  bee,  apis  alpina,  and  two  small  but  beautiful  butterflies. 
The  people  took  two  mice,  and  some  deer  were  seen  grazing  at  a  distance. 
The  rocks  were  chiefly  of  gray  granite,  but  we  also  obtained  interesting  spe- 
cimens of  other  stones.     At  thirty  minutes  past  twelve,  the  tide  having  risen 
so  as  to  float  our  boat,  we  made  sail  to  the  westward  to  examine  the  only 
point  which  we  supposed  could  bound  any  inlet,  but  finding  the  land  conti- 
nuous we  again  returned  to  the  eastward.     At  the  distance  of  one  mile  from 
the  shore  we  could  get  no  soundings  with  our  boat's  lead  at  twenty-five  fa- 
thoms, but  nearer  the  beach  it  shoaled  gradually,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that 
good  anchorage  would  be  found.     Leaving  the  bay,  which  as  a  small  token 
of  gratitude  I   named  after  Rear-Admiral  Sir  John   Gore,     I   decided   on 
going  to  the  eastward  of  Georgina  Island,  and  at  half  past  three  we  passed  its 
extreme  point,  where  we  found  a  snug  bay  about  a  mile  in  circumference 
having  a  small  islet  in  its  centre     Soon  after  four  P.M.  we  met,  on  entering 
the  large  strait,  two  of  our  boats,  which  had  been  sent  to  sound.     Waiting 
with  them  on  a  low  rocky  point  until  the  strength  of  the  tide  abated,  we 
then  returned  on  board  by  ten  P.M." 


%i 


72 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


EM 


i:|:|*i!|  Ll 


i!i  ii  i 


m 


182 1.  That  no  time  might  be  lost  in  running  the  ships  through  the  narrows,  I 
J^J  directed  three  boats  from  each  to  be  prepared,  for  the  purpose  of  sounding 
every  part  of  this  intricate,  and  as  yet  unknown,  passage,  which  I  named 
after  Captain  Thomas  Hurd  of  the  Royal  Navy,  Hydrographer  to  the  Admi- 
ralty. Giving  to  the  officer  commanding  each  boat  a  certain  portion  to  ac- 
complish, I  reserved  for  my  own  examination  the  narrowest  part  of  the  chan- 
nel; and  at  thirty  minutes  past  one  P.M.,  as  soon  as  the  flood-tide  began  to 
slacken,  Ave  left  the  ships  and  continued  our  work  till  late  at  night,  when 
having  received  the  reports  of  the  officers  and  made  out  a  plan  of  the  channel 
for  each  ship,  I  directed  every  thing  to  be  in  readiness  for  weighing  at  the 
last  quarter  of  the  ebb  on  the  following  morning.  Much  as  I  lamented  this 
delay,  at  a  period  of  the  season  when  every  moment  was  precious,  it  will  not 
appear  to  have  been  unnecessary,  when  it  is  considered  that  the  channel 
through  which  the  ships  were  to  be  carried  did  not  in  some  places  exceed  a 
mile  in  breadth,  with  half  of  that  space  encumbered  with  heavy  masses 
of  ice,  and  with  an  ebb-tide  of  six  knots  running  through  it. 

The  lines  and  kedges  were  prepared  at  daylight  on  the  morning  of  the 
Thur.30.  30th,  but  when  the  proper  time  of  tide  arrived  there  was  not  a  breath  of 
wind  for  working  the  ships,  so  that  I  was  reluctantly  obliged  to  remain  at 
anchor  till  the  next  ebb.  I  therefore  directed  a  large  party  of  officers  and 
men  to  be  sent  on  shore  in  quest  of  game,  three  deer  having  been  killed  the 
preceding  day.  We  had  now  however  no  success  ;  a  number  of  deer  were 
seen  in  herds  of  from  four  to  ten,  but  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ships  had 
rendered  them  too  wild  to  be  approached.  A  dog  of  mine,  of  the  breed 
called  by  game-keepers  buck-dogs,  that  had  for  one  or  two  years  past  been  ac- 
customed to  run  down  deer  in  England,  had  now  two  fair  chases,  but  without 
the  smallest  chance  of  coming  up  even  with  three  young  fawns.  The  dog 
returned  with  his  feet  much  cut  by  the  rocks,  and  so  completely  exhausted 
that  he  could  scarcely  move  a  limb  for  a  day  or  two  afterwards. 

The  little  anchorage  we  were  now  about  to  leave,  and  which  was  named 
by  Captain  Lyon,  Duckett's  Cove,  lies  in  lat.  66°  12' 36";  and  in  longitude, 
by  our  chronometers,  86°  44'  01".9.  The  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle  was  here 
87°  31'  06"  and  the  variation  52°  19'  48"  westerly.  We  found  the  holding 
ground  so  tough  that  we  could  with  difficulty  purchase  the  anchors  ;  the  shel- 
ter from  wind  and  sea  is  perfect  in  every  direction,  and  there  being  scarcely 
any  stream  of  tide,  no  ice  enters  but  what  is  drifted  in  with  a  south-easterly 
wind,  which  coming  with  little  force  is  not  likely  to  do  a  ship  any  injury. 


N»'i1 


" 


>  *r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


73 


At  fifteen  minutes  past  three  P.M.  a  light  air  of  wind  springing  up  from 
the  eastward  we  weighed,  and  having  warped  out  by  kedges  till  we  had 
cleared  the  shoal  point  of  the  cove,  made  sail  for  the  channel  and,  with  the 
assistance  of  the  boats,  got  the  Fury  into  the  fair  set  of  the  tide,  before  it 
made  very  strong  to  the  eastward.  At  a  quarter  before  seven,  when  in  the 
narrowest  part,  which  is  abreast  of  a  bold  headland  on  the  south  shore, 
named,  by  desire  of  Mr.  Bushnan,  Cape  Shackleton,  and  where  the  tide 
was  now  driving  the  ice  along  at  the  rate  of  five  or  six  knots,  the  wind  came 
in  a  sudden  gust  from  the  south-west,  scarcely  allowing  us  to  reduce  and 
trim  our  sails  in  time  to  keep  the  ship  off  the  north  shore,  which  is  not  so 
safe  as  the  other.  It  was  now  that  the  advantage  appeared  of  having  tho- 
roughly sounded  the  channel  previously  to  attempting  the  passage  of  it ;  for 
had  the  ships  taken  the  ground  with  so  rapid  and  considerable  a  fall  of  tide, 
and  with  so  much  heavy  ice  hurried  along  by  it,  I  do  not  know  what  hu- 
man effort  could  have  saved  them  from  almost  immediate  wreck.  By  carry- 
ing a  heavy  press  of  canvass,  however,  we  succeeded  in  forcing  through  the 
ice,  but  the  Fury  was  twice  turned  completely  round  by  eddies  and  her  sails 
brought  aback  against  the  helm  ;  in  consequence  of  which  she  gathered  such 
fresh  sternway  against  several  heavy  floe-pieces,  that  I  apprehended  some 
serious  injury  to  the  stern-post  and  rudder,  if  not  to  the  whole  frame  of  the 
ship.  The  Hecla  got  through  the  narrows  soon  after  us,  but  Captain  Lyon, 
wishing  to  bring  away  the  flags  and  staves  set  up  as  marks,  had  sent  his  little 
boat  away  for  that  purpose,  during  the  continuance  of  the  calm  weather. 
When  the  breeze  suddenly  came  on  she  was  still  absent,  and  being  obliged  to 
wait  for  some  time  to  pick  her  up,  the  Hecla  was  about  dusk  separated 
several  miles  from  us. 

It  was  my  intention,  after  getting  through  the  narrows,  to  haul  round  to 
the  northward  and  eastward,  either  to  find  an  anchorage  or  to  keep  under 
way  during  the  night,  in  the  large  space  to  the  northward  and  eastward  of 
Rouse  Island,  which  I  had  before  found  clear  of  ice,  and  free  from  any 
perceptible  stream  of  tide.  My  mortification  may  therefore  be  conceived 
at  now  finding  the  whole  of  this  space  so  covered  with  ice  as  not  to  be  na- 
vigable, while  the  only  clear  water  in  sight  was  along  the  south  shore,  where 
the  whole  strength  of  tide  was  known  to  set,  and  which  therefore,  unac- 
quainted as  we  were  with  the  soundings,  would  be  a  dangerous  station  for 
the  ships  to  occupy  during  the  night.     There  appeared  however  no  alterna- 


1821. 
Aug-ust. 


I 


,• 


74 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821.    tive,  and  it  being  now  dusk,  we  had  every  prospect  of  passing  an  anxious 

August.  ,  ,  .    i  , 

v-»v-v^  and  unpleasant  night. 

On  hauling  up  for  the  south  shore,  we  perceived  from  the  crow's  nest  a 
point  of  land  that  seemed  to  open  into  a  bay  ;  and  as  there  was  a  chance,  not- 
withstanding the  general  boldness  of  the  coast,  of  our  there  finding  ground 
for  anchorage,  we  stood  in  for  it  under  all  sail.  In  this  hope  we  were  not 
disappointed  for,  on  rounding  the  point,  we  opened  a  snug  little  bay,  at  the 
head  of  which  we  anchored  soon  after  nine  P.M.,  in  fourteen  fathoms  on  a 
bottom  of  tough  clay.  We  here  lay  at  the  distance  of  two  cables'  length 
from  the  land,  which  is  high  all  round  the  bay ;  and,  the  strong  south-west 
wind  preventing  any  ice  from  coming  in,  we  passed  a  quiet  night  and  our 
people  enjoyed  the  rest  which  they  much  required.  Lights  were  hoisted 
and  rockets  occasionally  sent  up  as  guides  to  the  Hecla ;  but  as  we  saw  no 
answer,  and  she  did  not  arrive  in  the  bay,  we  apprehended  she  had  been 
obliged  to  keep  under  way  during  this  inclement  night. 
Frid.  31.  At  daylight  on  the  31st  we  perceived  the  Hecla  under  the  land  to  the 
eastward  standing  towards  us.  I  found  from  Captain  Lyon  that  he  had, 
with  the  same  good  fortune  which  we  experienced,  found  a  secure  shelter 
during  the  night,  by  anchoring  close  under  the  land  to  the  eastward, 
in  seventeen  fathoms  muddy  bottom.  In  order  to  have  a  more  com- 
manding view  of  the  situation  of  the  ice,  on  which  depended  our  next 
movements  whenever  the  wind  should  moderate,  I  proposed  to  Captain 
Lyon  to  land  and  ascend  the  hill  for  that  purpose.  At  thirty  mi- 
nutes past  eight  A.M.,  however,  just  as  we  were  setting  off,  the  wind 
suddenly  fell,  and  the  ice  began  immediately  to  approach  the  shore.  We 
therefore  weighed  just  in  time  to  avoid  a  large  floe-piece  that  drifted  into 
the  bay  ;  and,  standing  over  to  the  main  body  of  ice  to  the  northward,  sud- 
denly got  soundings  in  sixteen  to  twelve  fathoms,  and  then  dropped  into 
twenty  and  twenty-five  fathoms,  no  bottom.  The  Hecla  a  little  to  the  west- 
ward of  us  had  several  casts  from  seven  to  five  and  three  quarter  fathoms, 
and,  from  the  rippling  occasioned  by  the  tide,  it  is  probable  that  there  is 
shoaler  water  in  this  neighbourhood.  Our  distance  from  the  south  shore  was 
about  two  miles  and  a  half,  and  about  four  from  Georgina  Island,  on  an  E.b.S. 
bearing.  After  standing  a  quarter  of  a  mile  beyond  the  shoal,  the  ice  obliged 
us  to  tack  ;  and  as  there  was  not  at  present  the  smallest  prospect  of  our 
getting  to  the  northward,  so  as  to  approach  Gore  Bay,  in  order  to  ascertain 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


75 


its  continuity  with  the  shore  on  which  I  landed  on  the  28th,  I  determined  to 
run  along  the  edge  of  the  ice  to  the  eastward,  and  to  look  for  any  opening 
that  might  there  be  found  practicable,  rather  than  wait  inactively  in  our  pre- 
sent situation.  Our  course  was,  therefore,  directed  towards  the  openings 
before  observed  to  the  eastward,  where  the  land  appeared  to  be  broken  into 
several  islands.  As  we  approached  these,  which  I  named  after  The  Right 
Honourable  William  Sturges  Bourne,  we  found  that  they  presented  at  least 
four  openings,  all  of  which  appeared  navigable  but  for  the  ice  which  now 
choked  the  three  northern  ones.  The  other  channel,  which  is  the  widest, 
was  however  quite  clear  ;  we  therefore  hauled  up  for  it,  and  discovered  soon 
after  to  the  southward  an  opening  into  the  Frozen  Strait,  thus  determin- 
ing the  insularity  of  a  large  portion  of  its  north-eastern  shore,  which  I  named 
after  the  Right  Honourable  Nicholas  Vansittart,  Chancellor  of  the  Exche- 
quer. The  opening  now  discovered  was  between  Baffin  and  Vansittart 
Islands. 

The  Hecla,  in  rounding  a  point  of  ice  which  the  tide  had  set  in  motion,  was 
beset  by  the  loose  masses  rapidly  closing  round  her,  and  drifted  by  the  ebb 
along  the  island  lying  on  the  north  side  of  this  channel.  She  remained  in 
this  situation  above  two  hours  ;  when,  all  our  boats  having  been  sent  to  her 
assistance,  she  was  towed  out  into  clear  water,  and  joined  us  at  dusk  in 
the  evening.  The  ice  having,  in  the  mean  time,  remained  too  close  to  allow 
ms  to  proceed  to  the  northward,  no  time  was  lost  by  this  accident,  and  we 
lay -to  in  open  water  during  the  night  in  the  hope  of  perceiving  some  favour- 
able change  the  following  day.  The  night  was  nearly  calm,  notwithstanding 
which  the  ships  appeared  to  be  so  little  influenced  by  tide,  that  they  retained 
their  station  till  daylight  without  any  difficulty  or  disturbance  from  ice. 

I  was  sorry  to  perceive,  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  of  September,  that  the 
appearance  of  the  ice  was  by  no  means  favourable  to  our  object  of  sailing  to 
the  northward,  along  the  Sturges  Bourne  Islands  ;  but  at  ten  A.M.,  the  edge 
being  rather  more  slack,  we  made  all  sail  with  a  very  light  air  of  southerly 
wind,  and  the  weather  clear,  warm,  and  pleasant.  We  were  at  noon  in  lat. 
66°  03'  35",  and  in  long.  83°  33'  15",  in  which  situation  a  great  deal  of  land 
was  in  sight  to  the  northward,  though  apparently  much  broken  in  some  places. 
From  N.E.  round  to  S.S.E.,  there  was  still  nothing  to  be  seen  but  one  wide 
sea,  uninterruptedly  covered  with  ice  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.  A 
prospect  like  this  would  naturally  convey  to  the  mind  of  a  person  little  ac- 
quainted with  this  navigation,  an  idea  of  utter  hopelessness.     So  apt,  indeed, 

L  2 


1821. 
August. 


Sept. 
Sat.  1. 


V 


Ml' 


lb  J 


fci 


"v, 


"V 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


77 


are  we  to  be  influenced  by  present  impressions  rather  than  by  those,  how- 
ever strong  or  often  repeated,  that  past  events  have  left  upon  the  mind,  that 
I  believe  even  those  who  have  been  the  longest  habituated  to  the  surprising 
changes,  which  an  hour  or  two  will  frequently  bring  about  in  these  seas,  can- 
not altogether  divest  themselves  of  similar  sensations. 

At  twenty  minutes  after  noon,  having  advanced  only  a  mile  or  two  through 
very  close  "  sailing  ice,"  the  Fury  was  beset  in  trying  to  force  through  a 
narrow  though  heavy  stream,  round  the  end  of  which  the  Hecla  more  pru- 
dently sailed.  Having  hove  to  on  the  opposite  side  of  it,  Captain  Lyon  im- 
mediately sent  his  boats  with  lines  to  endeavour  to  tow  us  out  by  making 
sail  on  the  Hecla,  a  method  which  cannot  be  too  strongly  recommended,  and 
which  serves  as  an  example  of  the  mutual  assistance  that  may  be  rendered 
by  two  ships  employed  on  this  service.  The  line  proved  rather  too  weak  for 
the  weight  of  the  masses  of  ice,  but  the  impulse  communicated  by  it  before  it 
broke,  aided  by  our  own  exertions,  enabled  us  shortly  after  to  escape,  and  we 
again  made  sail  to  the  northward.  At  forty-five  minutes  past  one  P.M.,  we  had 
come  to  the  end  of  the  clear  water,  and  prepared  to  shorten  sail,  to  await  some 
alteration  in  our  favour.  At  this  time  the  weather  was  so  warm,  that  we  had  just 
exposed  a  thermometer  to  the  sun,  to  ascertain  the  temperature  of  its  rays, 
which  could  not  have  been  less  than  70°  or  80°,  when  a  thick  fog,  which  had 
for  some  hours  been  curling  over  the  hills  of  Vansittart  Island,  suddenly 
came  on,  creating  so  immediate  and  extreme  a  change  that  I  never  remem- 
ber to  have  experienced  a  more  chilling  sensation.  As  we  could  no  longer 
see  a  hundred  yards  around  us  in  any  direction,  nothing  was  to  be  done  but 
to  make  the  ships  fast  to  the  largest  piece  of  ice  we  could  find,  which  we 
accordingly  did  at  two  P.M.,  in  one  hundred  and  fifty-eight  fathoms,  at  the 
distance  of  three  or  four  miles  to  the  eastward  of  Sturges  Bourne  Islands. 
Just  before  dark  the  fog  cleared  away  for  a  few  minutes,  when,  perceiving 
that  the  wind  which  was  now  increasing  was  likely  to  drift  us  too  near  the 
islands,  we  took  advantage  of  the  clear  interval  to  run  a  mile  further  from 
the  land  for  the  night,  where  we  again  made  fast  to  a  large  floe-piece  in  two 
hundred  fathoms.  The  ice  in  this  neighbourhood  was  the  heaviest,  though 
not  in  the  largest  floes,  of  any  we  had  yet  seen  on  this  voyage.  It  was  for 
the  most  part  covered  with  hummocks,  and  appeared  yellow  from  the  quan- 
tity of  sand  that  lay  upon  it,  and  from  which  it  generally  receives  the  name 
of  "  dirty  ice."  After  dark  the  fog  was  succeeded  by  heavy  rain  for  several 
hours. 


1821. 
Sept. 

Sat.  1. 


pin 


">C 


*'<:iA^ 


Sill: 


:-  --ii  .=.  ..| 


tj 


i .=.1 


' 


78 


1821. 
Sept. 

'  Sun.  2. 


Ijll    || 


Tues.  4, 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


The  wind  drawing  round  to  the  northward  and  westward  on  the  morning  of 
the  2d,  increased  to  a  fresh  gale,  which  continued  to  blow  during  the  night ; 
notwithstanding  which,  I  was  in  hopes  that  the  immense  size  of  the  floe  to  which 
the  ships  were  attached  would  have  enabled  us  to  retain  our  station  tolerably. 
It  was  mortifying  therefore  to  find,  on  the  morning  of  the  3d,  that  we  had  drifted 
more  than  I  ever  remember  to  have  done  before,  in  the'same  time,  under  any 
circumstances.  It  was  remarkable  also  that  we  had  not  been  set  exactly  to 
leeward,  but  past  Baffin  Island  towards  the  two  remarkable  hills  on  Southamp- 
ton Island,  from  which  we  were  at  noon  not  more  than  seven  or  eight  leagues 
distant.  Thus,  after  a  laborious  investigation  which  occupied  one  month, 
we  had,  by  a  concurrence  of  unavoidable  circumstances,  returned  to  neaiiy  the 
same  spot  as  that  on  which  we  bad  been  on  the  6th  of  August.  To  consider 
what  might  have  been  effected  in  this  interval,  which  included  the  very  best 
part  of  the  navigable  season,  had  we  been  previously  aware  of  the  position  and 
extent  of  the  American  continent  about  this  meridian,  is  in  itself  certainly  un- 
availing ;  but  it  may  serve  to  shew  the  value  of  even  the  smallest  geographical 
information  in  seas  where  not  an  hour  must  be  thrown  away,  or  unproiitably 
employed.  Nor  could  we  help  fancying  at  this  period  of  the  voyage  that,  had 
Bylot,  Fox,  and  Middleton,  by  their  joint  exertions,  succeeded  in  satisfactorily 
determining  thus  far  the  extent  of  the  continental  land,  the  time  which  we 
had  lately  occupied  in  this  manner  might  have  been  more  advantageously 
employed  in  rounding,  by  a  more  direct  route,  the  north-eastern  point  of 
America,  and  even  in  pursuing  our  way  along  its  northern  shores. 

In  the  afternoon  an  attempt  was  made  to  move,  for  the  mere  sake,  it  must  be 
confessed,  of  moving  and  keeping  the  people  on  the  alert,  rather  than  with  the 
slightest  prospect  of  gaining  any  ground  ;  but  by  the  time  that  we  had  laid  out 
the  hawsers,  the  small  hole  of  water  that  had  appeared  again  closed  and  we 
were  obliged  to  remain  as  before. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  the  ice  remained  close  about  us,  but  we  found 
at  daylight  that  we  had  still  approached  Southampton  Island,  and  were  now 
within  five  or  six  miles  of  a  very  small  rocky  islet,  not  distinctly  seen  for  ice 
when  we  first  made  this  coast,  but  which  now  appeared  black,  though  very  low. 
This  rock,  which  I  named  after  Mr.  Fife,  who  first  discovered  it  on  our  former 
arrival  on  this  coast,  lies  N.E.b.E.  from  the  two  high  hills  of  Southampton 
Island  ;  its  distance  from  the  land  is  between  five  and  six  leagues,  and  being 
quite  by  itself  it  might,  if  covered  with  snow,  be  easily  mistaken  for  heavy  ice- 
At  thirty  minutes  past  eight  A.M.  the  ice  slackened  for  about  a  mile  to  the 


I       Mill 


V 


\>*r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE.  79 

N.N.W.,  when  we  cast  off  with  a  light  air  of  westerly  wind,  and  got  all  the  boats  ^82L 
ahead,  but  having  gained  that  distance  were  again  obliged  to  make  fast.  In  v^r^L, 
the  afternoon  the  breeze  freshened  from  the  southward,  with  rain,  and  the  ice 
soon  after  slackening  a  little  about  us  we  once  more  made  sail,  in  the  hope  only 
of  being  drifted  a  short  distance  among  the  ice,  but  without  the  least  apparent 
chance  of  forcing  even  a  hundred  yards  through  it  in  the  regular  way.  It  is, 
however,  impossible  to  judge  when  circumstances  are  about  to  improve  among 
the  ice,  which  now  opened  so  much  immediately  after  we  moved,  that  we 
advanced  eight  or  nine  miles  almost  without  difficulty  ;  and  could  still  have 
continued  to  run  had  not  night  come  on,  when,  being  within  a  few  miles  of 
the  small  islands  to  the  southward  and  eastward  of  Baffin  Island,  we  shortened 
sail  and  made  the  ships  fast  to  a  floe-piece,  with  the  intention  of  pushing  in-shore 
at  break  of  day.  It  was  now  my  wish  to  sail  through  the  opening  last  disco- 
vered between  Baffin  and  Vansittart  Islands,  in  order  to  save  as  much  time  as 
possible  in  recommencing  the  examination  of  the  continental  coast  at  the 
point  to  which  it  had  already  been  traced.  Our  soundings  varied  during  the 
night  from  one  hundred  and  three  to  sixty-one  fathoms. 

At  four  A.M.  on  the  5th  we  cast  off  and  made  sail  for  the  land,  with  a  fresh  Wed.  5. 
breeze  from  the  south-east.  The  ice  was  closely  packed  against  the  land  near 
the  passage  I  had  intended  to  try  and,  as  it  appeared  slack  more  to  the  east- 
ward, I  determined  to  run  between  the  south-east  point  of  Baffin  Island  and 
the  smaller  islands  lying  off  it.  The  wind  drawing  more  to  the  eastward  as 
we  approached  the  channel,  we  had  several  tacks  to  make  in  getting  through, 
but  carried  a  good  depth  of  water  on  each  side  though  its  breadth  does  not 
exceed  three  quarters  of  a  mile.  As  we  now  advanced  to  the  northward,  we 
found  less  and  less  obstruction,  the  main  body  of  the  ice  having  been  carried 
to  the  southward  and  eastward  by  the  late  gale  which  had  in  so  extraordinary 
a  manner  drifted  us  in  the  same  direction.  This  was  one  of  the  opportunities 
I  have  before  described  as  the  most  favourable  that  ever  occur  for  making 
progress  in  these  seas.  We  had  therefore  a  fine  run  during  the  day  along  the 
east  side  of  Sturges  Bourne  Islands  ;  for,  having  found  the  passages  between 
them  still  choked  with  ice,  we  were  obliged  to  run  to  the  northward  with  the 
hope  of  attaining  our  present  object.  A  large  opening  in  the  land  now  came  in 
sight  in  the  N.N.W.,  being  that  discovered  by  Mr.  Ross  on  the  28th  of  August, 
and  which  had  led  us  to  suppose  the  land  we  then  stood  on  would  prove  in- 
sular, and  that  some  communication  would  be  found  to  the  northward  of  it  with 
Gore  Bay.     For  this  opening  therefore  our  course  was  directed,  and  in  the 


i 


i!:  hii 


80 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
Sept. 


Thuis.  6 


i     . 


!|»  ■ 


evening  we  arrived  off  a  point  of  the  eastern  land,  which  I  named  Cape 
Edwards,  after  Mr.  John  Edwards,  Surgeon  of  the  Fury.  We  had  here 
twelve  fathoms  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  from  the  shore,  and  found  the  water 
deepen  gradually  as  we  hauled  out.  A  small  stream  of  ice  lay  off  the  point, 
besides  which  there  was  not  a  piece  in  sight,  and  we  ran  along  the  shore 
without  obstruction  till  it  was  time  to  look  out  for  an  anchorage.  Having  first 
sent  the  boats  to  sound,  we  hauled  into  a  small  bay  where  we  anchored  at 
dusk,  in  seventeen  fathoms,  good  holding-ground,  though  the  bottom  was  so 
irregular  that  we  had  from  five  to  thirteen  close  upon  our  quarter.  The  wind 
freshened  up  strong  from  the  eastward  and  continued  to  blow  during  the  night, 
but  we  lay  quite  sheltered  and  secure.  A  great  number  of  stones  set  up  by 
the  Esquimaux  were  here  observed,  placed  as  usual  on  every  spot  most  con- 
spicuous from  the  sea. 

We  began  to  weigh  at  break  of  clay  on  the  6th,  but  found  the  ground  so 
tough  that  we  had  some  difficulty  in  purchasing  the  anchors.  In  effecting 
this,  James  Richardson  one  of  the  leading-men  of  the  Fury  received  a  severe 
contusion  on  his  shoulder  by  the  purchase-block  falling  upon  him  from  aloft  *. 
After  running  four  or  five  leagues  to  the  northward  and  westward,  we  came 
at  thirty  minutes  after  nine  A.M.  to  a  small  group  of  islands  lying  in  the 
channel,  and  directed  our  course  to  the  eastward  of  them.  The  wind  how- 
ever failing  us  Justin  the  middle,  we  hauled  out  and  sent  the  boats  to  tow; 
but  whichever  way  we  put  the  ships'  heads,  a  "  cats-paw"  every  now  and  then 
took  the  sails  aback,  keeping  us  for  an  hour  in  a  very  awkward  situation,  bein°- 
only  two  hundred  yards  from  either  shore,  and  in  seventy  fathoms'  water! 
The  boats  being  sent  to  sound,  several  shoals  were  discovered  just  beyond  us 
to  the  northward,  but  nothing  like  anchorage  near  them.  As  the  situation  of 
the  ships  was  now  a  very  precarious  one,  should  any  stream  of  tide  begin  to 
run,  I  determined  to  tow  them  into  two  small  nooks  near  us,  where  they  might 
at  least  be  out  of  the  way  of  the  tide.  Finding  here  a  depth  of  from  seven- 
teen to  nineteen  fathoms  at  half  a  cable's  length  from  the  shore/the  anchors 
were  dropped,  and  several  hawsers  immediately  secured  to  the  rocks,  to  steady 
the  ships.  The  men  from  this  circumstance,  and  with  their  usual  humour, 
called  this  place  Five-hawser  Bay,  by  which  name  I  have  distinguished  it  on 
the  chart.     We  found  that  the  two  little  nooks  communicated  by  a  narrow  and 

*  This  accident  which  produced  no  eventual  injury,  occurred  in  consequence  of  an  iron 
hook  giving  way.  It  is  only  mentioned  in  this  place,  to  shew  the  propriety  of  substituting 
lashings  for  the  hooks  of  blocks,  wherever  practicable,  in  this  climate 


HI 


shallow  channel,  making  the  land  which  intervened  between  the  ships  an  island 
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  length. 

We  had  now  once  more  approached  a  part  of  the  coast  of  which  the  thorough 
and  satisfactory  examination  could  not  possibly  be  carried  on  in  the  ships, 
without  incurring  constant  and  perhaps  useless  risk,  and  a  certain  and  serious 
loss  of  time.  I  determined  therefore  to  proceed  at  once  upon  this  service  in 
two  boats,  one  from  each  ship.  Having  communicated  my  intentions  to 
Captain  Lyon,  and  requested  him  to  move  the  ships  when  practicable  into 
some  more  secure  situation,  I  left  the  Fury,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Ross  and 
Mr.  Sherer,  taking  with  us  our  tents,  blankets,  and  stove,  together  with  four 
days'  provisions  and  fuel. 


HOPPNER'S  INLET  ENTERED    AND    SURVEYED    BY    THE    BOATS CONTINUITY    OF    LAND 

THERE    DETERMINED PROCEED    TO    EXAMINE    ANOTHER  OPENING  LEADING    TO  THE 

WESTWARD FAVOURABLE    APPEARANCE    OF    A    CONTINUED     PASSAGE     IN     THAT     DI- 
RECTION  MEET     WITH     SOME     ESQUIMAUX ARRIVAL     IN     ROSS  BAY,    BEING     THE 

TERMINATION  OF    LYON  INLET DISCOVERY  AND   EXAMINATION  OF  VARIOUS  CREEKS 

RETURN  TO  THE  SHIPS,    AFTER  FINDING  THE  LAND  ENTIRELY  CONTINUOUS SOME 

ACCOUNT    OF   THE    NATURAL   HISTORY    OF   THIS   PART    OF   THE    COAST. 

A  thick  fog  unfortunately  coming  on  just  before  we  left  the  ships,  prevented 
us  from  making  choice  of  any  part  of  the  land,  which  might  be  the  most 
likely  to  afford  a  passage  to  the  northward  and  westward.  We  could  only 
therefore  direct  our  course  northerly  with  tolerable  certainty,  by  a  compass- 
bearing  previously  taken  on  board,  and  by  occasionally  obtaining  an  indis- 
tinct glimpse  of  the  land  through  the  fog.  Having  rowed  four  miles  we  came 
to  a  high  point,  round  which  we  turned  rather  to  the  westward,  and  then 
landed  a  little  beyond  it.  The  fog  becoming  somewhat  less  thick,  Mr.  Sherer 
and  myself  ascended  the  hill  in  hopes  of  obtaining  a  view  of  the  surrounding 
shores,  in  order  to  form  a  better  judgment  of  the  route  we  should  pursue  on 
the  following  morning.  Though  the  weather  still  continued  very  unfavourable 
for  this  purpose,  we  could  at  times  see  far  enough  around  us  to  determine  me 
to  follow  up  the  small  inlet,  which,  as  we  now  found,  we  had  lately  entered 
in  the  boat.  It  was  here  one  mile  across,  and  seemed  to  lead  first  to  the 
N.N.W.,  and  afterwards  more  to  the  westward.  Contracted  as  our  view  was, 
in  consequence  of  the  fog,  it  was  still  sufficiently  extensive  to  embrace  a 
number  of  detached  sheets  of  water  which,  being  magnified  by  the  fog, 
served  to  perplex  us  not  a  little  in  conjecturing  whether  they  might  be  lakes 
or  arms  of  the  sea.  Most  of  them  afterwards  proved  to  be  the  former,  and 
some  of  them  were  of  considerable  size.  Having  taken  all  the  compass- 
bearings  that  the  weather  would  permit  we  descended  to  the  beach,  where 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


83 


we  found  that  Mr.  Ross  had  hauled  the  boats  up  and  pitched  the  tents  for    *821- 
the  night.     A  number  of  deer  were  seen  but  they  were  very  wild ;  a  hare  ^yw 
or  two  however  and  some  ptarmigan  were  procured  for  our  suppers.     It  was 
high  water  by  the  shore  at  thirty  minutes  past  six  P.M.,  but  no  stream  of 
tide  was  perceptible. 

The  tents  were  struck  at  thirty  minutes  past  three  A.M.,  on  the  7th,  and  Frid.  7. 
our  course  directed  up  the  inlet,  the  weather  being  calm  and  tolerably  clear. 
At  three  miles  and  a  quarter  we  passed  on  our  starboard  hand  a  point  of 
land  which,  from  the  bright  colour  of  the  rocks,  composed  chiefly  of  feldspar, 
obtained  the  name  of  Red  Point. 

At  a  quarter  past  four,  when  we  knew  the  flood-tide  must  be  running,  the 
current  was  found  to  set  half  a  knot  to  the  northward,  and  at  seven  it  was 
going  rather  more  slowly  in  the  same  direction.  As  far  as  indications  went, 
this  seemed  but  little  encouragement;  but  as  our  business  was  to  explore  and 
not  to  speculate,  we  continued  our  progress.  After  passing  Red  Point  we 
arrived  at  a  wider  part  of  the  inlet,  near  which  is  an  islet  of  this  remark- 
able form, 


•UP'* 


exactly  resembling,  at  a  little  distance,  the  roof  of  a  house  just  shewing  itself 
above  the  water,  some  large  stones  set  upright  on  the  top,  (probably  by  the 
Esquimaux,)  appearing  like  so  many  chimneys.  It  consists  entirely  of  small 
stones  and  sand  intermixed,  and  has  more  the  appearance  of  having  been, 
placed  there  by  art  than  by  nature.  Just  beyond  this  islet,  and  after  rounding 
a  low  sandy  point  on  the  left,  the  inlet  turns  much  more  to  the  westward  and 
becomes  narrower,  with  frequent  shoals  occupying  in  some  places  the  greater 
part  of  the  channel.  Mr.  Ross  and  I  ascended  the  nearest  hill,  and  saw  the 
inlet  still  extending  to  the  N.W.,  though  it  became  narrower  than  before  and 
apparently  much  more  shoal.  The  rein-deer  were  here  very  numerous  on  the 
higher  parts  of  the  land ;  we  saw  above  forty  in  a  walk  of  two  or  three 
miles,  and  our  people  met  with  several  more.  The  vegetation  was  abundant, 
consisting  chiefly  of  short  thick  grass,  moss,  the  andromeda  tetragona  and  ledum 
■palustre,  a  sweet  smelling  plant  which  here  grew  very  luxuriantly.  Much 
of  the  ground  was  wet  and  swampy,  small  lakes  occurring  in  almost  every 

M  2 


!^!l 


i(!wj;i 


84 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821.    hollow,  and  numerous  streams  of  water  running  from  the  hills.     There  was 

\*~r>*>  no  snow  upon  the  land,  nor  the  smallest  vestige  of  ice  on  any  part  of  the 

sea  that  we  overlooked.     The  rocks,  like  all  that  we  had  lately  met  with, 

consisted  chiefly  of  gneiss,  traversed  by  some  veins  of  white  quartz  and 

red  feldspar  from  three  to  twelve  inches  thick. 

The  water  was  falling  by  the  shore  during  our  stay  at  this  place,  and  at  nine 
A.M.  we  found  the  stream  setting  slowly  to  the  southward,  confirming  our 
former  observations  as  to  the  direction  of  the  flood-tide.  At  half-past  ten 
we  had  arrived  at  the  head  of  the  inlet,  having  rowed  thirteen  miles  from 
the  entrance.  This  arm  of  the  sea  is  three  hundred  yards  wide  at  the  top, 
having  three  rivulets  running  into  it  over  a  rough  stony  beach.  The  land 
on  each  side  is  from  six  to  eight  hundred  feet  high  ;  and  at  the  distance  of  a 
mile  below  the  head  of  the  inlet  there  is,  on  the  eastern  shore,  a  remarkable 
perpendicular  bluff  overlooking  the  sea,  composed  of  red  feldspar  overgrown 
in  some  parts  with  herbage  of  various  tints,  which  give  to  it  a  striking  and 
picturesque  appearance.  The  soundings  are  here  irregular,  varying  from  one 
fathom  to  twelve,  but  the  eastern  side,  as  the  bold  character  of  its  shore  indi- 
cates, is  much  the  deepest.  After  rowing  down  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  we  took 
up  a  bottle  of  the  sea- water  which  was  fresh  enough  to  drink,  being  in  fact,  as 
Mr.  Fisher  afterwards  found  by  experiment,  of  nearly  the  same  specific  gra- 
vity as  spring-water.  We  saw  a  great  many  deer  on  the  hills  and  some  flocks 
of  ducks  in  the  water :  the  latter  being  mostly  too  young  to  fly  were  so 
quick  in  diving  that  it  was  not  easy  to  kill  them ;  but  Mr.  Ross  shot  a  speci- 
men or  two,  which  proved  to  be  the  young  and  the  females  of  the  long- 
tailed  duck  (anas  glacialis.) 

This  part  of  our  examination  being  concluded,  we  landed  (on  our  return) 
at  Red  Point,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  observations  for  the  longitude,  but 
the  sun  remained  obscured  throughout  the  day.  On  this  point  were  the 
remains  of  several  Esquimaux  habitations,  two  of  which  were  larger  than 
usual,  and  differing  in  form  from  any  we  had  before  noticed.  They  were 
oval,  about  fifteen  feet  in  length,  and  each  had  three  separate  bed-places 
parted  off  with  stones,  and  composed  of  the  andromeda  tetragona.  There  were 
also  in  each  a  similar  number  of  fire-places,  so  that  it  had  apparently  been 
occupied  by  three  distinct  families. 

Opposite  to  Red  Point  was  a  small  opening,  which  we  next  proposed 
to  examine.  We  had  not,  however,  advanced  a  mile  within  the  entrance 
when  the  boats  grounded,  the  water  becoming  more  and  more  shoal  within. 


rwiYts 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


85 


1821. 
Sept. 


We  therefore  landed  to  obtain  the  best  view  we  could,  and  observed  the 
water  to  extend  about  a  mile  beyond  us,  and  then  to  turn  to  the  south- 
ward, in  which  direction  the  land  obstructed  our  further  view.  As  it  was 
plain  that  no  passage  could  here  be  found  for  the  ships,  which  alone  it  was 
my  present  object  to  discover,  I  did  not  choose  to  wait  for  the  flowing  of  the 
tide  to  enable  us  further  to  explore  this  place,  but  determined  to  prosecute 
our  examination  of  the  other  parts  of  the  coast  without  delay.  Lieutenant 
Hoppner  subsequently  determined  the  insularity  of  the  land  on  the  south  side 
of  this  opening  by  rowing  through  the  passage  at  high  water.  There  were 
here  a  great  number  of  stones  placed  in  an  upright  position  in  every  conspi- 
cuous spot,  many  of  them  looking  like  men  at  a  distance.  These  marks  are 
generally  placed  without  regard  to  regularity,  but  there  were  here  several 
lines  of  them  about  fifty  yards  in  length,  the  stones  being  four  or  five  yards 
apart,  and  each  having  a  smaller  one  placed  on  its  top.  Having  rowed  out  of 
the  inlet,  we  landed  at  six  P.M.  in  a  little  bay  just  outside  of  the  last  night's 
sleeping-place,  pitching  the  tents  on  a  fine  shingly  beach,  which  was  the  kind 
of  ground  we  usually  looked  out  for  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  day,  as 
affording  the  softest  bed,  consistently  with  dryness,  that  nature  supplies  in  this 
country.  Of  such  a  convenience  the  men  were  not  sorry  to  avail  themselves, 
having  rowed  above  thirty  miles  since  the  morning.  Some  old  Esquimaux 
habitations  were  here  completely  grown  over  with  long  rich  grass,  a  number  of 
bones  were  scattered  about  near  them,  and  I  found  a  piece  of  asbestos  and  part 
of  a  pot  of  lapis  ollaris.  Near  one  of  the  circles  of  stones  were  also  two  walls 
for  resting  a  canoe  upon. 

The  boats  were  launched  at  daylight  on  the  8th,  and  we  soon  came  to  a  Sat 
much  more  promising  opening  on  the  same  shore,  about  a  mile  wide  at  the 
entrance  and  leading  directly  to  the  westward.  After  rowing  four  miles  in  that 
direction,  we  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  a  bay  from  three  to  five  miles  wide,  out  of 
which  there  did  not  appear  the  least  chance  of  discovering  an  outlet.  As 
nothing  however  but  rowing  round  the  bay  would  satisfactorily  determine  this, 
we  were  proceeding  to  do  so,  when  we  observed,  in  the  northern  corner,  some- 
thing like  a  low  point  overlapping  the  high  land  at  the  back.  Towards  this 
spot  we  steered,  as  the  readiest  way  of  completing  the  circuit  of  the  bay,  and 
half  a  mile  short  of  it  landed  to  breakfast. 

In  the  mean  time  I  sent  Mr.  Ross  to  one  hill,  and  ascended  another  myself, 
expecting  to  save  the  time  and  trouble  of  rowing  into  the  nook.  I  was  not 
a  little  astonished  to  find  from  my  own  and  Mr.  Ross's  observations,  that 


- 


•i 


:\ 


< 


\'<:- 


'"<<. 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
Sept. 


iH  !i   I 


IdMjil't-jili 


there  was  on  the  other  side  of  the  point  a  broad  and  apparently  navigable 
channel,  through  which  the  tide  was  setting  to  the  northward,  at  the  rate  of 
three  or  four  miles  an  hour,  I  am  thus  minute  in  the  discovery  of  this  chan- 
nel, which  afterwards  promised  to  be  of  no  small  importance,  to  shew  how 
nearly  such  a  place  may  be  approached  without  the  slightest  suspicion  being^ 
entertained  of  its  existence,  and  the  consequent  necessity  of  close  examina- 
tion, wherever  a  passage  is  to  be  sought  for.  An  inspection  of  the  chart, 
together  with  the  narrative  of  our  proceedings  for  the  four  or  five  following 
days,  will  afford  a  striking  and  perhaps  a  useful  lesson  in  this  respect. 

On  proceeding  in  the  boats,  we  found  a  part  of  the  channel  occupied  by  a 
small  rocky  islet  nearest  to  the  eastern  shore,  having  a  bed  of  sunken  rocks 
about  it,  over  which  the  tide  was  setting  with  great  rapidity  and  with  a  lou4 
noise  like  that  of  a  mill-stream.  The  passage  to  the  westward  of  the  islet 
is  half  a  mile  wide,  and  we  could  find  no  bottom  in  it  with  twelve  fathoms  of 
line  ;  on  the  other  side  the  water  is  very  shoal,  scarcely  affording  a  passage 
for  boats  at  low  tide.  Beyond  this  channel,  which  we  distinguished  by  the 
name  of  the  Rapids,  the  inlet  again  widens  out  considerably,  turning  to  the 
westward  and  afterwards  to  the  northward,  a  circumstance  which  could  not 
fail  to  excite  in  us  the  most  lively  hopes  and  expectations.  At  noon  we 
had  reached  a  place  where  it  branched  off  in  so  many  different  directions, 
that  our  present  stock  of  provisions  appeared  insufficient  to  enable  us  to 
accomplish  its  complete  examination.  I  therefore  determined  to  send  Mr. 
Sherer  back  to  the  ships  for  a  fresh  supply,  as  soon  as  the  tide  should  turn 
in  his  favour.  That  we  might  lose  none  of  the  favourable  tide  now  running, 
we  dined  in  the  boats,  and  being  in  the  mean  time  carried  onward  a  considerable 
distance,  at  half-past  one  we  landed  on  an  island,  in  order  to  make  the  neces- 
sary arrangements  for  despatching  Mr.  Sherer,  as  well  as  to  obtain  a  view  of 
the  surrounding  lands.  The  latter  object  was,  however,  defeated  by  hard  rain, 
which  came  on  soon  after,  rendering  the  atmosphere  extremely  thick.  The 
next  island  to  the  northward  was  chosen  as  our  rendezvous,  and  a  particular 
point  of  it  agreed  on  as  the  spot  at  which,  in  passing,  we  should  leave  in- 
structions for  Mr.  Sherer's  guidance  in  following  us.  He  left  us  at  half-past 
two  and  the  tide  being  strong  in  his  favour,  he  succeeded  in  reaching  the 
Hecla  the  same  night. 

In  the  mean  time,  Ave  made  sail  for  Rendezvous  Island  with  a  strong  breeze 
from  the  eastward,  accompanied  by  torrents  of  rain  ;  and  having  fetched  a  little 
bay  on  its  south-west  side,  pitched  our  tents  on  the  beach,  on  which  were 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


87 


\>*r* 


4W 


several  Esquimaux  circles  of  stones.  On  ascending  the  higher  part  of  the  *821- 
island  the  land  about  us  appeared  to  consist  of  islands  in  almost  every  di-  v^rv^], 
rection.  The  main  branch  of  the  inlet  ran  nearly  due  north,  and  afterwards 
seemed  to  turn  westward,  which  was  enough  to  determine  our  course  on  the 
following  morning.  We  saw  here  several  hares,  ptarmigans  and  ducks,  and 
one  or  two  ravens.  The  island  is  composed  of  gneiss  rock  traversed  in 
several  places  by  rich  veins  of  pale  rose  quartz,  of  which  substance  large 
lumps  were  here  and  there  lying  on  the  surface.  I  also  noticed  many  round- 
ish masses  of  quartz  in  a  granular  and  decomposed  state,  easily  falling  to 
pieces  on  being  handled. 

The  tents  were  struck  at  daylight  on  the  9th";  and  after  leaving  a  note  Sun.  9 
under  a  pile  of  stones  at  the  appointed  place,  to  apprize  Mr.  Sherer  in  what 
direction  we  should  be  found,  we  rowed  to  the  northward.  The  wind  having 
however  got  round  to  that  quarter  in  the  course  of  the  night,  and  continuing 
to  blow  fresh,  we  did  not  reach  the  first  point  of  land  till  nine  A.M.,  by  which 
time  the  people's  clothes  were  so  thoroughly  drenched  by  the  sea  that  I  de- 
termined to  remain  here  till  noon  to  dry  them,  and  to  obtain  the  requisite 
observations.  The  comfort  of  a  dry  atmosphere,  bright  sunshine,  and  a  warm 
breakfast,  under  these  circumstances  and  in  this  climate,  can  perhaps  scarcely 
be  imagined  by  those  who  have  not  experienced  it. 

The  latitude  of  this  point,  which  stands  on  a  small  island,  is  66°  57'  04",  and 
its  longitude,  by  chronometers,  84°  52'  17".  The  tide  was  ebbing  by  the  shore 
from  nine  A.M.  till  noon,  when  we  left  the  point,  and  on  trying  the  current 
soon  after  it  was  found  to  be  setting  E.S.E.  half  a  mile  an  hour.  Our  progress 
now  became  more  and  more  interesting  as  we  advanced  to  the  north-westward, 
there  being  every  appearance  of  broken  land  in  that  direction.  The  inlet  was 
here  from  two  to  four  miles  in  breadth,  and  in  most  parts  sufficiently  deep  for 
the  passage  of  ships  ;  so  that  notwithstanding  the  direction  of  the  flood-tide 
which  evidently  came  from  the  southward,  we  could  not  but  entertain  very 
sanguine  hopes  of  here  finding  a  continued  passage  to  the  westward.  This 
hope  received  additional  encouragement  by  our  perceiving  something  white 
upon  the  water  ahead,  which  we  at  first  took  to  be  a  piece  of  ice.  It  is  not 
easy  to  imagine  the  eager  impatience  with  which  we  rowed  towards  this  sup- 
posed indication  of  our  approach  to  the  sea  on  this  side,  nor  our  disappointr 
ment  on  coming  up  to  it  in  finding  it  only  a  rock  of  a  yelloAvish-white  colour, 
just  peeping  above  the  water's  edge. 

Proceeding  along  the  south-western  shore,  we  left  in  several  places  fresh 


E 


«tH 


^*F 


iP-l|| 


■s  :\   •- 


-^^i 


I 


88 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


■m.\ 


1821.    directions  for  Mr.  Sherer,  and  at  three  P.M.  being  doubtful  of  the  best  route 

Sept.  ..'''.  . 

•«*-y-v/  to  pursue,  landed  to  obtain  a  better  view.  There  was  here  an  inlet  near  a 
mile  wide  within,  but  having  an  entrance  not  more  than  forty  yards  across 
and  very  shoal,  out  of  which  the  water  was  rushing  with  great  rapidity.  Ima- 
gining this  to  be  a  river,  Mr.  Ross  and  myself  hastened  to  the  bank  to  taste 
the  water,  which  proved  so  intolerably  salt  as  to  set  aside  any  further  conjec- 
tures of  this  nature.  We  found  here  as  usual  many  deserted  habitations  of 
Esquimaux,  and  numberless  upright  stones,  especially  on  the  banks  of  the 
stream  just  mentioned. 

On  the  northern  shore,  directly  opposite  to  us,  was  some  of  the  highest 
land  we  had  yet  seen  next  the  sea  hereabouts ;  and  as  our  present  sta- 
tion did  not  afford  a  satisfactory  view  we  rowed  over  to  the  other  side, 
for  the  purpose  of  ascending  the  hills,  by  which  means  much  time  and 
labour  may  often  be  saved  in  exploring  places  of  this  nature.  This  plan  now 
also  seemed  the  more  eligible  as,  in  case  of  the  inlet  still  extending  to  the 
westward,  it  would  be  necessary  to  wait  somewhere  for  Mr.  Sherer  to  over- 
take us,  so  that  both  these  objects  might  thus  be  advantageously  combined. 
The  night  was  cold,  but  beautifully  clear  and  serene,  and  while  the  last 
rays  of  the  sun  still  tinged  the  western  horizon,  the  moon  appearing  upon 
the  cloudless  sky  exactly  opposite  the  door  of  our  tent,  with  her  beams 
reflected  from  the  unruffled  surface  of  the  water,  created  one  of  those  tranquil 
scenes  where  all  nature  seems  hushed  into  repose,  and  of  which,  without 
knowing  precisely  why,  the  mind  very  long  retains  the  remembrance. 
Mon.  10.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  10th  I  ascended  the  hill,  accompanied  by  two 
of  the  men,  leaving  Mr.  Ross  at  the  tents  to  obtain  the  usual  observations. 
From  the  top  of  this  hill,  which  is  not  less  than  seven  hundred  feet  above  the 
level  of  the  sea,  I  had  an  extensive  and  commanding  view  of  the  lands  around 
us,  and  found  that  we  might  still  proceed  to  the  westward,  in  which  direction 
there  seemed  more  than  one  opening  between  islands.  The  water  that  ap- 
peared at  the  back  of  the  isthmus  on  which  the  tents  stood  proved  to  be  a 
shoal  and  narrow  branch  of  the  sea,  of  which  we  could  now  trace  the  extent. 
Having  obtained  angles  for  every  object  in  sight  1  returned  to  the  tents  about 
noon,  and  was  soon  gratified  by  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Sherer,  accompanied 
by  Mr.  Bushnan,  whose  knowledge  of  Gore  Bay  was  likely  to  prove  of 
service,  should  this  inlet,  as  now  seemed  not  unlikely,  be  found  to  communi- 
cate with  the  land  in  that  neighbourhood.  The  latitude  of  the  tents  was 
66°  59'  06",  and  the  longitude,  by  chronometers,  84°  59'  35".    It  was  low  water 


P  Mil  If! 


.>«.  ' 


^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


89 


by  the  shore  at  eight  P.M.  on  the  9th,  and  at  twenty  minutes  past  eight  A.M. 
on  the  10th,  the  rise  and  fall  being  only  six  or  seven  feet.  We  saw  a  number 
of  deer,  and  killed  a  few  ptarmigan  during  our  stay  at  this  place  ;  the  former 
were  in  general  very  wild,  being  probably  at  this  season  a  good  deal  hunted 
by  the  Esquimaux.  The  surface  of  the  land  presented  one  uniform  mass  of 
grey  gneiss,  except  in  the  valleys  and  smaller  hollows,  where  the  vegetation, 
as  well  as  moisture,  was  abundant. 

The  boats  being  re-loaded  immediately  after  Mr.  Sherer's  arrival  we  pro- 
ceeded to  the  westward.  Having  passed  several  islands  on  our  left  we  kept 
close  along  the  northern  shore,  which  here  began  to  trend  considerably  to  the 
southward  of  west.  In  running  along  the  coast  with  a  fresh  and  favourable 
breeze,  we  observed  three  persons  standing  on  a  hill  and,  as  we  continued 
our  course,  they  followed  us  at  full  speed  along  the  rocks.  Having  sailed 
into  a  small  sheltered  bay  1  went  up,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Bushnan,  to  meet 
them  on  the  hills  above  us.  In  sailing  along  the  shore  Ave  had  heard  them 
call  out  loudly  to  us,  and  observed  them  frequently  lift  something  which  they 
held  in  their  hands  ;  but  on  coming  up  to  them  they  remained  so  perfectly 
mute  and  motionless  that,  accustomed  as  we  had  been  to  the  noisy  importuni- 
ties of  their  more  sophisticated  brethren,  we  could  scarcely  believe  them  to 
be  Esquimaux.  There  was  besides  a  degree  of  lankness  in  the  faces  of  the 
two  men,  the  very  reverse  of  the  plump  round  oily  cheeks  of  those  we  had 
before  seen.  Their  countenances  at  the  time  impressed  me  with  the  idea  of 
Indian  rather  than  of  Esquimaux  features ;  but  this  variety  of  physiognomy  we 
afterwards  found  not  to  be  uncommon  among  these  people.  The  men 
appeared  about  forty  and  twenty-two  years  of  age,  and  were  accompanied  by 
a  good-looking  and  good-humoured  boy  of  nine  or  ten.  They  each  held  in 
their  hand  a  seal-skin  case  or  quiver,  containing  a  bow  and  three  or  four  arrows, 
with  a  set  of  which  they  willingly  parted,  on  being  presented  with  a  knife  in 
exchange.  The  first  looks  with  which  they  received  us  betrayed  a  mixture  of 
stupidity  and  apprehension,  but  both  wore  off  in  a  few  minutes,  on  our  making 
them  understand  that  we  wished  to  go  to  their  habitations.  With  this  request 
they  complied  without  hesitation,  tripping  along  before  us  for  above  two  miles 
over  very  rough  ground,  and  crossing  one  or  two  considerable  streams  running 
from  a  lake  into  the  sea.  This  they  performed  with  so  much  quickness  that 
we  could  with  difficulty  keep  up  with  them,  though  they  good-naturedly- 
stopped  now  and  then  till  we  overtook  them.  We  were  met  on  our  way  by 
two  women,  from  twenty  to  twenty-five  years  of  age,  having  each  a  child  at 

N 


1821. 
Sept. 


IfeJ 


'N  S 


'T  * 


90 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
Sept. 


i  mil  hi 


her  back ;  they  too  accompanied  us  to  their  tent,  which  was  situated  on  a 
high  part  of  the  coast  overlooking  the  sea.  It  consisted  of  a  rude  circular 
wall  of  loose  stones,  from  six  to  eight  feet  in  diameter  and  three  in  height,  in 
the  centre  of  which  stood  an  upright  pole  made  of  several  pieces  of  fir-wood 
lashed  together  by  thongs,  and  serving  as  a  support  to  the  deer-skins  that 
formed  the  top  covering.  Soon  after  our  arrival  we  were  joined  by  a  good- 
looking  modest  girl  of  about  eight,  and  a  boy  five  years  old.  Of  these  nine 
persons,  which  were  all  we  now  saw,  only  the  elder  man  and  two  of  the 
children  belonged  to  this  tent,  the  habitations  of  the  others  being  a  little 
more  inland.  The  faces  of  the  women  were  round,  plump,  tattoed,  and  in 
short  completely  Esquimaux.  During  the  cursory  examination  of  these  people's 
dresses  which  we  had  now  an  opportunity  of  making,  I  observed  nothing 
beyond  the  peculiarities  which  have  been  repeatedly  described,  except  that 
the  tails  of  the  women's  jackets  were  of  unusual  length  as  well  as  breadth. 
The  kayak  or  canoe  belonging  to  this  establishment  was  carefully  laid  on 
the  rocks  close  to  the  sea-side,  with  the  paddle  and  the  man's  mittens  in 
readiness  beside  it.  The  timbers  were  entirely  of  wood,  and  covered  as 
usual  with  seal-skin.  Its  length  was  nineteen  feet  seven  inches,  and  its 
extreme  breadth  two  feet ;  it  was  raised  a  little  at  each  end,  and  the  rim  or 
gunwale  of  the  circular  hole  in  the  middle  was  high,  and  made  of  whale- 
bone. A  handsome  seal-skin  was  smoothly  laid  within  as  a  seat,  and  the 
whole  was  sewn  and  put  together  with  great  neatness.  The  paddle  was 
double,  made  of  fir,  and  the  ends  of  the  blades  tipped  with  bone,  to  pre- 
vent splitting. 

The  fire-place  in  the  tent  consisted  of  three  rough  stones  carelessly  placed 
on  end  against  one  side,  and  they  had  several  pots  of  lapis  ollaris,  for  culi- 
nary purposes.  These  people  seemed  to  us  altogether  more  cleanly  than 
any  Esquimaux  we  had  before  seen,  both  in  their  persons  and  in  the  interior 
of  their  tent,  in  neither  of  which  could  we  discover  much  of  that  rancid  and 
pungent  smell,  which  is  in  general  so  offensive  to  Europeans.  One  instance 
of  their  cleanliness  which  now  occurred,  deserves  perhaps  to  be  noticed, 
both  because  this  is  justly  considered  rather  a  rare  quality  among  Esquimaux, 
as  well  as  to  shew  in  what  way  they  do  sometimes  exercise  it.  When  leaving 
the  tent,  to  return  to  our  boats,  I  desired  one  of  the  seamen  to  tie  the  articles 
we  had  purchased  into  a  single  bundle,  for  the  convenience  of  carrying 
them  ;  but  the  elder  of  the  two  male  Esquimaux,  who  watched  the  man  thus 
employed,  would  not  permit  it  to  be  done  without  excluding  a  pot,  which,  as 


" 


\>* 


■v 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


91 


he  explained  by  wiping  the  lamp-black  off  with  one  of  his  fingers,  would  soil 
a  clean  seal-skin  jacket  that  formed  part  of  the  bundle. 

Among  the  few  domestic  utensils  we  saw  in  the  tent  was  the  woman's 
knife  of  the  Greenlanders  described  by  Crantz,  and  resembling,  in  its  semi- 
circular shape,  that  used  by  shoe-makers  in  England.  The  most  interesting 
article,  however,  was  a  kind  of  bowl  exactly  similar  to  that  obtained  by 
Captain  Lyon  from  the  natives  of  Hudson's  Strait,  being  hollowed  out  of  the 
root  of  the  musk-ox's  horn.  As  soon  as  I  took  the  cup  in  my  hand,  the 
boy  who  was  our  first  companion,  and  had  since  been  our  constant  attendant, 
pronounced  the  word  oomingmuk,  thus  affording  an  additional  confirmation  to 
that  obtained  on  the  former  voyage,  of  the  musk-ox  being  the  animal  de- 
scribed by  the  natives  of  the  west  coast  of  Greenland,  as  having  occasionally, 
though  rarely,  been  seen  in  that  country. 

As  soon  as  the  Esquimaux  became  a  little  more  familiar  with  us,  they  re- 
peatedly asked  for  soivi/c  (iron),  in  answer  to  which  we  gave  them  to  under- 
stand that  they  must  accompany  us  to  our  boats,  if  they  wished  to  obtain  any 
of  this  precious  article.  Accordingly,  the  whole  group  set  off  with  us  on  our 
return,  the  males  keeping  up  with  us,  and  the  women  a  short  distance  behind. 
The  whole  of  the  children  carried  bundles  of  the  branches  of  ground  willow,, 
which  we  had  just  before  seen  them  bring  in  for  their  own  use,  and  which 
they  seemed  to  consider  an  article  of  barter  that  might  be  acceptable  to  us. 
As  we  returned,  I  noticed  a  quantity  of  the  ledum  palustre,  and  having 
plucked  some  of  it,  gave  it  to  the  boy  to  carry ;  after  which,  though  he  very 
much  disliked  its  smell,  he  gathered  eveTy  root  of  it  that  we  came  to,  and 
deposited  it  at  our  tents.  This  lad  was  uncommonly  quick  and  clever  in 
comprehending  our  meaning,  and  seemed  to  possess  a  degree  of  good- 
humour  and  docility,  which,  on  our  short  acquaintance,  made  him  a  great 
favourite  among  us. 

We  had  hitherto  been  much  pleased  with  our  new  acquaintance,  who  were 
certainly  a  good-humoured  decent  sort  of  people.  We  therefore  loaded  them 
with  presents,  and  endeavoured  to  amuse  them  by  shewing  them  the  manner 
of  rowing  our  boats,  which  were  hauled  up  on  the  beach.  While  the  men 
and  children  were  occupied  in  observing  this,  the  women  were  no  less  busily 
employed,  near  the  tents,  in  pilfering  and  conveying  into  their  boots,  some 
of  our  cups,  spoons,  and  other  small  articles,  such  as  they  could  conveniently 
secrete.  This  they  accomplished  with  so  much  dexterity,  that  no  suspicion 
would  have  been  excited  of  their  dishonesty,  had  not  Mr.  Sherer  fortunately 

N  2 


1821. 
Sept. 


ir 


92 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


,|     J,,|N 


■   !i 


182L  missed  a  cup  which  was  required  for  supper.  A  general  search  being  insti- 
kJy^J  tuted  in  consequence,  and  the  cargo  of  the  women's  boots  brought  back  to 
our  tents,  I  directed  all  our  presents  to  be  likewise  taken  from  the  two 
offenders ;  and,  dismissing  the  whole  party  with  great  appearance  of  indig- 
nation, thus  put  an  end  for  the  present  to  our  communication  with  these 
people. 
Tues  11.  We  moved  before  broad  daylight  on  the  11th,  and,  after  two  hours'  pro- 
gress, began  to  perceive  every  appearance  of  our  having  once  more  got  into 
a  close  bay,  round  the  shores  of  which  we  now  proceeded  to  row.  A  deer  was 
here  chased  into  the  water,  but  being  on  the  side  of  the  island  opposite  to 
our  boats,  escaped  our  pursuit.  These  animals  seem  to  consider  the  sea  as 
a  great  security  to  them,  and  they  swim  fast  and  to  a  considerable  distance. 
The  nearest  island,  for  which  the  deer  struck  out  this  morning,  with  a  strong 
breeze  and  a  breaking  sea  not  altogether  in  his  favour,  was  above  two  miles 
distant.  ' 

We  landed  just  before  noon,  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  the  meridian  altitude, 
but  the  sun  being  obscured  we  continued  our  circuit  of  the  bay,  and  at  two 
P.M.  put  on  shore  near  the  mouth  of  a  small  creek.  The  wind  had  now 
increased  to  a  stiff  gale  from  the  eastward,  which  being  right  down  the  creek, 
we  were  above  two  hours  in  reaching  the  head  of  it,  though  it  is  not  more  than 
three  miles  in  length.  Its  breadth  varies  from  one  and  a  half  to  half  a  mile, 
and  the  shores  on  both  sides  arc  high.  One  mile  from  the  entrance  is  an 
island  nearest  to  the  south  shore,  from  which  a  herd  of  seven  fine  deer  swam 
to  the  main  land  on  our  approach,  and  in  consequence  of  the  wind  and  sea 
obstructing  us  landed,  before  we  could  get  up  with  them.  We  now  com- 
menced our  return  along  the  starboard  shore,  having  no  longer  any  hope  of 
finding  an  outlet  to  the  westward  in  this  direction.  To  the  bay  that  thus 
terminated  the  inlet,  which  had  till  now  excited  such  encouraging  hopes, 
I  gave  the  name  of  Ross  Bay,  in  compliment  to  the  gentleman  who  had 
accompanied  me  during  the  whole  of  this  examination.  We  landed  at 
sunset  at  the  mouth  of  another  creek,  which  was  reserved  for  examination 
on  the  following  morning ;  and  were  not  sorry  to  pitch  our  tents  on  a  fine 
shingly  beach,  after  a  cold  and  wet  day's  work.  We  here  saw  as  usual 
several  deer,  but  nothing  except  a  marmot  and  a  covy  of  nine  ptarmigan  were 
killed  in  the  course  of  the  day. 
Wed.  12.  After  an  hour's  rowing  on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  we  found  the  creek 
terminate  at  the  distance  of  two  mileis  and  a  half  in  a  south-east  direction 


'i« 


!  Mi  IT 


" 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


93 


>*r* 


\ 


from  its  entrance,  being  from  a  mile  to  a  mile  and  a  quarter  in  breadth,  with  1821. 
good  depth  of  water,  and  having  several  small  islands  near  its  mouth.  Pro-  ^^ 
ceeding  without  delay  on  our  return,  we  landed  at  nine  o'clock  at  the  sup- 
posed river  discovered  on  the  9th,  where  it  was  low  water  by  the  shore  at  thirty 
minutes  past  nine  A.M.  The  wind  was  moderate  from  the  eastward,  with 
small  drizzling  rain.  At  two  P.M.  we  once  more  landed  on  Rendezvous  Island, 
as  well  for  the  purpose  of  picking  up  some  provisions  which  I  had  directed 
Mr.  Sherer  to  leave  here  in  case  of  accidents,  as  to  ascertain  from  the  hill  what 
parts  of  the  inlet  in  this  neighbourhood  yet  remained  to  be  examined.  The 
weather  being  now  more  clear  than  when  we  had  last  reached  this  central  point 
of  the  inlet,  we  found  that  an  opening  to  the  eastward  and  two  to  the  westward 
still  presented  themselves.  I,  therefore,  chose  the  most  northerly  of  the  latter 
for  our  next  examination,  and  that  this  might  be  pursued  with  confidence  to 
the  requisite  extent,  I  once  more  despatched  Mr.  Sherer  back  for  a  fresh 
supply  of  provisions,  and  having,  from  the  hill,  fixed  on  a  remarkable  islet 
for  his  first  rendezvous,  directed  him  to  follow  us  as  before. 

These  arrangements  being  completed  and  Mr.  Sherer  despatched,  we  left 
the  island  and  rowed  over  to  the  creek  which  I  named,  after  that  gentleman, 
Sherer's  Creek.  We  found  this  arm  of  the  sea  to  have  more  than  one  en- 
trance, there  being  some  islands  on  the  northern  side ;  but  the  passage  to  the 
southward  of  them  is  much  the  broadest.  Having  reached  the  first  appointed 
rendezvous,  we  found  it  to  be  a  small  insulated  rock  of  gneiss  thickly  stud- 
ded with  garnets.  We  here  fixed  a  pike  with  the  necessary  directions  to 
Mr.  Sherer,  and  then  put  on  shore  for  the  night  in  a  small  snug  cove,  where 
we  found  the  usual  traces  of  Esquimaux  visitors. 

The  weather  was  calm  with  rain  during  the  night;  and  a  thick  fog  on  the 
morning  of  the  13th,  prevented  our  moving  till  thirty  minutes  past  six,  when  Thur.  13. 
we  proceeded  up  the  creek,  and  in  less  than  two  hours  had  reached  the  head 
of  it.  Near  this  spot  we  raised  a  conspicuous  pile  of  stones,  with  a  memoran- 
dum deposited  under  it  for  Mr.  Sherer ;  and  then  crossed  over  to  the  south 
shore,  which  it  was  now  our  object  to  trace  closely  along  till  we  came  to  the 
second  of  the  westerly  openings  before  noticed.  Soon  after  noon  we  arrived 
at  a  low  point,  off  which  we  perceived  a  very  strong  rippling  of  tide  setting 
from  the  southward  between  the  main  land  and  an  island  lying  off  it.  As 
we  approached  this  point,  where  the  passage  is  not  more  than  one-third  of  a 
mile  across,  another  appeared  a  little  beyond  it,  round  which  the  tide  was 
running  with  still  greater  rapidity  ;  it  now  became  doubtful  whether  we  could 


tiii 


•*'!»-. 


** 


*     ■ 


in 


^^ffc 


94 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
Sept. 


proceed  much  further.  After  hanging  on  for  ten  minutes,  the  utmost  exertion 
of  the  men  at  the  oars  enabled  us  to  pass  the  first  point ;  but  the  attempt 
to  pass  the  second  must  not  only  have  been  useless  but  dangerous,  the  tide 
running  full  six  knots  over  some  shoal  ground,  with  an  overfall  like  that 
under  bridges,  making  the  level  of  the  water  about  eighteen  inches  higher  on 
one  side  of  the  point  than  on  the  other.  We  landed  therefore  at  a  smooth 
place  under  a  sheltered  part  of  the  rocks,  till  the  tide  should  enable  us  to 
proceed  ;  and  we  were  not  a  little  pleased  to  find,  by  walking  across  the  point, 
that  the  direction  of  this  rapid  flood-tide  was  from  the  south-west,  and  to  all 
appearance  proceeded  out  of  the  opening  we  were  next  about  to  explore. 
While  employed  here  in  drying  our  clothes  and  tents,  we  fortunately  observed 
two  boats  rowing  up  the  inlet,  and  were  soon  joined  by  Messrs.  Henderson 
and  Sherer  in  a  boat  from  each  ship,  bringing  a  fresh  supply  of  provisions  and 
fuel.  I  now  learned  from  Captain  Lyon  that,  as  the  ice  had  come  in  near 
the  ships,  he  proposed  as  soon  as  practicable  to  move  them  higher  up,  and,  if 
possible,  nearer  the  entrance  of  the  inlet  in  the  examination  of  which  we  were 
at  present  engaged. 

As  I  now  entertained  the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  at  length  finding  a  pas- 
sage to  the  westward,  without  the  necessity  of  going  round  all  the  land  we 
had  seen  in  an  opposite  direction,  I  could  not  but  consider  the  present 
supply  a  most  opportune  one.  We  therefore  loaded  the  boats  as  deeply  as 
was  consistent  with  safety,  concealing  the  remainder  under  a  heap  of  stones, 
as  a  resource  on  our  return ;  and  despatched  Mr.  Henderson  back  with  one 
of  the  boats,  together  with  such  articles  as  were  no  longer  likely  to  prove 
useful  to  us, 

The  latitude  of  this  point  is  66°  51'  06",  and  its  longitude,  by  chronometers, 
84°  43'  19".  The  rocks  near  the  sea  presented  one  continued  and  bare  surface 
of  granite  and  gneiss  ;  but  a  little  way  inland  there  was  no  want  of  vegetation, 
and  several  hares  were  killed.  The  tide,  for  which  we  impatiently  waited,  gra- 
dually slackened  between  three  and  four  P.M.,  at  which  time  it  was  high  water 
by  the  shore,  and  the  stream  of  ebb  immediately  began  running  to  the  south- 
ward. In  addition  to  the  sanguine  hopes  we  entertained  of  now  making 
some  useful  discovery,  we  Avere  also  congratulating  ourselves  on  the  advan- 
tage we  should  derive  from  the  strong  and  favourable  ebb-tide  just  about  to 
make,  and  which  we  trusted  would  enable  us  to  end  all  our  doubts  and  ap- 
prehensions before  the  close  of  this  day.  Our  disappointment  may  therefore 
in  some  measure  be  conceived  on  finding  that  the  rapid  flood-tide,  on  which 


" 


r  7V*r'  >  v 


>*r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


95 


1821. 
Sept. 


\*>r*j 


our  expectations  had  been  built,  did  not  come  from  this  opening  as  appear- 
ances had  led  us  to  suppose,  but  from  the  eastward,  passing  to  the  southward 
of  the  island,  and  then  receiving  a  check  from  some  shoals  and  islets,  which 
caused  it  to  sweep  round  almost  at  a  right  angle,  assuming  the  appearance  of 
a  south-western  tide  by  which  we  had  lately  been  deceived.  This  was  made 
apparent  by  our  now  meeting  the  ebb  setting  against  us  at  the  rate  of  a  mile 
an  hour,  which  unfavourable  indication  was  shortly  after  confirmed  by  our 
reaching  the  head  of  this  little  branch  of  the  sea,  which  is  six  miles  in  length 
and  three-quarters  of  a  mile  in  its  general  breadth,  and  was  named  by  Mr. 
Ross's  desire  Culgrupp  Creek.  We  landed  just  before  sunset,  and  knowing 
that  we  could  not  repass  the  point  below  as  long  as  the  ebb  was  running,  I 
sent  Messrs.  Ross  and  Bushnan  to  a  high  hill  in  the  neighbourhood,  with  the 
hope  of  their  obtaining  a  good  view  to  the  south-westward  before  dark  ;  but 
it  being  already  dusk  before  they  reached  the  summit,  and  the  prospect 
being  somewhat  obstructed  by  intervening  land,  no  information  that  then 
seemed  of  much  importance  was  thus  gained.  Near  the  entrance  to  this 
creek,  on  the  north  shore,  is  a  hill  of  a  remarkable  shape,  seen  at  a  consider- 
able distance  to  the  eastward. 

We  left  the  beach  at  five  A.M.  on  the  14th,  and  arrived  at  the  point  at  half-  Frid.  14. 
past  six,  when  we  found  the  stream  of  ebb  setting  so  strongly  against  us  as  to 
render  it  impracticable  to  stem  it  with  the  oars  and  sails.  Finding  therefore 
after  breakfast  that  much  time  must  be  lost  if  we  waited  for  low  water,  we 
attempted  the  expedient  of  "  tracking"  the  boats  round  the  point  which,  after 
one  or  two  narrow  escapes  on  account  of  the  breaking  sea  occasioned  by  the 
tide,  was  safely  effected  in  half  an  hour;  and  at  nine  o'clock,  having  re-loaded 
the  boats,  we  once  more  embarked  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  point. 

There  now  remained  to  be  examined  only  a  small  portion  of  the  opposite 
or  eastern  shore,  which  from  Rendezvous  Island  had  appeared  to  present  an 
opening.  The  direction  of  this  coast  was  indeed  diametrically  opposite  to 
that  in  which  it  was  our  object  to  find  a  passage  for  the  ships;  but  as  it  was 
impossible  to  judge  what  turnings  the  land  might  there  take,  I  determined 
to  persevere  in  the  plan  I  had  from  the  first  pursued,  of  leaving  no  part  of  the 
coast  without  actual  and  close  examination.  Rowing  therefore  across  the 
tide,  and  passing  the  point  which  seemed  to  form  one  side  of  the  mouth  of 
the  opening  we  were  now  to  examine,  the  direction  of  the  land  led  us  to 
the  E.S.E.  A  little  before  noon,  after  passing  some  low  sandy  islands  which 
occupy  the  greater  part  of  the  entrance,  we  landed  to  obtain  the  meridian 


lhto.1 


*%^ 


"Ni 


H 


L 


VPS?: 


I  !!l  IVil  111 


96 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


«ii| ''H 


1821. 
Sept. 


altitude,  which  gave  the  latitude  66°  50'  40".  While  thus  employed  a  line 
doe  and  her  fawn  took  the  water  near  us,  and  would  have  been  easily  over- 
taken had  not  our  people  been  straggling  about  with  their  guns,  so  that  only 
half  a  boat's  crew  could  be  made  up  to  go  in  pursuit  of  them.  Judging  by 
the  velocity  of  the  boat  through  the  water.  I  should  think  these  animals  swam 
across  the  creek  at  the  rate  of  between  two  and  three  miles  an  hour,  the  dis- 
tance being  one-third  of  a  mile.  The  doe  could  evidently  have  gone  faster 
if  alone,  but  she  kept  so  close  to  her  young  one,  that  our  people  positively 
declared  the  latter  sometimes  rested  on  her  back,  or,  as  they  expressed  it,  was 
"  taken  in  tow  by  her."  The  doe,  having  landed  first,  turned  round  to  face 
us,  trembling  violently,  but  remaining  on  the  spot  till  the  fawn  joined  her, 
when  they  trotted  off  together  and  thus  escaped. 

The  tide  was  running  to  the  westward  during  the  time  that  the  water  was 
falling  by  the  shore  this  day  ;  at  noon  it  was  flowing  and  the  stream  setting- 
up  in  our  favour  at  the  rate  of  half  a  knot.  In  less  than  half  an  hour  after 
leaving  the  shore,  we  saw  clearly  to  the  head  of  this  creek,  of  which  the 
breadth  had  now  become  narrowed  to  three  or  four  hundred  yards.  We  found, 
however,  a  good  depth  of  water  after  passing  the  islands  at  the  entrance, 
on  neither  side  of  which  did  we  carry  above  fifteen  feet  through  the  channel. 
I  named  this  place,  which  was  the  last  we  had  now  to  explore,  after  my  friend 
Mr.  George  Norman,  jun.  of  Bath. 

To  save  time  on  our  return  Ave  rowed  towards  an  isthmus  on  the  west  shore, 
which  we  had  observed  in  the  morning,  and  over  which  we  now  proposed 
hauling  the  boats.  On  reaching  the  spot,  however,  we  found  that  even  this 
labour  might  be  spared,  as  the  water,  being  at  this  time  higher,  afforded  a 
shoal  and  narrow  passage,  which  must  be  quite  dry  at  low  tide.  The  stream 
of  flood  was  here  setting  north-east  at  the  rate  of  two  miles  per  hour.  We 
next  rowed  into  a  small  bay  about  a  mile  deep,  and  after  remaining  on  shore 
there  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  till  it  was  high  water,  set  out  at  twenty 
minutes  past  four  P.M.  on  our  return  to  the  ships.  The  stream  began  to  set 
down  in  an  hour  after  ;  and  being  thus  assisted  by  a  rapid  and  favourable  tide, 
we  fortunately  just  before  dark  discovered  the  Heclaat  anchor  near  the  mouth 
of  the  inlet,  and  arrived  on  board  at  thirty  minutes  past  six  P.M. 

I  learned  from  Captain  Lyon  that  the  Hecla  had  just  anchored  at  her  pre- 
sent station,  the  Fury  still  remaining  at  the  former  place,  into  which  the  ice 
had  lately  come  so  thick  as  to  require  the  assistance  of  all  hands  from  both 
ships  to  warp  and  tow  the  Hecla  out.     Proceeding  with  a  fresh  boat's  crew 


i<  I'- 


;• 


VlW*/^*  v 


m.*.\     I,      <    . 


>*r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


97 


towards  the  Fury,  which  we  found  close  beset  by  thick  and  heavy  ice,  we  1821. 
succeeded  after  much  difficulty  in  hauling  the  boat  through  it,  and  arrived  J^t 
on  board  at  10  P.M. 

The  next  object  to  which  my  attention  was  directed  was  the  connecting 
of  the  coast  last  examined,  with  that  of  Gore  Bay — an  object  that  might 
perhaps  have  been  effected  during  my  absence  ;  but  I  did  not  consider 
it  prudent,  in  the  insecure  situation  in  which  I  had  been  obliged  to  leave  the 
ships,  to  take  more  than  one  boat's  crew  from  each,  which  number  out  of 
our  small  complements  of  working  men  bore  a  large  proportion  to  the  Avhole 
strength  that  might  be  required  on  any  emergency.  The  absence  of  two 
boats  from  either  ship,  indeed,  scarcely  left  hands  enough  to  purchase  the 
anchor,  much  less  to  handle  them  with  the  alacrity  necessary  among  ice,  and 
in  a  confined  and  rocky  navigation.  It  remained  therefore  to  complete  this 
examination  in  the  boats,  as  soon  as  the  Fury  could  be  extricated  from  the 
ice  by  which  she  was  at  present  beset. 

This  ice  consisted  of  heavy  and  large  floe-pieces,  which  pressed  with 
considerable  force  upon  the  cable  ;  but  the  strain  being  steady,  the  ground 
good,  and  little  or  no  stream  of  tide  running,  the  anchor  did  not  come 
home.  It  may  here  be  of  service  to  remark  that,  in  smooth  water  and  in 
situations  where  there,  is  no  perceptible  stream  of  tide,  a  ship's  safety  is  not  so 
much  endangered  by  the  approach  of  a  large  body  of  loose  ice  as  might  be 
supposed.  The  smaller  pieces  are  pushed  astern  by  poles,  the  larger  masses, 
not  coming  with  any  violence,  rest  across  the  cable  or  bows  without  doing- 
any  damage,  and  the  space  between  the  ship  and  the  land  is  generally  soon 
filled  up  with  ice,  so  as  to  preclude  the  possibility  of  her  being  driven  on 
shore,  even  should  the  anchor  afterwards  come  home. 

As  soon  as  the  tide  would  serve  in  the  offing,  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  Sat  15 
we  weighed,  and  by  means  of  warping  and  towing,  in  which  we  were  as- 
sisted by  Captain  Lyon's  boats,  succeeded  in  joining  the  Hecla  at  her  an- 
chorage at  three  P.M.  About  the  same  time  Lieutenant  Hoppner  arrived, 
having  re-examined  that  arm  of  the  sea  which  I  had  at  first  explored;  being 
the  only  one  near,  Captain  Lyon  had  in  pursuance  of  my  directions  instructed 
him  to  trace  it,  not  knowing  that  I  had  already  done  so.  From  Lieutenant 
Hoppner's  report  and  observations  however  much  useful  information  was  de- 
rived in  laying  down  the  coast.  Among  other  things  the  extent  and  commu- 
nication of  the  opening  I  had  entered  but  could  not  pass  on  the  7th,  had  now 

o 


II . 


*ii 


!!i,7'i| 


V 


.,'.i  J 


i 


98 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


'!«    i 


!«    illlk 


I 


1821. 
Sept. 


been  determined  by  rowing  through  at  high  water,  and  returning  to  the 
ships  by  that  route.  To  this  arm  of  the  sea  I  gave  the  name  of  Hoppner's 
Inlet  ;  and  the  more  extensive  one  which  I  had  lately  returned  from  ex- 
ploring, was  distinguished  by  the  name  of  my  brother-officer,  Captain 
George  Francis  Lyon.    ' 

While  a  boat  from  each  ship  was  preparing  for  our  next  excursion,  I  com- 
municated to  Captain  Lyon  my  wishes  respecting  the  movement  of  the  ships, 
directing  him  to  follow  me  down  the  south-western  land  as  soon  as  it  might 
be  practicable,  that  no  time  might  be  lost  in  prosecuting  the  voyage  either  in 
the  direction  I  was  now  about  to  pursue,  should  I  there  discover  an  outlet  to 
the  westward,  or  failing  to  do  so,  to  the  eastward  of  the  land  now  in  sight, 
which  in  that  case  would  prove  to  be  a  part  of  the  continent.  With  a  view 
also  to  save  time  on  my  return,  I  requested  Captain  Lyon  to  endeavour  to 
ascertain  whether  a  portion  of  land  to  the  south-eastward  of  the  inlet,  on 
which  it  was  our  lot  afterwards  to  winter,  was  insular  or  connected  with  the 
main  land.  These  and  other  necessary  arrangements  being  shortly  made,  I 
left  the  ships  at  thirty  minutes  after  four,  P.M.,  accompanied  by  Messrs. 
Ross,  Sherer,  and  Mac  Laren,  the  two  latter  gentlemen  in  the  Hecla's  boat, 
the  whole  party  being  victualled  for  nine  days. 

Previously  however  to  my  commencing  the  account  of  our  next  boat-ex- 
cursion, I  gladly  avail  myself  of  some  extracts  from  Captain  Lyon's  Journal 
during  the  time  of  my  late  absence,  to  complete  the  narrative  of  proceed- 
ings up  to  this  period. 


"  The  ships  having  been  principally  stationary  during  the  time  of  Captain 
Parry's  absence,  the  remarks  which  I  am  enabled  to  offer  must  be  chiefly 
confined  to  such  observations  on  this  part  of  the  coast  as  I  had  then  an 
opportunity  of  making.  I  must  first,  however,  briefly  notice  the  proceedings 
of  the  ships  during  that  interval. 

"  Previous  to  Captain  Parry's  leaving  us,  he  had  expressed  to  me  his 
wish  that  the  ships  should,  as  soon  as  convenient,  be  removed  to  some 
more  commodious  anchorage  than  that  in  which  we  lay,  provided  I  suc- 
ceeded in  finding  one  on  the  eastern  shores  of  the  inlet.  I  therefore 
occupied  two  days  in  examining  the  coast  to  the  north-eastward,  but  did 
not  succeed  in  finding  any  spot  so  well  sheltered  as  the  one  in  which  we 


" 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

were.    I  therefore  decided  on  not  moving  the  ships  unless  circumstances    1821- 
should  render  it  necessary. 

'  On  the  11th  I  was  convinced  that  our  present  situation  was  by  no 
means  secure,  by  observing  that  the  opening  between  the  Fury's  anchorage 
and  the  high  islands  off  it  was  quite  filled  up  with  a  large  and  heavy  floe, 
which  had  been  brought  into  the  inlet  by  the  recent  southerly  winds.    Dur- 
ing the  whole  day  other  heavy  masses  of  ice  were  forced   on  it  from  the 
same  direction,  and  the  entrance  of  the  inlet  appeared  to  be  rapidly  filling. 
The  tides  at  this  time  were  at  their  highest  (fourteen  feet),  and  I  feared 
they  would  ultimately  cause  the  disruption  of  our  protecting  floe,  and  thus 
allow  the  whole  body  of  ice  to  set  on  the  ships.  <  On  the  12th  therefore 
I  sent  to  order  the  Fury  to  proceed  to  an  open  bay  about  three  miles  to  the 
northward,  through  a  passage  amongst  some  low  islets  lying  off  our  anchor- 
age, and  which  had  been  already  sounded  by  our  boats.     On  learning  that 
the  Fury  was  secured,  we  weighed  and  stood  through  the  same  channel, 
but  the  tide  Avas  then  at  its  lowest  ebb,  and  in  the  centre  we  clearly  saw  the 
bottom  at  the  depth  of  four  fathoms  ;  our  lead  at  one  cast  fell  on  a  sharp 
pointed  rock  which  had  escaped  the  notice  of  the  sounding  boats  in  eight 
feet  water.     We  fortunately  met  with  no  others,  and  anchored  at  sunset 
near  the  Fury.     Mr.  Sherer  having  returned  from  Captain  Parry,  brought 
me  an  instruction,  that  any  inlet  or  opening  in  the  land  near  us,  which 
the  fog  had  obscured  at  his   departure,  should  be   examined  before   his 
return,  if  it  could  be  done  consistently  with  the  safety  of  the  ships.     I  now 
therefore  despatched  Lieutenant  Hoppner,  with  directions  to  explore  the 
only  opening  of  that  kind  which  presented  itself. 

'  As  the  ice  had  accumulated  considerably  in  the  centre  of  the  islet,  I 
employed  myself  successfully  in  seeking  an  anchorage  to  the  northward,  and 
on  my  return  in  the  evening  found  the  ships  so  closely  beset  as  to  render  it 
very  difficult  to  reach  them  with  the  boat.     On  the  14th  I  determined  on 
moving,  and  with  the  assistance  of  the  Fury's  people  and  boats  succeeded 
in  getting  into  open  water  after  four  hours'  labour,  although  the  distance  we 
warped  through  the  ice  did  not  exceed  one  mile.     We  then  ran  to  the  north- 
ward, and  anchored  about  five  miles  from  the  Fury,  off  a  shingle  beach  near 
the  entrance  of  that  branch  of  the  inlet  Avhich  Captain  Parry  was  employed 
in  examining.      Owing  to   the  length  of  time  occupied  in  removing  the 
Hecla,  we  found  it  was  too  late  to  bring  the  Fury  out  also,  and  she  there- 
fore remained  beset  for  the  night. 

o  2 


■ 

■Mil 

£ 

■*<*, 

liiHlii 


llfH»~ 


«*• 


€\:f 


100 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Wk  i 


1821. 
Sept. 


H  ■'■:H! 


I 


i  If  11,11 


"  In  some  of  the  excursions  I  made  to  the  hills  which  bound  the  inlet, 
I  found  them  without  exception  to  be  composed  of  granite  and  gneiss, 
presenting  rugged,  irregular  outlines,  and  entirely  void  of  vegetation  on 
their  tops  ;  yet  even  here  we  found  evident  proofs  of  the  Esquimaux  having 
made  their  temporary  residence,  as  Ave  frequently  observed  piles  of  stones 
erected  by  these  extraordinary  people,  and  also  the  circular  little  walls 
which  form  the  lower  part  of  their  habitations.  In  situations  nearer  the 
sea  these  indications  were  so  frequent  that  it  became  a  matter  of  surprise 
if  we  did  not  find  some  vestiges  of  their  little  settlements  on  the  lower 
points.  One  in  particular  which  we  discovered  at  a  short  distance  from  our 
first  anchorage  bore  evident  marks  of  its  having  been  very  recently  occu- 
pied, and  many  were  of  opinion  that  the  natives  had  quitted  it  on  our  ap- 
proach. The  circles  amounted  to  eleven  ;  on  many  of  their  fire-places  the 
soot  was  quite  recent,  and  quantities  of  bones  of  seals,  foxes,  and  other  ani- 
mals were  scattered  round  ;  some  had  small  portions  of  flesh  still  adhering  to 
them.  We  were  much  astonished  on  finding  at  least  a  dozen  pair  of  mittens 
and  socks,  some  of  which  were  nearly  new.  A  few  of  the  huts  had  a  little 
elevation  at  either  end,  and  neatly  spread  with  small  branches  of  what 
appeared  to  me  a  kind  of  birch,  (although  we  had  seen  none  growing,)  tied 
together  in  bunches,  and  from  their  arrangement  to  all  appearance  intended 
as  the  base  of  beds.  We  also  found  a  curious  kind  of  net,  having  large  open 
meshes  of  about  two  inches  diameter,  and  entirely  composed  of  small  and 
strong  hoops  or  rings  of  whalebone,  firmly  lashed  together  with  thongs  of 
the  same  material.  This  net  would  appear  to  be  of  the  same  kind  as  that 
described  by  Davis  as  found  by  him  amongst  the  natives  of  Greenland.  A 
few  broken  spear-heads  and  implements  of  ivory  were  also  picked  up,  and 
I  am  of  opinion  that  the  removal  of  the  people  must  have  been  very 
hurried. 

"  From  the  remarkable  form  of  the  coast  it  is  not  surprising  that  the 
Esquimaux  should  make  choice  of  it  for  their  occasional  settlements,  and 
they  have  a  most  important  inducement  in  finding  such  profusion  of  their 
necessary  food,  for  the  seals  are  here  in  great  numbers  and  appear  ex- 
tremely bold  and  fearless,  which  must  render  them  an  easy  prey  to  these 
expert  fishermen.  In  a  short  excursion  which  some  of  our  gentlemen  made 
in  the  small  boat,  they  were  so  fortunate  as  to  obtain  four  in  a  short  time ; 
two  were  very  large  and  fat  and  the  others  quite  young. 

"  The  great  quantities  of  seals  which  we  constantly  saw  in  this  place  are 


UNcHH 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

doubtless  attracted  by  the  shrimps,  moluscae,  and  other  marine  productions, 
with  which  the  sea  abounds  to  an  extraordinary  degree.  The  gulls  (larus 
glaucus  and  argentatus, )  the  eider  and  other  ducks,  and  the  divers  (colymbm 
troile  and  septentrionalisj  which  are  also  numerous,  appear  to  derive  a  plenti- 
ful subsistence  from  the  same  means  which  nature  has  so  amply  provided. 
To  this  may  perhaps  be  attributed  the  occasional  visits  we  received  from 
whales,  black  and  white,  of  which  the  latter  were  in  far  the  greatest  num- 
bers, but  not  so  frequently  seen  near  the  ships.  While  at  our  first  anchorage 
a  large  black  whale  came  and  lay  so  close  to  our  gangway  as  to  be  within 
reach  of  a  harpoon,  but  while  the  officer  of  the  watch  ran  down  to  inform 
me  of  the  circumstance  the  fish  moved  from  us. 

'  Our  sportsmen  met  with  very  tolerable  success  in  their  rambles  and 
procured  a  plentiful  supply  of  hares  and  ptarmigan,  but  were  not  so  fortu- 
nate as  to  kill  above  two  deer.  Several  ermines  and  marmots  were  also 
taken,  and  three  foxes  of  a  bluish  colour  evidently  advancing  to  their  wintery 
hue.  In  the  hills  of  which  I  have  spoken  as  consisting  of  granite  and  gneiss 
we  found  numerous  lakes,  some  of  which,  although  of  no  great  extent,  must 
from  their  situation  have  been  of  considerable  depth.  They  appeared  to 
be  the  resort  of  the  young  of  the  red-throated  diver,  some  of  which  birds 
we  killed,  and  it  may  thence  be  inferred  that  they  contain  sufficient  food 
for  their  subsistence.  One  of  the  officers  caught  a  large  salmon-trout  in  a 
piece  of  water  a  very  considerable  height  up  the  hills.  In  the  valleys  the 
vegetation,  although  at  this  time  on  the  decline,  appeared  to  have  been 
very  rich,  abounding  in  grasses,  and  some  other  plants,  but  the  sorrel  had 
all  withered.  Some  gentlemen  who  visited  the  isles  lying  off  Five-hawser 
Bay,  found  that  iron-stone  bore  a  considerable  share  in  their  formation,  and 
some  pieces  which  they  brought  on  board  emitted  a  strong  sulphureous 
smell  on  being  heated,  and  had  in  a  slight  degree  the  power  of  attracting 
iron.  A  few  small  rounded  pieces  of  graphite  were  also  procured  from 
the  same  place  ;  their  appearance  was  like  those  ashes  which  are  found 
in  a  blacksmith's  forge.  Along  most  of  the  beaches  we  found  that  the 
rocks  were  absolutely  studded  with  garnets  of  a  clear  and  brilliant  colour, 
but  in  a  state  of  decomposition,  which  caused  them  to  break  easily  on 
endeavouring  to  detach  them  from  the  rocks  in  which  they  were  em- 
bedded. Amongst  the  shingle  we  obtained  several  fine  specimens  of  ma- 
drepore, and  also  found  a  few  fossil  shells,  of  which  some  were  of  a  deli- 


fiflH^ 


l»M;iji 


I 


"y 


cate  and  well-defined  form,  enclosed  in  limestone,  generally  of  the  fetid  kind. 
In  a  small  water-course  I  picked  up  some  curious  pieces  of  steatite,  which 
appeared  to  have  come  from  a  neighbouring  hill,  through  the  face  of  which 
to  the  northward  I  observed  a  broad  vein  of  a  green  sandstone  running  in 
an  oblique  direction.  I  obtained  some  extremely  interesting  specimens  at 
this  part,  one  of  which  from  a  block  of  granulated  quartz  contained  a  quan- 
tity of  thin  laminae  of  graphite,  of  a  very  pure  and  brilliant  colour,  but  which 
with  the  slightest  touch  left  a  very  dark  mark. 

"  Although  the  weather  had  in  general  been  fine  during  Captain  Parry's 
absence,  yet  we  frequently  found  that  during  the  night  a  thin  sheet  of  ice 
was  formed  in  the  small  bays  and  other  sheltered  places." 


CHAPTER  V. 

FURTHER  EXAMINATION  IN  THE  BOATS  FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  CONNECTING  THE    SHORES 

OF    LYON  INLET    WITH    THAT    OF    GORE  BAY — DETAINED   BY   THE  ICE REACH    GORE 

BAY CONTINUITY  OF  THE  LAND   DETERMINED— FRESH    DETENTION   BY    THE    ICE 

BOATS  CARRIED  OVER  LAND RETURN  TO  THE  SHIPS PROGRESS  OUT  OF    THE    INLET 

PREVENTED   BY   THE   ICE THE   FURY   GROUNDS   UPON   A   ROCK ANCHOR    IN  SAFETY 

COVE HEAVY  EASTERLY  GALES — PROCEED  OUT  OF  THE    INLET ARRIVAL    IN  A  BAY 

ON  THE  SOUTH  SIDE  OF  WINTER  ISLAND SHIPS  SECURED  IN  WINTER-QUARTERS. 

At  the  time  of  my  quitting  the  ships  the  ice  was  in  sight  from  the  mast-    1821. 
head,  stretching  across  the  mouth  of  the  inlet,  a  few  miles  below  our  an-     Sept' 
chorage,  while  the  sea  was  only  partially  covered  with  loose  masses  nearTues.  15. 
our  last  station,  and  higher  up  was  entirely  free  from  it.     I  was  in  hopes, 
however,  of  being  able  to  find   our  way  along-shore  in  the  boats  without 
incurring  any  great  loss  of  time  ;  and,  at  all  events,  there  was  a  satisfaction 
in  knowing  that,  should  the  boats  fail  in  doing  so,  it  would  be  in  vain  to 
attempt  it  in  the  ships ;  so  that,  in  every  point  of  view,  our  present  plan  was 
the  only  advantageous  one  that  could  be  adopted. 

We  rowed  before  sunset  between  six  and  seven  miles  along;  the  high 
south-western  land,  passing  what  appeared  a  small  harbour,  with  an  island 
near  the  middle  of  the  entrance,  and  landed  on  a  shingly  beach  near  a 
small  bay  or  creek,  extending  three  quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  W.N.W.  and 
then  terminating  in  a  deep  broad  valley.  There  were  here  three  or  four 
acres  of  thick,  close,  and  rather  long  grass,  affording  excellent  feeding  for 
the  rein-deer  and  hares  of  which  several  were  seen.  A  great  number  of 
white  whales  were  playing  about  near  the  beach.  We  left  the  shore  at 
half-past  four  A.M.  on  the  16th,  and  in  an  hour's  sailing  with  a  fresh  north-  Sun.  16. 
west  wind  came  to  some  loose  ice,  through  which  we  continued  to  make 
our  way  till  eleven  o'clock,  when  it  became  so  close  that  a  passage  could 


**i 


i^i'KJh, 


lisiili 


Up* 


3 


&.  wL* 


T» 


104 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


;!■'  'i'i 


1821. 
Sept. 


Mon.  17. 


lilt' 


no  longer  be  found  in  any  direction.  There  was  also  so  much  young  ice  in 
every  small  interval  between  the  loose  masses,  that  the  boats  were  much  cut 
about  the  water-line  in  endeavouring  to  force  through  it.  We  were  now 
abreast  of  a  remarkable  bluff,  called,  after  the  master  of  the  Fury,  Allison's 
Bluff,  and  forming  the  northern  point  of  an  open  bay,  in  which  alone  there 
was  the  smallest  pool  of  clear  water  to  be  seen.  In  order,  therefore,  to 
avoid  the  risk  of  being  altogether  driven  from  the  shore,  I  determined  to 
attempt  a  passage  into  the  bay,  which  was  three  quarters  of  a  mile  distant ; 
and  in  this,  after  two  hours'  labour,  we  at  length  succeeded.  The  tents 
being  pitched  and  the  boats  hauled  up,  a  part  of  our  hands  were  employed 
in  repairing  the  damages  occasioned  by  the  young  ice,  Avhile  the  rest  were 
despatched  inland  in  search  of  game  :  in  this  pursuit  they  were  not  suc- 
cessful, only  one  hare  being  brought  in  before  dark.  Finding  that  the  ice 
was  likely  to  prove  an  obstacle  of  which  we  could  not  calculate  the  extent 
or  continuance,  we  began  at  once  to  reduce  our  daily  expenditure  of  provi- 
sions, in  order  to  meet  any  contingency. 

Ascending  the  hill  at  daylight  on  the  17th,  we  were  much  disappointed  in 
finding  that,  though  the  ice  continued  to  drive  a  little  to  the  S.E.,  it  was 
even  more  compact  than  before,  the  loose  masses  through  which  we  had 
sailed  the  preceding  day  being  now  closely  set  together.  Our  people  were 
to-day  rather  more  successful  in  pursuit  of  game,  bringing  in  seven  hares 
before  sunset.  These  animals  were  quite  white,  presenting  so  strong  a  con- 
trast with  the  colour  of  the  ground  on  which  no  snow  as  yet  remained,  as 
to  render  them  very  conspicuous  at  a  distance  ;  and  we  often  killed  them 
on  landing,  by  having  observed  their  situation  while  rowing  along-shore  at 
the  distance  of  half  a  mile  or  more.  Several  of  the  ermines  also  which  we 
had  procured  for  the  last  week  or  two  were  entirely  white,  except  the  little 
brush  at  the  tip  of  the  tail,  which  was  black.  In  other  specimens  of  this 
animal,  however,  the  back  was  quite  brown  and  the  belly  of  a  delicate  light 
straw  or  sulphur  colour. 
Tues.  18.  It  was  high  water  on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  at  four  o'clock,  being  some- 
what earlier  than  the  preceding  tide  ;  a  kind  of  irregularity  which  was  very 
common  about  the  mouth  of  Lyon  Inlet  at  this  season,  rendering  it  impossi- 
ble by  one  or  two  observations  to  calculate  the  true  time  of  tide  on  the  full 
and  change  days  of  the  moon.  As  soon  as  it  was  light  enough  to  make  out 
the  situation  of  the  ice,  which  had  now  drifted  considerably  to  the  south- 
ward, we  left  the  bay  with  a  fresh  and  favourable  breeze,  and  at  a  quarter 


0 


>  V< 


.>'*;v 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


105 


1821. 
Sept. 


past  eight  A.M.,  after  a  quick  run  through  "  sailing  ice,"  landed  to  breakfast 
on  the  south-east  point  of  this  shore,  which  afterwards  received  the  name  of 
Cape  Martineau,  out  of  regard  for  a  highly  esteemed  friend  and  relative. 
There  being  a  number  of  small  islands  and  shoals  about  this  point,  we  found 
much  difficulty  in  picking  our  way  through  the  ice  lying  aground  upon  them, 
which,  however,  we  at  length  effected;  and  after  passing  the  S.W.  point, 
which  I  named  after  Mr.  M'Laren,  got  into  clear  water  to  the  westward,' 
crossing  an  open  bay  with  a  shoal  near  the  middle  of  the  entrance.  Proceed- 
ing from  hence  with  a  strong  breeze  and  a  considerable  sea  ahead,  but  the 
flood-tide  still  running  slowly  with  us  to  the  N.W.,  we  rowed  several  miles 
close  along  the  shore,  and  entered  at  dusk  a  little  cove,  where  the  tents 
were  pitched  and  the  boats  moored  for  the  night. 

The  night  being  cold,  clear,  and  nearly  calm,  a  quantity  of  "bay-ice," 
half  an  inch  in  thickness,  had  on  the  morning  of  the  19th  formed  in  the  cove,  Wed.  19 
and  for  some  distance  outside  of  it,  which  again  cut  the  boats'  planks  very 
much,  besides  occasioning  great  loss  of  time  in  getting  through  it.     This 
symptom  of  approaching   svinter,  which  had  now  for  the  first  time  occurred 
to   us,   rendered  it   expedient  in  future  to  select  the  most  open  beaches 
for  our  resting-places  at   night.     As  soon  as  Ave  had  extricated  ourselves 
from  this  impediment,  we  rowed  along  without  further  hinderance,  as  no 
young  ice  had  formed  in  the  deeper  water  of  the  offing.    After  tracing  every 
bend  of  the  shore  which  here  occurred,  and  especially  that  of  a  bay  named, 
by  Mr.   Sherer's   request,    Moyle  Bay,  we  landed  at  the  point  called  by 
Captain  Lyon,  Point  Farhill,  at  a  quarter  past  seven  ;  and  ascending  the 
hill  to  take  angles  obtained  a  view  of  Gore  Bay,  easily  recognising  every 
other  feature  of  the  lands  discovered  by  Captain  Lyon.     A  mile  or  two  of 
coast  was  now  all  that  remained  to  be  examined,  in  order  to  determine  the 
connexion  of  Gore  Bay  with  the  rest  of  the  land  recently  explored.     Pro- 
ceeding therefore  as  soon  as  our  observations  were  finished,  we  soon  after 
entered  the  bay,  and  in  the  course  of  an  hour  had  satisfied  ourselves  on  this 
point.     The  weather  being  very  fine,  however,  I  determined  to  row  to  the 
head  of  the  bay,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  observations ;  and  we  reached 
it  exactly  at  noon  in  time  for  the  meridian  altitude. 

The  place  at  which  we  landed  proved  to  be  a  low  and  narrow  isthmus, 
having  on  the  other  side  a  creek  about  a  mile  long  and  half  a  mile  in 
breadth.     The  north  shore  of  this  creek,  which  is  the  northernmost  land 


•ill 


^k 


**i 


;a»|!l|||t, 


frOH 


>: 


hi 


it 


■ 


m 


106 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


*82*-  of  Gore  Bay,  is  high  at  the  back,  but  with  a  strip  of  low  land  at  the  foot 
v**-y->j  of  the  hills,  affording  abundant  pasturage  for  the  numerous  rein-deer  that 
frequent  it.  The  stone  circles  of  above  twenty  Esquimaux  tents  were  met 
with  upon  the  isthmus,  but  they  all  appeared  to  have  been  long  deserted. 
We  saw  several  black  whales  and  a  few  seals  near  the  beach,  upon  which 
a  number  of  masses  of  ice  were  aground,  though  there  was  none  afloat  in 
the  bay.  The  isthmus  is  composed  of  small  loose  fragments  of  gneiss,  granite, 
feldspar,  quartz,  hornblende,  and  some  limestone.  The  latitude  by  obser- 
vation was  66°  24'  33"  ;  the  longitude,  by  chronometer,  84°  39'  50"  ;  and  the 
variation  of  the  magnetic  needle  56°  19'  52"  westerly. 

A  breeze  springing  up  from  the  south-east  just  as  we  embarked,  rather 
retarded  us  on  our  return  down  the  bay,  the  entrance  of  which  we  reached 
however  soon  after  sunset,  and  were  about  to  land  upon  one  of  two  islands 
that  lie  close  of  Point  Farhill,  when  we  heard  a  shouting,  which  appeared 
to  proceed  from  some  people  on  Georgina  Island.  Rowing  in  that  direc- 
tion we  heard  the  same  kind  of  shouting  once  or  twice  repeated,  after 
which  all  remained  silent.  Landing  just  before  dark  upon  the  north-west 
end  of  Georgina  Island,  we  with  some  difficulty  made  our  way  to  a  shingly 
beach,  by  removing  and  cutting  away  a  part  of  the  grounded  ice  with  which 
it  was  lined.  Immediately  on  landing  I  sent  Messrs.  Ross  and  M'Laren 
to  look  round  from  the  hill  above  us  ;  but  as  nothing  could  be  seen  or  heard, 
we  concluded  that  the  Esquimaux  must  have  been  frightened  at  our  approach 
and  purposely  remained  quiet. 

Being  apprehensive  that  the  south-east  wind  would  bring  in  the  ice  and 
Thur.  20.  obstruct  our  return  to  the  ships  round  Cape  Martineau,  I  gave  orders  for 
moving  at  break  of  day  on  the  20th  ;  and  had  scarcely  launched  the  boats 
when  my  apprehensions  Avere  confirmed,  by  observing  a  great  deal  of  close 
ice  a  little  below  the  island.  The  navigation  of  boats  among  ice  is  pecu- 
liarly perplexing,  in  consequence  of  being  placed  so  near  the  level  of  the 
water  that  there  is  no  possibility  of  seeing  the  best  "  leads."  On  this 
account  it  is  often  more  advantageous  to  land  and  look  round  from  a  greater 
height,  than  blindly  to  persevere  in  picking  out  a  slow  and  uncertain  pas- 
sage. With  this  intention,  after  in  vain  endeavouring  for  two  hours  to 
penetrate  the  ice,  we  put  on  shore  at  eight  A.M.,  towards  the  eastern 
point  of  Georgina  Island,  where  Ave  shortly  ascertained  that  Ave  could  make 
no  progress  without  first  retracing  some  of  our  steps  to  the  north-Avest,  in 


^f^ZjP/^w  'V. 


.>*;■* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


107 


which  direction  alone  a  narrow  lane  of  water  appeared  to  lead  towards  ^82i- 
the  main  land.  Pursuing  this  route,  we  were  again  obliged  to  go  on  \Jy>L> 
shore  at  thirty  minutes  past  one  P.M.  upon  an  island  on  that  coast,  having 
failed  in  our  attempt  to  pass  it  on  the  outside.  While  dining,  however,  we 
perceived  that  a  shoal  and  narrow  passage  within  the  island  was  still  clear 
for  about  a  mile  further  along  shore.  Having  reached  this  ne  phis  ultra,  we 
landed  on  a  coast  too  shoal  and  rugged  to  allow  the  boats  to  be  hauled 
up,  and  at  the  same  time  too  much  encumbered  with  ice  to  permit  them  to 
be  moored  afloat  with  safety.  After  unloading  them  therefore  we  allowed 
them  to  ground  at  high  water,  watching  them  as  the  tide  came  in.  Many 
deer  were  seen,  and  several  brace  of  ptarmigan  killed  in  the  course  of  the 
day.  For  eight  and  forty  hours  past  we  had,  for  the  first  time  this  season, 
experienced  difficulty  in  procuring  fresh  water  for  our  consumption,  the 
small  streams  and  pools  near  the  sea,  on  which  we  had  hitherto  relied, 
being  now  frozen  to  the  bottom.  I  allude  however  to  the  very  smallest 
ones  of  six  or  seven  inches  in  depth ;  for  those  which  were  a  foot  or  two 
deep  had  still  plenty  of  water  under  the  ice :  and  the  surface  of  many  of 
the  larger  ponds  was  still  unfrozen,  except  close  round  the  margin. 

The  ice  remained  closely  packed  on  the  21st,  as  far  as  we  could  see  Frid.  21. 
along  shore,  so  that  we  were  still  detained  in  the  same  place.  A  party 
sent  out  to  procure  game,  killed  a  deer  and  a  hare :  the  former  after  being 
wounded  took  a  deep  lake,  into  which  the  people  had  to  swim  to  get  him 
out.  Except  these  animals,  which  were  here  tolerably  abundant,  the  game 
was  scarce,  though  there  was  no  want  of  feeding  for  them.  The  ground- 
willow  was  very  plentiful,  and  so  dry  at  this  season  that  we  easily  pro- 
cured enough  for  keeping  up  a  good  fire  all  day.  Some  snow  which 
fell  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  night,  lightly  powdering  the  land,  had 
entirely  disappeared  before  the  evening,  except  in  places  having  a  northern 
aspect,  where  it  now  permanently  remained  for  the  winter. 

On  the  morning  of  the  22d  the  ice  was  not  only  as  close  as  ever,  but  had  Sat.  22. 
forced  its  way  much  higher  up  towards  Gore  Bay.  A  party  was  therefore 
sent  out  to  endeavour  to  procure  game  further  inland ;  and  another  em- 
ployed in  gathering  ground-willow,  which  was  here  abundant  and  in  good 
condition  for  fuel.  Two  bears,  a  female  and  her  cub,  being  probably  at- 
tracted by  the  smell  of  our  cooking,  came  towards  the  tents  upon  the 
ice,  but  on  hearing  our  voices  set  off  in  the  opposite  direction.  A  good 
deal  of  snow  fell  in  partial  showers  in  the  course  of  the  day ;  it  was  nearly 

P  2 


M 


-«%uj 


IS 


^i 


i^imni 


s? 


x 


108 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


iNUi, 


Sun.  23. 


Ml 


'lit! 


J,82}'  of  that  fine  kind  whicli  usually  falls  during  the  winter  of  these  regions,  but 
^t^j  we  had  flake  snow  and  even  light  rain  some  days  after  this.  The  snow 
however  now  remained  undissolved  upon  the  land  in  all  situations.  Our 
hunting  party  returned  late  in  the  evening  without  success,  having  merely 
seen  a  number  of  rein-deer,  which  the  want  of  cover  prevented  their  ap- 
proaching. Seven  days  out  of  the  nine  for  which  we  were  victualled  having 
noAV  elapsed,  a  party  was  selected  for  walking  over  to  the  ships  on  the  fol- 
lowing day,  should  the  ice  still  continue  in  its  present  state. 

The  tents  were  struck  and  the  boats  launched  at  day-break  on  the  23d, 
when  we  made  tolerable  way  along-shore  for  two  hours,  landing  occasionally 
to  distinguish  the  best  road  among  the  ice.     At  eight  we  put  on  shore  to 
breakfast,  and  then  again  set  forward,  leaving  Mr.   Ross  to   walk  along  the 
rocks  and  by  appointed  signals  to  shew  us  the  right  "  leads."      After  one 
P.M.,  however,  when  we  had  arrived  within  a  mile  of  Cape  M'Laren,  we 
could  make  no  further  progress.     The  wind  Avas  at  this  time  freshening  up 
from  the  south-west  which,  while  it  served  to  pack  the  ice  more  and  more 
closely  in  the  bay,  was  rapidly  clearing  the   coast  on  the  opposite  or  eastern 
side  of  the  land  about  Cape  Martineau.  We  had  therefore  the  mortification 
of  observing  from  the  hills  that,  could  we  have  effected  our  passage  for  three 
or  four  miles  further  along  the  shore,  we  should  at  once  have  gained  an  open 
sea,  and  should  probably  have  met  with  no  further  obstruction  the  whole  way 
to  the  ships.  Being  thus  unavoidably  detained,  our  people  went  out  with  their 
guns  and  chased  a  fine  deer  into  a  creek  at  the  back  of  our  landing-place. 
The  animal  being  here  surrounded  by  the  men  who  stationed  themselves  on 
the  beach  on  each  side,  remained  swimming  more  than  an  hour,  when  he  be- 
came fatigued  ;  and,  after  tAvo  attempts  to  land,  Avas  killed  by  persons  con- 
cealed behind  hummocks  of  ice.      He  proved  a  fine  buck,  and  gave  us  about 
a  hundred  pounds  of  venison,  which  Avas  taken  on  board  for  the  use  of  the 
ships.     A  feAV  brace  of  ptarmigan  Avere  also  shot.      The   ground  Avas  here 
covered  with  snow  two  inches  deep,  which  Avas  more  than  at  any  other  place 
at  Avhich  Ave  had  landed.     After  another  ineffectual  attempt  to  push  along 
the  shore,  by  which  the  boats  Avere  much  damaged  in  consequence  of  the 
young  ice,  Ave  proposed,  should  the  ice  not  alter  its  position,  to  endeavour  to 
carry  the  boats  and  their  geer  over  land  on  the  folloAving  morning,  rather 
than  suffer  this  detention  any  longer. 

The  ice  continuing  in  the  same  state,  avc  commenced  our  Avork  at  break  of 
day  on  the  24th,  and  in  three  journeys  had  carried  all  the  lighter  part  of  our 


Mon.  24 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

baggage  over  land  by  eleven  o'clock.  All  hands  then  returned  for  the  two 
boats,  across  the  gunwales  of  which  the  masts  and  oars  were  lashed  for  lifting 
them,  the  ground  not  allowing  us  to  drag  them  except  for  a  short  space  here 
and  there.  By  half-past  one  the  first  boat  had  been  carried  over  and,  by  the 
unwearied  exertions  of  the  officers  and  men,  we  had  the  satisfaction  of 
launching  the  second  before  four  o'clock,  the  distance  being  a  mile  and  a  half, 
and  chiefly  over  rocky  and  uneven  ground.  The  weather  felt  cold  and  raw 
during  the  day ;  but  we  were  afterwards  surprised  to  learn  that,  while  we  were 
thus  employed,  the  thermometer  had  been  as  low  as  20°  on  board  the  ships. 
As  soon  as  we  had  dined,  the  boats  were  re-loaded  ;  and  at  five  o'clock  we 
left  the  shore.  A  quantity  of  ice  was  still  aground  upon  the  shoals  and  islets 
off  Cape  Martineau,  through  which  however  we  fortunately  found  a  passage 
before  dark,  when,  having  cleared  every  obstacle,  we  sailed  in  an  open  sea 
and  with  a  fresh  breeze  to  the  northward.  Keeping  close  along  the  shore 
to  avoid  missing  the  ships  in  the  dark,  our  first  musket  was  immediately 
answered  by  a  blue-light ;  and  being  guided  by  the  lights  now  shewn  by  the 
ships,  we  arrived  on  board  at  nine  P.M.,  where  we  found  that  our  late  de- 
tention had  excited  some  alarm  for  our  safety. 

During  my  absence  from  the  ships,  Lieutenant  Hoppner  had  been  de- 
spatched to  ascertain  whether  the  portion  of  land  to  the  southward  of  Cape 
Edwards  was  insular  or  otherwise,  with  a  view  to  save  time  in  the  examina- 
tion of  this  part  of  the  coast  on  my  return.  The  land  in  question  proved  an 
island  ;  but  the  passages  within  it  being  shoal,  and  narrowed  by  several  inlets, 
I  determined  on  going  on  the  outside,  which  would  occupy  very  little  more 
time  Avith  much  less  risk  to  the  ships.  We  therefore  kept  to  windward  as  well 
as  we  were  able,  during  a  night  of  ten  hours  of  more  than  usual  darkness,  in 
a  channel  only  seven  miles,  in  width,  and  with  squally  and  unsettled  weather. 

On  the  morning  of  the  25th  the  wind  had  gradually  veered  to  the  south-  Tues. 
ward,  bringing  up  the  ice  so  far  as  to  obstruct  our  passage  round  the  island. 
After  making  several  tacks  near  its  margin,  we  found  it  so  close  and 
heavy  as  to  render  a  passage  through  it  wholly  impracticable,  even  had 
we  been  favoured  with  a  free  wind.  We  therefqre  hauled  over  to  the  western 
land,  and  at  four  P.M.,  anchored  in  an  open  bay  close  to  the  shore,  and  in 
twenty-three  fathoms,  being  the  only  shelter  we  could  find.  Nothing  could 
have  proved  more  opportune  than  our  anchoring  here,  as  it  soon  came  on  to 
snow  so  hard  with  an  increase  of  wind,  that  the  situation  of  the  ships  if 
under  way  must  have  been  a  very  hazardous  one. 


^'""V 


m 


•s*  'lr'Aoirir\. 


110 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


II" 


1    I! 


1821. 
Sept. 

Wed.  26 


Thur.  27, 


The  wind  coming  rather  to  the  eastward  of  south  on  the  morning  of  the 
26th,  and  the  ice  having  advanced  much  nearer  than  before,  our  situatio 
was  no  longer  a  sheltered  or  secure  one.  At  one  P.M.,  therefore,  we  weighed 
and  hauled  over  for  the  eastern  land,  where  alone  from  the  depth  and  nature 
of  the  soundings,  we  entertained  any  hope  of  finding  security  for  the  night. 
We  reached  this  coast  just  as  the  day  began  to  close  in,  and,  being  unac- 
quainted with  that  part  of  it  near  which  Ave  fetched,  I  went  in  a  boat  soon 
after  six  P.M.,  to  sound  for  an  anchorage,  the  Fury  being  then  in  stays  in  six 
fathoms,  and  half  a  mile  from  several  small  rocky  islets.  Finding  the 
wrater  deepen  gradually  to  seventeen  fathoms,  I  soon,  with  the  assistance  of  a 
boat  from  the  Hecla,  selected  a  birth  for  each  ship,  and  leaving  our  little  boat 
with  a  light,  as  a  guide  to  us  in  anchoring,  returned  on  board,  sounding  the 
whole  way  back.  Standing  in  immediately  to  save  what  day-light  yet  re- 
mained, we  struck  soundings  as  I  expected  in  seventeen  and  then  in  fourteen 
fathoms  ;  the  leadsman  next  called  out  five,  and  before  the  helm  could  be  put 
down,  or  the  man  in  the  opposite  chains  obtain  another  cast,  the  ship  was 
fast  aground  on  a  bed  of  sunken  rocks.  The  sails  were  instantly  thrown 
aback  and  as  much  weight  as  possible  brought  aft ;  and  in  the  mean  time 
Captain  Lyon  anchored  on  our  weather  quarter,  for  the  purpose  of  heaving 
the  Fury  off  by  a  hawser.  It  being  fortunately  dead  low  water  at  the  time 
of  our  grounding,  this  was  accomplished  without  difficulty  or  damage,  and  at 
eight  o'clock  the  ship  was  backed  off  into  deep  water.  After  making  a  tack 
we  anchored  at  half-past  nine,  by  means  of  the  Hecla's  light,  the  weather 
being  now  so  foggy  as  well  as  dark  that  without  this  guide  we  could  not 
again  have  ventured  near  the  shore.  In  the  course  of  the  night  some  streams 
of  ice  came  in  upon  the  ships,  the  heavier  pieces  lixing  themselves  on  the 
rocks  on  which  we  had  grounded. 

Perceiving  at  daylight  on  the  27th  that  the  main  ice  had  nearly  reached 
us  and  was  still  advancing,  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  went  in  the  boats  in- 
shore to  search  for  some  security  against  it.  The  bottom  proved  so  rocky 
and  irregular  that  no  proper  place  could  be  met  with  till  we  had  rowed  a 
couple  of  miles  to  the  northward  ;  and  here  we  came  to  a  snug  though  small 
cove  that  seemed  to  suit  our  purpose.  In  the  mean  time  the  ships  had  been 
directed  to  weigh,  in  doing  which  the  Fury,  being  hampered  by  a  light  and 
baffling  wind,  cast  the  wrong  way,  and  would  once  more  have  driven  upon 
the  rocks  but  for  the  timely  assistance  of  the  Hecla's  boats,  which  Lieute- 
nant Hoppner  promptly  despatched  to  tow  her  clear  of  the  danger.     Leaving 


■v    •  ■'     ,1   ./  V     V- 


>*ry 


"\ 


s, 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


Ill 


Sept. 


buoys  at  the  proposed  anchorage,  we  returned  on  board  at  noon  ;  and  finding  1821- 
the  ice  had  advanced  nearly  a  mile  since  the  morning,  I  determined  to  lose 
no  time  in  securing  the  ships  from  its  approach,  and  accordingly  bore  up  for 
the  cove,  in  which,  after  passing  over  a  shoal  with  five  fathoms,  and  discover- 
ing another  dry  at  low  water,  we  anchored  at  two  P.M.  in  thirteen  fathoms, 
muddy  bottom.  An  officer  was  immediately  despatched  along  the  hills  to 
ascertain  before  dark  the  exact  position  of  the  ice,  which  he  reported  to  be 
quite  close  to  the  southward,  filling  up  the  entrance  of  the  inlet.  The  lone-- 
tailed  ducks  were  here  so  numerous,  that  I  believe  we  disturbed  some  thou- 
sands of  them  in  the  boats  in  the  course  of  the  morning. 

On  the  28th  the  ice  still  continued  to  occupy  the  whole  mouth  of  the  Frid.  28. 
inlet ;  and  on  the  following  day,  the  wind  increasing  to  a  strong  gale  from  Sat.  29. 
the  E.N.E.,  and  there  being  no  room  to  drive,  we  were  obliged  to  drop  our 
second  anchors  under  foot.  A  good  deal  of  snow  fell  and  the  land  was 
now  entirely  covered  with  it,  except  a  horizontal  strip  of  black  along  the 
shores  which,  being  washed  by  the  sea  and  varying  in  breadth  according  to 
the  time  of  tide,  presented,  except  at  high  water,  a  striking  contrast  with 
the  uniform  whiteness  of  the  rest  of  the  land.  Notwithstanding  the  reflected 
light  occasioned  by  the  snow,  the  nights  were  at  this  period  so  dark,  that  we 
could  scarcely  distinguish  the  shores  of  the  cove  at  the  distance  of  only  a 
cable's  length. 

The  gale  still  blew  hard  on  the  30th,  and  indeed  increased  so  much  atSund.30, 
night  as  to  render  it  expedient  to  strike  the  lower  yards,  and  send  the  top- 
gallant masts  on  deck.  This  continued  with  little  intermission  during  the  October. 
1st  of  October,  when  some  small  rain  fell,  which  immediately  freezing  made  Mon"  L 
the  decks  and  ropes  as  smooth  and  slippery  as  if  coated  with  glass.  The 
mercury  in  the  barometer  stood  at  29.36  inches  at  noon,  being  its  minimum 
during  this  gale ;  it  then  gradually  rose,  though  the  wind  continued  with 
equal  or  even  increased  violence  for  more  than  six  and  thirty  hours  after- 
wards. The  thermometer  had  for  several  days  past  permanently  fallen  below 
the  freezing  point,  and  sometimes  as  low  as  20°  at  night ;  which  change, 
together  with  the  altered  appearance  of  the  land,  and  the  rapid  formation 
of  young  ice  near  the  shores,  gave  pretty  evident  notice  of  the  approach 
of  winter.  The  commencement  of  this  dreary  season  in  these  regions, 
may  indeed,  be  fairly  dated  from  the  time  when  the  earth  no  longer 
receives  and  radiates  heat  enough  to  melt  the  snow  which  falls  upon  it. 
When  the  land  is  once  covered  with  this  substance,  so  little  calculated  to    . 


'%% 


^ 


"'*i  mm.. 


Jt 


£  ft  *sO 


5T/s1 


k*^H*M£m$± 


'""!'' 


i,.hl 


ABSTRACT 

of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on 

board  H 

is  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  during  the  Month  of  September,  1821. 

Temperature  of  Air 
in  Shade. 

II 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 

Day 

Place. 

Maxi- 

Mini- 

Mean. 

5!  ^h 
<=<  o 

Maxi- 

Mini- 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity. 

Weather. 

1 

]         Off 

+& 

O 

+37 

+39.25 

o 
32.25 

inclics 

29.80 

inches 
29.56 

inches 

29.718 

a.m.  Westl 
p.m.  SbW  J 

light 

fine 

1    2 

1     Sturges 
|     Bourne 
J    Islands. 

39 

30 

35.58 

31.46 

29.93 

29.50 

■29.703 

NW 

fresh 

fine 

3 

37 

28 

32.92 

31.33 

30.01 

29.93 

29.9G0 

WbN 

fresh 

fine 

4 
5 

^OffSouth- 
V-    ampton 
S     Island. 

40 
34 

31 
31 

33.87 
32.67 

31.33 

31.58 

30.00 

29.73 

29.80 
29.56 

29.930 
29.652 

a.m.  WbS) 
p.m.  SSE  j 

EbS 

light 
fresh 

cloudy 
cloudy 

C 

37 

33 

35.75 

33.54 

29.53 

29.40 

29.448 

SSE 

light    ) 

&  calms ) 

hazy 

7 

37 

32 

34.46 

33.  S3 

29.44 

29.42 

29.427 

Southerly 

ditto 

ditto 

8 

37 

33 

35.00 

33.67 

29.64 

29.45 

29.525 

SE 

light  and ) 
variable  J 

hazy  and  rain 

9 

36 

33 

34.54 

34.33 

30.23 

29.72 

30.073 

NW 

light 

fine 

10 

37 

27 

32.46 

33.17 

30.23 

29.99 

30. 1C0 

SE 

modt. 

fine 

11 

36 

30 

33.67 

33.42 

29.92 

29.78 

29.818 

ESE 

modt. 

squalls  and  cloudy 

12 

36 

33 

35.25 

33.62 

29.73 

29.57 

29.023 

ESE 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

13 

40 

33 

35.92 

33.25 

29.64 

29.57 

29.588 

Calm 

hazy 

14 

37 

32 

34.58 

30.67 

29.93 

29.70 

29.817 

NWbW 

light 

cloudy 

15 

36§ 

34 

34.96 

32.07 

30.03 

29.97 

30.005 

NWbW 

light 

cloudy 

16 

At 

35 

30 

32.46 

33.54 

30.12 

30.03 

30.075 

NbW 

modt. 

cloudy 

17 

anchor 

28 

23i 

26.54 

30. 9i 

30.30 

30.13 

30.198 

NbW 

fresh 

cloudy 

18 

in 

31 

24 

28.42 

32.42 

30.41 

30.30 

30.375 

WNW 

modt. 

cloudy 

19 

Lyon 

33 

25 

29.04 

33.00 

30.40 

30.37 

30.378 

NE 

light 

fine 

20 

Inlet. 

31 

24 

27.17 

32.42 

30.37 

30.29 

30.330 

South 

modt. 

cloudy 

21 

28 

24 

26.08 

31.04 

30.36 

30.13 

30.208 

a.m.  SbW) 
p.m.  IN  E  J 

light     i 
&  calms  J 

cloudy 

22 

32 

27 

29.12 

32.00 

30.08 

30.02 

30.043 

NWbN 

modt. 

cloudy  and  snow 

23 

29 

»i 

26.96 

32.00 

30.15 

30.11 

30.128 

NbW 

modt. 

cloudy  and  snow 

24 

29 

20 

24.29 

29.75 

30.07 

29.58 

29.835 

a.m.  NbW  ) 
p.m.SWbS) 

modt. 

cloudy  and  squalls 

25 

31 

28 

29.42 

31.04 

29.50 

29.47 

29.507 

ssw 

modt. 

cloudy  and  snow 

20 

32 

27 

29.37 

31.67 

29.70 

29.50 

29.568 

South 

modt. 

cloudy  and  snow 

27 

29 

25 

27.12 

30.83 

29.82 

29.70 

29.760 

SbW 

light 

fine 

28 

27 

20 

23.86 

29.64 

30.03 

29.86 

29.966 

NEbE 

modt. 

cloudy 

29 

27 

21 

24.17 

28.92 

30.00 

29.70 

29.862 

EbN 

fresh 

snow  in  squalls 

30 

_ 

28f 

26 

26.92 

30.33 

29.63 

29.48 

29.588 

East 

strong 

snow  in  squalls 

42 

20 

31.06 

31.99 

30.41 

29.40 

29.876 

^  •    y    • 


n    •    .<  ;  v  \'. 


l^  ».  ^  i>  <_* 


>*r* 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


113 


favour  the  absorption  of  heat,  the  frigorific  process  seems  to  be  carried  on    182L 
with  increased  vigour,  defining  very  clearly  the  change  from  summer  to  °£$Z' 
winter,  with  little  or  no  intermediate  interval  to  which  the  name  of  autumn 
can  be  distinctly  assigned. 

The  gale  continuing  the  same  both  in  direction  and  force  on  the  2d,  I  Tues.  2. 
ordered  the  topmasts  to  be  struck  in  the  evening,  being  apprehensive  of 
starting  the  anchors  during  the  night  in  some  of  the  violent  squalls  that  blew 
off  the  land  ;  and  it  was  not  till  two  P.M.  on  the  3d  that  the  gale  began  to  Wed.  3. 
moderate.      The  evening  was  therefore  employed  in  Adding  the  topmasts 
and  top-gallant-masts,  and  in  other  preparations  for  moving ;  and  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning,  having  cast  by  hawsers  fastened  to  the  rocks,  we  left  the  Thur.4. 
cove  at  eight  A.M.     A  boat  being  kept  ahead  to  sound,  discovered  and 
enabled  us  to  avoid  another  rocky  shoal  with  twelve  feet  water  upon  it,  and 
only  a  yard  or  two  in  breadth,  lying  a  little  to  the  northward  of  our  former 
track  into  the  cove. 

The  anchorage  we  had  now  left,  and  which  from  the  security  it  had 
afforded  us  obtained  the  name  of  Safety  Cove,  lies  in  lat.  66°  31'  59",  and 
in  longitude,  by  chronometers,  83°  48'  54",  being  in  the  north-eastern  corner 
of  a  considerable  bend  in  the  coast,  which  seems  to  be  full  of  dangerous 
rocks  and  shoals,  mostly  covered  by  the  tide,  and  is  therefore  distinguished 
on  the  chart  as  the  Bay  ok  Shoals.  There  were  considerable  flocks  of 
the  long-tailed  duck  feeding  on  the  innumerable  shrimps  (cancer  nugax,  of 
Phipps's  Voi/.)  with  which  the  sea  swarmed  in  all  this  neighbourhood.  The 
ground  being  almost  wholly  covered  with  snow,  our  examination  of  the  natu- 
ral productions  was  necessarily  much  limited :  the  rocks  were  however  prin- 
cipally of  gneiss,  and  a  fine  specimen  of  asbestous  actynolite  was  brought  on 
board  from  a  large  mass  of  that  substance. 

As  soon  as  we  had  cleared  the  shoals,  all  sail  was  made  along-shore  to  the 
south-east.  We  found  the  ice  closely  packed  against  the  high  western  land, 
and  as  we  advanced  it  gradually  led  us  in  towards  the  eastern  shore  till,  at 
half-past  eleven  A.M.,  when  we  had  sailed  about  ten  miles  from  the  cove,  no 
passage  could  be  seen  from  the  crow's  nest  between  the  land  and  the  ice. 
Soon  after  noon,  therefore,  Captain  Lyon  and  myself,  accompanied  by  a  second 
boat  from  each  ship,  went  in-shore  to  look  for  a  place  in  which  we  might 
remain  till  the  ice  had  drifted  farther  down  the  inlet.  We  soon  succeeded 
in  discovering  a  roadstead  secure  enough  from  wind  and  sea,  but  open  to  the 
ice  in  the  event  of  its  taking  a  turn  that  way.     As  however  it  was  necessary 

Q 


*h|j 


I 


"Kilt, 


!i**-.afr.MMBdL 


114 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


n'"l'i|ll!lh 


1821. 
October. 


Frid.  5. 


1   I 


Sat.  6. 


either  to  run  this  risk  or  to  return  a  part  of  the  distance  sailed  in  the  morning, 
we  anchored  at  three  P.M.  in  seven  fathoms,  on  a  muddy  bottom,  being 
sheltered  by  a  point  of  land  to  the  southward,  and  by  an  island  to  the  north. 

The  ice  at  the  time  of  our  anchoring  was  a  mile  and  a  half  distant,  and 
seemed  to  be  fast  driving  out  of  the  inlet.  About  midnight  however  the 
whole  body  was  observed  to  be  coming  in  upon  the  ships.  The  cables 
being  immediately  veered  to  prevent  the  anchors  starting,  the  holding- 
ground  proved  so  good  that  they  did  not  move.  The  Hecla  rode  a  very 
great  strain,  the  floe-pieces  being  heavy  and  too  large  to  find  their  way  past 
us.  Fortunately  however  the  pressure  of  the  ice  relaxed  soon  after,  and 
it  then  moved  out  again ;  so  that  not  the  smallest  damage  was  sustained  by 
either  ship.  The  wind  freshening  up  from  the  northward,  the  ice  again 
acquired  good  way  out  of  the  inlet  in  the  course  of  the  day  ;  and  I  was  glad 
to  find,  in  the  afternoon,  that  the  prospect  from  the  hills  was  somewhat  more 
promising  than  before.  We  endeavoured  to  get  fresh  water  on  shore  here, 
but  found  all  the  ponds,  which  were  indeed  shallow,  hard  frozen  to  the 
bottom.  The  ground  was  mostly  covered  with  snow  ;  but  in  some  places  on 
the  rocks  it  had  been  in  part  dissolved,  and  then  frozen  again  into  a  cake  of 
smooth  transparent  ice,  which  made  the  walking  very  slippery.  On  every 
smaller  stone  also,  and  round  the  decayed  stalk  of  each  plant  that  protruded 
through  the  snow,  a  knob  of  the  same  substance  was  formed,  and  these  reflect- 
ing the  rays  of  an  unclouded  sun  had  a  very  brilliant  effect.  This  appearance 
seemed  to  us  worth  noticing,  as  it  shewed  the  difference  between  this  climate 
and  that  of  a  more  northern  latitude  where,  after  the  snoAV  has  once  fallen, 
the  sun's  rays  have  not  power  to  produce  the  slightest  appearance  of  glazing 
on  the  surface  till  late  in  the  spring.  A  flock  of  five  ptarmigans  and  the  track 
of  a  bear  were  seen.  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  also  distinctly  saw  a  hawk, 
whose  plumage  appeared  quite  white,  being  the  only  instance  in  which  such 
a  bird  was  met  with.  The  thermometer  being  at  15°  at  six  in  the  morning, 
and  rising  only  to  17°  at  two  P.M.,  much  young  ice  was  formed  in-shore. 
Every  attention  was  paid  to  the  clothing  of  the  ships'  companies  at  this 
period  when,  from  the  suddenness  of  the  change  of  temperature,  and  the 
necessity  of  frequent  exposure,  there  is  perhaps  as  much  to  apprehend  in 
this  respect  as  at  almost  any  other  time  of  the  year. 

The  ships  were  under  way  at  a  quarter  past  six  on  the  morning  of  the  6th, 
the  wind  being  fresh  from  the  N.b.W.  and  the  thermometer  as  low  as  11°. 
The  ships'  bends  were  now  so  coated  with  ice  about  the  water-line,  that  we 


;• 


WJV/y  .    v.*; 


-.>*r* 


itn,. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


115 


had  to  beat  and  cut  it  off  to  prevent  its  impeding  their  way.  We  then  ran  q^^; 
along  without  obstruction  till  we  had  passed  Cape  Edwards  when,  in  v*py^w 
hauling  up  for  the  south  point  of  the  island  we  were  desirous  of  round- 
ing, we  found  the  sea  covered  with  "  pancake  ice,"  which  however  being 
thin  and  easily  moved  among  its  several  component  parts,  does  not  offer 
any  considerable  impediment.  As  we  advanced  along  the  south  side  of  the 
island,  the  young  ice  began  to  occur  more  in  continuous  sheets,  and  as 
these  had  in  many  parts  been  broken,  and  overlaid  each  other  in  the 
manner  already  described  *,  the  obstruction  soon  became  greater.  To- 
wards noon  we  had  approached  the  south-east  point  of  the  island,  where 
we  found  the  packed  ice  stretching  close  in  with  the  shore.  As  the 
management  of  the  ships  could  no  longer  be  depended  on,  hampered  as 
they  were  by  the  young  ice,  it  was  needless  at  present  to  attempt  passing 
the  point :  we  therefore  hauled  up  towards  a  bay  which  here  very  oppor- 
tunely presented  itself,  and  in  which  I  determined  to  await  some  change  if 
anchorage  could  be  met  with.  As  soon  as  we  had  opened  the  bay,  and  a 
passage  could  be  found  for  the  boats  through  the  young  ice,  I  went  in  to 
sound  it,  accompanied  by  Captain  Lyon,  and  finding  the  depth  regular  and 
the  ground  good,  anchored  the  ships  at  three  P.M.  in  six  to  seven  fathoms. 
The  water  was  here  so  clear  that  the  man  in  the  chains  was  somewhat 
alarmed  by  seeing  the  bottom  when  in  nine  fathoms  and  a  half,  and  at  our 
anchorage  a  shilling  might  have  been  easily  seen  upon  the  ground.  The 
soundings  on  the  south  side  of  this  island  we  found  remarkably  regular, 
presenting  a  striking  contrast  with  the  coast  we  had  lately  left.  We  had 
above  thirty  fathoms  at  two  miles'  distance,  and  the  water  shoaled  very 
gradually  as  we  approached  the  western  point  of  the  bay,  where  we  had  ten 
fathoms  within  two  ships'  lengths  of  the  grounded  ice,  which  here  as  well 
as  all  round  the  shores  of  the  bay  occurred  in  unusually  heavy  masses. 

Mr.  Ross  being  sent  on  shore  to  examine  the  state  of  the  ice  on  the  other 
side  of  the  point,  reported  on  his  return  that  there  was  a  narrow  channel 
between  the  floes  and  the  land,  but  no  anchoring-place  in  case  of  our  being 
stopped.  There  being  now  only  an  hour's  daylight  remaining,  the  young 
ice  fast  increasing,  and  a  strong  tide  running  in  the  offing,  I  was  obliged  to 
relinquish  the  idea  of  moving  till  the  morning. 

At  daylight  on  the  7th  I  despatched  Mr.  Crozier  to  the  point,  beyond  Sun.  7. 


K 


«Mi 


llll 


:  film. 


l> 


*  Narrative  of  the  Voyage  of  1819-20,  p.  90. 


Q,   2 


*mr. 


116 


i    I!: 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Mon 


c/fb'  wn*ch'  at  tne  distance  of  one  mile,  he  found  the  whole  body  of  ice  close  in 
^^tsj  with  the  land,  appearing  very  thick  and  heavy  as  far  as  could  be  seen  to 
the  north-eastward.  After  divine  service  I  sent  Lieutenant  Reid  for  the  same 
purpose,  when  I  was  glad  to  find  that  our  passage  was  now  only  obstructed 
by  a  body  of  ice  a  mile  and  a  half  in  breadth,  beyond  which  a  great  deal  of 
clear  water  appeared  ;  and  as  this  ice  was  in  rapid  motion  to  the  southward, 
there  seemed  every  chance  of  our  being  enabled  to  push  on  in  the  morning. 
The  bay  ice  round  the  ships  was  just  thick  enough  to  bear  a  man's  weight, 
but  that  in  the  offing  was  much  thinner,  and  in  many  places  the  surface  of  the 
sea  was  still  clear  of  it. 

The  thermometer  gradually  fell  to  10°  after  midnight,  and  to  zero  at  six 
A.M.  on  the  8th.  An  hour  before  day -break  Lieutenant  Reid  again  left  the 
ship,  to  give  us  information  of  the  state  of  the  ice  round  the  point,  with- 
out which  it  would  have  been  imprudent  to  quit  our  present  anchorage. 
In  the  mean  time  the  sails  were  set  and  the  cables  hove  short  in  readi- 
ness for  moving,  the  instant  he  should  make  the  appointed  signal  from  the 
hill.  To  our  great  disappointment  however  no  signal  appeared  ;  and  Lieu- 
tenant Reid  acquainted  me  on  his  return,  that  the  ice  in  one  solid  and 
unbroken  "  pack,"  to  which  he  could  see  no  end,  closed  completely  in  with 
the  beach,  at  a  shoal  and  open  bay  on  the  east  side  of  the  island.  The 
ice  now  beginning  also  to  approach  the  ships,  I  directed  the  anchors  to  be 
weighed  and  lines  to  be  run  out  towards  the  eastern  side  of  the  bay, 
which  appeared  to  offer  rather  the  best  security  against  its  approach.  In 
this  the  boats  at  length  succeeded,  and  the  ships  were  accordingly  removed, 
while  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  landed  and  walked  to  the  northward,  in 
order  to  obtain  a  more  distinct  and  extensive  view  of  the  position  of  the  ice  in 
that  quarter.  Having  reached  a  hill  about  three  miles  to  the  northward  of 
the  ships,  we  could  perceive  that  there  was  scarcely  a  pool  of  clear  water 
among  the  ice,  which  filled  the  space  between  us  and  the  main  land.  The 
only  part  of  the  sea  in  sight  unoccupied  by  "  old"  ice  was  along  the  south 
shore  of  the  island,  and  this  was  almost  entirely  covered  with  bay-floes, 
through  which  a  ship  could  not  possibly  have  made  her  way. 

The  formation  of  young  ice  upon  the  surface  of  the  water  is  the  circum- 
stance which  most  decidedly  begins  to  put  a  stop  to  the  navigation  of  these 
seas,  and  warns  the  seaman  that  his  season  of  active  operations  is  nearly  at 
an  end.  It  is  indeed  scarcely  possible  to  conceive  the  degree  of  hinderance 
occasioned  by  this  impediment,  trifling  as  it  always   appears  before  it  is 


*IA"2I .' 


v | 


:svt«i 


>*r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


117 


encountered.  When  the  sheet  has  acquired  a  thickness  of  about  half  an  inch,  0182L 
and  is  of  considerable  extent,  a  ship  is  liable  to  be  stopped  by  it  unless  fa-  ^n>J 
voured  by  a  strong  and  free  wind ;  and  even  when  still  retaining  her  way 
through  the  water,  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  an  hour,  her  course  is  not  always 
under  the  control  of  the  helmsman,  though  assisted  by  the  nicest  attention 
to  the  action  of  the  sails,  but  depends  on  some  accidental  increase  or 
decrease  in  the  thickness  of  the  sheet  of  ice,  with  which  one  bow  or  the 
other  comes  in  contact.  Nor  is  it  possible  in  this  situation  for  the  boats  to 
render  their  usual  assistance,  by  running  out  lines  or  otherwise  ;  for  having 
once  entered  the  young  ice,  they  can  only  be  propelled  slowly  through  it 
by  digging  the  oars  and  boat-hooks  into  it,  at  the  same  time  breaking  it 
across  the  bows,  and  by  rolling  the  boat  from  side  to  side.  After  continuing 
this  laborious  work  for  some  time  with  little  good  effect,  and  considerable 
damage  to  the  planks  and  oars,  a  boat  is  often  obliged  to  return  the  same 
way  that  she  came,  backing  out  in  the  canal  thus  formed  to  no  purpose.  A 
ship  in  this  helpless  state,  her  sails  in  vain  expanded  to  a  favourable  breeze, 
her  ordinary  resources  failing,  and  suddenly  arrested  in  her  course  upon 
the  element  through  which  she  has  been  accustomed  to  move  without  re- 
straint, has  often  reminded  me  of  Gulliver  tied  down  by  the  feeble  hands  of 
Lilliputians ;  nor  are  the  struggles  she  makes  to  effect  a  release,  and  the 
apparent  insignificance  of  the  means  by  which  her  efforts  are  opposed,  the 
least  just  or  the  least  vexatious  part  of  the  resemblance. 

When  to  the  ordinary  difficulties  which  the  navigation  of  the  Polar  Seas 
presents  were  superadded  the  disadvantages  of  a  temperature  at  or  near 
zero,  its  necessary  concomitant  the  young  ice,  and  twelve  hours  of  darkness 
daily,  it  was  impossible  any  longer  to  entertain  a  doubt  of  the  expediency 
of  immediately  placing  the  ships  in  the  best  security  that  could  be  found 
for  them  during  the  winter,  rather  than  run  the  risk  of  being  permanently 
detached  from  the  land,  by  an  endeavour  to  regain  the  continent.  Captain 
Lyon  being  of  the  same  opinion  with  myself,  we  proceeded  on  our  return 
to  the  beach  to  sound  the  north-eastern  part  of  the  bay,  by  making  holes 
in  the  ice  which  was  now  strong  enough  to  bear  us.  We  were  in  hopes  of 
receiving  effectual  shelter  from  the  numerous  grounded  masses,  but  could 
only  find  births  within  one  of  them  in  five  to  six  fathoms  water.  We 
now  for  the  first  time  walked  on  board  the  ships ;  and  before  night  had 
them  moved  into  their  places,  by  sawing  a  canal  for  two  or  three  hundred 
yards  through  the  ice.     The  average  thickness  of  the  new  floe  Avas  already 


I'ft'iftk 


:%  ±. 


m 


118 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
October. 


three  inches  and  a  quarter ;  but  being  in  some  places  much  less,  several 
officers  and  men  fell  in  and,  from  the  difficulty  of  getting  a  firm  place  to  rest 
on,  narrowly  escaped  a  more  serious  inconvenience  than  a  thorough  wetting. 
The  whole  sheet  of  ice,  even  in  those  parts  which  easily  bore  a  man's 
weight,  had  a  waving  motion  under  the  feet,  like  that  of  leather  or  any  other 
tough  flexible  substance  set  afloat ;  a  property  which  is  I  believe  peculiar  to 
salt-water  ice. 

In  reviewing  the  events  of  this  our  first  season  of  navigation,  and  consi- 
dering what  progress  we  had  made  towards  the  attainment  of  our  main 
object,  it  was  impossible,  however  trifling  that  progress  might  appear  upon 
the  chart,  not  to  experience  considerable  satisfaction.  Small  as  our  actual 
advance  had  been  towards  Behring's  Strait,  the  extent  of  coast  newly  dis- 
covered and  minutely  explored  in  pursuit  of  our  object,  in  the  course  of  the 
last  eight  weeks,  amounted  to  more  than  two  hundred  leagues,  nearly  half 
of  which  belonged  to  the  continent  of  North  America.  This  service,  not- 
withstanding our  constant  exposure  to  the  risks  which  intricate,  shoal,  and 
unknown  channels,  a  sea  loaded  with  ice,  and  a  rapid  tide  concurred  in  pre- 
senting, had  providentially  been  effected  without  injury  to  the  ships,  or 
suffering  to  the  officers  and  men  ;  and  we  had  now  once  more  met  with  tole- 
rable security  for  the  ensuing  winter,  when  obliged  to  relinquish  further 
operations  for  the  season.  Above  all,  however,  I  derived  the  most  sincere 
satisfaction  from  a  conviction  of  having  left  no  part  of  the  coast  from  Repulse 
Bay  eastward  in  a  state  of  doubt  as  to  its  connexion  with  the  continent.  And 
as  the  mainland  now  in  sight  from  the  hills  extended  no  farther  to  the  east- 
ward than  about  a  N.N.E.  bearing,  we  ventured  to  indulge  a  sanguine  hope 
of  our  being  very  near  the  north-eastern  boundary  of  America,  and  that  the 
early  part  of  the  next  season  would  find  us  employing  our  best  efforts  in 
pushing  along  its  northern  shores. 


PRECAUTIONS    FOR   THE    SECURITY  OF    THE    SHIPS   AND    THEIR   STORES AND    FOR   THE 

HEALTH   AND    COMFORT    OF   THE    CREWS ESTABLISHMENT    OF   THEATRICAL   ENTER- 
TAINMENTS AND  SCHOOLS ERECTION  OF  AN  OBSERVATORY  AND  HOUSE  ON  SHORE- 
STATE  OF  HEALTH  AT  THIS  PERIOD PARTIAL   DISRUPTION  OF    THE  ICE  IN   THE   BAY 

ANCHORS  AND  CABLES  TAKEN  TO  THE  SHORE GRADUAL  INCREASE  OF  COLD,  AP- 
PEARANCE OF  THE  AURORA  BOREALIS  ON  SEVERAL  OCCASIONS,  AND  VARIOUS  OTHER 
METEOROLOGICAL  PHENOMENA  TO  THE  CLOSE  OF  THE  YEAR  1821. 

Our  operations  at  sea  being  now  at  an  end  for  the  season,  my  chief  attention    1821. 
was  directed  to  the  security  of  the  ships,  and  to  the  various  internal  arrange- 
ments which  experience  suggested  as  necessary  for  the  preservation  of  clean- 
liness, health,  and  comfort  during  the  winter,  as  well  as  for  the  economical 
expenditure  of  the  provisions,  fuel,  and  other  stores. 

The  situation  which  circumstances  obliged  us  to  put  up  with  for  our 
winter-quarters,  was  by  no  means  as  secure  as  could  have  been  wished.  The 
bay,  though  as  fine  a  roadstead  as  could  have  been  desired  if  situated  in  a 
temperate  climate,  was  still  only  a  roadstead  ;  and,  being  entirely  open  to 
the  south,  was  exposed  to  a  pressure  from  ice  in  that  direction,  unless 
the  solid  floe  now  about  to  be  formed  round  the  ships  should  shortly  become 
sufficient  to  guard  them  from  external  injury.  There  was  some  reason, 
however,  to  doubt  the  efficacy  of  this  protection ;  for,  as  the  spring-tides 
approached,  the  numerous  grounded  masses  around  the  shores  of  the  bay  began 
to  evince  symptoms  of  instability,  one  or  two  having  fallen  over  and  others 
turned  round ;  so  that  these  masses  might  be  looked  upon  rather  as  dangerous 
neighbours,  likely  to  create  a  premature  disruption  of  the  ice,  than  as  the 
means  of  security  which,  in  seas  not  subject  to  any  considerable  rise  of  tide, 
they  had  so  often  proved  to  us  on  former  occasions.  To  these  circumstances 
was  added  our  uncertainty  whether  very  high  tides,  during  the  winter,  might 
not  crack  the  ice,  thereby  exposing  the  ships  to  the  double  danger  of  being 


120 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
October 


•   , 


"nipped  "  about  their  water-line,  and  of  being  drifted  out  of  the  bay  by  north- 
-  erly  gales.  That  which  was,  however,  perhaps  the  most  to  be  apprehended 
was  the  possibility  of  the  ships  being  forced  into  shoal  water,  without  de- 
taching themselves  from  the  mass  of  ice  cemented  to  their  bends,  the  weight 
of  which,  hanging  upon  the  sides  of  a  ship  left  aground  by  the  tide,  could  not 
but  produce  very  serious  injury. 

Such  were  the  principal  contingencies  to  which  we  were  liable,  and  which, 
though  we  happily  escaped  them  all,  rendered  our  present  situation  an  ex- 
periment I  would  willingly  have  dispensed  with  trying.     As  a  measure  of 
precaution  we  began  by  removing  the  ships  into  rather  deeper  water,  by 
cutting  the  ice  astern,  so  that  they  now  lay  in  full  six  fathoms  at  low  water. 
Several  hawsers  were  also  secured  to  the  grounded  masses  ahead  of  the 
ships,  and  the  chain-cables  kept  bent  till  some  idea  could  be  formed  of  the 
dependence  to  be  placed  on  the  ice,  under  the  various  circumstances  of  wind 
and  tide  that  might  occur.     The  disposition  of  the  masts,  yards,  and  sails 
was  next  determined  on.     The  fore  and  main-top  masts  were  kept  fidded, 
the  top-gallant-masts  (except  the  Fury's  main  one,  which  was  kept  up  for  the 
electrometer-chain,)  were  struck,  the  lower  yards  got  down  to  the  housing, 
the  topsail-yards,  gaff,  jib-boom,  and  spritsail-yard  remaining  in  their  proper 
places.     The  topsails  and  courses  were  kept  bent  to  the  yards,  the  sheets 
being  unrove,  and  the  clues  tucked  in.     The  rest  of  the  bending-sails  were 
stowed  on  deck  to  prevent  their  thawing  during  the  winter ;  and  the  spare 
spars  were  lashed  over  the  ships'  sides,  to  leave  a  clear  space  for  taking  ex- 
ercise in  bad  weather. 

In  these  arrangements  I  had  kept  in  view  a  determination  to  send  nothing 
out  of  the  ships  during  the  winter,  as  well  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  loss  by 
robbery  should  any  natives  visit  us,  as  to  prevent  a  great  deal  of  unnecessary 
wear  and  tear,  incurred,  on  a  former  occasion,  in  the  removal  of  stores  to  and 
from  the  shore.  With  the  same  view,  it  was  my  first  intention  to  keep  all  the 
boats  hanging  at  the  davits,  but  the  carpenter  of  the  Fury  having  represented 
their  liability  to  injury  by  frost,  if  not  protected  by  a  covering  of  snow,  I  then 
proposed  placing  them  on  the  ice  near  the  ships.  This  plan  however  I  was 
also  induced  subsequently  to  relinquish,  from  our  ignorance  of  the  effect 
likely  to  be  produced  upon  the  ice  by  the  winter's  tides,  and  we  therefore 
hauled  them  on  shore  and,  placing  their  gear  in  them,  covered  them  with  snow. 

About  the  time  of  our  arrival  in  the  bay,  when  the  thermometer  had  fallen 
nearly  to  zero,  the  condensation  of  vapour  upon  the  beams  of  the  lower  deck, 


n 


'  b  i .  i  ■ 


>a;"v- 


•tita, 


GF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


121 


!%t<ril 


and  in  the  cabins  near  the  hatchways,  commenced  mst  as  it  had  done  at  a    182L 

.     .,  ,      .  _  ,       .  .  ..        J  .  ,•!.,.        October. 

similar  tenperature  before.  To  remedy  this  evil,  no  time  was  lost  in  lighting  ..^v^ 
a  fire  in  the  warming-stove  upon  the  orlop-deck,  every  thing  being  previously 
moved  from  its  neighbourhood  that  was  likely  to  create  danger.  The  iron 
tanks  in  the  main  hatchway  were  laid  bare  on  the  top,  and  the  interstices 
between  them  filled  with  sand,  to  form  a  secure  platform  in  front  of  the  fire  ; 
and  the  sail-room  bulk-heads  and  stancheons  covered  with  sheet  copper. 
Four  steady  men,  of  whom  one  was  a  petty  officer,  were  appointed  to  attend 
the  fire  in  regular  watches,  being  made  responsible  for  the  due  expenditure 
of  the  fuel,  and  for  the  safety  of  every  thing  about  the  stove.  They  had 
likewise  particular  charge  of  the  fire-engine,  buckets,  and  two  tanks  of 
water,  all  of  which  were  kept  in  the  hatchway  in  constant  readiness  in  case 
of  accidents.  In  addition  to  these  precautions,  some  general  regulations 
were  established  for  stationing  the  officers  and  men  in  the  event  of  fire  ; 
and  a  hole  was  directed  to  be  kept  open  in  the  ice  alongside  each  ship,  to 
ensure  at  all  times  a  sufficient  supply  of  watej. 

In  twelve  hours  after  lighting  the  stove  not  a  drop  of  moisture  remained. 
The  stream  of  air  in  the  vessel  on  the  lower  deck  was  rapid,  constant,  and 
above  120°  of  Fahrenheit;  that  in  the  cabins  near  the  apparatus  about  100°, 
and  at  the  end  of  the  flue  in  my  cabin,  at  the  distance  of  forty-six  feet  from 
the  air-vessel,  it  rose  to  65°  on  the  first  evening,  and  on  the  two  following 
days  to  70°  and  72°.  The  mean  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  at  this  time 
was  a  few  degrees  above  zero.  To  prevent  the  flues  which  were  of  sheet 
iron  from  parting  too  readily  with  their  heat,  the  most  exposed  parts,  espe- 
cially about  the  opening  of  the  hatchway-door,  were  coated  with  fearnought, 
a  kind  of  woollen  stuff  which,  from  its  slowly-conducting  property,  was  con- 
sidered well  calculated  to  retain  the  warmth,  and  thus  to  convey  some  por- 
tion of  it  to  the  after-cabins*.  The  quantity  of  coals  for  which  this  stove 
was  purposely  constructed  was  five  pecks,  or  a  bushel  and  a  quarter,  per  day ; 


*  This  apparatus  completely  answered  the  purpose  of  keeping  up  a  uniform  and  comfort- 
able temperature  on  the  lower-deck  throughout  the  winter,  as  will  appear  by  the  column 
inserted  for  that  purpose  in  the  Meteorological  Abstracts.  The  mean  temperature  shewn  in 
this  column,  viewed  in  connexion  with  that  next  to  it,  containing  the  temperature  of  the 
atmosphere,  is  a  good  proof  of  the  efficacy  of  this  mode  of  warming  the  deck. 

For  the  warming  of  the  cabins  abaft  the  main-mast,  it  was  by  no  means  so  efficacious. 
This  defect  was  in  some  measure  anticipated,  from  the  impracticability  of  placing  the  stove 
lower  in  the  ship,  so  as  to  increase  the  rapidity  of  the  current  of  air. 


,0t 


122 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


-  'i  ill, 


',i 


1821-  but  by  way  of  experiment  we  now  commenced  with  a  proportion  of  only 
£n2'  four  pecks,  with  which  a  constant  fire  was  kept  up  throughout  the  twenty- 
four  hours  ;  and  this  quantity  was  subsequently  found  sufficient  during  the 
whole  of  this  winter. 

The  provisions  supplied  to  the  Expedition  were  calculated  to  last,  at  full 
allowance,  for  a  period  of  three  years  from  the  preceding  1st  of  July,  the 
day  the  transport  left  us  ;  but  as,  in  case  of  our  passing  three  winters  in  the 
ice,  and  at  length  effecting  our  object,  it  would  be  absolutely  necessary  to 
extend  our  resources  to  the  close  of  the  year  1824,  such  arrangements  were 
now  commenced  as  were  requisite  for  that  purpose.  Such  indeed  was  the 
unbounded  liberality  with  which  all  our  supplies  had  been  furnished,  particu- 
larly in  the  important  article  of  Donkin  and  Gamble's  preserved  meats,  which 
contain  great  nutriment  in  a  small  bulk,  that  by  a  judicious  scale  previously 
made  out  by  Mr.  Hooper,  it  was  only  necessary  to  adopt,  during  the  inactive 
season  of  each  winter,  a  reduction  of  one-third  of  the  usual  proportion  of  bread 
and  spirits,  and  of  one-sixth  of  the  ordinary  allowance  of  sugar.  This  reduc- 
tion could  hardly  be  considered  a  privation,  for  the  bread  was  still  sufficient, 
and  the  spirits  much  more  than  enough,  for  men  who  had  no  very  laborious 
duties  to  perform. 

The  regulations  for  the  maintenance  of  due  cleanliness  among  the  ships' 
companies  were  principally  the  same  as  those  established  on  the  preceding 
voyage.  The  superior  warmth,  however,  which  we  could  now  command 
between  decks,  rendered  the  drying  of  the  clothes  and  the  airing  of  the 
bedding  a  matter  of  comparative  facility  ;  while  the  comfort  the  men  expe- 
rienced from  sleeping  in  hammocks,  instead  of  standing  bed-places,  now  be- 
came so  apparent,  that  the  prejudice  at  first  existing  among  them  on  this 
score  soon  wore  off.  This  prejudice  had  indeed  principally  arisen  from  the 
daily  removal  and  replacing  of  the  hammocks,  a  trouble  which,  perhaps, 
occupied  each  man  ten  minutes  in  the  twenty -four  hours,  but  which  was  not 
necessary  with  the  bed-places.  This  very  circumstance,  however,  is  perhaps 
what  constitutes  the  chief  superiority  of  one  plan  over  the  other  ;  the  ventila- 
tion of  the  inhabited  parts  of  the  ship  being  thus  materially  promoted,  and 
the  bedding  removed  during  the  whole  day  from  the  possibility  of  imbibing 
moisture  from  the  victuals,  breath,  and  other  sources. 

While  care  was  thus  taken  to  adopt  all  the  physical  means  within  our  reach, 
for  the  maintenance  of  health  and  comfort  among  the  crews,  recourse  was 
also  had  to  some  of  a  moral  nature,  which  experience  has  shewn  to  be  useful 


'! 


IP*- 


■       N         •  -V 


'.*'<£?*> 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


123 


auxiliaries  in  the  promotion  of  these  desirable  objects.  It  would  pevhaps,  f,182}' 
indeed,  be  difficult  to  imagine  a  situation  in  which  cheerfulness  is  more  to  be  ^^r^> 
desired,  or  less  likely  to  be  maintained,  than  among  a  set  of  persons  (and 
those  persons  seamen  too,)  secluded  for  an  uncertain  and  indefinite  period 
from  the  rest  of  the  world  ;  having  little  or  no  employment  but  that  which  is 
in  a  manner  created  to  prevent  idleness,  and  subject  to  a  degree  of  tedious 
monotony  ill  according  with  their  usual  habits.  It  was  not,  however,  simply 
as  a  general  principle,  applicable  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  to  all  situations 
and  societies,  that  the  preservation  of  cheerfulness  and  good-humour  was  in 
our  case  particularly  desirable,  but  as  immediately  connected  with  the  pre- 
vention of  that  disease  to  which  our  crews  were  most  liable,  and  which  in- 
deed, in  all  human  probability,  we  had  alone  any  cause  to  dread.  The 
astonishing  effects  produced  by  the  passions  of  the  mind,  in  inducing  or 
removing  scorbutic  symptoms,  are  too  well  known  to  need  confirmation,  or  to 
admit  doubt ;  those  calculated  to  excite  hope,  and  to  impart  a  sensation  of 
pleasure  to  the  mind,  having  been  invariably  found  to  aid  in  a  surprising 
manner  the  cure  of  this  extraordinary  disease,  and  those  of  an  opposite  na- 
ture to  aggravate  its  fatal  malignity.  As  a  source  therefore  of  rational  amuse- 
ment to  the  men,  soon  after  our  arrival,  I  proposed  to  Captain  Lyon  and  the 
officers  of  both  ships  once  more  to  set  on  foot  a  series  of  theatrical  enter- 
tainments, from  which  so  much  benefit  in  this  way  had,  on  a  former  occasion, 
been  derived.  This  proposal  was  immediately  and  unanimously  acquiesced 
in  ;  Captain  Lyon  obligingly  undertook  to  be  our  manager  and,  some  pre- 
paration having  been  made  for  this  purpose  previous  to  leaving  England, 
every  thing  was  soon  arranged  for  performing  a  play  on  board  the  Fury  once 
a  fortnight.  In  this,  as  in  more  important  matters,  our  former  experience 
gave  many  useful  hints.  Our  theatre  was  now  laid  out  on  a  larger  and  more 
commodious  scale,  its  decorations  much  improved  and,  what  was  no  less  es- 
sential both  to  actors  and  audience,  a  more  efficient  plan  adopted  for  warm- 
ing it,  by  which  we  succeeded  in  keeping  the  temperature  several  degrees 
above  zero  on  each  night  of  performance  throughout  the  winter  *. 

To  furnish  rational  and  useful  occupation  to  the  men,  on  the  other  evenings, 


1 


'^ttl 


to 


Hwtfti  bitttu 


*  While  on  the  subject  of  our  plays,  I  cannot  omit  to  mention  that  just  before  we  left 
England,  a  large  and  handsome  phantasmagoria  or  magic  lantern  had  been  presented  to  me 
for  the  use  of  the  Expedition,  by  a  lady  who  persisted  in  keeping  her  name  a  secret  to  those 
whom  she  was  thus  serving.     This  apparatus,  which  was  excellent  of  its  kind,  was  frequently 

R  2 


,mK 


■ 


124 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821.  a  school  was  also  established  under  the  voluntary  superintendence  of  Mr, 
v^rw'  Halse,  for  the  instruction  of  such  of  the  men  as  were  willing  to  take  advan- 
tage of  this  opportunity  of  learning  to  read  and  write,  or  of  improving  in 
those  acquirements.  The  same  plan  was  adopted  on  board  the  Hecla,  Ben- 
jamin White,  one  of  the  seamen  who  had  been  educated  at  Christ  Church 
school,  volunteering  to  officiate  as  school-master.  Tables  were  set  up  for  the 
purpose  in  the  midship  part  of  the  lower  deck  ;  some  of  the  men  already  thus 
qualified  undertook  the  task  of  assisting  in  the  instruction  of  their  shipmates, 
and  thus  were  about  twenty  individuals  belonging  to  each  ship  occupied 
every  evening  from  six  till  eight  o'clock.  I  made  a  point  of  visiting  the 
school  occasionally  during  the  winter,  by  way  of  encouraging  the  men  in 
this  praise-worthy  occupation,  and  I  can  safely  say  that  I  have  seldom 
experienced  feelings  of  higher  gratification  than  in  this  rare  and  interesting 
sight. 

While  these  internal  arrangements  were  making,  the  interests  of  science 
were  not  neglected.  A  day  or  two  after  our  arrival  Mr.  Fisher  and  myself 
selected  a  spot  for  the  portable  observatory,  which  was  immediately  erected 
for  the  purpose  of  making  magnetic  observations ;  and  as  soon  as  the  car- 
penters could  be  spared  from  the  necessary  duties  of  the  ships,  a  house  was 
built  for  the  reception  of  the  instruments  requisite  in  conducting  the  other 
observations  and  experiments.  A  portion  of  the  house  was,  by  Mr.  Fisher's 
suggestion,  parted  off  as  an  observatory,  having  slits  to  open  in  the  roof  and 
sides  in  the  direction  of  the  meridian.  This  method  was  considered  likely 
to  be  especially  useful  in  a  series  of  observations  for  the  atmospheric  refrac- 
tion, which  Mr.  Fisher  proposed  making  at  low  temperatures,  and  which  on 
account  of  the  difficulties  attending  the  use  of  the  repeating-circle,  and  of 
most  other  instruments  in  severely  cold  weather,  it  was  scarcely  possible  to 
do,  except  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  warm  apartment.  The  house  was  built 
of  our  spare  boat-plank,  the  sides,  which  were  double  and  filled  with  sand 
between,  being  fixed  to  capstan  bars  set  upright,  and  sunk  two  feet  into  the 
ground,  which  we  found  quite  loose  and  dry  for  about  thirty  inches  below 
the  surface  ;  beyond  that  depth  it  was  frozen  almost  as  hard  as  a  rock,  re- 
quiring extreme  labour  in  digging  into  it.     The  larger  apartment,  in  which  a 


resorted  to  during  this  and  the  succeeding  winter ;  and  I  am  happy  to  avail  myself  of  this 
mode,  the  only  one  in  my  power,  of  thanking  our  benefactress  and  assuring  her  that  her 
present  afforded  a  fund  of  amusement  fully  answering  her  kind  intentions. 


I 


>  *>r* 


V 


'  ■  '* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


125 


stove  was  placed,  could  at  all  times  be  kept  at  a  high  temperature,  but  the 
observatory-part  when  the  slits  were  open  derived  of  course  but  little  ad- 
vantage in  this  way  ;  and  Mr.  Fisher  in  vain  endeavoured  to  keep  his  clock 
going  in  it,  when  it  would  have  been  most  convenient  as  well  as  most  interest- 
ing to  have  done  so.  The  house  was  also  of  service  for  receiving  the  che- 
mical apparatus,  and  materials  furnished  for  certain  experiments  recommended 
by  a  committee  of  the  Royal  Society,  as  well  as  for  conducting  those  experi- 
ments whenever  circumstances  would  permit  during  the  winter-months.  The 
electrometer-chain  was  hoisted  up  to  the  Fury's  masthead,  the  point  of  pla- 
tina  being  one  hundred  and  twelve  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  and  the 
lower  end  secured  to  the  ice  several  yards  from  the  ship's  side.  As  the 
usual  method  of  hoisting  it  up  at  sea,  attached  to  a  line  of  the  same  length 
by  means  of  a  number  of  short  glass  rods,  appeared  an  uncertain  mode  of 
insulating  the  chain,  a  more  effectual  plan  suggested  by  Mr.  Fisher  was 
afterwards  adopted.  A  long  plank  being  firmly  secured  up  and  down  the 
royal-mast,  several  glass  rods  three  or  four  feet  apart  were  fixed  to  it  hori- 
zontally :  the  links  being  attached  to  the  outer  ends  of  these  as  a  support, 
the  line  was  altogether  removed  ;  so  that  when  the  lower  end  of  the  chain 
was  fastened  also  by  glass  rods,  the  whole  was  kept  free  from  contact  and 
thus  effectually  insulated.  A  tide-pole  marked  to  feet  and  inches  was  drop- 
ped through  the  fire-hole,  and  firmly  moored  to  the  bottom  by  a  heavy  weight ; 
and  an  accurate  account  of  the  time  and  height  of  the  tides  registered  in  a 
table  in  the  log-book  throughout  the  winter. 

It  was  a  matter  of  sincere  satisfaction  to  observe  the  excellent  health  en- 
joyed by  our  people  at  this  time,  as  well  as  the  various  comforts  which  were 
likely  to  ensure  its  continuance.  The  only  man  on  the  Fury's  sick-list  was 
John  Reid,  carpenters'  mate,  who,  in  consequence  of  a  severe  cold  and  cough 
occasioned  by  exposing  himself  when  overheated  by  work,  had  been  for 
several  Weeks  confined  with  an  inflammatory  complaint,  which  threatened  to 
be  of  a  very  serious  and  alarming  nature.  He  was  just  at  this  time  in  some 
respects  better,  having  nearly  lost  the  cough,  but  was  still  in  a  delicate  and 
precarious  state.  Every  possible  attention  was  paid  to  the  dryness,  warmth, 
and  ventilation  of  the  sick-bay,  in  which  a  fire  was  kept  alight  during  a  part 
of  the  day,  and  subsequently,  as  the  cold  increased,  during  the  whole  of  the 
twenty-four  hours,  preserving  a  high  and  equable  temperature  of  about  60°. 
This  and  other  arrangements  for  the  convenience  of  the  sick  rendered  it 
fittle  less  comfortable  than  the  ward  of  a  regular  hospital. 


1821. 
October. 


m  h, 


i:.,ranm,. 


126 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
October 


Soon  after  our  arrival  here,  Captain  Lyon  expressed  a  wish  that  his 
officers  and  men,  with  himself,  should  attend  divine  service  on  board  the 
Fury,  during  the  continuance  of  the  ships  in  winter-quarters.  This  arrange- 
ment, which  Mr.  Fisher  concurred  with  me  in  thinking  in  every  respect 
desirable,  was  accordingly  made,  and  we  formed  one  congregation  for  the 
rest  of  the  winter.  Our  lower-deck  afforded  abundance  of  accommodation 
in  this  respect ;  some  psalm  tunes,  which  had  been  purposely  set  upon  an 
organ,  were  played  at  the  proper  intervals  of  the  service,  and  our  little 
church  formed  a  pleasing  and  interesting  scene  to  such  as  are  disposed  to  be 
interested  by  scenes  of  this  nature. 

Our  people  were  sent  out  to  walk  for  exercise  whenever  the  weather  was 
favourable,  and  the  duties  of  the  ships  did  not  afford  them  sufficient  em- 
ployment; care  being  taken  to  keep  them  together,  under  an  officer,  and  to 
furnish  them  with  proper  arms.  Finger-posts  were  also  erected,  as  before, 
in  various  parts  of  the  island  near  the  bay,  for  the  purpose  of  directing  per- 
sons to  the  ships  if  surprised  by  snow-drifts. 

The  weather  continued  wintery  and  inclement  from  the  time  of  our  arrival 
in  the  bay  ;  but  the  rapid  equinoctial  spring-tides  coming  on  soon  after, 
prevented  the  permanent  freezing  of  the  sea  in  the  offing.  The  sheet  of 
ice  which  had  formed  in  the  bay  was  also  in  part  detached  by  one  of  the 
boats  having  been  hauled  over  it,  her  keel  leaving  a  score  which,  like  those 
on  glass  made  by  the  scratch  of  a  diamond,  caused  it  to  separate  just  in 
that  place :  a  fresh  sheet  was  however  formed  in  the  course  of  eight  and 
forty  hours,  which  appeared  sufficient  to  secure  us  from  external  pressure. 
The  flood-tide  was  observed  to  come  from  the  north-east  and  to  set,  at 
spring-tides,  at  the  rate  of  two  miles  and  a  half  an  hour.  The  phenomenon 
called  frost  smoke,  or  the  "  barber,"  being  the  vapour  arising  from  the 
sea,  rendered  visible  by  condensation,  made  its  appearance  when  the  ther- 
mometer sunk  to  2°  or  3°  below  zero,  but  at  that  temperature  of  the  atmo- 
sphere it  was  not  very  dense. 

Before  the  ships  were  permanently  frozen  in,  several  black  whales  came 
up  to  blow  in  the  small  pools  left  open  by  our  cutting  the  ice.  As  a 
supply  of  oil  would  have  been  particularly  acceptable  just  at  this  period, 
every  endeavour  was  made  to  strike  one  of  them,  but  without  success  ;  the 
young  ice  preventing  the  boats  from  approaching  them  notwithstanding 
the  ardour  of  our  Greenland  sailors  in  this  pursuit. 

I  have  before  mentioned  the  myriads  of  small  shrimps,  (cancer  migax,) 


V    I 


>    •   /.j^.'vjbk.     .   .       . .»  . 


>*r* 


ii  .i« 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


127 


which  for  some  weeks  past  had  been  observed  near  the  surface  of  the  1821- 
sea.  These  insects  were  found  to  be  still  as  numerous  as  ever  in  any  ^-r%J 
hole  we  made  in  the  ice ;  and  such  was  the  extreme  avidity  with  which 
they  immediately  seized  upon  any  meat  put  overboard,  to  thaw  or 
soak  for  the  sake  of  freshness,  that  Captain  Lyon  to-day  sent  me  a  goose 
to  look  at,  belonging  to  the  officers  of  the  Hecla,  that  had  been  thus 
deposited  within  their  reach  only  eight  and  forty  hours,  and  from  which 
they  had  eaten  every  ounce  of  meat,  leaving  only  a  skeleton  most  deli- 
cately cleaned.  Our  men  had  before  remarked  that  their  meat  suffered 
unusual  loss  of  substance  by  soaking,  but  did  not  know  to  what  cause  to 
attribute  the  deficiency.  We  took  advantage  however  of  the  hunger  of 
these  depredators  to  procure  complete  skeletons  of  small  animals,  for  pre- 
servation as  anatomical  specimens,  enclosing  them  in  a  net  or  bag  with 
holes,  to  which  the  shrimps  could  have  access,  but  which  prevented  the 
loss  of  any  of  the  limbs,  should  the  cartilage  of  the  joints  be  eaten.  For 
want  of  this  latter  precaution  some  specimens  were  at  first  rendered  im- 
perfect. 

A  thermometer  placed  in  the  sun  at  noon  to-day  stood  at  32°,  that  in  the 
shade  being  at  5°.  In  the  course  of  the  afternoon  I  witnessed,  for  the 
third  time  in  my  life,  that  peculiar  and  delicate  colouring  of  the  clouds 
which  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe  in  my  narrative  of  the  last  voyage,  on 
the  16th  and  29th  of  April,  1820.  The  red  tint  was,  as  on  both  those  occa- 
sions, nearest  to  the  sun,  and  the  clouds  on  Avhich  the  colours  were  exhi- 
bited were  passing  within  four  or  five  degrees  of  that  object. 

We  were  occupied  about  this  time  in  getting  to  hand  in  the  holds  the  Wed.  17. 
supply  of  provisions  that  would  be  required  for  the  next  six  months,  in 
order  to  prevent  the  necessity  of  opening  the  hatches  oftener  than  once  a 
week  ;  an  arrangement  which  was  found  extremely  conducive  to  the  clean- 
liness of  the  lower-deck,  as  well  as  to  that  of  the  men  personally.  While 
doing  this,  the  opportunity  was  taken  to  place  all  the  lemon-juice,  pickles, 
cranberries,  and  any  other  articles  liable  to  damage  by  frost,  as  nearly 
amidships  as  possible.  A  single  cask  of  lemon-juice  was  however  left  in 
contact  with  the  ship's  side  as  an  experiment,  of  Avhich  some  account  will 
be  given  in  another  place.  Mr.  Hooper  having  exposed  a  portion  of  this 
fluid  to  a  low  temperature  on  deck,  observed  it  to  congeal,  when  a  ther- 
mometer immersed  in  it  stood  at  25°,  into  a  thick  but  soft  consistence  not 
sufficiently  solid  to  break  a  glass  bottle. 


% 


^^mmm^mm^^^^^^m 


128 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Frid.  19. 


October  Several  wnite  foxes  had  about  this  period  been  caught  in  traps  set  on 
^~  shore,  and  were  kept  on  board  by  the  officers,  with  the  hope  of  taming 
them.  Some  account  of  these  beautiful  little  animals  is  given  in  another 
part  of  this  winter's  narrative.  The  thermometer  rose  as  high  as  21°  on  the 
Jhur.  18.  morning  of  the  18th,  and  thick  snow  continued  falling  incessantly  for  many 
hours  ;  this  remained  in  a  very  soft  state  upon  the  ice,  and  clung  quite  fast  to 
the  rigging,  in  both  these  respects  differing  essentially  from  what  we  had 
experienced  during  any  part  of  our  stay  at  Melville  Island.  A  pair  of  snow- 
boots  were  now  issued  gratis  to  each  individual  in  the  Expedition,  being 
part  of  a  stock  of  extra  warm  clothing  liberally  furnished  by  Government, 
to  be  supplied  to  the  officers  and  men,  at  my  discretion,  as  occasion  should 
require.  These  boots  were  made  of  strong  drab  cloth  with  thick  soles  of 
cork,  the  slowly  conducting  property  of  which  substance,  together  with 
their  large  size,  allowing  a  free  circulation  to  the  blood,  afforded  the  ut- 
most comfort  that  could  be  desired.  Boots  or  shoes  of  leather  never  retain 
the  warmth  long,  under  circumstances  of  very  severe  exposure. 

On  the  19th  we  began  to  put  on  the  housing-cloths  for  covering  in  the 
upper  decks,  and  thus  ensuring  a  comfortable  and  sheltered  place  for 
walking  in  any  weather  during  the  winter.  These  cloths  were  composed 
of  the  same  stout  and  serviceable  material  as  before,  but  were  now  painted 
of  a  light  colour  instead  of  black,  under  the  idea,  suggested  by  some  scientific 
gentlemen  in  London,  of  preventing  in  a  certain  degree  the  radiation  of 
heat.  As  it  was  a  great  convenience,  as  well  as  saving  of  candles,  to  admit 
daylight  by  the  cabin  and  gun-room  skylights,  during  the  three  hours 
which,  even  at  the  darkest  period,  we  should  have  in  this  latitude,  the 
housing  was  not  carried  the  whole  way  aft,  but  finished  by  a  screen  a  little 
abaft  the  mainmast,  which  with  a  door  at  the  gangway  was  found  quite 
sufficient  for  every  useful  purpose  :  a  door  with  a  pulley  was  also  fixed 
at  the  head  and  foot  of  each  of  the  ladders  communicating  with  the  upper 
deck.  Instead  of  the  planks  used  on  the  former  voyage  for  resting  the 
housing-cloths  upon,  and  which  took  up  a  great  deal  of  room  in  the  stowage, 
we  now  substituted  ropes,  set  up  to  the  midship  spars,  and  to  others  over 
the  ships'  sides,  after  the  manner  of  what  seamen  call  "  jack-stays,"  which 
answered  quite  as  well  if  not  better  than  the  other  plan. 

On  the  20th,  the  thermometer  again  fell  to  zero  at  ten  A.M.,  and  by  mid- 
night as  low  as  — 10°,  the  temperature  gradually  decreasing  as  the  wind 
backed  to  the  W.N.W.  during  the  two  last  days.     A  spirit  thermometer  was 


Sat.  20 


' 


WMm.A    .¥/  •         i,         V.     ,  ..\    i, 


-«ry- 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


129 


iBri 


now  substituted  for  the  mercurial  one,  for  registering  the  temperature  of  the    182l- 
atmosphere  ;  and  that  of  the  sea,  which  always  remained  nearly  the  same  in  ^v-v' 
the  winter,  Avas  only  taken  occasionally  in  future. 

On  the  21st  there  was  a  considerable  space  of  open  water  in  the  offing  to  Sun.  21. 
the  southward  and  eastward,  from  which  a  cloud  of  frost-smoke  constantly 
issued,  driving  like  a  fog  with  the  wind.  The  ships'  companies  amused 
themselves,  in  the  course  of  their  afternoon  walk,  with  sliding  upon  the  ice 
in  a  pond,  from  which  we  were  still  able  to  procure  water  a  couple  of  feet 
below  the  surface,  though  the  pond  was  not  a  deep  one  :  this  advantage 
we  enjoyed  as  late  as  the  26th  of  November,  after  which  we  had  recourse 
entirely  to  snow  melted  by  artificial  means.  The  thermometer  falling  to 
— 13°  in  the  course  of  the  night,  the  ships'  timbers  began  to  crack  a  little,  in 
consequence  of  the  freezing  of  the  juices  of  the  wood.  I  expected  this  to 
have  occurred  in  a  greater  degree  with  the  Fury  than  with  the  Hecla,  the 
latter  having  been  already  seasoned  to  a  cold  climate  ;  but  on  inquiry  I 
understood  the  reverse  to  be  the  case,  both  during  the  present  and  the 
succeeding  winter.  On  the  23d  there  was  a  considerable  snow-drift,  the  Tues.  22. 
wind  blowing  strong  from  the  westward  ;  but  the  snow  being  less  fine,  and 
not  so  easily  raised  by  the  wind,  made  the  atmosphere  much  less  thick  than 
in  a  higher  northern  latitude. 

The  wind  veering  to  the  S.E.  on  the  24th  and  25th,  the  thermometer  gra-  Thur.  25. 
dually  rose  to  +  23°.  I  may  possibly  incur  the  charge  of  affectation  in  stating, 
that  this  temperature  was  much  too  high  to  be  agreeable  to  us  ;  but  it  is  never- 
theless the  fact,  that  every  body  felt  and  complained  of  the  change.  We 
had  often  before  remarked,  that  considerable  alterations  in  the  temperature 
of  the  atmosphere  are  as  sensibly  felt  by  the  human  frame,  at  a  very  low 
part  of  the  scale,  as  in  the  higher.  The  difference  consists  only  in  this,  that 
a  change  from  —40°  upwards  to  about  zero  is  usually  a  very  welcome  one, 
while  from  zero  to  the  freezing-point,  as  in  the  instance  just  alluded  to, 
it  becomes  to  persons  in  our  situation  rather  an  inconvenience  than 
otherwise.  This  may  be  more  readily  imagined,  by  considering  that  our 
clothing,  bedding,  fires,  and  other  precautions  against  the  severity  of  the 
climate,  having  been  once  adapted  to  a  low  degree  of  cold,  an  increase  of 
temperature  renders  them  oppressive  and  inconvenient ;  while  any  reduction 
(of  the  first  two  at  least)  is  impracticable  with  safety.  To  this  must  be 
added,  that  at  this  temperature  the  snow  becomes  too  soft  for  convenient 
walking,  and  the  accumulation  of  ice  in  the  crevices  and  linings  of  the  officers' 


nil 


■   n    ,M| 


'■J* 


m 


^<r>  /i;  *!> .j&tiAr^A^MgK 


>fij&irr&-:ik: 


130 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


1821. 
October. 


Novem. 
Thur.  1. 
Frid.  2. 


Sat.  3. 


Tues.  6, 


cabins  is  converted  into  a  source  of  extreme  annoyance,  which,  while  it 
continues  solid,  is  never  experienced.  It  is  true  that  these  inconveniences 
occur  in  a  much  greater  degree  in  the  spring ;  but  being  then  hailed  as  the 
harbingers  of  the  return  of  permanent  warmth,  it  is  easy  to  obviate  some 
and  would  be  hard  to  complain  of  any  of  them. 

During  the  month  of  October  the  Aurora  Borealis  was  occasionally  seen, 
though  with  little  brilliancy.  From  ten  P.M.  till  midnight,  on  the  21st,  it 
was  visible  from  S.E.  to  S.W;,  but  most  bright  in  the  latter  direction.  The 
light  was  principally  stationary,  but  a  few  faint  coruscations  shot  upwards 
from  it  now  and  then.  During  the  same  hours  on  the  23d,  it  was  seen  near 
the  horizon  from  W.b.N.  to  S.W.,  having  a  tendency  to  form  an  irregular 
arch,  4°  or  5°  high  in  the  centre.  It  was  generally  stationary,  and  at  times 
tolerably  bright,  but  upon  the  whole  a  poor  display  of  this  phenomenon. 

The  mild  weather  Avith  which  the  month  of  October  closed  continued  for 
the  first  two  days  in  November.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  2d,  the  wind 
freshened  up  to  a  gale  from  the  N.b.W.,  and  before  midnight  the  thermo- 
meter had  fallen  to  —5,  which  latter  circumstance  I  mention  here,  as  differ- 
ing from  what  we  had  so  often  observed  to  take  place  at  Melville  Island,  a 
rise  of  wind  there  being  generally  accompanied  by  a  simultaneous  rise  in 
the  thermometer  at  low  temperatures.  The  gale  continued  during  the  3d, 
with  much  snow-drift.  The  people  were  carefully  kept  on  board  during  this 
and  every  high  wind  throughout  the  winter,  to  avoid  the  possibility  of 
frost-bites. 

Captain  Lyon  having  represented  to  me  that  a  portion  of  biscuit  in  one  of 
the  Hecla's  bread-rooms  had  been  found  damp  and  mouldy,  I  directed  a 
survey  to  be  held  on  the  whole,  when  four  hundred  and  seventy-six  pounds 
were  reported  to  be  unfit  for  use.  These  bread-rooms  consisted,  as  before 
described,  of  a  portion  of  the  forehold  divided  off  by  bulkheads  on  each  side 
of  the  ship,  for  the  purpose  of  stowing  a  certain  quantity  of  bread  in  bulk 
and  thus  increasing  our  resources.  Notwithstanding  the  above-mentioned 
loss,  which  was  all  that  we  sustained,  and  only  amounted  to  eight  days'  pro- 
portion for  one  ship,  the  plan  proved  a  good  one,  as  the  gain  in  stowage 
exceeded  three  months'  bread  for  both. 

On    the  6th,  the  wind  blew  strong  from   the    eastward  with  overcast* 

*  The  word  "  overcast"  is  meant  to  express  a  general  obscurity  of  the  azure  colour  of  the 
sky,  but  without  any  separate  clouds,  which  indeed  we  had  never  hitherto  seen  during  the 


Vv>*fv"* 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  during  the  Month  of  October , 

1821. 

Temperature  of  Air 
in  shade. 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 

Day 

Place. 

Alaxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

—  <d  ™ 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini, 
mum. 

Mean. 

Direction.       [Velocity. 

Weather. 

1 

*I 

o 
+32 

+-29§ 

+30.50 

o 
31.12 

inches. 

29.44 

inches. 

29.36 

inches. 
29.403 

East. 

strong 

squally  and  rain 

2 

s 

31 

28 

29.71 

31.08 

29.63 

29.48 

29.562 

East 

fresh 

squally  and  snow 

3 

a 
re 
p 

28 

19 

25.00 

30.08 

29.  S3 

29.59 

29.720 

NE 

fresh 

ditto  and  ditto 

4 

23 

17 

19.25 

28.08 

29.82 

29.80 

29.S07 

NbE 

modt. 

fine 

5 

a 

18 

14 

16.12 

28.00 

29.87 

29.72 

29.788 

NbW 

fresh 

fine 

6    • 

J   re 

20 

11 

15.37 

27.92 

29.93 

29.86 

29.895 

NNW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

7    • 

16 

10' 

13.12 

27.75 

29.99 

29.90 

29.933 

NNE 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

8 

15 

0 

8.04 

30.07 

29.92 

30.018 

NNE 

light 

fine  and  clear 

9 

23 

7 

18.12 

29.85 

29.50 

29.677 

SW 

fresh 

cloudy 

10 

22 

0 

11.17 

29.80 

29.51 

29.650 

|NbE 

modt. 

cloudy  and  snow 

11 

6 

-  2 

2.67 

29  89 

29.80 

29.848 

NbE 

modt. 

fine  and  clear 

12 

12 

3 

6.62 

29.84 

29.74 

29.797 

NbW 

light 

hazy  and  snow 

13 

15 

+  3 

10.33 

29.91 

29.77 

29.835 

NbE 

modt. 

cloudy 

14 

11 

-  2 

3.71 

29.84 

29.77 

29.797 

NbW 

modt. 

fine  and  clear 

15 

10 

2 

5.42 

29.95 

29.77 

29.868 

North 

fresh 

cloudy 

16 

t-l 

11 

1 

3.17 

30.14 

30.05 

30.110 

NNW 

modt. 

cloudy 

17 

S' 
a? 

21 

+  5 

12.67 

29.94 

29.46 

29.760 

SE 

modt. 

cloudy ;  snow  at 
times 

18 

p 

5 

23 

14 

18.92 

29.40 

29.20 

29.272 

SW 

light 

calm  at  times ;  cloudy 

19 

re 

14 

5 

9.58 

29.53 

29.31 

29.468 

WNW 

fresh 

fine 

20 

i—l 

6 

-10 

-  1.08 

29.70 

29. 5G 

29.630 

NbW 

modt. 

fine 

21 

3 

1 

12 

6.33 

29.76 

29.70 

29.732 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy 

22 

-  8 

13 

10.17 

29.99 

29.76 

29.893 

NW 

modt. 

fine  and  clear 

23    | 

+  5 

5 

0.25 

30.04 

29.99 

30.010 

NNW 

fresh 

cloudy  and  snow 

24 

5 

8 

+  0.42 

30.13 

29.90 

30.073 

AM.  NbW\ 
PM.  ESE_/ 

light 

cloudy 

25    [ 

23 

+  5 

16.42 

29.73 

29.35 

29.522 

SE 

strong 

cloudy  with  drift 

26 

23§ 

22 

22.96 

29.38 

29.30 

29.333 

ESE 

modt. 

cloudy 

27 

24 

22 

23.13 

29. CO 

29.40 

29.482 

ESE 

light 

cloudy 

28 

22 

12i 

17.50 

29.74 

29.61 

29.692 

NNE 

light 

cloudy 

29 

21§ 

15 

18.37 

29.65 

29.55 

29.630 

NbE 

strong 

cloudy 

30 

27 

20 

24.79 

29.60 

29.50 

29.553 

NbE 

fresh 

cloudy  with  drift  J 

31 

27 

201 

+22.67 

29.80 

29.60 

29.702 

North 

light 

calms  ;  cloudy  and! 
snow 

+32J 

-13 

+12.51 

29.15 

30.14 

29.20 

29.725 

-rx^jj 


132 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


H    .|! 


1821.    Weather  and  considerable  snow-drift.     For  several  days  about  this  period 
Novem.  .  J  r 

w-s-^  the  weather  continued  remarkably  mild,  the  thermometer  generally  rising  as 

high  as  from  +20°  to  +28°  in  the  course  of  the  day,  from  the  6th  to  the 

16th.     Most  of  our  necessary  arrangements  for  the  security  of  the  ships  and 

stores  during  the  winter  being  now  completed,  the  people  were  employed  in 

what  they  called  "  rigging  the  theatre,"  and  on  the  evening  of  the  9th  the 

officers  performed  the  play  of  the  "  Rivals,"  to  the  infinite  amusement  of 

both  ships'  companies. 

Sun.  11.  At  two  P.M.  on  the  11th,  it  now  being  the  time  of  spring-tides,  we  ob- 
served a  large  crack  in  the  ice  near  each  of  the  ships,  which  on  examination 
was  found  to  extend  a  considerable  distance  outside  of  them.  As  it  appeared 
very  probable  that  a  complete  separation  might  take  place,  in  which  case  the 
ships  would  have  been  drifted  out  of  the  bay,  several  fresh  hawsers  were  run 

Mon.  12.  out  a-head  and  attached  to  the  grounded  masses.  On  the  following  day,  in 
order  to  obtain  all  the  security  in  our  power,  some  anchors  and  a  bower- 
cable  were  run  out  and  fixed  on  the  beach.  This  precaution  soon  appeared 
no  more  than  necessary,  as  half  an  hour  before  midnight  the  ice  astern  set 
outwards,  leaving  a  little  canal  eight  inches  wide  at  the  crack  made  the 
preceding  day.  By  this  disruption  the  ships  were  disengaged  in  part  from 
the  ice  to  which  their  sides  were  attached,  and  came  a  little  astern  ;  but  for- 
tunately nothing  occurred  to  cause  farther  apprehension. 

Tues.  13.  On  the  13th  the  Hecla  was  secured  to  the  shore  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
Fury.  Although  the  wind  was  from  the  south-east  the  day  was  beautifully 
clear,  which  was  the  more  striking  as  we  had  lately  experienced  a  great 
deal  of  overcast  weather  with  northerly  winds.  About  the  time  of  sunset 
this  evening  the  sky  presented  a  most  brilliant  appearance,  the  part  next  the 
horizon  for  one  or  two  degrees  being  tinged  of  a  bright  red,  above  which 
was  a  soft  light  blue,  passing  by  an  imperceptible  gradation  into  a  delicate 
greenish  hue. 

Wed.  14.  I*  being  desirable  occasionally  to  register  a  thermometer  at  a  distance  from 
the  influence  of  the  ships,  in  order  to  compare  it  with  the  indications  of  that 
in  common  use  on  board,  a  post  was  set  up  on  the  ice,  and  two  correspond- 
ing spirit-thermometers  *  selected  for  that  purpose.  The  difference  observed 
between  them  will  be  noticed  hereafter. 


winter  in  these  regions.    The  kind  of  weather  here  alluded  to  is  usually  expressed  in  the  Logs 
and  Meteorological  Journals  by  the  general  term  "  hazy." 

*  In  making  this  selection,  we  found,  on  comparing  ten  thermometers,  (of  which  three 


"511  "2fc  A-iA*' 


v  v  ^rcJ^H   s  •*/  .m\-. 


**.!    A    *A 


>*;* 


'fiii*. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


133 


On  the  17th  several  broad  lanes  of  water  were  open  in  the  offing,  and  the  N^^'b 

ice  as  usual  in  rapid  motion  on  the  eastern  and  south-eastern  sides  of  the  ^^^ 

Sat.  17. 
island.     A  number  of  dovekies  were  swimming  about  off  the  point,  and  three 

of  them  were  killed  by  the  Hecla's  people,  but  the  tide  floated  them  away. 
On  the  23d  there  were  again  several  miles  of  clear  water  in  the  offing.  This  Frid.  23. 
always  occurred  to  the  greatest  extent  with  a  westerly  breeze  ;  while  the 
wind  from  the  opposite  quarter,  or  with  any  southing,  invariably  forced  the 
ice  close  in  with  the  shore.  The  frost  smoke  was  to-day  extremely  dense, 
rising  about  a  degree  above  the  horizon,  so  as  completely  to  obscure  objects 
at  that,  height,  and  at  the  distance  of  three  or  four  miles.  As  the  winter 
advanced  this  occurred  to  a  greater  extent,  the  cloud  being  more  dense,  and 
also  rising  higher  whenever  there  was  any  open  water  in  the  offing.  It 
proved  a  considerable  inconvenience  to  Mr.  Fisher  in  the  course  of  his  ob- 
servations in  the  winter,  utterly  precluding  on  most  clear  nights,  which  seldom 
happened  but  with  a  westerly  wind,  his  obtaining  a  sight  of  low  stars  for  the 
purpose  of  ascertaining  the  refraction  at  small  altitudes.  This  evening  the 
officers  performed  the  two  farces  of  "  Raising  the  Wind,"  and  the  "  Mock 
Doctor,"  for  the  amusement  of  the  ships'  companies. 

The  following  meteorological  phenomena  are  all  that  occurred  worthy  of 
notice  during  the  month  of  November,  in  addition  to  those  already  men- 
tioned: At  nine  A.M.  on  the  5th  a  parhelion  appeared  on  each  side  of  the 
sun,  but  very  faint,  and  tinged  only  in  a  slight  degree  with  the  prismatic 
colours.  At  thirty  minutes  past  nine  A.M.  on  the  15th,  the  weather  being 
rather  cloudy,  and  a  light  breeze  blowing  from  the  southward,  the  electro- 
meter was  tried,  and  again  at  nine  P.M.  on  the  16th,  at  which  time  the 
Aurora  Borealis,  consisting  of  a  stationary  white  light  near  the  horizon,  was 
visible  in  the  S.b.E.  quarter  of  the  heavens,  but  in  neither  case  was  the  gold- 
leaf  in  the  slightest  degree  affected. 

From  ten  A.M.  till  two  P.M.  on  the  17th  a  halo  appeared  round  the  sun, 
its  radius  being  22°  40'.  At  eight  in  the  evening  the  Aurora  Borealis  was 
seen,  consisting  of  a  stationary  light  occupying  a  very  small  portion  of  the 
heavens  in  the  S.E.b.E.  quarter,  and  close  to  the  horizon,  from  which  at 
times  vivid  flashes  shot  across  the  zenith  nearly  to  the  opposite  horizon. 

were  mercurial,  and  seven  of  alcohol)  a  difference  of  no  less  than  7|°  between  them,  their 
indications  ranging  between  —22.5°  and  —30°.  Two  which  indicated  the  mean  of  the  whole 
were  taken  for  use.  At  higher  temperatures  the  difference  was  found  to  be  very  inconsiderable. 


till1 


l»iH| 


■^I'MJlt^.. 


"•>< 


->rig>:"g^l 


&  H.s 


'I  i«.!; 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept 

on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Winter  Island,  during  the  Month  of  November,  1821. 

Day 
1 

Fahrenheit's 
mometer 

Ther- 

Mean  Tempe- 
rature of 
Lower  Deck. 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing  Weather. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Maxi- 
mum, 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity 

O 

'+22 

o 
+19 

+20.25 

o 
64.7 

inches 
29.81 

inches 
29.60 

incites 
29.757 

North 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

2 

21 

-    5 

13.08 

60.0 

29.54 

29.31 

29.445 

North 

strong 

cloudy  and  snow 

3 

-    8 

14§ 

-11.96 

62.6 

29.60 

29.28 

29.442 

NNW 

fresh 

squally  and  drift 

4 

+  2 

8 

1.71 

66.6 

30.12 

29.73 

29.932 

WNW 

modt. 

fine 

5 

13 

1 

+4.33 

65.0 

30.18 

30.09 

30.152 

NW" 

light 

cloudy 

6 

22 

+13 

18.33 

66.0 

30.01 

29.90 

29.912 

EbN 

fresh 

cloudy 

7 

22 

19 

20.67 

69.5 

29.90 

20.79 

29.830 

NEbE 

modt. 

cloudy 
cloudy 

8 

20 

16 

18.00 

63.0 

29.91 

29.81 

29.837 

NbE 

modt. 

9 

16 

15 

15.08 

64.2 

29.95 

29.84 

29.893 

NbE 

modt. 

cloudy 

10 

20 

14 

16.04 

65.2 

30.12 

29.96 

30.037 

NNE 

,modt. 

cloudy 

11 

28 

15 

21.96 

70.3 

30.01 

29.88 

29.930 

NE 

strong 

hazy  and  considerable  drift 

12 

28 

26§ 

27.50 

64.2 

29.88 

29.86 

29.868 

East 

modt. 

hazy 

13 

25 

16 

21.79 

67.2 

29.95 

29.88 

29.912 

SE 

modt. 

cloudy 

14 

24 

18 

20.71 

70.2 

30.16 

29.93 

30.087 

sw 

modt. 

cloudy 

15 

26 

22 

24.50 

70.0 

30.19 

30.17 

30.182 

South 

light 

cloudy 

16 

21 

21 

*2 

9.12 

70.6 

30.16 

30.13 

30.143 

North 

modt. 

cloudy 

17 

2 

-    1 

0.71 

67.0 

30.25 

30.10 

30.185 

North 

light 

fine 

18 

5 

+  1 

3.83 

67.7 

30.23 

30.19 

30.215 

NNE 

light 

fine 

19 

9 

5 

6.50 

65.0 

30.10 

30.06 

30.087 

NNE 

modt. 

cloudy 

20 

15 

6 

10.17 

67. 3 

30.25 

30.10 

30.135 

I  North 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

21 

13 

5 

9.00 

66.5 

30.40 

30.27 

30.337 

NNE 

light& 
calm 

cloudy 

22 

13 

4 

7.37 

67.0 

30.40 

30.32 

30.343 

West 

modt. 

cloudy 

23 

8 

-15 

-3.25 

65.7 

30.30 

30.26 

30.287 

NW 

light 

cloudy 

24 

-  3 

13 

7.42 

67.0 

30.27 

29.98  30.087 

NW 

light 

cloudy 

25 

+  21 

3 

+0.08 

67.5 

29.98 

29.85  29.926 

SW 

light 

cloudy 

26 

3 

17 

-5.04 

67.0 

29.  S6 

29.82  29.835 

NNW 

modt. 

cloudy 

27 

-16 

19 

17.42 

64.5 

30.00 

29.87  29.933 

NW 

strong 

fine  and  clear 

28 

7 

20 

15.08 

67.0 

30.15 

30.00  30.078 

NW 

fresh 

fine  and  clear 

J  29 

+  5 

5 

+0.33 

61.7 

30.08 

29.7629.960 

West 

strong 

cloudy 

3  30 

11 

8 

4.92 

64.0 

29.74 

29.63 

29.67S 

West 

strong 

cloudy 

+28 

-20 

+7.75 

66.1 

30.40  29.28! 

'9.983 

J 

| 

\>*r* 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


135 


After  ten  P.M.  the  stationary  light  shifted  more  to  the  southward,  and  then  1821- 
gradually  disappeared.  At  ten  P.M.  on  the  18th  this  phenomenon  assumed  ^xrw' 
a  similar  appearance  in  the  S.b.W.  quarter.  On  the  evening  of  the  23d  the 
Aurora  Borealis  made  its  appearance  in  the  N.W.,  vivid  coruscations  shoot- 
ing at  times  across  the  zenith  to  the  opposite  horizon.  The  gold  leaf  of  the 
electrometer  was  not  perceptibly  affected  by  it.  On  the  morning  of  the  24th 
it  was  again  faintly  seen  in  irregular  streams  of  white  light,  extending  from 
the  western  horizon  to  the  zenith:  for  several  hours  the  same  night  also 
this  extraordinary  phenomenon  was  visible  from  the  south-east  round  by 
south  to  west,  being  principally  confined  to  a  space  about  five  degrees  above 
the  horizon.  The  magnetic  needle,  which  was  attentively  watched,  was 
not  at  all  affected  by  any  of  these  phenomena.  On  the  26th,  both  in  the 
morning  and  evening,  the  Aurora  again  appeared  from  south-east  to  south- 
west, the  brightest  part  being  about  ten  degrees  above  the  horizon, 
and  with  pencils  of  rays  shooting  upwards  towards  the  zenith.  In  almost 
every  instance  it  is  observable  that  the  light,  however  irregularly  disposed 
in  other  respects,  has  a  tendency  to  assume  an  arch-like  form  ;  but  I  think 
a  plane  bisecting  the  arch  would  more  generally  have  coincided  with  the 
true  than  the  magnetic  meridian,  in  the  phenomena  we  had  here  an  opportu- 
nity of  observing.  This  was  particularly  the  case  on  the  morning  of  the  27th, 
when  at  six  A.M.  the  Aurora  formed  one  broad  continuous  and  well-defined 
arch,  its  centre  passing  rather  to  the  southward  of  the  zenith,  and  its  legs 
appearing  to  rest  upon  the  horizon  at  east  and  west.  For  several  hours  on 
the  evening  of  the  28th  it  was  seen  in  the  south-east,  with  rays  darting  ra- 
pidly up  nearly  as  high  as  the  zenith.  There  is  almost  always  one  stationary 
patch  of  light  near  the  horizon,  appearing,  as  it  were,  the  source  whence 
the  shifting  or  variable  part  of  the  phenomenon  proceeds.  It  will  be  seen 
from  about  this  period  how  much  more  frequently  the  Aurora  seemed  to 
issue  from  the  south-eastern  quarter  than  from  any  other  during  the  rest  of 
the  winter. 

On  the  1st  of  December  there  was  a  space  of  many  miles  in  which  none  of  Deeemb 
the  "  old"  ice  was  visible.  The  sea  was  here  for  the  most  part  covered  with 
a  very  thin  sheet  of  "  young"  ice,  probably  the  formation  of  a  single  day, 
since  the  westerly  wind  had  driven  the  floes  off  the  land.  The  whole  of  this 
was  in  motion  with  the  tide,  Avhich  breaking  the  thin  floes  left  several  spaces 
of  clear  water.  It  was  observable  that  though  a  considerable  frost-smoke 
arose  from  the  young  ice,  it  was  not  so  dense  as  that  from  the  clear  water, 


i  «ii' 


v. 


m 


H" 


Sat.  1. 


•  •!*"' 


136 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
Decemb. 


Sun.  2. 


immediately  over  every  pool  of  which  a  little  thick  cloud  floated,  correspond- 
ing as  well  in  size  as  in  situation  with  the  pool  from  whence  it  issued.  A 
number  of  dovekies  were  swimming  about  the  point ;  and  it  being  desirable 
if  possible  to  obtain  some  of  them  for  the  sake  of  ascertaining  their  plumage 
at  this  season,  we  hauled  the  small  boat  over  and  launched  her.  Mr.  Ross 
succeeded  in  killing  one  of  the  birds  which  was  preserved  as  a  specimen,  but 
it  was  with  great  difficulty  that  the  boat  avoided  being  carried  away  from  the 
shore  by  the  young  ice.  I  was  on  this  account  afraid  of  repeating  the  attempt 
during  the  rest  of  the  winter.  One  grouse  was  seen  on  shore ;  it  appeared 
entirely  white,  except  having  its  tail  black  near  the  tip. 

I  was  this  day  under  the  necessity  of  closing  in  my  stern  dead-lights,  and 
fixing  the  cork-shutters  between  the  double  window-frames  of  my  cabin,  the 
temperature  having  lately  fallen  rather  low  at  night ;  in  consequence  of  which 
one  of  the  chronometers  (No.  369  of  Arnold)  had  stopped  on  the  26th  of 
November.  We  had  before  this  time  banked  the  snow  up  against  the  ships' 
sides  ;  but  it  was  noAV  thrown  higher,  and  its  thickness  at  the  bottom  increased 
to  about  four  feet.  Besides  this  a  bed  of  snow,  three  feet  deep,  was  subse* 
quently  laid  on  the  deck,  over  my  cabin,  and  also  on  the  forecastle  over  the  sick- 
bay, to  assist  in  retaining  the  warmth  in  those  parts  of  the  ship,  an  office  which 
it  seemed  to  perform  very  effectually.  It  was  impossible,  however,  as  the  cold 
increased,  to  keep  up  a  tolerably  comfortable  temperature  in  the  cabin,  if  the 
fire  was  suffered  to  go  out  for  several  hours :  for  instance,  the  night  after 
the  above  arrangements  had  been  made,  the  fire  was  out  for  only  six  hours; 
and  the  consequence  was,  that  the  thermometer  fell  to  27°,  and  could  be  got 
no  higher  the  following  day,  in  the  after  part  of  the  cabin,  though  only  nine 
feet  from  the  stove,  than  33°.  This  was  indeed  a  most  inclement  day,  the 
temperature  of  the  atmosphere  having  for  the  first  time  fallen  to  — 27°, 
accompanied  by  a  fresh  wind  from  the  northward  and  westward. 

At  six  in  the  evening  of  the  5th  there  was  a  halo  round  the  moon,  with 
a  confused  appearance  of  a  paraselena  on  the  lower  part  of  it.  This  halo, 
as  I  have  often  observed  with  others,  had  the  appearance  of  being  oval,  the 
vertical  diameter  seeming  to  be  the  longest;  but  on  measuring  them  with  a 
sextant  the  deception  became  evident. 

From  six  till  ten  P.M.  on  the  11th,  a  halo  appeared  about  the  moon,  with 
three  paraselene,  two  at  the  sides  and  one  above  it.  This  halo  varied  in  its 
degree  of  clearness  as  the  haziness  of  the  atmosphere  became  greater  or  less, 
and  was  sometimes  a  little  tinged  with  colour.     A  more  rare  phenomenon 


Mh*b 


than  this  was  noticed  at  seven  A.M.  on  the  20th,  by  the  officer  of  the  watch,  j}^& 
namely,  that  the  moon  in  rising  had  assumed  the  appearance  of  two.      On 
hearing  this  I  went  on  deck,  and  saw  an  inverted  image  of  the  moon  below 
and  nearly  touching  that  luminary,  which  was  about  half  a  degree  high  at  the 
time,  thus : 


Mr.  Scallon  told  me  that  the  image  had  at  first  been  as  distinct  as  the  moon 
itself,  and  it  was  nearly  so  when  I  saw  it.  This  phenomenon  continued 
about  five  minutes,  the  barometer  being  29.48,  and  the  thermometer  20°, 
with  very  clear  weather  at  the  time. 

A  white  hare  was  seen  on  shore  on  the  5th,  as  were  two  or  three  others  in 
the  course  of  the  winter.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  these  animals  find 
subsistence  while  the  snow  lies  deep  on  the  ground,  unless  indeed  they 
become  in  a  certain  degree  torpid  during  the  winter.  At  Melville  Island, 
where  in  the  summer  they  were  found  in  considerable  numbers,  we  never 
saw  one,  nor  even  the  track  of  one,  before  the  month  of  June. 

The  wind  freshened  from  the  S.E.  at  night,   and  blew  a  gale  from  that  Thar.  6. 
quarter  all  the  following  day,  the  thermometer  keeping  up  to  about  zero  as 
usual,  with  the  wind  in  that  direction. 

At  the  time  of  sunset,  this  afternoon,  and  for  half  an  hour  afterwards,  Mon.  10. 
the  sky  exhibited  a  beautiful  red  colour  near  the  southern  horizon,  and  a 
soft  rich  purple  to  the  northward.  A  great  deal  of  clear  water  was 
observed  in  the  offing,  and  at  night,  a  dark  water  sky  hung  over  it. 
This  appearance  was  darker,  and  served  better  to  define  the  exact  ex- 
tent of  the  open  water  during  the  winter  nights  than  I  ever  saw  it  under 
any  other  circumstances,  probably  in  consequence  of  the  uninterrupted 
whiteness  of  every  other  object.  The  cold  increased  to  — 27°  once  more 
at  midnight  on  the  10th,  as  indicated  by  the  thermometer  on  the  ice,  but  the 
ships  continued  warm  and  comfortable.  A  register-thermometer  kept  near 
the  chronometers  in  the  book-cases    of  the  cabin  indicated  in  general  a 

T 


138 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


If 


Decemb.  minimum  temperature  of  50°  to  53°,  and  frequently  during  the  day  was  as 
*-^v-^.   high  as  60°.     The  temperature  of  the  lower  deck  at  midnight  was  usually 
about  50°,  without  any  other  fire  than  that  in  the  warming  apparatus. 

Tues.  n.  On  the  11th,  the  wind  being  northerly  and  the  weather  tolerably  clear, 
stars  of  the  third  magnitude  were  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  as  late  as  forty 
minutes  past  eight  apparent  time,  those  of  the  second  magnitude  till  a  quarter 
past  nine,  and  of  the  first  till  ten  o'clock  ;  after  which  the  sky  became  rather 
overcast.  This  may  serve  to  give  some  idea  of  the  degree  of  light  at  this 
period.  The  twilight  was  of  course  of  long  duration,  and  the  redness  pro- 
duced by  the  sun's  rays  was  sometimes  very  plainly  visible  for  more  than 
three  hours  after  his  setting. 

The  temperature  of  the  sea- water  in  the  fire-hole  was  29°  and,  by  the  same 
thermometer,  that  at  the  bottom  in  six  fathoms  and  a  half  was  30°.  The  de- 
position of  small  snow,  which  I  have  remarked  as  almost  always  going  on  in 
these  regions  in  the  winter,  took  place  this  evening  in  occasional  showers,  so 
thick  as  to  oblige  us  to  cover  the  instruments  with  which  we  were  observing, 
though  the  stars  were  plainly  visible  all  the  time,  and  the  night  was  in  every 
other  respect  what  would  generally  be  called  clear. 

A  great  squeezing  of  the  young  floes  took  place  at  the  S.E.  point  of  the 

Wed.  12.  island  on  the  1.2th.  The  noise  it  makes  when  heard  at  a  distance  very  much 
resembles  that  of  a  heavy  waggon  labouring  over  a  deep  gravelly  road  ;  but 
when  a  nearer  approach  is  made,  it  is  more  like  the  groAvling  of  wild  ani- 
mals, for  which  it  was  in  one  or  two  instances  mistaken.  It  was  however 
rather  useful  than  otherwise  to  encourage  the  belief  that  bears  were  abroad, 
as,  without  some  such  idea,  people  are  apt  to  become  careless  about  going 
armed. 

Thur.13.  On  the  13th,  the  thermometer  fell  to  —31° on  the  ice,  being  the  greatest 
degree  of  cold  we  had  as  yet  experienced.  There  was,  notwithstanding  this, 
a  great  deal  of  open  water  in  the  offing,  covered  only  by  a  very  slight  sheet 
of  young  ice.  A  favourite  walk  with  the  officers  during  the  winter  was 
round  the  S.E.  point,  where  there  was  in  consequence  a  hard  and  beaten 
path  upon  the  snow.  The  rapid  tide  which  ran  here,  always  kept  the  point 
clear  of  ice,  whenever  there  was  any  open  water  at  all ;  and  accustomed  as 
we  had  before  been  in  the  winter  to  a  sea  perfectly  frozen  up,  it  can  scarcely 
be  conceived  what  a  relief  it  was  to  the  tedious  monotony  of  our  situation, 
to  see  water  naturally  in  a  fluid  state  and  in  motion,  with  birds  swimming 
about  in  it,  even  at  this  inclement  season  of  the  year. 


-.>«.;  t 


11  'i 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


139 


The  thermometer  rising  to  —  5°  in  the  course  of  the  17th,  the  weather  ap-    *821- 

,.  '  Decemb. 

peared  warm  to  our  feelings.      It  proved  favourable  also  for  another  play  <^r**j 

v\  on    1 7 

which  had  been  fixed  for  this  night,  and  the  "  Poor  Gentleman"  was  per- x 
formed  by  the  officers  in  so  admirable  and  feeling  a  manner  as  to  excite  un- 
common interest  among  the  men,  and  to  convince  me  more  than  ever  of  the 
utility  of  our  theatrical  amusements.  The  18th  was  a  remarkably  clear  day  Tues.  18. 
without  any  of  that  cloudiness  which  usually  hung  about  the  southern  hori- 
zon. The  sun  was  therefore  clearly  visible  at  noon,  when  such  was  its  oval 
shape  that  its  horizontal  diameter  exceeded  the  vertical  by  4'. 07".  We  had 
light  in  the  cabin  for  reading  and  writing  for  three  hours  and  a  quarter  with- 
out candles,  and  about  five  hours  for  convenient  walking. 

We  had  about  this  time  occasion  to  notice,  that  ever  since  our  arrival  in 
the  bay,  a  gradual,  though  slow,  alteration  had  been  taking  place  in  the  size 
of  the  numerous  grounded  masses  of  ice  in-shore,  occasioned  by  every  tide 
leaving  a  thin  additional  coat  all  round  the  surface  of  each  ;  so  that  by  this 
time,  only  a  narrow  passage  could  be  found  between  some  of  them,  where 
at  first  there  had  been  a  large  space.  In  the  course  of  the  winter,  also,  a 
number  of  them  were  split  and  upset  by  the  great  rise  of  tide,  which,  to- 
gether with  the  cracking  of  the  floe,  and  the  occasional  overflowing  of  the 
water  upon  it  near  the  beach,  made  the  landing  extremely  bad.  This  in- 
convenience was  particularly  felt  by  Mr.  Fisher,  whose  various  avocations 
led  him  most  on  shore  during  the  hours  of  darkness. 

On  the  21st,  it  blew  strong  from  the  N.W.,  with  clear  weather  overhead,  Frid.  21. 
and  some  snow-drift  below.  We  remarked,  however,  that  the  snow  was  still 
much  less  minute  than  at  Melville  Island,  and  therefore  less  easily  raised  by 
the  wind  into  drift.  The  peculiarity  before  remarked  of  its  adhering  to  the 
masts  and  rigging  still  continued  also.  I  had  three  hours'  daylight  for 
writing  in  the  cabin  this  day,  the  light  being  admitted  only  by  the  sky-light, 
and  the  weather  unfavourable  on  account  of  the  snow-drift. 

The  shortest  day  had- now  passed,  and  all  that  could  be  remarked  upon  it 
was,  that  nobody  seemed  to  consider  it  a  matter  of  much  interest  one  way  or 
the  other.  On  the  former  occasion,  when  novelty  combined  with  the  peculia- 
rity of  our  situation  to  give  it  more  importance,  it  seemed  to  constitute  a  sort 
of  era  in  our  winter's  calendar  and  excited  a  more  than  ordinary  sensation  in 
our  minds.  The  case  was  now  very  different ;  our  wintering  was  no  longer 
an  experiment,  our  comforts  were  greatly  increased,  and  the  prospect  of  an 
early  release  from  the  ice  as  favourable  as  could  be  desired.      Under  these 


«n 


1  [!"**" ' 

MM 

:;jJ|:.T 

ill 

"*> 

;■;];   ;                 "  ■ 

140 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1     1 1: 


1821  •  • 

Decem'b.  circumstances,  it  may  easily  be  imagined  how  light  the  winter  sat  upon  us, 
^<^>   and  with  what  comparative  indifference  we  now  regarded  the  passing  of 
the  shortest  day. 

Mon.  24.      On  the  evening  of  the  24th,  being  Christmas-eve,  the  ship's  companies 
were  amused  by  the  officers  performing  the  two  farces  of  "  A  Roland  for  an 

Tues. 25.  Oliver,"  and  the  «  Mayor  of  Garratt."  On  Christmas-day,  divine  service 
on  board  the  Fury  was  attended  by  the  officers  and  crews  of  both  ships. 
A  certain  increase  was  also  made  in  the  allowance  of  provisions,  to  enable 
the  people  to  partake  of  Christmas  festivities  to  the  utmost  extent  which  our 
situation  and  means  would  allow  ;  and  the  day  was  marked  by  the  most 
cheerful  hilarity,  accompanied  by  the  utmost  regularity  and  good  order 
Among  the  luxuries  which  our  Christmas  dinner  afforded  was  that  of  a  joint 
of  English  roast  beef,  of  which  a  few  quarters  had  been  preserved  for  such 
occasions,  by  rubbing  the  outside  with  salt,  and  hanging  it  on  deck  covered 
with  canvass.  The  low  latitude  in  which  our  last  summer's  navigation  was 
performed  would  have  rendered  its  preservation  doubtful  without  the  salt 
^  Considering  it  interesting  to  try  whether  any  difference  could  be  detected 
m  the  rate  at  which  sound  travels  at  low  temperatures,  as  compared  with 
that  usually  assigned  to  it,  we  commenced  a  series  of  experiments  for 
that  purpose,  by  measuring  a  base  completely  across  the  ice  in  the  bay 
and  noting  by  a  chronometer  the  interval  between  the  flash  and  report  of  a 
six-pounder  gun  fired  several  times  at  the  extremity  of  it.  An  account  of 
these  experiments  will  be  given  in  its  proper  place. 

For  the  last  two  days  with  the  thermometer  on  the  ice  indicating  a  tem- 
perature of  -  27°  to  -  30°,  that  of  the  Fury's  lower  deck  continued  from  61 
to  64  ,  affording  a  convincing  proof  of  the  efficacy  of  our  warming  apparatus 
To  assist  in  preventing  the  escape  of  warm  air,  and  the  consequent  conden- 
sation of  the  vapour  near  the  ladder-hatchways,  which  must  unavoidably  be 
frequently  opened  during  the  day,  screens  had  been  in  the  early  part  of  the 
winter  fixed  round  the  lower  part  of  them,  and  this  plan  will  I  believe  be 
always  found  necessary  under  similar  circumstances.     In  spite  of  every  pre 
caution  however,  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  ladders  must  always 
be  colder  than  the  rest  of  the  deck,  owing  to  the  rush  of  cold  air  which  in- 
variably takes  place  on  the  opening  of  the  doors.     I  may  here  take  the  op- 
portunity of  remarking,  that  the  construction  of  a  ship  appears  in  one  respect 
unfavourable  for  preventing  the  escape  of  the  warm  air  generated  by  the  fires 
and  the  admission  of  cold  from  the  external  atmosphere.      I  allude  to  all  the 


Sun.  30. 


25Ct».V-«( 


£.  1 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


141 


openings  of  a  ship's  inhabited  deck  into  the  open  air,  occurring/rom  above,  D1821' 
so  that  besides  the  tendency  to  restore  an  equilibrium  occasioned  by  the  v^-r^a 
rarefaction  of  the  air  below,  that  operation  must  be  much  assisted  by  the 
comparative  specific  gravities  of  the  two  atmospheres;  the  warm  by  its 
lightness,  constantly  struggling  to  ascend  through  every  open  crevice,  and 
the  cold  by  its  weight,  as  incessantly  forcing  itself  downwards.  A  considera- 
tion of  this  circumstance  Avill  perhaps  set  in  a  still  stronger  light  the  value  of 
placing  cork  or  some  other  slow  conductor  of  heat,  as  a  lining  for  the  deck 
above,  while  it  also  points  out  the  necessity  of  stopping  up  as  far  as  practi- 
cable every  hole  and  cranny  communicating  with  the  cold  superincumbent 
atmosphere.  On  the  same  account  there  can  be  little  doubt  that,  at  every 
opening  of  our  hatchway-doors  during  the  winter,  a  larger  volume  of  warm 
air  rushed  out  than  would  have  escaped  by  a  door  of  equal  size,  placed  below, 
or  on  a  level  with  the  inhabited  deck  *. 

The  sea  presented  to-day  a  large  open  space  to  the  south-eastward,  but 
the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  being  low  it  was  almost  entirely  coated 
with  a  sheet  of  young  ice.  In  some  clear  pools  near  the  point  a  single  flock  of 
more  than  fifty  dovekies  were  swimming  about,  besides  other  smaller  ones. 
While  continuing  the  experiments  on  sound  this  evening,  Mr.  Fisher  and 
myself  remarked  that  Sirius,  which  was  nearly  on  the  meridian  at  the  time, 
exhibited  the  most  beautiful  violet  and  blue  colours  that  can  be  imagined. 
The  violet  was  to  the  westward,  which  was  the  direction  in  which  the  moon 
was,  and  the  Aurora  was  playing  about  at  the  time.  1  thought  I  had  never 
before  seen  any  thing  so  brilliant ;  the  play  of  prismatic  colours  in  a  cut 
diamond  comes  the  nearest  to  it. 

The  concluding  month  of  this  year  presented  more  frequent  as  well  as 
more  brilliant  displays  of  the  Aurora  Borealis  than  we  had  noticed  at  an 
earlier  period  of  the  winter.  On  the  evening  of  the  2d,  we  observed  it 
constantly  appearing,  from  five  till  ten  o'clock,  in  one  quarter  of  the  heavens 
or  another,  but  entirely  confined  to  the  southern  side  of  the  zenith.  It 
consisted  sometimes  of  luminous  blotches  or  small  clouds,  at  others  of 
coruscations  shooting  upwards,  and  a  stationary  light  always  perceptible 
near  the  horizon  from  S.S.E.  to  S.W.  The  light  was  white  or  yellowish 
white,  and  the  compass  was  not  affected.      On  the  evening  of  the   3d,  it 

*  The  passage  to  an  Esquimaux  hut  is  in  this  respect  better  placed  than  our  doors  ;  for, 
being  rather  below  the  level  of  the  apartment,  the  warm  air  constantly  floats  above  it  in  the 
dome  of  the  hut,  having  no  outlet  but  through  the  materials  of  which  it  is  constructed. 


ilPii 


,  :        .» 


•~£\ 


142 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Decemb.  also  aPPeared  in  little  white  spots,  resembling  the  nebula  in  the  heavens, 
^r**  as  viewed  by  a  telescope,  or  the  milky-way  on  a  very  clear  night.       I  may 
here  remark  by  the  way,  that  this  last  beautiful  feature  of  the  heavens  very 
seldom  appeared  here,  for,  notwithstanding  the  notion  generally  entertained 
of  the  extreme  clearness  of  the  atmosphere  under  a  polar  sky,  we  have  always 
found  the  very  reverse  to  be  the  fact.     It  is  true,  indeed,  that  with  a  nor- 
therly or  westerly  wind,  the  sky  was  generally  what  would  be  called  clear  ; 
but  there  is  scarcely  one  night  in  twenty  when  the  heavenly  bodies,  if  viewed 
through  a  telescope,  do  not  appear  surrounded  with  more  or  less  haze.      In- 
deed, it  very  seldom  happens  that  a  considerable  deposition  of  minute  snow 
may  not  be  observed  to  take  place,  even  in  the  clearest  nights  in  these  regions. 
While  making  lunar  observations  on  the  evening  of  the  4th,  Mr.  Ross 
and  myself  remarked  a  meteor  falling  from  the  S.E.  to  N.W.,  being  about 
40°  high  when  it  disappeared.     It  fell  so  slowly  as  to  be  visible  for  four 
or  five  seconds,  but  Avas  in  every  other  respect  like  the  falling  stars,   as 
they  are  called,   seen  in  other  parts  of   the  world.     At   eleven  P.M.   the 
Aurora  was  seen  forming  an  arch,  about  5°  high  in   the   centre,   and  ex- 
tending from  S.S.W.  to  S.E.      The  magnetic  needle  of  Alexander's  compass 
was  not  perceptibly  affected  during  its  continuance.     At  half-past  two  P.M., 
on  the  5th,  the  wind  being  light  from  the  E.S.E.,  and  the  atmosphere  not 
very  clear,  though  free  from  clouds,  the  electrometer  was  tried,  but  without 
effect,  the  gold  leaf  not  being  in  the  least  degree  excited. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  14th,  the  Aurora  began  to  shew  itself  as  soon 
as  it  was  dark,  consisting  principally  of  rays  shooting  up  from  the  horizon 
in  the  E.b.N.  towards  the  zenith,  and  sometimes  passing  through  but  very 
little  beyond  it,  towards  the  opposite  side  of  the  heavens.  Just  before  ten 
o'clock,  however,  a  much  finer  display  of  this  phenomenon  presented  itself 
than  we  had  yet  seen  this  season.  There  still  remained  a  place  near  the 
.  horizon  at  E.b.N.,  whence  a  bright  light  seemed  constantly  to  issue,  and  if 
any  part  of  the  phenomenon  could  be  said  to  continue  uniformly  the  same, 
it  was  the  leg  of  a  broadish  arch  in  that  point,  which  scarcely  ever  changed 
its  place,  or  the  intensity  of  its  light.  The  arch  was  at  times  completed,  or 
thrown  over  to  the  W.S.W.,  being  15°  high  in  the  centre,  and  generally 
about  2°  broad,  though  in  this  respect  it  was  irregular  and  somewhat  vari- 
able. The  lower  part  of  the  arch  was  always  well  defined,  the  space  under 
it  appearing  dark,  as  if  a  black  cloud  had  been  there,  which,  however,  was 
not  the  case,  as  we  saw  the  stars  in  it  unobscured  except  by  the  light  of  the 


_ 


.v> 


jv*r*#m 


\>*r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


143 


i^»i* 


Aurora.  The  upper  side  of  the  arch  was  never  well  defined  ;  but  its  light 
was  gradually  softened  off,  so  as  to  mingle  with  the  azure  of  the  sky,  and 
often  sent  up  coruscations  towards  the  zenith. 

Thus  far  description  may  give  some  faint  idea  of  this  brilliant  and  extra- 
ordinary phenomenon,  because  its  figure  here  maintained  some  degree  of 
regularity ;  but  during  the  most  splendid  part  of  its  continuance,  it  is,  I 
believe,  almost  impossible  to  convey  to  the  minds  of  others  an  adequate  con- 
ception of  the  truth.  It  is  with  much  difference,  therefore,  that  I  offer  the 
following  description,  the  only  recommendation  of  which  perhaps  is,  that  it 
was  written  immediately  after  witnessing  this  magnificent  display. 

Innumerable  streams  or  bands  of  white  and  yellowish  light  appeared  to 
occupy  the  greater  part  of  the  heavens  to  the  southward  of  the  zenith,  being 
much  the  brightest  in  the  S.E.  and  E.S.E.,  from  whence  it  had  indeed  often 
the  appearance  of  emanating.  Some  of  these  streams  of  light  were  in  right 
lines  like  rays,  others  crooked  and  waving  in  all  sorts  of  irregular  figures, 
and  moving  with  inconceivable  rapidity  in  various  directions.  Among  these 
might  frequently  be  observed  those  shorter  collections  or  bundles  of  rays, 
which,  moving  with  even  greater  velocity  than  the  rest,  have  acquired  the 
name  of  the  "merry  dancers,"  which,  if  I  understand  aright  the  descriptions 
given  of  them  by  others,  I  do  not  think  I  ever  saw  before.  In  a  short  time 
the  Aurora  extended  itself  over  the  zenith,  about  half-way  down  to  the 
northern  horizon  but  no  farther,  as  if  there  was  something  in  that  quarter 
of  the  heavens  which  it  did  not  dare  to  approach.  About  this  time,  how- 
ever, some  long  streamers  shot  up  from  the  horizon  in  the  N.W.  which  soon 
disappeared.  While  the  light  extended  over  part  of  the  northern  heavens, 
there  were  a  number  of  rays  assuming  a  circular  or  radiated  form  near  the 
zenith,  and  appearing  to  have  a  common  centre  near  that  point,  from  which 
they  all  diverged.  The  light  of  which  these  were  composed  appeared  to 
have  inconceivably  rapid  motion  in  itself,  though  the  form  it  assumed  and 
the  station  it  occupied  in  the  heavens  underwent  little  or  no  change  for 
perhaps  a  minute  or  more.  Suppose,  for  instance,  a  stream  of  light  to  have 
occupied  a  space  between  any  two  of  the  stars,  by  which  its  position  could 
be  accurately  noticed,  the  light  appeared  to  pass  constantly  and  instanta- 
neously from  one  to  the  other,  as  if,  when  a  portion  of  the  subtle  fluid  of 
which  it  is  composed  had  made  its  escape  and  vanished  at  the  end  next  one 
of  the  stars,  a  fresh  supply  was  uninterruptedly  furnished  at  the  other.  This 
effect  is  a  common   one  with  the  Aurora,    and  puts  one  in  mind,   as   far 


1821. 
Decemb. 


•? 


•f^ 


144 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821. 
Decemb 


as  its  motion  alone  is  concerned,  of  a  person  holding  a  long  ribbon  by  one 
end,  and  giving  it  an  undulatory  motion  through  its  whole  length,  though  its 
general  position  remains  the  same.  One  of  the  most  striking  of  the  various 
locomotive  properties  of  the  Aurora  is  that  which  it  often  has  laterally,  by 
which  I  mean  in  the  direction  perpendicular  to  its  length.  This  motion, 
compared  with  the  other,  is  usually  slow,  though  still  very  rapid  in  the  "  merry 
dancers,"  which  seem  to  observe  no  law  with  regard  to  the  rest  of  the  pheno- 
menon. When  the  streams  or  bands  were  crooked,  the  convolutions  took 
place  indifferently  in  all  directions.  The  Aurora  did  not  continue  long  to  the 
north  of  the  zenith,  but  remained  as  high  as  that  point  for  more  than  an  hour ; 
after  which  on  the  moon  rising,  it  became  more  and  more  faint,  and  at  half- 
past  eleven  was  no  longer  visible. 

The  colour  of  the  light  was  most  frequently  yellowish-white,  sometimes 
greenish,  and  once  or  twice  a  lilac  tinge  was  remarked,  when  several  strata, 
as  it  were,  appeared  to  overlay  each  other,  by  very  rapidly  meeting,  in 
which  case  the  light  was  always  increased  in  intensity.  The  electrometer 
was  tried  several  times,  and  two  of  Kater's  compasses  exposed  upon  the 
the  ice,  during  the  continuance  of  this  Aurora,  but  neither  was  percep- 
tibly affected  by  it.  We  listened  attentively  for  any  noise  which  might 
accompany  it,  but  could  hear  none,  but  it  was  too  cold  to  keep  the  ears 
uncovered  very  long  at  one  time.  The  intensity  of  the  light  was  some- 
thing greater  than  that  of  the  moon  in  her  quarters.  Of  its  dimming  the 
stars  there  cannot,  I  think,  be  a  doubt.  We  remarked  it  to  be,  in  this 
respect,  like  drawing  a  gauze  veil  over  the  heavens  in  that  part,  the  veil 
being  most  thick,  when  two  of  the  luminous  sheets  met  and  overlapped. 
The  phenomenon  had  all  the  appearance  of  being  full  as  near  as  many  of  the 
clouds  commonly  seen,  but  there  were  none  of  the  latter  to  compare  them 
Avith  at  the  time.  1  may  in  conclusion  remark  that,  notwithstanding  the 
variety  and  changeableness  displayed  by  this  Aurora,  there  was  throughout 
a  perceptible  inclination  in  the  various  parts  of  it  to  form  an  irregular  arch 
from  E.b.N.  over  to  S.W.b.W. 

From  seven  till  ten  P.M.,  on  the  20th,  while  engaged  in  making  observa- 
tions upon  the  ice,  we  observed  the  Aurora  almost  constantly  appear- 
ing, though  varying  in  its  form  and  situation.  It  commenced  with  a 
number  of  vertical  coruscations  from  the  S.E.,  south,  and  N.W.  horizons, 
darting  nearly  as  high  as  the  zenith.  This  being  discontinued  after  half  an 
hour,  the  leg  of  an  arch  appeared  at  E.S.E.,  inclining  towards  the  south, 





OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

which  remained  nearly  unaltered  for  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  its  light  being  1821- 
of  a  yellow  cast  and  remarkably  brilliant.  After  this  an  arch  was  gradually 
formed  by  the  light  extending  over  to  W.N.W.,  the  brightest  portion  of  it 
being  still  that  in  the  eastern  quarter.  The  arch  was  irregular  and  some- 
times not  continuous,  but  divided  into  a  number  of  luminous  patches  like 
nebulae.  We  also  noticed,  and  now  remembered  to  have  done  so  once  before, 
that  there  were  in  some  places  narrow  but  long  horizontal  separations  of  the 
light,  appearing  like  so  many  dark  parallel  streaks  lying  over  it,  which,  how- 
ever, they  were  not,  as  the  stars  were  here  most  plainly  visible.  The  mag- 
netic needle  was  not  affected.  This  night  was  one  of  the  clearest  we  had 
during  the  winter,  the  milky-way  appearing  unusually  bright  and  well-defined. 

On  the  22d,  the  electrometer  was  tried,  the  wind  being  light  from  the 
N.  W.,  with  overcast  weather,  and  some  very  small  snow  falling;  but  no 
perceptible  effect  was  produced  upon  the  gold  leaf.  In  the  evening,  the 
Aurora  appeared,  like  a  white  cloud  in  the  E.S.E.  At  half-past  nine, 
an  irregular  arch  extended  from  that  point  of  the  horizon  to  the  S.W., 
the  breadth  being  from  one  to  two  degrees,  though  constantly  varying,  and 
its  height  in  the  middle  ten  degrees.  When  this  kind  of  arch  appears  most 
perfect,  it  is  less  frequently  than  any  other  kind  attended  with  coruscations, 
or  very  rapid  motion  in  the  light.  When  these  do  accompany  it,  they  are 
almost  invariably  observed  to  proceed  from  the  upper  side  of  the  arch  only. 

In  the  evening  of  the  23d,  though  the  wind  was  from  the  N.W.,  a 
number  of  small  roundish  clouds,  very  unusual  here  at  this  season,  rose 
from  the  S.E.,  and  the  sky  was  very  prettily  illuminated  in  the  intervals  by 
the  Aurora.  These  clouds  remaining  quite  dark  in  their  appearance,  ex- 
cept about  their  edges,  even  during  the  most  brilliant  display  of  the  Aurora, 
seemed  to  indicate  that  the  latter  phenomenon  was  the  most  distant  of  the 
two.  The  light  of  the  Aurora  was,  as  usual,  much  the  brightest  in  the  S.E. 
quarter.  This  phenomenon  again  made  its  appearance  very  beautifully,  on 
the  24th,  resembling,  in  most  particulars,  that  described  on  the  14th.  It  was 
principally  confined  to  the  southern  half  of  the  heavens,  and  the  different 
streamers  and  coruscations,  though  almost  infinitely  varied,  had  an  evident 
tendency  to  arch  from  E.b.S.  over  to  the  opposite  horizon.  The  "  merry 
dancers  "  were  also  playing  about  with  indescribable  rapidity,  and  many  of 
the  sheets  of  light,  when  they  overlapped  in  meeting,  had  a  very  perceptible 
lilac  tinge. 

On  the  morning  of  the  28th,  the  Aurora  Borealis  appeared  faintly  to  the 


I 


^^mm^mm 


r&ST. 


i .:.:,!, 


146 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1821.  westAvard,  from  4  to  6  o'clock.  Early  on  the  following  morning,  it  was  ob- 
Decemb.  served  to  form  an  arch  of  very  bright  light  from  S.E.  to  S.S.W.,  its  centre 
being  30°  high.  In  its  general  form  it  was  quite  stationary,  as  indeed  the 
more  perfect  arches  usually  are,  but  varied  occasionally  in  the  intensity 
of  the  light,  and  also  in  its  continuity.  From  the  time  that  the  daylight 
began  to  leave  the  heavens  in  the  afternoon,  the  Aurora  again  appeared, 
commencing  in  the  S.E.b.E.  with  very  long  coruscations  or  streamers, 
which  afterwards  shot  past  the  zenith  over  to  the  N.W.  At  9  o'clock,  the 
light  had  become  concentrated  into  a  low  arch,  4°  high  in  the  centre,  well 
defined  at  the  lower  edge,  but  not  so  at  the  upper.  The  legs  were  at  first 
situated  in  the  E.S.E.  and  S.W.b.W.  quarters,  but  the  former  gradually 
shifted  about  two  points  more  to  the  south.  At  one  time  in  the  evening, 
and  before  the  phenomenon  had  assumed  the  more  regular  arch-like  form 
above-mentioned,  we  observed  for  the  space  of  a  few  minutes  together  the 
same  radiated  appearance  about  the  zenith  as  that  described  on  the  14th. 


This  changed  pretty  suddenly  into  an  irregularly  circular  band  of  light,  like 
a  ribbon,  thus : 


or 


and  then  again  returned  to  the  radiated  form,  but  neither  of  these  appear- 
ances continued  very  long.  There  was  a  great  deal  of  the  lilac  tint  observ- 
able this  evening,  and  the  effect  of  the  sheets  of  light  in  obscuring  the  stars 
was  again  too  evident  to  admit  a  doubt. 

The  frequency  and  ill  success  with  which  we  had  tried  the  electrometer 
made  us  almost  despair  of  ever  detecting  any  electricity  in  the  atmosphere, 
but  on  the  evening  of  the  13th  the  chain  being  observed  to  tremble  very 
much,  Ave  thought  the  motion  might  have  been  occasioned  by  this  cause. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

1  09  1 

On  applying  the  electrometer,  however,  the  gold  leaf  was  not  in  the  slightest  Decenrf>, 
degree  affected.     We  afterwards  found  it  to  have  arisen  from  the  wind  acting 
upon  the  plank  at  the  mast-head  in  a  certain  angle,  the  same  effect  being 
once  or  twice  afterwards  produced  with  a  breeze  in  the  same  direction. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  last  day  of  the  year,  it  was  impossible  not  to  expe- 
rience very  high  gratification  in  observing  the  excellent  health  and  spirits 
enjoyed  by  almost  every  officer  and  man  in  both  ships.  The  only  invalid  in 
the  Expedition  was  Reid,  our  carpenter's  mate,  and  even  he  was  at  this 
period  so  much  improved,  that  very  sanguine  hopes  were  entertained  of  his 
continued  amendment.  In  consequence  of  the  effectual  manner  in  which 
the  men  were  clothed,  particularly  about  the  feet,  not  a  single  frost-bite  had 
occurred  that  required  medical  assistance  even  for  a  day,  and,  what  was  more 
important  to  us,  not  a  scorbutic  symptom  had  appeared. 

To  increase  our  ordinary  issue  of  anti-scorbutics,  liberal  as  it  already  was, 
Ave  had  from  the  commencement  of  the  winter  adopted  a  regular  system  of 
growing  mustard  and  cress,  which  the  superior  warmth  of  the  ships  now 
enabled  us  to  do  on  a  larger  scale  than  before.  Each  mess,  both  of  the  offi- 
cers and  ships'  company,  was  for  this  purpose  furnished  with  a  shallow 
box  filled  with  mould,  in  which  a  crop  could  generally  be  raised  in  from 
eight  or  ten  days.  The  quantity  thus  procured  on  board  the  Fury  now 
amounted  to  above  fifty  pounds'  weight,  and  before  the  arrival  of  spring  to 
nearly  one  hundred  pounds ;  and,  trifling  as  such  a  supply  may  appear  to 
those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  being  more  abundantly  furnished,  it  will  not  be 
considered  to  have  been  without  its  use,  when  it  is  remembered  how  complete 
a  specific  for  the  scurvy  fresh  vegetable  substance  has  invariably  proved.  In 
consideration  of  the  salads  thus  raised,  Mr.  Edwards  recommended  our  re- 
serving the  cranberries  intended  to  have  been  issued  during  a  part  of  this 
winter,  until  circumstances  might  render  them  more  essentially  requisite 
to  the  health  of  the  ships'  companies.  This  arrangement  was  accordingly 
adopted  and  the  event  fully  justified  its  propriety. 

With  respect  to  the  occupations  which  engaged  our  time  during  this 
season  of  unavoidable  inactivity,  I  can  add  little  or  nothing  to  my  former 
account  of  the  manner  in  which  we  passed  the  winter  at  Melville  Island  ;  for 
the  two  situations  were  so  nearly  similar,  and  our  resources  necessarily  so 
limited  in  this  way,  that  it  was  not  easy  to  produce  much  variety  in  the 
employment  of  them.  It  may  be  imagined,  and  was  indeed  anticipated  by 
ourselves,  that  want  of  novelty  was  on  the  present  occasion  a  disadvantage 

u  2 


!f 


148 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


■1 


I   I     l!   iijil 


Decemb  **kely  to  ren(^er  our  confinement  more  tedious  than  before ;  but  this  by  no 
v^rw/  means  appeared  to  be  the  case :  for  the  men  sufficient  employment  may 
always  be  found  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  their  being  idle  ;  and  I  have 
already  noticed  the  auxiliaries,  to  which  Ave  had  recourse  to  assist  in  pro- 
moting this  end  ;  while  most  officers  have  resources  within  themselves,  of 
which  scarcely  any  situation  or  circumstances  can  divest  them.  What  with 
reading,  writing,  making  and  calculating  observations,  observing  the  various 
natural  phenomena,  and  taking  the  exercise  necessary  to  preserve  our 
health,  nobody  I  believe  ever  felt  any  symptoms  of  ennui  during  our  conti- 
nuance in  winter  quarters. 

Among  the  recreations  which  afforded  the  highest  gratification  to  several 
among  us,  I  may  mention  the  musical  parties  we  Avere  enabled  to  muster, 
and  which  assembled  on  stated  evenings  throughout  the  Avinter,  alternately 
in  Captain  Lyon's  cabin  and  my  own.  More  skilful  amateurs  in  music  might 
well  have  smiled  at  these  our  humble  concerts  ;  but  it  will  not  incline  them 
to  think  less  of  the  science  they  admire  to  be  assured  that,  in  these  remote 
and  desolate  regions  of  the  globe,  it  has  often  furnished  us  with  the  most 
pleasurable  sensations  Avhich  our  situation  Avas  capable  of  affording:  for 
independently  of  the  mere  gratification  afforded  to  the  ear  by  music,  there 
is  perhaps  scarcely  a  person  in  the  Avorld  really  fond  of  it,  in  whose  mind 
its  sound  is  not  more  or  less  connected  Avith  "  his  far-distant  home."  There 
are  always  some  remembrances  Avhich  render  them  inseparable,  and  those 
associations  are  not  to  be  despised  which,  while  Ave  are  engaged  in  the  per- 
formance of  our  duty,  can  still  occasionally  transport  us  into  the  social  circle 
of  our  friends  at  home,  in  spite  of  the  oceans  that  roll  betAveen  us. 

With  our  time  thus  occupied,  our  comforts  so  abundant,  and  the  prospect 
to  sea-ward  so  enlivening,  it  would  indeed  have  been  our  oAvn  faults,  had 
Ave  felt  any  thing  but  enjoyment  in  our  present  state,  and  the  most  lively 
hopes  and  expectations  for  the  future. 


=,S*WI 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 
Fury,  at  Winter  Island,  during  the  Month  of  December,  1821. 


Fahrenheit's  Ther- 
mometer. 

£    O   <B 

a  5  « 
£  u  ° 

B 

arome 

er. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

L»aj 

Maxi- 

Mini- 

Mean. 

Maxi- 

Mini- 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity, 

1 

O 
-10 

O 

-19 

O 
-17.54 

o 
61.7 

inches 

29.81 

inches 

29.71 

inches 

29.773 

NNW 

light 

2 

19 

27 

23.07 

61.6 

29.92 

29. 8C 

29.853 

NNW 

modt. 

3 

24 

29 

26.83 

60.5 

30.00 

20.90 

29.945 

NW 

modt. 

4 

14 

22 

17.67 

59.2 

30.01 

29.96 

29.990 

NW 

modt. 

5 

1 

17 

5.75 

62.0 

29.90 

29.74 

29.843 

SE 

light 

6 

+  1 

1 

+  0.33 

62.5 

29.82 

29.74 

29.777 

SE 

fresh 

7 

2 

1 

0.33 

61.0 

29.90 

29.83 

29. 875 

ESE 

light 

8 

2 

10 

-4.25 

61.0 

29.82 

29.70 

29.775 

North 

light 

9 

-10 

20 

16.33 

59.2 

29.70 

29.66 

29.083 

NW 

light 

10 

14 

24 

17.50 

58.6 

29.66 

29.60 

29.610 

NW 

modt. 

11 

18. 

22 

20.50 

55.5 

29.77 

29.62 

29.708 

NNW 

light 

12 

18 

21 

19.21 

53.4 

29.82 

29.62 

29.745 

North 

light 

13 

18 

25 

22.25 

54.6 

30.03 

29.86 

29.953 

NW  . 

light 

14 

24 

27 

25.50 

55.1 

30.12 

30.05 

30.092 

NW 

light 

15 

13 

24 

18.33 

53.7 

30.11 

29.80 

29.953 

WNW 

fresh 

16 

9 

13 

11.12 

53.3 

29.70 

29.60 

29.637 

WNW 

modt. 

17 

5 

16 

8.42 

55.4 

29.50 

29.10 

29.285 

SE 

fresh 

18 

5 

18 

10.58 

58.7 

29.63 

29.31 

29.525 

North 

light 

19 

7 

18 

13.00 

58.2 

29.02 

29.45 

29.493 

NW 

From  Strong 
to  Light. 

20 

2 

151 

9.00 

60.3 

29.90 

29.50 

29.728 

North 

light 

21 

5 

14 

11.33 

60.1 

29.91 

29.76 

29.853 

NNW 

fresh 

22 

2 

10 

4.67 

60.6 

29.68 

29.40 

29.487 

'    NW 

light 

23 

1 

8 

4.00 

63.5 

29.72 

29.40 

29.587 

NW 

light 

24 

0 

6 

3.67 

66.4 

29.80 

29.70 

29.762 

NW 

modt. 

25 

+  2 

3 

-f-1.00 

61.8 

29.61 

29.37 

29.470 

ssw 

fresh 

26 

2 

3 

-1.06 

62.5 

29.46 

29.27 

29.338 

SE 

fresh 

27 

-2 

11 

5.00 

63.4 

29.72 

29.46 

29.578 

NNE 

light 

28 

8 

21 

16.79 

65.25 

30.05 

29.72 

29.912 

North 

modt. 

29 

21 

231 

22.42 

66.25 

30.12 

30.06 

50.102 

i.m.  north  C 
p.m.  NW   \ 

modt. 

30 

22 

25 

23.33 

62.00 

30.12 

29.921 

SO. 028 

NW 

light 

31 

21 

25 

23.08 

59.25 

29.88 

29.685 

29.765 

NW 

modt. 

+  2 

-29     - 

-12.94 

59.64 

30.12 

29  162  9.76 

1 

*y  V^^M^JTiir^ 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Wed.  2. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

MANY  FOXES    CAUGHT CONTINUED    OPEN    WATER    TN  THE    OFFING PARTIAL    DISRUP- 
TION OF  THE  ICE  IN  THE  BAY METEOROLOGICAL    PHENOMENA    AND    TEMPERATURE 

OF  ANIMALS ARRIVAL    OF    A    TRIBE    OF    ESQUIMAUX FIRST    MEETING    AND    SUBSE- 
QUENT INTERCOURSE  WITH  THEM ESQUIMAUX  IN  WANT  OF   PROVISIONS — SUPPLIED 

WITH    BREAD-DUST — SOME  ACCOUNT    OF  A  SEALING  EXCURSION  WITH    THEM FRESH 

DISRUPTION    OF  THE    ICE    IN    THE    BAY CLOSING    OF    THE    WINTER    THEATRE ME- 
TEOROLOGICAL PHENOMENA  TILL  THE  END  OF  FEBRUARY  1822. 

The  first  day  of  the  new  year  was  a  very  severe  one  in  the  open  air,  the 
thermometer  being  down  to  —  22°,  and  the  wind  blowing  strong  from  the 
north-west.  The  effect  of  a  breeze  upon  the  feelings  is  well  known  to  every 
person,  even  in  comparatively  temperate  climates,  but  at  low  temperatures 
it  becomes  painful  and  almost  insupportable.  Thus,  with  the  thermometer 
at  —  55°,  and  no  wind  stirring,  the  hands  may  remain  uncovered  for  ten 
minutes  or  a  quarter  of  an  hour  without  inconvenience  ;  while  with  a  fresh 
breeze  and  the  thermometer  nearly  as  high  as  zero,  few  people  can  keep 
them  exposed  so  long  without  considerable  pain.  A  high  wind  also  had 
great  effect  in  occasioning  a  general  decrease  of  temperature  in  most  parts 
of  the  ships,  not  by  its  gaining  admission  into  the  inhabited  apartments,  but 
by  favouring  the  rapid  abstraction  of  heat  from  without. 

About  noon  on  the  2d,  Captain  Lyon  observed  a  considerable  body  of 
snow  taken  up  by  the  wind  and  whirled  round  in  a  spiral  form  like  that  of 
a  water-spout,  though  with  us  the  breeze  was  quite  light  at  the  time.  It 
increased  gradually  in  size  till  lost  behind  the  south-east  point.  As  a  proof 
of  the  difficulty  which  the  hares  must  find  in  obtaining  subsistence  during 
the  winter,  these  animals  were  at  this  time  in  the  habit  of  coming  alongside 
the  ships  upon  the  ice  to  pick  up  what  they  could  from  our  rubbish  heaps. 
A  fox  or  two  still  entered  the  traps  occasionally,  and  our  gentlemen  in- 
formed me  that  they  had  always  been  most  successful  in  catching  them  after 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

a  southerly  wind,  which  they  attributed  with  great  probability  to  the  smell  1822- 
of  the  ships  being  thus  more  extensively  communicated  over  the  island. 
One  or  two  of  these  poor  creatures  had  been  found  in  the  traps  with  their 
tongues  almost  bitten  in  two.  The  traps  made  use  of  for  catching  these  beau- 
tiful little  animals  were  formed  of  a  small  cask,  having  a  sliding  door  like 
that  of  a  common  mouse-trap,  and  were  baited  with  oiled  meat  or  blubber. 
The  whole  number  caught  during  the  winter  was  between  eighty  and  ninety, 
of  which  more  than  seventy  were  taken  before  the  end  of  December.  In  a 
single  trap  of  Captain  Lyon's,  no  less  than  fifteen  were  caught  in  the  course 
of  four  hours,  on  the  night  of  the  25th  of  November  ;  and  the  people  en- 
gaged in  watching  the  trap  remarked  that  no  sooner  had  one  of  these  ani- 
mals been  taken  out,  and  they  themselves  retired  a  few  yards,  than  ano- 
ther entered  it.  So  stupid  indeed  are  they  in  this  respect  that,  in  seve- 
ral instances,  those  which  had  escaped  from  the  ships  entered,  and  were 
re-caught  in  the  same  traps  as  before. 

Of  a  great  number  of  foxes  weighed  by  Captain  Lyon  during  the  winter, 
the  average  weight  was  eight  pounds,  but  they  varied  from  nine  and  a  half 
to  seven,  and  he  observed  that  the  males,  though  larger  than  the  females, 
were  not  so  fat.  The  fur  of  the  whole  of  them  when  first  caught  was  of 
the  purest  white,  except  in  two  or  three  individuals  of  a  bluish  colour, 
which  appeared  to  be  of  a  different  species.  The  great  variety  of  dis- 
positions displayed  by  those  which  were  kept  for  taming  was  very  re- 
markable, some  being  gentle  and  quiet  from  the  time  of  their  first  coming 
on  board,  and  others  remaining  wild  and  intractable  in  spite  of  every 
kindness  and  good  treatment.  Our  dogs  became  familiar  enough  even  to 
play  with  them  ;  but  the  foxes  were,  on  their  part,  never  entirely  free  from 
apprehension  on  this  account.  The  noise  they  make  when  irritated  is  a 
weak  half-stifled  sort  of  bark,  but  they  have  also  a  more  shrill  and  piercing 
cry  when  much  frightened.  When  placed  with  their  houses  upon  the  ice, 
they  were  constantly  endeavouring  to  burrow  in  the  snow  within  the  circle 
of  their  chains,  and  one  of  them,  where  the  snow  lay  deeper  than  usual, 
soon  formed  for  himself  a  secure  and  sheltered  apartment  under  it.  When 
deprived  of  the  means  of  doing  this,  they  are  far  from  being  proof  against 
the  severity  of  the  season,  for  two  or  three  died  on  board  the  Fury  entirely 
from  this  cause,  though  furnished  with  good  kennels.  Of  those  which  were 
taken  better  care  of,  not  one  remained  on  board  alive  Avhen  we  Avent  to 
sea,  the  greater  part  having  gradually  wasted  away,  though  well  fed   and 


t#*~¥r,MMKdb 


Mon.  14 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

housed  ;  and  the  rest  which  were  thriving  better  made  their  escape  to  the 
shore. 

We  had  hitherto  found  the  thermometer  on  board  stand  from  two  to  five 
degrees  higher  than  that  on  the  ice,  owing  to  the  warm  atmosphere  created 
by  the  fires.  On  the  5th  at  noon,  however,  the  difference  amounted  to  9°, 
that  on  board  standing  at  —  22°,  when  the  other  indicated  a  temperature  of 

31°.  We  did  not  know  to  what  cause  to  attribute  this,  but  two  or  three 
decrees  may  fairly  be  deducted  on  this  account  from  the  mean  temperatures 
given  in  the  Meteorological  Abstract  throughout  the  winter. 

Some  port-wine,  which  was  stowed  in  bins  in  the  slop-room,  having  a 
week  or  two  before  been  found  partially  frozen,  a  further  examination  took 
place  on  the  12th,  when  two  or  three  bottles  were  found  broken,  and  the 
wine  entirely  frozen  in  thin  laminae  not  unlike  the  plates  of  white  mica, 
and  from  one-eighth  to  two-eighths  of  an  inch  in  thickness.  White  wine  was 
frozen  into  one  mass,  retaining  its  colour  and  translucency,  and  assuming 
the  appearance  of  very  clear  amber.  The  circumstance  of  our  never  having 
met  with  so  much  loss  in  this  way,  in  the  course  of  a  much  more  severe 
winter  at  Melville  Island,  induced  us  to  examine  into  the  cause  ;  when  we 
found  it  arose  from  a  different  stowage  of  the  wine,  which  in  the  present 
instance  had  been  allowed  to  come  in  contact  with  the  ship's  side,  but  had 
before  been  a  foot  or  two  removed  from  it. 

On  the  13th  we  were  no  less  surprised  than  gratified  to  see  almost  as 
much  open  water  to  the  south-east  and  north-east  of  the  island,  as  we  had 
ever  yet  observed.  It  was  covered  indeed  with  a  very  thin  coating  of 
young  ice,  but  a  cloud  of  frost-smoke  rose  freely  from  it,  which  is  never 
the  case  many  hours  after  its  formation.  A  floe  of  young  ice,  on  which 
some  of  the  officers  had  walked  a  day  or  two  before  to  a  considerable  dis- 
tance from  the  shore,  having  now  disappeared,  I  considered  it  prudent  to 
direct,  in  addition  to  the  general  precautionary  orders,  that  no  person 
should  in  future  venture  outside  of  the  grounded  masses  in  the  bay. 

An  ermine,  of  which  the  tracks  had  been  traced  the  preceding  day  up 
the  Hecla's  stern,  and  even  on  board  her,  Captain  Lyon  to-day  succeeded 
in  catching  in  a  trap.  This  beautiful  creature  was  entirely  white,  ex- 
cept a  black  brush  to  its  tail,  and  a  slight  tinge  of  the  usual  sulphur  or 
straw  colour  on  the  root  of  the  tail,  and  also  on  the  fore  part  of  the  fore- 
legs. The  little  animal  being  put  into  a  convenient  cage  seemed  soon  to 
feel  himself  perfectly  at  home,  eating,  drinking,  and  sleeping  without  any 


Ai2»rwx 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

apparent  apprehension,  but  evincing  a  very  decided  determination  to  resent     1822- 
a  too  near  approach  to  the  wires  of  his  new  habitation. 

There  was  to-day  a  very  thick  deposit  of  snow  almost  constantly  occur- 
ring, though  the  weather  might  very  well  be  called  clear.  The  winter  at- 
mosphere of  these  regions  is  indeed  seldom  or  never  free  from  it,  as  may 
readily  be  seen  by  placing  an  instrument  in  the  open  air  for  an  hour  or 
two ;  that  of  to-day  only  differed  from  the  usual  deposit  in  the  degree  in 
which  it  took  place.  At  one  P.M.  a  thermometer  on  the  north  side  of  the 
post  on  the  ice  stood  at  —  32°,  and  the  other,  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays  on 
the  south  side,  only  indicated  a  temperature  one  degree  higher. 

There  was  to-day  a  great  deal  of  terrestrial  refraction,  the  ice  and  land 
to  the  westward  being  thrown  up  by  it  into  a  thousand  fantastic  and  ever 
varying  shapes.  The  thermometer  was  —31°,  and  the  barometer  at  29.73 
inches,  under  which  conditions  of  the  atmosphere  the  smoke  was  observed 
to  ascend  quite  freely  from  the  stove-pipes.  At  one  P.M.  the  snow  upon 
the  black  paint-work  of  the  stern,  which  was  exposed  directly  to  the  sun's 
rays,  was  falling  off  in  little  pieces  and  leaving  a  wet  mark  behind  it. 
This  circumstance  recalled  to  our  recollection  the  anxious  impatience  with 
which,  at  Melville  Island,  Ave  were  watching  for  this  symptom  of  returning 
warmth,  four  or  five  months  later  than  this. 

At  thirty  minutes  past  one  on  the  18th,  the  thermometer  on  the  north  Frid.  18 
side  of  the  post  stood  at  —37°,  while  another  with  its  bulb  coated  with 
black  rose  to  —26°,  when  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays  on  the  south  side. 

At  a  late  hour  this  evening  the  stove-pipe  of  my  cabin  caught  fire,  which 
gave  us  cause  for  a  momentary  alarm,  but  buckets  and  water  being  at  hand 
it  was  soon  extinguished.  This  accident  was  occasioned  by  a  quantity  of 
soot  collected  in  the  stove-pipe,  and  yet  was  not  altogether  to  be  attributed 
to  neglect  in  the  persons  appointed  to  sweep  the  whole  of  them  twice  a 
week.  As  the  cause  of  it  is  such  as  is  not  likely  to  be  anticipated  by  per- 
sons living  in  temperate  climates,  and  as  the  knowledge  of  it  may  be  ser- 
viceable to  somebody  destined  for  a  cold  one,  I  shall  here  explain  it.  The 
smoke  of  coals  contains  a  certain  quantity  of  water  in  the  state  of  vapour. 
This  in  temperate  climates,  and  indeed  till  the  thermometer  falls  to  about 
10°  degrees  below  zero,  is  carried  up  the  chimney  and  principally  dif- 
fused in  the  atmosphere.  When  the  cold  becomes  more  intense  however, 
this  is  no  longer  the  case ;  for  the  vapour  is  then  condensed  into  water 
before  it  can  escape  from  the  stove-pipes,  within  which  a  mass  of  ice  is,  in 


175SSW 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


The  vapour  thus  arrested  must  ne- 


1822.    consequence,  very  speedily  formed  *. 

January.  .  J     x  * 

cessanly  also  detain  a  quantity  of  soot,  which  being  subsequently  en- 
closed in  the  ice  as  the  latter  accumulates,  the  brush  generally  used  to 
clean  the  pipes  cannot  bring  it  away.  By  any  occasional  increase  of  tem- 
perature, either  in  the  external  air  or  in  the  fire  below,  the  ice  sometimes 
thaws,  pouring  down  a  stream  of  water  into  the  fire  and  bringing  with 
it  a  most  pungent  and  oppressive  smell  of  soot.  For  these  reasons,  as  well 
as  to  avoid  accidents  of  the  nature  above  alluded  to,  it  is  necessary  to 
sweep  the  pipes  much  more  frequently  than  in  warmer  climates,  and  even 
occasionally  to  thaw  the  ice  out  of  them  by  a  fire  made  expressly  for  the 
purpose. 

The  thermometer,  which  had  fallen  to  —38°  the  preceding  night,  stood  at 

Sun.  20.  —40°  at  nine  A.M.  on  the  20th,  being,  as  it  afterwards  proved,  the  lowest 
temperature  we  were  destined  to  experience  for  this  winter.  The  thermo- 
meter rose  to  —  36°  at  noon,  and  was  ten  degrees  higher  when  exposed  to 
the  sun's  rays,  the  weather  being  fine  and  clear  and  the  wind  very  light. 

Tues.  22.  The  22d  was  a  very  severe  day  in  the  open  air,  in  consequence  of  a  fresh 
wind  blowing,  which  also  occasioned  the  temperature  of  the  Fury's  lower 
deck  to  fall  for  the  first  time,  though  only  for  an  hour,  to  48°.  The  incon- 
venience of  a  cold  night  was  felt  in  a  greater  degree,  however,  by  the 
officers  who,  notwithstanding  a  most  uncomfortable  and  even  painful  tem- 
perature for  stage-dresses,  persevered  in  amusing  the  men  by  the  theatrical 
performances  that  had  been  fixed  for  this  evening,  and  accordingly  produced 
the  two  farces  of  "Raising  the  Wind"  and  "The  Sleep-walker,"  to  the 
infinite  gratification  of  their  audience. 

About  this  time  we  were  surprised  to  find  that  one  of  the  Hecla's  anchors 
on  shore  had  come  home,  in  consequence  of  the  cable  becoming  more  tight 
from  the  ship.  This  was  perhaps  occasioned  by  the  ice,  which  was  detached 
from  the  shore  every  tide,  receiving,  in  the  manner  before  described  with 
the  grounded  masses,  a  certain  daily  though  small  addition,  by  which  means 
it  had  imperceptibly  receded,  taking  the  ships  Avith  it.  It  was  necessary 
therefore  in  future,  to  keep  the  cables  more  slack,  to  avoid  disturbing  or 

Frid.  25.  injuring  the  anchors.     On  the  25th,  being  about  the  time  of  the  highest 

*  When  the  weather  was  not  very  severely  cold,  and  a  part  of  the  vapour  escaped  from 
the  pipe  of  the  galley-fire,  the  fore-rigging  was  always  coated  with  ice,  from  the  smoke 
passing  by  it. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

spring-tide,  we  began  to  think  that  the  ice  might  one  day  remove  us  rather  1822 
more  forcibly  than  by  the  slow  process  just  related,  for  we  found  at  day-  3'^Z 
light,  to  our  great  surprise,  that  a  portion  of  the  floe  belonging  to  the  bay, 
and  which  we  had  considered  as  quite  fixed  for  the  winter,  had  now  been 
broken  off  and  removed,  leaving  the  clear  water  within  four  or  five  hundred 
yards  of  our  sterns.  A  cloud  of  frost-smoke  was  issuing  from  it,  and  a  flock 
of  dovekies  swimming  about  in  it. 

On  the  26th,  we  flew  a  kite  to  the  height  of  three  hundred  and  seventy-  Sat.  26. 
nine  feet,  (as  obtained  by  geometrical  measurement,)  with  a  Six's  register- 
thermometer  attached  to  it.     This  after  it  had  been  up  a  quarter  of  an  hour 
indicated  a  minimum  of  — 23§°,  the  temperature  upon  the  ice,  by  the  same 
thermometer  tried  before  and  after  being  — 24|°. 

Mr.  Pulfer  the  carpenter  of  the  Hecla  in  taking  a  Avalk  round  the  S.E. 
point,  on  the  27th,  was  somewhat  startled  at  suddenly  observing  a  large  Sun.  27. 
bear  at  no  great  distance  from  him,  and  prudently  retreated  to  the  ships 
before  Bruin  saw  him.  It  is  commonly  believed  by  the  Greenland  sailors, 
who  have  certainly  the  best  opportunities  of  judging,  that  these  animals  are 
not  generally  disposed  to  retreat  from  one  man,  though  they  invariably  fly 
from  a  party. 

On  the  29th  there  was  a  fresh  breeze  from  the  N.W.,  which  on  the  fol- Tues.  29 
lowing  day  increased  to  a  gale  more  to  the  westward.     In  this  instance  the  Wed.30 
thermometer  seemed  to  rise  with  the  wind,  namely,  from  —26°  in  the  morn- 
ing to  —18°  at  midnight.     The  thermometer  fell  again  on  the  31st,  at  the  Thur.31. 
same  time  with  the  wind  ;  but  these  two  phenomena  did  not  often  appear 
to  have  the  same  connexion  as  at  Melville  Island.    The  month  of  January 
closed  with  cold  though  rather  overcast  weather,  and  we  thought  we  had 
escaped  very  favourably  with  a  mean  temperature  of  —22°  96'. 

The  appearances  of  the  Aurora  Borealis  during  January  were  generally 
more  distinguished  for  their  frequency  than  their  brilliancy,  or  for  any  ex- 
traordinary forms  which  this  phenomenon  presented.  Towards  midnight, 
on  the  13th,  the  weather  being  clear,  it  appeared  in  a  very  bright  arch  from 
south  to  N.E.,  being  10°  to  15°  higher  in  the  centre.  It  afterwards  assumed 
a  wavy  or  serpentine  form,  which  constantly  varied,  and  smaller  streams  of 
light  seemed  to  be  continually  meeting  the  larger,  from  near  the  zenith. 
From  midnight  till  two  A.M.  on  the  24th,  it  continued  very  bright  and 
generally  extended  from  east,  where  it  was  most  brilliant,  to  W.N.W.  The 
following  evening,   an    arch    of    the    Aurora    assumed    the    most   perfect 

X  2 


msg&aaa&BM3amzsiE?z 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

1822.    bridge-like  form  I  ever  saw.     It  extended  from  S.E.  to  N.W.,  on  the  south- 
January.         °> 
v-t>^  ern  side  of  the  heavens,  both  its  edges  being  well  defined,  which  is  very 

rarely  the  case.  At  seven  A.M.  on  the  following  morning,  it  appeared  again 
in  a  form  still  more  novel,  three  complete  arches  being  now  visible;;  the 
middle  one,  which  was  the  brightest,  passing  through  the  zenith  and  the 
others,  which  were  in  the  centre  about  20°  distant  from  it  on  each  side,  gra- 
dually closing  till  they  joined  it  at  the  east  and  west  points  of  the  horizon. 
It  was  impossible  not  to  be  struck  with  the  general  resemblance  in  the  form 
of  this  phenomenon  to  that  I  have  frequently  mentioned,  as  assumed  by  the 
clouds  in  the  polar  regions  at  particular  seasons  *  :  this  coincidence  may 
possibly  serve  to  throw  some  light  on  the  nature  and  peculiarities  of  the 
Aurora.  For  several  hours  on  the  same  night,  this  meteor  formed  a  tole- 
rably well-defined  arch  from  E.S.E.  to  W.N.W.,  being  6°  high  in  the 
centre,  reaching  from  one  horizon  to  the  other,  and  confined  entirely  to  the 
southern  side  of  the  heavens.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  it  was  seen 
for  an  hour  and  a  quarter  much  in  the  same  situation,  and  on  the  following 
evening  it  appeared  faintly  in  almost  every  part  of  the  heavens. 

From  eleven  P.M.  till  past  midnight,  on  the  18th,  it  once  more  appeared 
very  bright  from  W.  to  S.E.,  having  at  times  a  very  rapid  and  irregular 
motion.  Whenever  the  light  was  most  concentrated  it  was  also  the  brightest, 
and  almost  always,  in  that  case,  we  observed  it  assume  an  arch-like  form  in  the 
southern  part  of  the  heavens.  This  was  particularly  the  case  on  the  evening 
of  the  19th,  when  there  appeared  two  concentric  though  not  altogether  con- 
tinuous arches,  extending  from  S.E.b.E.  to  W.S.W.,  the  highest  being  8°  to 
10°  above  the  horizon,  but  in  this  respect  at  times  slowly  varying.  At  eleven 
P.M.,  after  thus  remaining  without  any  very  remarkable  alteration  for  above  two 
hours,  it  suddenly  became  extremely  variable,  shifting  its  place  laterally  with 
a  prodigiously  rapid  motion,  but  still  keeping  within  the  general  limits  above 
mentioned,  both  in  bearing  and  altitude.  In  this  lateral  motion,  which  was 
somewhat  of  the  kind  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe  on  the  14th  of  Decem- 
ber, it  seemed,  as  it  were,  to  roll  over  from  one  end  of  the  arch  to  the  other, 
while  at  the  same  time  numberless  lighter  and  less  brilliant  coruscations  were 
emitted  from  its  upper  margin.  Whenever  the  phenomenon  occupied  the 
smallest  space  in  the  heavens,  the  light  was  invariably  the  most  intense,  and 
often  when   several  sheets  of  it  appeared  to  unite,   in  the  manner  before 

Account  of  the  Voyage  of  1819-20,  pp.  141, 144,  164. 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

explained,  the  lilac  tint  was  quite  vivid  ;  in  general,  its  colour  was  yellowish. 
Stars  of  the  second  magnitude  were  almost  obscured  by  it. 

Towards  the  end  of  January,  this  phenomenon  appeared  frequently  in  the 
S.E.  and  E.S.E.,  but  it  was  generally  faint,  and  unmarked  by  any  peculiarity 
requiring  farther  notice.  The  electrometer  was  frequently  applied  to  the 
mast-head  chain,  and  the  magnetic  needle  constantly  watched  during  all 
these  appearances,  but  neither  of  these  was  on  any  one  occasion  sensibly 
affected.  The  only  other  meteorological  phenomena  that  need  be  noticed 
about  this  period  were  one  or  two  instances  of  parhelia  and  paraselene, 
sometimes  tinged  with  the  prismatic  tints,  and  sometimes  colourless,  but 
always  situated  at  the  angular  distance  of  about  22|°  on  each  side  of  the  sun 
and  moon,  and  usually  upon  halos,  more  or  less  distinct  and  perfect. 

A  sheet  of  young  ice  was  several  times  formed  and  dislodged  by  the  tides 
within  the  points  of  our  bay  but ;  the  water  continued  open  to  the  south-east- 
ward with  every  northerly  or  westerly  wind,  and  numerous  dovekies  were 
swimming  about  near  the  shore  :  neither  did  the  land  animals  altogether 
desert  us,  a  few  foxes  being  still  occasionally  caught  in  traps,  and  one  or  two 
hares  killed  while  literally  feeding  alongside  the  ships  on  our  rubbish  heaps. 

The  following  temperatures  of  animals  just  after  death  were  principally 
taken  by  Captain  Lyon,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  them  : — 


< 

Temperature  of 

i 
rhe  Animal.               The  Atmosphere 

Nov.  15, 

1821. 

.     An  Arctic  fox 

o                                        o 
106f        .          .           —14 

Dec.  3, 

5> 

Ditto 

•    ioi£ 

—    5 

3,         5, 

55 

Ditto 

100 

—   3 

,,         11, 

,5 

Ditto 

ioi! 

—  21 

»      15, 

5? 

Ditto 

99f 

-15 

„      17, 

5, 

Ditto 

9S 

-10 

,,      19, 

,, 

Ditto 

99-1 

—  14 

Jan.  3,  1822. 

Ditto 

104i 

-23 

5,             ", 

,5 

.     A  white  hare 

101 

—21 

»    io, 

,, 

.  An  Arctic  fox 

.      100 

—  15 

„     17, 

,, 

Ditto 

.      106 

—  32 

»     24, 

55 

Ditto 

103 

—  27 

JJ             5, 

55                • 

Ditto 

.     103 

—27 

!J            5, 

55 

Ditto 

.      102 

-25 

„     27, 

5, 

Ditto 

101 

—  32 

Feb.  2, 

5,                • 

A  Wolf   j      . 

105 

-27 

IWAJI&dUIfiaHi  '  , 


d 


'( 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 
Fury,  at  Winter  Island,  during  the  Month  of  January,  1822. 




~T 

Daj 

Fahrenheit's 
Thermometer. 

"     site 
cs  g  15 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 

Maxi- 

Mim- 

Maxi- 

Mini- 



Weather. 

a  ^ 

mum. 

mum. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity. 

1 

o 
-10 

O 

-22 

o 
-19.7£ 

61.00 

inches 

29.02 

inches 

29.55 

inches 

29.593 

NW 

fresh 

fine 

2 

18 

27 

22.0S 

57.33 

29.09 

29.57 

29.017 

NNW 

modt. 

clear 

3 

17 

26 

21.58 

59.22 

29.75 

29.66 

29.723 

NE 

light 

cloudy- 

4 

11 

21 

15.75 

60.  5 

29.69 

29.45 

29.547 

NW 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow- 

5 

19 

26 

22.50 

59.66 

29.72 

29.70 

29.710 

NW 

light 

fine 

G 

17 

22 

19.04 

55.  5 

29.84 

29.76 

29.805 

West 

modt. 

hazy 

7 

13 

21 

18.46 

59.75 

29.70 

29.59 

29.027 

WNW 

modt. 

cloudy 

8 

17 

20 

19.33 

58.  5 

29.99 

29.66 

29.800 

WNW 

strong 

cloudy- 

9 

18 

22 

20.04 

54.66 

30.01 

29.78 

29.952 

NNW 

|      light 

fine 

10 

7 

13 

9.42 

60.33 

29.70 

29.47 

29.565 

East 

light 

cloudy- 

11 

6 

16 

11.29 

60.00 

29.76 

,29.47 

29.582 

East 

modt. 

hazy 

12 

16 

24 

19.96 

60.  5 

29.88 

:29.80 

29.847 

NW 

fresh 

cloudy 

13 

20§ 

26 

22.67 

59.  5 

29.80 

29,72 

29.757 

North 

light 

clear 

14 

19 

26 

23.75 

57.33 

29.85 

29.80 

29.827 

North 

light 

clear 

15 

19 

25 

22.25 

53.25 

29.84 

29.70 

29.753 

NW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

lb 

18 

25 

20.29 

60.25 

29.70 

29.64 

29.683 

WNW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

17 

15 

27 

18.62 

58.75 

29.69 

29.03 

29.652 

North 

light 

cloudy 

18 

25 

31 

28.40 

60.00 

29.74 

29.70 

29.713 

NNW 

I  light 

fine  and  clear 

19 

28 

33 

30.00 

58.25 

29.95 

29.75 

29.855 

West 

light 

fine  and  clear 

20 

27 

37 

33.00 

58.25 

30.12 

29.94 

30.035 

NW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

21 

31 

37i 

33.29 

54.00 

30.17 

30.12 

30.137 

NW 

modt. 

clear 

22 

25 

32 

28.33 

53.25 

30.13 

30.09 

30.110 

NW 

fresh 

hazy 

23 

29 

32 

30.71 

51.25 

30.20 

30.13 

30.205 

NNW 

modt. 

clear 

24 

15 

31 

21.92 

56.00 

30.20 

29.87 

30.118 

NNW 

light 

cloudy 

25 

14 

27 

19.54 

57.00 

29.70 

29.48 

29.577 

E.  to  N. 

fresh 

cloudy  and  snow- 

26 

22 

30 

26.46 

54.00 

29.51 

29.42  ■ 

29.466 

NNW 

fresh 

clear 

27 

31 

34 

32.79 

52.  5 

29.73 

29.52  : 

29.620 

NW 

modt. 

fine 

28 

30 

37 

34.00 

52.00 

29.87 

29.73  S 

29.805 

NNW 

light 

fine 

29 

27 

37 

30.58 

52.00 

29.98 

29.89  5 

'9.922 

WNW 

fresh 

clear 

30 

14 

26 

18.67 

52.66 

30.03 

30.00  : 

10.022 

West 

from  light 
to  fresh 

fine 

31 

14 

24 

18.25 

55.00 

30.02 

29.94  : 

29.980 

WNW 

strong  to 
light 

hazy 
fine 

—6     - 

-37|  - 

-22.9G 

56.84 

30.26 

29.42  i 

'9.794 

\  • 


^K5I 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 

On  the  morning  of  the  1st  of  February  it  was  reported  to  me  that  a  num-  1822- 
ber  of  strange  people  were  seen  to  the  westward,  coming  towards  the  ships  FvS^y 
over  the  ice.  On  directing  a  glass  towards  them  we  found  them  to  be  Esqui- 
maux, and  also  discovered  some  appearance  of  huts  on  shore,  at  the  dis- 
tance of  two  miles  from  the  ships,  in  the  same  direction.  I  immediately  set 
out,  accompanied  by  Captain  Lyon,  an  officer  from  each  ship,  and  two  of 
the  men,  to  meet  the  natives  who,  to  the  number  of  five-and-twenty,  were 
drawn  up  in  a  line  abreast  and  still  advanced  slowly  towards  us.  As  we  ap- 
proached nearer  they  stood  still,  remaining  as  before  in  a  compact  line,  from 
which  they  did  not  move  for  some  time  after  we  reached  them.  Nothing  could 
exceed  their  quiet  and  orderly  behaviour  on  this  occasion,  which  presented 
a  very  striking  contrast  with  the  noisy  demeanour  of  the  natives  of  Hudson's 
Strait.  They  appeared  at  a  distance  to  have  arms  in  their  hands,  but  what 
we  had  taken  for  bows  or  spears  proved  to  be  only  a  few  blades  of  whalebone 
which  they  had  brought,  either  as  a  peace-offering,  or  for  barter,  and  which 
we  immediately  purchased  for  a  few  small  nails  and  beads.  Some  of  the 
women,  of  whom  there  were  three  or  four,  as  well  as  two  children,  in  this 
party,  having  handsome  clothes  on  which  attracted  our  attention,  they 
began  to  our  utter  astonishment  and  consternation  to  strip,  though  the  ther- 
mometer stood  at  23°  below  zero.  We  soon  found  however  that  there  was 
nothing  so  dreadful  in  this  as  we  at  first  imagined,  every  individual  among 
them  having  on  a  complete  double  suit.  The  whole  were  of  deer-skin  and 
looked  both  clean  and  comfortable. 

However  quietly  the  Esquimaux  had  awaited  our  approach  and  still  con- 
tinued to  conduct  themselves,  there  was  as  little  apprehension  or, distrust 
visible  in  their  countenances  or  manner  as  it  was  possible  for  one  strange  set 
of  persons  to  evince  on  meeting  another.  As  soon,  therefore,  as  we  had 
bought  all  that  they  had  to  sell,  and  made  them  a  number  of  valuable  pre- 
sents, we  expressed  by  signs  our  wish  to  accompany  them  to  their  huts,  with 
which  they  willingly  complied,  and  we  immediately  set  out  together.  On 
our  way  the  Esquimaux  were  much  amused  by  our  dogs,  especially  by  a  large 
one  of  the  Newfoundland  breed,  that  had  been  taught  to  fetch  and  carry— a 
qualification  which  seemed  to  excite  unbounded  astonishment ;  and  the  chil- 
dren could  scarce  contain  themselves  for  joy,  when  Captain  Lyon  gave  them 
a  stick  to  throw  for  the  dog  to  bring  back  to  them.  A  child  of  five  or  six 
years  old,  thus  amusing  itself  on  such  a  day  and  in  such  a  climate,  formed  by  no 
means  the  least  characteristic  figure  of  our  motley  group.     An  old  and  infirm 


wvitaue^vraro 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

1822     man>  supported  by  a  stick  which  indeed  he  much  needed,  was  soon  left  behind 
us,  his  companions  seeming  to  take  no  notice  of  his  infirmities,  and  leaving 
him  without  reluctance  or  apology  to  find  his  way  home  at  his  OAvn  pace. 
When  we  had  approached  the  huts  within  a  few  hundred  yards,  three  of  the  Es- 
quimaux went  on  before  us,  having  previously  explained  that  they  were  going  to 
confine  their  dogs,  lest  being  frightened  at  our  coming  they  should  run  away. 
When  it  is  remembered  that  these  habitations  were  fully  within  sight  of  the 
ships,  and  how  many  eyes  were  continually  on  the  look  out  among  us  for  any 
thing  that  could  afford  variety  or  interest  in  our  present  situation,  our  sur- 
prise may  in  some  degree  be  imagined  at  finding  an  establishment  of  five 
huts,  with    canoes,   sledges,  dogs,  and  above  sixty  men,  women,  and  chil- 
dren, as  regularly  and,  to  all  appearance  as  permanently  fixed,  as  if  they 
had  occupied  the  same  spot  for  the  whole  winter.     If  the  first  view  of  the 
exterior  of  this  little  village  was  such  as  to  create  astonishment,  that  feeling 
was  in  no  small  degree  heightened,  on  accepting  the  invitation  soon  given  us, 
to  enter  these  extraordinary  houses,  in  the  construction  of  which  we  observed 
that  not  a  single  material  was  used  but  snow  and  ice.  After  creeping  through 
two  low  passages,  having  each  its  arched  door-way,  Ave  came  to  a  small  cir- 
cular apartment  of  which  the  roof  was  a  perfect  arched  dome.     From  this 
three  door-ways,  also  arched  and  of  larger  dimensions  than  the  outer  ones, 
led  into  as  many  inhabited  apartments,  one  on  each  side,  and  the  other  facing 
us  as  we  entered.     The  interior  of  these  presented  a  scene  no  less  novel 
than  interesting.     The  women  were  seated  on  the  beds  at  the  sides  of  the 
huts,  each  having  her  little  fire-place  or  lamp,  with  all  her  domestic  utensils 
about  her  ;  the  children  crept  behind  their  mothers,  and  the  dogs,  except  the 
female  ones,  which  were  indulged  with  a  part  of  the  beds,  slunk  out  past  us 
in  dismay.     The  construction  of  this  inhabited  part  of  the  huts  was  similar 
to  that  of  the  outer  apartment,  being  a  dome  formed  by  separate  blocks  of 
snow,  laid  with  great  regularity  and  no  small  art,  each  being  cut  into  the 
shape  requisite  to  form  a  substantial  arch,  from  seven  to  eight  feet  high  in 
the  centre,  and  having  no  support  whatever  but  what  this  principle  of  build- 
ing supplied.     I  shall  not  here  further  describe  the  peculiarities  of  these 
curious  edifices,  remarking  only  that  a  cheerful  and  sufficient    light  was 
admitted  to  them  by  a  circular  window  of  ice  neatly  fitted  into  the  roof  of 
each  apartment. 

We  found  our  new  acquaintance  as  desirous  of  pleasing  us,  as  we  were 
ready  to  be  pleased;  so  that  we  were  soon  on  "good  terms  with  them  all. 


by Cap-ffLTon.,  ii.lT 


Winter  Island  ,  1622. 

st    I  FabTlS^liT-JolniMairaT.  Lonton, 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


161 


>*r* 


While  we  were  engaged  in  examining  every  part  of  their  huts,  their  whole 
behaviour  was  in  the  highest  degree  orderly,  respectful  and  good-humoured. 
They  eagerly  received  the  various  articles  that  were  given  them,  either  in  ex- 
change for  their  own  commodities,  or  as  presents,  but  on  no  occasion  impor- 
tuned us  for  any  thing,  nor  did  the  well-known  sound  of  "  pilletay  "  once 
escape  from  them.  We  had  also  great  reason  to  belieye  that  these  people 
possessed,  in  no  ordinary  degree,  the  quality  of  honesty,  a  quality  the  more 
desirable  to  us,  as  we  had  on  shore,  besides  the  house  and  observatory,  all 
our  boats  and  other  articles,  which,  had  they  been  disposed  to  pilfer,  it 
would  have  required  all  our  vigilance  to  guard.  If  we  dropped  a  glove  or 
a  handkerchief  without  knowing  it,  they  would  immediately  direct  our  at- 
tention to  it  by  pointing,  and  if  the  owner  had  left  the  hut  before  they  disco- 
vered it,  would  run  out  after  him  to  return  it.  Numberless  instances  of  a 
similar  kind  occurred  in  the  course  of  our  subsequent  communication  with 
them,  some  of  which  I  shall  hereafter  have  an  opportunity  of  relating. 

After  remaining  with  them  a  couple  of  hours,  and  proposing  to  spend  the 
following  day  amongst  them,  we  set  out  on  our  return  to  the  ships.  Being 
desirous  of  trying  their  disposition  to  part  with  their  children,  I  proposed  to 
buy  a  fine  lad,  named  Toolooak,  for  the  very  valuable  consideration  of  ahandsome 
butcher's  knife.  His  father,  apparently  understanding  our  meaning,  joyfully 
accepted  the  knife,  and  the  boy  ran  into  the  hut  to  fetch  his  mittens,  which 
seemed  to  be  all  that  he  cared  for  in  leaving  his  home.  He  then  set  off  with  us 
in  high  spirits,  and  at  first  assisted  in  drawing  a  sledge  we  had  purchased  to 
carry  our  things  ;  but  as  he  began,  by  our  additional  signs,  more  clearly  to 
comprehend  our  true  meaning,  he  gradually  relaxed  in  his  zeal  to  accompany 
our  party,  and  being  afterwards  overtaken  by  a  number  of  his  companions, 
he  took  an  opportunity  to  slink  off  among  some  hummocks  of  ice,  so  that 
when  we  arrived  on  board  Toolooak  was  missing. 

On  our  reaching  the  ships,  these  people  expressed  much  less  surprise  and 
curiosity  than  might  naturally  have  been  expected  on  their  first  visit,  which 
may,  perhaps,  in  some  measure  be  attributed  to  their  being  in  reality  a  less 
noisy  kind  of  people  than  most  of  the  Esquimaux  to  whom  we  had  before 
been  accustomed.     Quiet  and  orderly,  however,  as  they  were  disposed  to  be, 
this  first  visit  shewed  them  to  be  as  fond  of  merriment  as  their  countrymen 
are  usually  considered  ;  for,  on  Captain  Lyon's  ordering  his  fiddler  up  on  the 
Hecla's  deck,  they  danced  with  the  men  for  an  hour,  and  then  returned  in 
high  glee  and  good  humour  to  their  huts. 


1822. 
February 


■ 


i,,. 


•| 


m 


1  \  *» 


m 


m 


mum 


n&sxsrTKr* 


ir.v!ai!^«»r,!^ :  *zr 


162 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Sat.  2. 


Februar  ^n  our  retum  on  board  we  Avere  informed  that,  during  our  absence  in  the 
morning,  a  flock  of  thirteen  wolves,  the  first  yet  seen,  crossed  the  ice  in 
the  bay,  from  the  direction  of  the  huts  and  passed  near  the  ships.  These 
animals,  as  we  afterwards  learned,  had  accompanied  or  closely  followed  the 
Esquimaux  on  their  journey  to  the  island  the  preceding  day ;  and  they  proved 
to  us  the  most  troublesome  part  of  their  suite.  They  so  much  resemble  the 
Esquimaux  dogs  that,  had  it  not  been  for  some  doubt  among  the  officers  who 
had  seen  them  whether  they  were  so  or  not,  and  the  consequent  fear  of  doing 
these  poor  people  an  irreparable  injury,  we  might  have  killed  most  of  them 
the  same  evening,  for  they  came  boldly  to  look  for  food  within  a  few  yards 
of  the  Fury,  and  remained  there  for  some  time. 

In  order  to  prevent  our  people  from  occasioning  the  Esquimaux  any  dis- 
turbance or  apprehension,  I  directed  that  only  six  from  each  ship  should  be 
allowed  to  visit  the  huts  at  one  time,  and  that  they  should  then  be  always 
accompanied  by  an  officer.  A  strict  prohibition  was,  at  the  same  time,  issued 
against  the  smallest  article  of  the  ships'  stores  being  given  to  the  people 
without  permission,  on  pain  of  severe  punishment. 

At  an  early  hour  on  the  2d,  we  set  out  with  a  large  party  on  our  proposed 
excursion  to  the  huts.  The  natives  received  us  with  great  cordiality  though 
with  somewhat  more  noisy  expressions  of  pleasure  than  before  ;  and  we  soon 
began  a  more  minute  examination  of  their  habitations  and  furniture  in  which 
they  readily  assisted  us,  except  that  they  always  sat  very  closely  on  the  deer- 
skins which  composed  their  beds,  under  Avhich  were  stowed  such  articles  as 
they  were  least  willing  or  able  to  dispose  of.  They  sold  however  a  great 
number  of  their  things  without  reluctance  ;  and  it  was  indeed  astonishing  to 
see  with  what  eagerness  they  would,  for  the  mere  sake  of  change  and  variety, 
barter  some  of  their  most  indispensable  articles  for  the  veriest  trifles  in  our 
possession.  For  instance,  a  single  sewing-needle,  of  which  they  possessed 
abundance  not  much  inferior  to  our  own,  procured  from  them  a  large  well- 
sharpened  pclmia*,  or  man's  knife  made  of  stout  iron,  for  which  in  point  of 
absolute  utility  a  hundred  needles  would  not  have  been  a  fair  equivalent. 
Various  other  instances  of  the  same  kind  occurred  by  which  indeed  they  were 
not  ultimately  losers,  though  they  certainly  would  have  been  so  had  our  inter- 
course ended  here. 

*  For  an  explanation  of  the  mode  of  accenting  the  Esquimaux  words  used  in  the  course  of 
this  Journal,  I  must  refer  to  the  remarks  immediately  preceding  the  vocabulary  at  the  end  of 
the  last  chapter. 


i#^..-«febft«£rik 


,      OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

We  dined  in  the  huts,  and  the  Esquimaux  gladly  partook  of  our  biscuit  and    1822- 
meat,  and  even  of  a  little  wine  which  however  they  did  not  relish.     We  Zr^X!^ 
returned  on  board  about  sunset,  much  gratified  with  the  interesting  day  we 
had  passed;  having  laid   the   foundation  of  that  perfect    confidence   and 
good  understanding  which,  with  little  or  no  interruption,  afterwards  subsisted 
between  us  and  our  new  acquaintance. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3d,  a  number  of  these  people  were  observed  to  set  Sun.  3 
off  over  the  ice  to  the  south-west  to  bring,  as  we  conjectured,  either  some  more 
of  their  people  or  of  their  property  from  their  last  place  of  abode.     On  walk- 
ing out  to  the  huts  after  divine  service,  however,  we  found  they  had  been 
seal-catching  and  had  succeeded  in  taking  four.     The  very  small  quantity 
of  food  which  they  had  in  their  huts  at  first  coming,  consisting  of  a  little  veni- 
son and  the  flesh  and  blubber  of  the  whale  and  seal,  induced  us  to  suppose 
they  had  left  some  of  their  provision  behind,  and  that  they  would  return  for 
it  as  occasion  demanded.     But  we  now  found  that,  even  at  this  rigorous  sea- 
son/they were  entirely  dependent  in  this  way  on  their  daily  exertions  ;  and 
that  they  had  only  removed  into  their  present  quarters  on  account  of  the 
failure  of  their  summer's  store,  and  of  the  greater  facility  of  obtaining  seals 
at  Winter  Island  than  where  the  sea  was  more  closely  and  continually  frozen. 
On  the  4th  a  number  of  Esquimaux  came  to  the  ships  and  we  took  the  op- 
portunity of  getting  them  to  go  through  the  process  of  building  a  snow-hut 
for  our  amusement  and  information.     From  the  quickness  with  which  they 
completed  this,  our  surprise  at  the  sudden  appearance  of  their  village  ceased  ; 
as  we  now  saw  that  two  or  three  hours  would  be  more  than  sufficient  to 
have  completed  the  whole  establishment  just  as  we  at  first  found  it.     They 
were  then  taken  on  board  and  derived  great  amusement  from  our  organ,  and 
from  any  thing  in  the  shape  of  music,  singing,  or  dancing,  of  all  which  they 
are  remarkably  fond.     Nor  can  I  here  omit  a  striking  instance  of  the  honesty 
of  these  people  which  occurred  to-day.     Some  of  the  gentlemen  of  the  Hecla 
had  purchased  two  of  their  dogs,  which  had  the  preceding  evening  made  their 
escape  and  returned  to  the  huts.     After  the  departure  of  the  Esquimaux  to- 
day, we  were  surprised  to  find  that  they  had  left  two  dogs  carefully  tied  up  on 
board  the  Fury,  which  on  inquiry  proved  to  be  the  animals  in  question,  and 
which  had  been  thus  faithfully  restored  to  their  rightful  owners. 

On  the  5th  a  number  of  the  natives  came  on  board  according  to  promise  Tues.  5 
to  rebuild  the  hut  in  a  more  substantial  manner,  and  to  put  a  plate  of  ice  into 
the  roof  as  a  window,  which  they  did  with  great  quickness  as  well  as  care, 

Y  2 


!#5s»fc£tf  WRU&ttftH  '*  VsffSW 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

February  several  of  the  women  cheerfully  assisting  in  the  labour.  The  men  seemed 
to  take  no  small  pride  in  shewing  in  how  expeditious  and  workman-like  a 
manner  they  could  perform  this ;  and  the  hut  with  its  outer  passage  was  soon 
completed.  From  this  time  they  were  in  the  constant  habit  of  coming  freely 
to  the  ships ;  and  such  as  it  was  not  always  convenient  to  admit,  usually  found 
very  profitable  employment  in  examining  the  heaps  of  ashes,  sand,  and  other 
rubbish  on  the  outside,  where  their  trouble  was  well  repaid  by  picking  up 
small  scraps  of  tin  or  iron.  All  that  they  found  in  this  manner  we  allowed 
them  to  consider  their  lawful  property;  but  were  very  particular  in  preventing 
their  handling  any  thing  on  board  without  permission. 

The  wolves  had  now  begun  to  do  us  some  damage  ;  for  not  even  the  sails 
that  were  fastened  round  the  house  and  observatory  could  escape  their 
ravenous  fangs,  and  they  had  thus  in  the  course  of  a  single  night  much  in- 
jured two  of  our  studding-sails.  We  set  traps  for  them  on  the  ice  ;  and  also 
large  shark-hooks  secured  with  chains  and  baited  with  meat ;  but  the  former 
they  entered  and  destroyed,  and  the  latter  were  always  found  broken  or  bent, 
without  securing  the  depredators.  These  animals  were  indeed  so  hungry 
and  fearless  as  to  take  away  some  of  the  Esquimaux  dogs  in  a  snow-house 
near  the  Hecla's  stern,  though  the  men  were  at  the  time  within  a  few  yards  of 
them. 

From  the  circumstance  of  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  having  accidentally 
gone  into  different  huts  on  our  first  visits  to  the  village,  (for  with  this  name 
I  believe  we  must  venture  to  dignify  the  united  abodes  of  more  than  sixty 
human  beings,)  particular  individuals  among  the  Esquimaux  had  already 
in  a  manner  attached  themselves  to  each  of*  us.  Captain  Lyon  now  in- 
formed me  that  one  of  his  acquaintance,  a  remarkably  fine  and  intelligent 
young  man  named  Ayoket,  had  given  him  to  understand  that  he  had  some- 
where or  other  seen  Kabloona*  people  like  ourselves  only  a  few  months  ago. 
This  being  the  case  there  seemed  no  reason  why,  if  it  were  made  worth  his 
while,  he  should  not  be  able  to  see  them  again  in  the  course  of  next  summer. 
Anxious  to  profit  by  this  unexpected  mode  of  communication,  I  requested 
Captain  Lyon  to  endeavour  to  direct  Ayoket's  attention  to  the  scheme  of 
conveying  a  letter  from  us  to  the  persons  of  whom  he  spoke. 

On  the  7th  I  paid  another  visit  to  the  huts,  where  I  found  scarcely  any 
body  but  women  and  children,  the  whole  of  the  men,  with  the  exception  of 
the  two  oldest,  having  gone  on  a  sealing  excursion  to  the  north-eastern  side 

*  European. 


Thurs 


aEWff^swFESCTf^sa: 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


of  the  island.     One  of  the  women  named  Iligliuk,  a  sister  of  the  lad  Toolooak,  _ 1,822- 

•  p  February 

who  favoured  us  with  a  song,  struck  us  as  having  a  remarkably  soft  voice,  an  v^vs~> 

excellent  ear,  and  a  great  fondness  for  singing,  for  there  was  scarcely  any 
stopping  her  when  she  had  once  begun.  We  had,  on  their  first  visit  to  the 
ships,  remarked  this  trait  in  Iligliuk's  disposition,  when  she  was  listening  for 
the  first  time  to  the  sound  of  the  organ,  of  which  she  seemed  never  to  have 
enough  ;  and  almost  every  day  she  now  began  to  display  some  symptom  of  that 
superiority  of  understanding  for  which  she  was  so  remarkably  distinguished. 
A  few  of  the  women  learned  several  of  our  names  to-day,  and  I  believe  all 
thought  us  Angekoks  *  of  a  very  superior  class,  when  we  repeated  to  them 
all  round,  by  the  assistance  of  our  books,  the  names  of  all  their  husbands 
obtained  on  board  the  preceding  day.  On  our  way  back  to  the  ships  we 
saAv  a  party  of  them.,  with  their  dogs,  returning  over  the  hill  from  the  north- 
eastward ;  and  we  afterwards  met  another  of  eight  or  ten  who  had  walked 
round  by  the  south-east  point  on  the  ice,  all  alike  unsuccessful,  after  being 
out  in  the  wind  for  six  hours  with  the  thermometer  from  eighteen  to  twenty- 
two  degrees  below  zero.  Thus  hardly  did  these  people  obtain  their  daily 
subsistence  at  this  severe  season  of  the  year  ! 

A  wolf  being  caught  in  one  of  the  traps  this  evening  which  was  so  close  as 
to  be  easily  watched  from  the  ship,  a  party  of  the  officers  ran  out  to  secure 
the  depredator,  and  fired  two  balls  into  the  trap  at  once  to  despatch  him. 
Finding  after  this  that  he  continued  to  bite  a  sword  that  was  thrust  in,  a  third 
shot  was  fired  at  him.  The  trap  was  then  sufficiently  opened  to  get  his  hind 
legs  firmly  tied  together,  after  which  being  considered  tolerably  secure  he 
was  pulled  out  of  the  trap,  which,  however,  his  head  had  scarcely  cleared 
when  he  furiously  flew  at  Mr.  Richard's  throat,  and  would  certainly  have  done 
him  some  serious  mischief  had  not  that  gentleman,  with  great  presence  of 
mind,  seized  the  animal  in  his  turn  by  the  throat,  squeezing  him  with  all  his 
force  between  both  hands.  This  made  the  wolf  relinquish  his  first  attempt, 
and  Mr.  Richards  only  suffered  by  a  bite  in  his  arm  and  another  in  his  knee, 
which,  on  account  of  the  thickness  of  his  clothes,  were  happily  not  severe 
ones.  As  for  the  wolf  he  prudently  took  to  his  heels,  though  two  of  them 
were  still  tied  together,  and  being  favoured  by  the  momentary  confusion  occa- 
sioned by  his  late  rencontre  with  Mr.  Richards,  succeeded  in  escaping  his  pur- 

*  Sorcerers,  or  wizards,  pronounced  as  written  above  in  Greenland  ;  but  at  Winter  Island 
Ang-et-kook ;  and  by  the  people  at  Igloolik  An-nat-ko. 


^y^fcr^¥5L*r.vw'N 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

He  was  found  dead  the  following  day  at  the  distance  of  three-quarters 
of  a  mile  from  the  ships. 

On  the  8th  we  were  visited  by  a  musical  party  of  females,  consisting  only  of 
a  few  individuals  expressly  invited  for  this  purpose.     A  number  of  the  officers 
assembled  in  the  cabin  to  hear  this  vocal  concert,  while  Mr.  Henderson  and 
myself  took  down  the  notes  of  their  songs,  for  which  indeed  they  gave  us 
every  opportunity,  for  I  thought  they  Avould  never  leave  off.     We  afterwards 
amused  them  by  our  little  band  of  flutes  and  violins,  and  also  by  some  songs, 
with  the  whole  of  which  they  were  extremely  well  pleased.  I  feared  several  of 
them,  and  especially  Iligliuk,  would  have  gone  into  fits  with  delight  when  we 
introduced  into  our  song  some  of  their  names  mingled  with  our  own.     While 
most  of  us  were  thus  employed,  Captain  Lyon  took  the  opportunity  of  making 
drawings  of  some  of  the  women,  especially  of  Togolat,  the  prettiest  of  the  party, 
and  perhaps  of  the  whole  village.     She  was  about  six  and  twenty  years  of  age, 
with  a  face  more  oval  than  that  of  Esquimaux  in  general,  very  pretty  eyes 
and  mouth,  teeth  remarkably  white  and  regular,  and  possessing  in  her  carriage 
and  manners  a  degree  of  natural  gracefulness,  which  could  not  be  hid  even 
under  the  disguise  of  an  Esquimaux>oman's  dress,  and,  as  was  usual  with 
Togolat,  the  dirtiest  face  of  her  whole  tribe.     Her  husband  Ewerat,  a  little 
ugly  man  of  about  five-and-forty,  was  the  only  individual  among  them  laying 
claim  to  the  title  of  Angetkook,  and  was  in  reality  a  sensible  obliging  man, 
and  a  first-rate  seal-catcher.     They  had  two  children,  one  of  which,  a  little 
girl,  Togolat  still  occasionally  suckled  and,  according  to  custom,  carried  in  the 
hood  behind  her  back  ;  the  other  a  boy  about  eight  years  of  age,   quite  an 
idiot,  deaf  and  dumb  from  his  birth,  and  squinting  most  horribly  with  both 
eyes. 

Finding  that  these  poor  creatures  were  now  really  in  want  of  food,  for  the 
men  had  again  returned  from  an  unsuccessful  excursion,  I  was  happy  to  avail 
myself  of  a  hint  given  to  me  by  Captain  Lyon  to  furnish  them  occasionally 
with  a  small  supply  of  bread-dust,  of  which  we  had  two  or  three  casks  in 
each  ship.  Our  present  party  was  therefore,  in  addition  to  other  articles, 
supplied  with  several  pounds,  which  they  immediately  expressed  their  in- 
tention to  take  home  to  their  children.  Several  of  them  visited  the  ships  as 
usual  on  the  9th,  and  among  the  rest  Ka-oong-ut  and  his  son  Toolooak.  The 
old  gentleman  was  not  a  favourite  with  us,  being  the  only  one  who  had  yet 
begun  to  tease  us  by  constant  begging.  We  had  often  expressed  displeasure 
at  this  habit,  which  after  a  day  or  two's  acquaintance  began  to  be  extremely 


» 


^T23T 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 
troublesome :  but  I  had  to-day  to  take  cognizance  of  his  stealing  a  nail,  of  which,  „ 1822- 

February 

though  not  a  very  serious  offence,  I  determined  to  take  rather  a  serious  notice, 
as  it  might  otherwise  lead  to  more  extensive  theft.  I  therefore  collected  all 
the  other  Esquimaux  who  were  on  board,  and  having  in  their  presence  ex- 
pressed great  indignation  at  this  conduct,  turned  the  offender  away  in  disgrace. 
Some  of  those  best  acquainted  with  us  were  afterwards  taken  into  the  cabin, 
where  our  sentiments  were  more  fully  explained  to  them.  Among  these  I  was 
not  sorry  to  have  Toolooak  and  Iligliuk,  who  would  not  fail  to  report  at  the 
huts  all  our  proceedings,  but  who  did  not  appear  to  consider  themselves  in  the 
slightest  degree  implicated  in  their  father's  offence,  or  concerned  in  his  dis- 
grace. The  people  of  the  huts  being  much  in  want  of  food,  we  again  dis- 
tributed some  bread-dust  among  them,  taking  care  to  send  a  portion  to  the  infirm 
old  man,  Hik-kei-erd,  by  Ohotoolc,  the  husband  of  Iligliuk,  a  fine  active  manly 
fellow  of  about  two  and  thirty,  who,  as  we  were  pleased  to  find  the  next 
day,  had  punctually  executed  his  commission. 

On  the  10th  the  mercury  in  the  barometer,  which  had  been  gradually  but  Sun.  10 
very  slowly  falling  for  several  days  preceding,  had  got  down  to  28.78  inches, 
which  is  here  remarkably  low.  It  continued  so  with  very  little  variation  for 
sixteen  hours,  and  then  rose  much  more  quickly.  The  wind  had  during  this 
interval  remained  constantly  from  the  northward  and  westward,  and  generally 
moderate,  with  now  and  then  some  snow  falling,  but  we  could  perceive  no- 
thing in  the  weather  that  seemed  to  coincide  with  this  unusual  indication  in 
the  barometer. 

The  Esquimaux  went  out  to  endeavour  to  catch  seals  as  usual,  but  returned 
unsuccessful  after  several  hours'  labour.  As  it  was  now  evident  that  their 
own  exertions  were  not  at  all  times  sufficient  to  procure  them  food  at  this 
season,  and  that  neither  indolence  nor  any  idea  of  dependence  on  our  charity 
induced  them  to  relax  in  those  exertions,  it  became  incumbent  on  us  care, 
fully  to  attend  to  their  wants,  and  by  a  timely  and  judicious  application  of  the 
slender  resources  we  had  set  aside  for  their  use,  to  prevent  any  absolute  suf- 
fering among  them.  We  therefore  sent  out  a  good  meal  of  bread-dust  for 
each  individual,  to  be  divided  in  due  proportion  among  all  the  huts.  The 
necessity  of  this  supply  appeared  very  strongly  from  the  report  of  our  people, 
who  found  some  of  these  poor  creatures  actually  gnawing  a  piece  of  hard 
seal-skin  with  the  hair  on  it,  while  few  of  the  huts  had  any  lamp  alight.  It 
must  be  remembered  that  the  failure  of  their  seal-fishery  always  involves  a 
double  calamity,  for  it  not  only  deprives  them  of  food,  but  of  fuel  for  their 


*&sr. 


168 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Mon.  11, 


February lamps'  When  this  is  the  case>  not  to  mention  the  want  of  warmth  and  light  in 
v^y^  the  huts,  they  are  also  destitute  of  the  means  of  melting  snow  for  water,  and  can 
therefore  only  quench  their  thirst  by  eating  the  snow,  which  is  not  only  a  com- 
fortless but  an  ineffectual  resource.  In  consequence  of  this,  it  was  surprising 
to  see  the  quantity  of  water  these  people  drank  whenever  they  came  on  board°; 
and  it  was  often  with  difficulty  that  our  coppers  could  answer  this  additional 
demand.  I  am  certain  that  Toolooak  one  day  drank  nearly  a  gallon  in  less 
than  two  hours.  Besides  the  bread-dust,  we  also  supplied  them  to-day  with 
a  wolf's  carcass  which,  raw  and  frozen  as  it  was,  they  eat  with  a  good  appe- 
tite; and  indeed  they  had  not  the  means  of  cooking  or  even  thawing  it.  I 
cannot  here  omit  a  pleasing  trait  in  their  character,  observed  by  our'people 
who  carried  out  their  supplies  ;  not  a  morsel  of  which  would  the  grown-up 
people  touch  till  they  had  first  supplied  the  wants  of  their  hungry  little  ones. 
On  the  11th,  the  weather  was  severely  cold,  the  wind  blowing  fresh  from 
the  north-west,  with  the  thermometer  from  -  26°  to  -  30°.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  severity  jof  the  day,  a  few  of  the  Esquimaux  came  on  board,  and 
among  the  rest  Siokobeut  who,  on  account  of  being  the  tallest  and  stoutest 
man  of  the  tribe,  had  been  distinguished  by  our  people  with  the  name  of 
;s  the  Commodore."  He  brought  with  him  his  son  Toonefr,  a  boy  live  or  six 
years  of  age,  who  became  a  great  favourite  with  us,  and  Avhose  clean  deer- 
skin clothes  and  ruddy  face  now  gave  him  a  very  pretty  and  interesting  ap- 
pearance. 

About  this  time  we  were  grieved  to  find  that  our  invalid,  Reid,  was  once 
more  attacked  by  his  complaint,  rendering  such  repeated  bleedings  necessary  as 
to  reduce  him  very  low,  and  to  convince  Mr.  Edwards  that  his  lungs  were  not 
in  a  state  to  bear  his  returning  strength.      As  if  some  fatality  attended  our 
carpenters,  Mr.  Fiddis  had  also,  for  some  time  past,  been  occasionally  com- 
plaining of  weakness,  trembling,  and  sickness;  but,  except  these  two,  we 
had  not,  for  several  weeks,  had  an  individual  in  the  sick-list. 
Tues.12.      On  the  morning  of  the  12th  Okotook  and  his  uncle  Arnaneelia,  a  sensible 
and  worthy  man  about  five-and-forty  years  of  age,  coming  on  board  from 
their  fishing,  we  shewed  them  the  stage  and  scenery  that  were  just  put  up, 
and  invited  them  and  their  wives  to  the  play  about  to  be  performed  this 
evening.     They  accordingly  went  back  and  brought  the  women,  who  under- 
stood they  were  to  be  present  at  some  diversion,  though  they  did  not  well 
know  what.     It  was  enough,  however,  with  Iligliuk  just  to  make  the  motion 
of  turning  the  handle  of  the  organ,  which,  conveying  to  her  mind  the  idea 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

of  music  and  merriment,  was  always  sure  to  put  her  immediately  into  high  in- 
spirits. As  they  came  three  or  four  hours  before  the  performance  of  "  John 
Bull"  was  to  commence,  they  began  to  grow  tired  and  impatient,  especially 
when  it  became  dusk  and  candles  were  brought  into  the  cabin.  The  men 
then  explained  that  it  would  soon  be  dark,  and  that,  in  returning  late  to 
their  huts,  they  should  disturb  the  people  who  would  then  be  fast  asleep 
there.  Finding  that  they  grew  uneasy,  I  made  no  objection  to  their  return- 
ing, and  sent  them  off  loaded  with  bread-dust  and  some  oil  for  each  of  their 
lamps.  They  remained  long  enough,  however,  to  have  a  peep  at  Mrs.  Brul- 
gruddery,  whose  dress,  when  they  were  informed  it  was  that  of  a  kabloona 
noollti-a,  (European  wife,)  they  were  very  anxious  in  examining,  and  seemed 
to  grieve  at  going  away  without  witnessing  the  diversion  which  this  and  other 
preparations  seemed  to  promise. 

On  the  13th  our  friends  at  the  huts  were  fortunate  in  procuring  three  seals,  Wed.  13 
an  event  that  created  great  joy  at  the  village.  Mr.  Allison,  who  happened  to 
be  there  when  one  of  these  prizes  was  announced,  informed  me  that  there 
was  a  general  outcry  of  joy  ;  all  the  women  hurried  to  the  doors  of  the  huts, 
and  the  children  rushed  to  the  beach  to  meet  the  men  dragging  along  the 
prize.  One  of  these  little  urchins,  to  complete  the  triumphant  exultation  with 
which  this  event  was  hailed,  instantly  threw  himself  on  the  animal,  and, 
clinging  fast  to  it,  was  thus  dragged  to  the  huts.  Each  woman  was  observed 
to  bring  her  obtkdoseek,  or  cooking-pot,  to  the  hut  where  the  seal  was  dis- 
sected, for  the  purpose  of  receiving  a  share  of  the  meat  and  blubber. 

Some  light  snow  fell  in  the  forenoon,  though  the  day  was  otherwise  clear. 
A  thermometer  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays*  at  noon  stood  at  —  9°,  that  in  the 
shade  being  10°  lower  than  this.  The  snow  was  melting  on  the  black  paint- 
work and  in  other  situations  equally  favourable.  Another  wolf,  being  the 
third,  was  entrapped  this  evening,  and  Mr.  Skeoch  undertook  to  make  a  ske- 
leton of  it  for  preservation  as  a  specimen  of  these  animals. 

*  It  is  here  necessary  to  explain  that  the  <(  temperatures  in  the  sun"  registered  in  this  Jour- 
nal, were  taken  by  a  thermometer  suspended  on  the  south  side  of  an  unpainted  upright  post, 
at  the  distance  of  one  hundred  yards  from  the  ship  ;  those  "  in  the  shade"  by  a  correspond- 
ing thermometer  on  its  north  side.  This  explanation  is  necessary,  because,  in  certain  situa- 
tions, such  as  under  the  lee  of  the  house,  or  the  ships'  sterns,  where  much  heat  was  radiated, 
the  snow  was  frequently  melting,  when  in  places  not  thus  favourably  situated,  the  sun  pro- 
duced no  such  effect. 


mE&53BEmammFsr?< 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

Febmary     0n  the  15th  [t  blew  a  stronS  Sale  from  SW-  to  W.N.W.,  and  the  thermo- 
v-^v-w  meter,  either  on  account  of  the  strength  of  the  wind  or  its  having  occa- 

Fnd.  15.  sjonaiiy  some  southing  in  it,  rose  to  -  4°,  being  the  highest  temperature 
registered  in  our  journals  since  the  27th  of  December  preceding.  I  had 
agreed  with  Okotook  to  accompany  him  on  a  sealing-excursion,  but  the  day 
proved  too  inclement,  the  Esquimaux  not  going  out  themselves,  though  it  was 
not  very  often  that  the  weather  could  prevent  them.  Considering  it  desirable 
to  increase  by  all  the  means  in  our  power  the  chances  of  these  people  giving 
information  of  us,  we  distributed  among  several  of  the  men  large  round 
medallions  of  sheet  copper,  having  these  words  punched  through  them : — 
"  H.  R  M.  S.  Fury  and  Hecla,  All  well,  A.D.  1822."  These  we  suspended 
by  a  piece  of  white  line  round  their  necks,  giving  them  to  understand  that 
they  were  to  shew  them  to  any  Kabloona  people  they  might  ever  meet  with  in 
future.  Similar  ornaments,  but  of  a  smaller  size,  were  subsequently  pre- 
sented to  many  of  the  women,  having  on  them  the  words,  "  Fury  and 
Hecla,  1822." 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  16th,  observing  a  party  of  the  Esquimaux 
equipped  with  spears  passing  near  the  ships,  I  joined  them,  accompanied 
by  Mr.  Bushnan  and  one  or  two  others.  Having  crossed  the  point  of  the 
island  they  walked  over  the  ice  to  the  eastward,  where  we  did  not  overtake 
them  till  they  had  got  above  a  mile  and  a  quarter  from  the  shore.  This  party 
consisted  of  eight  persons,  among  whom  we  were  glad  to  find  Arnaneelia, 
Okotook,  Toolooak,  Pootooalook  his  elder  brother,  and  one  or  two  others 
whom  we  knew.  They  had  by  this  time,  however,  separated  into  two  or 
three  different  parties,  stationed  at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile  from  each  other 
along  the  edge  of  the  floe,  beyond  which  to  the  eastward  there  was  clear 
water  as  far  as  we  could  see  for  frost-smoke. 

The  party  we  at  first  joined  were  seated  on  a  high  hummock  of  ice,  with 
their  spears  in  their  hands,  looking  out  for  seals.  After  we  had  talked  to 
them  for  a  few  minutes,  Okotook  suddenly  started  up  and  set  off  along  the 
edge  of  the  ice,  without  giving  us  or  his  own  companions  the  least  warning. 
The  latter  seemed  so  much  accustomed  to  this,  that  they  took  no  further 
notice  than  by  immediately  following  him,  and  we  did  the  same ;  the  whole 
party  walking  at  a  very  quick  rate,  and  the  natives  keeping  their  heads 
constantly  turned  towards  the  sea  to  look  out  for  seals.  After  being  thus  en- 
gaged for  an  hour  and  a  half,  we  judged,  from  the  motions  of  a  party  at  some 
distance  beyond  us,  that  they  had  game  in  view.     As  we  approached  them, 


^OTKT 


*3r 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


171 


1822. 


Okotook  evidently  began  to  be  apprehensive  that  we,  who  did  not  understand 
the  matter,  would  spoil  their  sport.     To  prevent  this,  he  did  the  most  civil 
thing  that  could  well  have  been  devised,  which  was,  to  send  his  companions 
one  by  one  to  the  spot,  and  to  remain  with  us  himself,  keeping  us  at  such  a 
distance  as  to  allow  us  to  see  their  proceedings,  without  alarming  the  animal 
they  were  in  pursuit  of.      The  other  seven  Esquimaux,  now  forming  one 
party,  disposed  themselves  into  a  single  line,  so  as  to  make  as  small  an  appear- 
ance as  possible  in  the  direction  in  which  they  were  going,  and  in  this  manner 
crept  very  cautiously  towards  the  margin  of  the  floe.     On  a  sudden  they  all 
stooped  down  quite  low,  to  hide  themselves,  and  continued  thus  a  quarter  of 
an  hour,  during  which  time  they  prepared  their  lines  and  spears ;  and  then, 
when  the  animal  appeared  to  be  intercepted  from  their  view,  again  took  the 
opportunity  of  gaining  a  few  paces  upon  him  in  the  same  cautious  manner  as 
before.     When  they  had  been  thus  occupied  for  a  full  hour,  alternately  creep- 
ing and  stooping  down,  the  seal  which  had  been  lying  on  the  ice  took  the 
water,  and  they  then  gave  up  their  chase.     During  this  time,  Okotook  could 
scarcely  restrain  his  impatience  to  be  nearer  the  scene  of  action  ;  and  when  we 
produced  a  spy-glass,  which  appeared  to  bring  his  companions  close  to  us,  he 
had  not  words  to  express  his  surprise  and  satisfaction.     In  a  short  time  he 
held  it  as  steadily  as  we  did,  and  explained  by  signs  every  motion  he  observed. 
As  soon  as  they  had  given  up  the  seal  they  had  been  watching,  the  whole 
party  seemed  with  one  accord  to  turn  their  steps  homeward,  in  which  direc- 
tion, being  that  of  the  ships  also,  we  were  by  this  time  not  sorry  to  accom- 
pany them.     We  were  now  between  three  and  four  miles  north-east  of  the 
ships,  and  full  a  mile  and  a  half  from  any  part  of  the  shore.     In  the  open 
water  beyond  the  floe,  the  tide  was  running  two  knots  to  the  northward,  and 
as  the  ice  on  which  we  stood  had  been  formed  only  within  the  last  fortnight, 
and  a  sheet  as  substantial  as  this  had  before  been  carried  away  by  the  stream, 
it  was  impossible  not  to  feel  some  apprehension  lest  we  might  thus  be  de- 
tached from  the  shore,  an  accident  that  has  been  known  to  happen  to  Esqui- 
maux ere  now*,    and  has  probably  more  frequently  befallen  them,  when 
none  have  survived  to  tell  the  tale. 

As  we  returned  towards  the  land,  we  came  to  a  small  rising  on  the  level 
surface  of  the  floe  not  larger  than  a  common  mole-hill,  and  of  much  the  same 
shape,  at  which  one  of  the  Esquimaux  immediately  stopped.  His  com- 
panions, still  walking  on,  called  us  away,  explaining  that  what  we  saw  was  the 

*  Crantz.  London  Edition,  1820,  Appendix,  p.  310. 

Z   2 


itiii^ 


I 


""•"-..,. 


Hl^J;  i 


172 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.  work  0f  a  sea\}  an(j  that  it  was  probable  the  animal  was  about  to  complete  his 
t!rS7  hole  and  to  come  up  on  the  ice,  in  which  case  the  man  would  endeavour  to 
kill  him.  We  watched  the  man  at  the  hole,  however,  with  a  glass,  for  more 
than  half  an  hour,  observing  him  constantly  putting  his  head  down  towards  the 
ice,  as  if  in  the  act  of  listening  for  the  seal,  but  without  otherwise  changing 
his  position  ;  after  which,  he  followed  us  on  board  without  success. 

If,  however,  a  man  has  any  reason  to  suppose  that  a  seal  is  at  work  beneath, 
he  immediately  attaches  himself  to  the  place,  and  seldom  leaves  it  till  he  has 
succeeded  in  killing  the  animal.  For  this  purpose,  he  first  builds  a  snow- 
wall  about  four  feet  in  height,  to  shelter  him  from  the  wind,  and,  seating  him- 
self under  the  lee  of  it,  deposits  his  spear,  lines,  and  other  implements  upon 
.  several  little  forked  sticks  inserted  into  the  snow,  in  order  to  prevent  the 
smallest  noise  being  made  in  moving  them  when  wanted.  But  the  most 
curious  precaution  to  the  same  effect  consists  in  tying  his  own  knees  together, 
with  a  thong,  so  securely  as  to  prevent  any  rustling  of  his  clothes  which 
might  otherwise  alarm  the  animal.  In  this  situation,  a  man  will  sit  quietly 
sometimes  for  hours  together,  attentively  listening  to  any  noise  made  by  the 
seal,  and  sometimes  using  the  keip-kuttuk,  an  instrument  hereafter  described, 
in  order  to  ascertain  whether  the  animal  is  still  at  work  below.  When  he 
supposes  the  hole  to  be  nearly  completed,  he  cautiously  lifts  his  spear,  to 
which  the  line  has  been  previously  attached,  and  as  soon  as  the  blowing  of 
the  seal  is  distinctly  heard,  and  the  ice  consequently  very  thin,  he  drives  it 
into  him  with  the  force  of  both  arms,  and  then  cuts  away  with  his  panna  the 
remaining  crust  of  ice,  to  enable  him  to  repeat  the  wounds  and  get  him  out. 
The  neitiek  is  the  only  seal  killed  in  this  manner  and,  being  the  smallest,  is 
held,  while  struggling,  either  simply  by  hand,  or  by  putting  the  line  round 
a  spear  with  the  point  stuck  into  the  ice.  For  the  oguke,  the  line  is  passed 
round  the  man's  leg  or  arm  ;  and  for  a  walrus,  round  his  body,  his  feet  being 
at  the  same  time  firmly  set  against  a  hummock  of  ice,  in  which  position  these 
people  can  from  habit  hold  against  a  very  heavy  strain.  Boys  of  fourteen  or 
fifteen  years  of  age  consider  themselves  equal  to  the  killing  of  a  neitiek,  but 
it  requires  a  full-grown  person  to  master  either  of  the  larger  animals. 

Sun.  17.  On  the  17th,  a  number  of  the  Esquimaux  coming  before  the  church  service, 
we  gave  them  to  understand,  by  the  sun,  that  none  could  be  admitted  before 
noon,  when  they  quietly  remained  outside  the  ships  till  divine  service  had  been 
performed.  We  then  endeavoured  to  explain  to  Iligluik  that  every  seventh 
day  they  must  not  come  to  the  ships,  for,  without  any  intention  of  offending, 


\timw 


w*h^y*jy&mj± 


"  "I'll  IS 


A 


OT 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

they  had  become  rather  an  annoyance  in  this  way.     They  now  brought  with    1822- 
them  a  great  many  little  canoes  and  paddles,  sledges,  figures  of  men  and  v-ry^ 
women,  and  other  toys,  most  of  them  already  bespoke  by  the  officers  and  men, 
and  the  rest  for  sale. 

There  was  to-day  a  great  deal  of  open  water  to  the  southward,  and  it  had 
once  more  approached  us  within  half  a  mile,  the  ice  at  the  mouth  of  the  bay 
having  broken  off  and  drifted  away.  Mr.  Crozier,  who  visited  the  huts, 
found  that  the  Esquimaux,  as  well  as  ourselves,  had  been  induced  to  attempt 
the  destruction  of  their  followers,  the  wolves,  by  setting  a  trap  for  them  not 
unlike  ours,  except  in  the  materials,  which  consisted  only  of  their  staple  com- 
modity, ice.  They  had  indeed  great  occasion  to  employ  some  such  means 
to  destroy  these  rapacious  animals,  which  had  already  carried  off  one  or 
two  of  their  dogs,  and  threatened  nightly  to  repeat  this  outrage. 

Toolooak,  who  now  considered  himself  as  quite  privileged  to  find  his  way  Mon.  18 
into  the  cabin  without,  a  conductor,  and  was  not  backward  in  thus  practising 
his  newly-acquired  art  of  opening  and  shutting  the.  door,  sat  with  me  for  a 
couple  of  hours  on  the  18th,  quietly  drawing  faces  and  animals,  an  occupa- 
tion to  which  he  took  a  great  fancy  ;  and  we  often  were  reminded,  by  this 
circumstance,  of  a  similar  propensity  displayed  by  his  amiable  countryman, 
our  lamented  friend  John  Sackhouse.  We  soon  found  that  Toolooak  pos- 
sessed a  capacity  equal  to  any  thing  he  chose  to  take  an  interest  in  learning  ; 
and  could  he  at  his  present  age  have  been  voluntarily  removed  from  his  com- 
panions, and  his  attention  directed  to  the  acquirement  of  higher  branches  of 
knowledge  than  that  of  catching  seals,  he  would  amply  have  repaid  any  pains 
bestowed  upon  his  education.  I  had  always  entertained  great  objection  to 
taking  any  such  individual  from  his  home,  on  the  doubtful  chance  of  benefit- 
ing himself,  or  of  his  doing  any  service  to  the  public  as  an  interpreter.  My 
scruples  on  this  head  had  hitherto  been  confined  to  the  consideration  due  to 
the  individual  himself,  and  to  the  relatives  he  leaves  behind.  In  our  present 
case,  however,  not  the  smallest  public  advantage  eould  be  derived  from  it ; 
for  it  had  long  ago  become  evident  that  we  should  soon  know  more  of  the 
Esquimaux  language  than  any  of  them  were  likely  to  learn  of  English  in  any 
reasonable  period  of  time  :  I  was  therefore  far  from  desiring  to  receive  from 
Toolooak  an  answer  in  the  affirmative,  when  I  to-day  plainly  put  the  ques- 
tion to  him,  whether  he  would  go  with  me  to  kablaona  noona  (European 
country).  Never  was  a  more  decisive  negative  given  than  Toolooak  gave  to 
this  proposal.     He  eagerly  repeated  the  word  Na-o  (No)  half  a  dozen  times, 


174 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


.    ;l'.«iiiHI:l 


1822.    an^  then  told  me  that  if  he  went  away  his  father  would  cry.     This  simple 
February  .  . 

v^-v^/   but  irresistible  appeal  to  paternal  affection,  his  decisive  manner  of  making  it, 

and  the  feelings  by  which  his  reply  was  evidently  dictated,  were  just  what 
could  have  been  wished.  No  more  could  be  necessary  to  convince  those  who 
witnessed  it,  that  these  people  may  justly  lay  equal  claim  with  ourselves  to 
these  common  feelings  of  our  nature ;  and  having  once  satisfied  myself  of  this, 
I  determined  never  again  to  excite  in  Toolooak's  mind  another  disagreeable 
sensation,  by  talking  to  him  on  this  subject. 

Besides  the  toys  and  models  I  have  mentioned  above,  as  articles  of  barter 
with  these  people,  we  also  employed  them  more  usefully  in  making  wooden 
shades  for  the  eyes,  after  their  own  method,  as  the  time  was  fast  approaching 
when  some  such  precaution  would  become  necessary  to  guard  the  eyes  from 
the  excessive  glare  of  reflected  light.  There  was  also  a  considerable  trade 
established  in  mittens,  which  being  made  of  prepared  seal-skin,  and  nearly 
water-tight,  were  particularly  serviceable  to  our  men  when  constantly  handling 
the  lead-lines  in  the  summer-  In  this  maimer  we  contrived  to  turn  our  new 
acquaintance  to  some  little  account. 
Tues.  19.  On  the  morning  of  the  19th,  the  thermometer,  for  the  second  and  last  time 
this  winter,  fell  to  — 39°  on  the  ice,  being  within  one  degree  of  the  lowest 
temperature  we  here  experienced.  It  was  curious  to  see  how  clearly  about 
this  period  a  space  continued  to  be  marked  out  in  the  sky  by  the  frost 
smoke,  shewing  where  there  was  still  clear  water,  though  in  some  parts  too 
distant  for  us  to  distinguish.  This  phenomenon  consisted  of  a  dark  cloud- 
like appearance,  rising  from  a  very  fine  point  at  the  horizon,  about  S.W.b.W., 
thence  increasing  in  altitude  to  about  3°  in  the  S.b.E.,  where  it  was  highest, 
and  again  coming  to  a  point  about  N.N.E.  The  contrast  between  this  cloud 
of  vapour  and  the  white  snowy  sky  was  often  peculiarly  striking,  particularly 
at  night  and  when  the  moon  shone  bright.  Whenever  the  clear  water  was 
near  us,  the  frost-smoke  that  issued  from  it  obscured  from  our  sight  the  more 
distant  appearance  I  have  now  described  ;  in  the  first  case  it  resembled  a 
fog  when  close  at  hand,  and  in  the  second  precisely  what  seamen  understand 
by  the  name  of  "  fog-bank." 

Among  the  natives  who  visited  the  Fury  to-day  was  Ewerat,  of  whom  I 
have  already  spoken  as  Ang-et-koo/c,  or  chief-sorcerer  of  the  tribe,  a  dis- 
tinction with  which  he  had  made  some  of  our  gentlemen  acquainted  at  one 
of  their  earliest  visits  to  the  huts.  Being  desirous  of  seeing  him  perform 
some  of  the  tricks,  which  had  acquired  for  him  this  pre-eminence,  I  requested 


■■111 


V 


^2W 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

him  to  indulge  me  with  a  sight  of  them.  After  some  little  demur,  he  began  1822- 
to  make  his  lips  quiver,  then  moved  his  nose  up  and  down,  gradually  closed  ^C^7 
his  eyes,  and  increased  the  violence  of  his  grimaces  till  every  feature  was 
hideously  distorted  ;  at  the  same  time,  he  moved  his  head  rapidly  from  side 
to  side,  uttering  sometimes  a  snuffling  sound,  and  at  others  a  raving  sort  of 
cry.  Having  worked  himself  into  this  ridiculous  kind  of  frenzy,  which  lasted 
perhaps  from  twenty  to  thirty  seconds,  he  suddenly  discontinued  it,  and 
suffered  his  features  to  relax  into  their  natural  form ;  but  the  motion  of  his 
head  seemed  to  have  so  stupified  him,  as  indeed  it  well  might,  that  there 
remained  an  unusual  vacancy  and  a  drowsy  stare  upon  his  countenance  for 
some  time  afterwards.  Being  pressed  to  repeat  this  piece  of  buffoonery,  he 
did  so  two  or  three  times ;  and  on  one  occasion  Togolat  asked  him  in  a  serious 
tone  some  questions  respecting  me,  which  he  as  seriously  answered.  In 
general  however  the  women  paid  little  attention  to  his  grimaces,  and  the 
whole  ended  with  a  hearty  laugh  from  all  parties. 

I  had  to-day  some  conversation  with  a  woman  named  Appokiuk,  whom 
Iligliuk  had  mentioned  as  having  seen  Kabloona  people  before  us.  This 
woman  was  gifted,  however,  with  such  a  volubility  of  tongue,  that  speak- 
ing as  she  did  in  a  language  very  imperfectly  known  to  us,  she  gave 
no  time  for  questions,  and  therefore  afforded  little  information.  All  we 
could  make  out  for  certain  was,  that  she  had  within  a  year  past  seen  two 
Kabloona  Oomia/c,  (whether  ships  or  boats  was  still  doubtful*)  and  that  her 
husband  was  now  far  away.  From  all  this  we  concluded  that  she  had  been 
far  enough  to  the  southward  to  see  the  Hudson's  Bay  ships  in  the  course  of 
their  annual  voyage  ;  and  this  account  gave  us  very  sanguine  hopes  of  being 
thus  able  to  communicate  with  them  by  means  of  some  of  the  Esquimaux. 

On  the  20th  a  number  of  our  new  friends  having  been  allowed  upon  the  Wed.  20. 
upper  deck,  an  old  woman,  named  Ayug-ga-look,  stole  our  cooper's  punch, 
which  she  was  shewing  to  her  companions  alongside  the  Hecla  just  after- 
wards, when  Lieutenant  Hoppner  observed  it  and  sent  her  back  with  an 
escort.  It  was  impossible  not  to  admit  that  the  fault  was  chiefly  on  our 
side,  in  permitting  these  poor  people  to  roam  about  too  freely  amidst 
temptations,  which  scarcely  any  thing  human  could  have  withstood ;  but 
as  it  was  necessary  to  take  some  notice  of  it,  I  went  through  nearly  the 
same  process  as  with  Kaoongut,  and  dismissed  her  with  great  appearance  of 

*  These  people  apply  the  word  oomiak  to  any  vessel  larger  than  a  canoe. 


176 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


|:|(lll-"> 


..,.,   J 


1822.    indignation  to  the  huts.     We  were  glad  to  find  that  their  wants  had  there 
February  tit  i  ■,  mi 

^^r^>  been  well  supplied  to-day,    three  seals  having  been  caught.     They  had 

lately  indeed  been  tolerably  successful  in  general,  and  had  required 
but  little  of  our  assistance.  Mr.  Elder  observing  one  of  their  dogs  at- 
tacked by  several  wolves,  and  hastening  to  the  spot  with  his  gun,  found 
that  these  animals  had  made  such  quick  work  in  the  partition  of  their  prey, 
that  though  he  reached  the  scene  of  action  in  a  few  minutes,  and  the  dog 
had  at  first  made  considerable  resistance,  only  one  of  its  hind  legs  re- 
mained, each  wolf  having  run  off  with  his  share.  It  is  remarkable  that 
these  creatures  had  never  entered  our  traps  since  the  moon  had  declined 
to  the  southward,  whereas  not  a  night  elapsed  before  that  without  their  going 
to  them.  The  Esquimaux  had  in  theirs  caught  only  a  fox. 
Thur.  21.  During  the  eclipse  of  the  sun,  which  took  place  to-day,  the  diminution 
of  light  was  very  considerable,  but  the  weather  was  unfavourable  for  ob- 
serving it  for  any  useful  purpose.  Captain  Lyon  remarked  that  some  of 
the  Esquimaux,  who  were  on  board  the  Hecla  at  the  time,  were  a  good  deal 
alarmed  at  this  phenomenon,  which  indeed  made  a  general  bustle  among 
them.  Two  of  them  were  found  on  the  ice  lying  on  their  faces,  but  it  was 
not  ascertained  whether  their  superstitions  on  this  subject  were  the  same 
as  those  of  their  brethren  in  Greenland. 

Mr.   Henderson  being  desirous  of  seeing  something  of  the  customs  of 
these  people    during  the  hours  of  darkness,    obtained   my  permission   to 
pass  the  night  at  the  huts,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Griffiths.     Soon  after  they 
left  the  ships  in  the  evening  it  came  on  to  blow  strong  from  the  north-west, 
with  much  snow-drift,  so  that  losing  the  tracks  they  with  difficulty  found 
the  village.     The  wind  quickly  increased  to  a  hard  gale,  and  the  thermo- 
Frid.22.  meter  rose  from  —25°  at  six  P.M.,  to  —16°  at  four  the  following  morning. 
Our  gentlemen   returning  on  board   in    the   course  of  the  forenoon,  we 
were   pleased  •  to    hear    that    they    had    met   with    every    attention,    and 
especially  from   Okotook,    with   whom  they  lodged.     As  they  had   slept 
in   Kaoongut's   hut,    one  side  of   which   was    occupied   by    Okotook   and 
his  family,  the  old  fellow  thought  it  a  good  opportunity  to  make  up  the 
quarrel  occasioned  by  his  dishonesty  ;  and  he  accordingly  made  his  appear- 
ance on  board  to-day  for  the  first  time  since  that  event.     Tolooak  was  de- 
puted to  bring  his  father  down  into  the  cabin,  where  a  formal  reconcilia- 
tion took  place,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  latter,  who  had   found  out 
that  to  be  out  of  favour  with  us  was  attended  with  the  serious  consequence 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

of  being-  also  out  of  pocket.     It  was  laughable  to  observe  the  pains  he  now    1822- 
took  to  impress  on  the  mind  of  every  person  he  saw,  that  he  was  no  longer  ^J^!y 
a  tigliktoke,    by    which  name    he   had    lately  been    distinguished ;    for  he 
seemed  to  think  that  my    receiving-  him  again  into    favour  was  a  perfect 
absolution  from  his  offence. 

The  gale  continued  to  blow  from  the  north-west  throughout  the  day, 
though  the  barometer  gradually  rose  from  29.73  to  29.93  inches.  Two 
ravens  were  seen:  these  birds,  which  were  observed  frequently  in  the 
course  of  the  winter,  were  almost  always  seen  in  a  single  pa  r  at  a  time, 
and  their  plumage  remained  perfectly  black  as  in  the  summer. 

On  the  23d  I  paid  another  visit  to  the  huts,  and  found  the  greater  part  Sat.  23 
of  the  men  absent  on  their  sealing  excursions.  We  thought  however  that, 
except  on  pressing  occasions,  one  man  was  left  in  each  hut  to  keep  an  eye 
on  the  conduct  of  the  women,  and  this  was  the  case  to-day.  The  huts 
had  in  the  interior  assumed  a  somewhat  different  appearance  since  I  had 
last  seen  them  ;  the  roofs  were  much  blackened  by  the  smoke  of  the 
lamps,  and  the  warmth  had  in  most  parts  given  them  a  glazed  and  honey- 
combed surface  :  indeed  the  whole  of  the  walls  had  become  much  thinner 
by  thawing,  so  that  the  light  was  more  plainly  visible  through  them.  The 
snow  also  on  which  the  lamps  stood  was  considerably  worn  away,  so  as  to 
destroy  in  great  measure  the  regularity  of  the  original  plan  of  construction. 
To  these  changes  might  be  added  that  of  a  vast  quantity  of  blood  and  oil 
that  now  defaced  the  purity  of  the  snowy  floor,  and  emitted  effluvia  not 
very  agreeable  to  European  noses;  so  that,  upon  the  whole,  it  may  be  ima- 
gined that  our  first  impressions  of  the  comfort  and  cleanliness  of  these  ha- 
bitations were  more  favourable  than  their  present  state  was  calculated  to 
excite. 

To  the  original  apartments  they  had  now  also  added  various  smaller 
places  for  stores,  communicating  with  the  huts  from  within,  and  looking 
something  like  our  ovens,  though  without  any  door  to  them.  In  some  of 
these  they  deposited  their  upper  jackets,  which  they  usually  take  off  in 
coming  into  their  huts,  as  we  do  a  great  coat ;  while  in  smaller  ones,  like 
little  shelves  in  a  recess,  they  kept  various  articles  of  their  Kablooana 
riches.  These  and  similar  alterations  and  additions  they  were  constantly 
making  throughout  the  winter;  for  their  inexhaustible  materials  being  always 
at  hand,  it  required  but  little  time  and  labour  to  adopt  any  arrangement 
that  might  suit  their  convenience. 


.1'  ■ 


178 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


I  HI 


>niliL 


1822  After  distributing  a  number  of  presents  in  the  first  four  huts,  I  found  on 
U^H  entering  the  last,  that  Pootooalook  had  been  successful  in  bringing  in  a  seal, 
over  which  two  elderly  women  were  standing,  armed  with  large  knives,  their 
hands  and  faces  besmeared  with  blood,  and  delight  and  exultation  depicted 
on  their  countenances.  They  had  just  performed  the  first  operation  of  di- 
viding the  animal  into  two  parts,  and  thus  laying  open  the  intestines.  These 
being  taken  out,  and  all  the  blood  carefully  baled  up  and  put  into  the 
ootkooseek,  or  cooking-pot,  over  the  fire,  they  separated  the  head  and  flippers 
from  the  carcass  and  then  divided  the  ribs.  All  the  loose  scraps  were  put 
into  the  pot  for  immediate  use,  except  such  as  the  two  butchers  now  and  then 
crammed  into  their  own  mouths,  or  distributed  to  the  numerous  and  eager 
by-standers  for  still  more  immediate  consumption.  Of  these  morsels  the 
children  came  in  for  no  small  share,  every  little  urchin  that  could  find  its  way 
to  the  slaughter-house,  running  eagerly  in  afid,  between  the  legs  of  the  men 
and  women,  presenting  its  mouth  for  a  large  lump  of  raw  flesh,  just  as  an 
English  child  of  the  same  age  might  do  for  a  piece  of  sugar-candy.  Every 
now  and  then  also  a  dog  would  make  his  way  towards  the  reeking  carcass,  and 
when  in  the  act  of  seizing  upon  some  delicate  part,  was  sent  off  yelping  by 
a  heavy  blow  with  the  handles  of  the  knives.  When  all  the  flesh  is  disposed 
of,  for  a  portion  of  which  each  of  the  women  from  the  other  huts  usually 
brings  her  ootkooseek,  the  blubber  still  remains  attached  to  the  skin,  from 
which  it  is  separated  the  last;  and  the  business  being  now  completed,  the  two 
parts  of  the  hide  are  rolled  up  and  laid  by,  together  with  the  store  of  flesh 
and  blubber.  During  the  dissection  of  their  seals,  they  have  a  curious  cus- 
tom of  sticking  a  thin  filament  of  skin,  or  of  some  part  of  the  intestines,  upon 
the  foreheads  of  the  boys,  who  are  themselves  extremely  fond  of  it,  it  being 
intended,  as  Iligliuk  afterwards  informed  me,  to  make  them  fortunate  seal- 
catchers. 

The  seals  which  they  take  during  the  winter  are  of  two  kinds,  the  Neitiek, 
or  small  seal  (phoca  hispidaj,  and  the  Oguke,  or  large  seal  (phoca  barbata). 
These  and  the  Ei-u-ek,  or  Walrus,  constitute  their  means  of  subsistence  at 
this  season  ;  but,  on  this  particular  part  of  the  coast,  the  latter  are  not  very 
abundant  and  they  chiefly  catch  the  neitiek.  The  animal  we  had  now  seen 
dissected  was  of  that  kind,  and  with  young  at  the  time.  A  small  one  taken 
out  of  it  had  a  beautiful  skin  which,  both  in  softness  and  colour,  very  much 
resembled  raw  silk  ;  but  no  inducement  could  make  Pootooalook  part  with  it, 
he  having  destined  it  for  that  night's  supper. 


II  I  H 


£Jfi 


^5T 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

After  quitting  this  scene  of  filth,  I  found,  on  returning  to  Kaoongut's  hut,  F^22' 
that  Toolooak  had  been  no  less  successful  than  his  brother,  and  that  the  v^p^ 
same  operation  was  also  performing  here.     Having,  therefore,  explained  to 
Iligliuk  that  none  of  them  were  to  come  to  the  ships  the  following  day,  I 
had  no  inclination  to  see  the  process  repeated,  and  was  glad  to  take  my 
leave. 

We  observed  a  great  deal  of  open  water  to  the  southward,  about  three 
miles  from  the  land,  with  the  usual  cloud  of  frost-smoke  hovering  over  it. 
The  ice  on  which  we  had  accompanied  the  Esquimaux  a  few  days  before  had 
now  entirely  disappeared,  and  on  that  side  of  the  island  the  clear  water  again 
washed  the  shore. 

On  the  24th  no  natives  visited  the  ships,  in  consequence  of  my  injunction  Sun.  24. 
to  that  effect.     This,  however,  was  the  only  Sunday  on  which  they  complied 
with  it,  partly,  I  believe,  from  their  not  rightly  understanding  what  we  wished, 
but  perhaps  more  from  their  not  much  piquing  themselves  on  sacrificing  any 
convenience  of  their  own  to  that  of  others.     A  great  number  of  dovekies, 
whose  plumage  appeared  still  whiter  than  before,  were  swimming  about  off 
the  point,  but  the  risk  of  sending  a  boat  among  the  young  ice  in  the  tide- 
way was  too  great  to  attempt  it.     The  weather  was  remarkably  fine  and  plea- 
sant, the  wind  being  light  from  the  north-west ;  but  the  thermometer  was  low 
during  the  day,  and  fell  to  — <  32°  at  midnight.     At  noon,  on  the  25th,  it  was  Mon.  25. 
at  —  28°  in  the  shade,  and  at  ~  16°  in  the  sun.     The  temperature  of  the  sea 
at  the  surface,  and  that  at  the  bottom  in  the  seven  fathoms  were  both 
by  the  same  thermometer. 

The  26th  was  a  clear  and  moderate  day,  and  the  thermometer  gradually  Tues.  26. 
rose  to  —  9°  at  midnight.  The  wind  became  easterly  for  a  few  hours,  and 
then  suddenly  veered  again  to  the  northward.  Our  theatre  closed  this  night 
for  the  season  with  the  two  farces  of  "  The  Citizen,"  and  "  High  Life  below 
Stairs."  The  ships'  companies  testified  the  gratification  which  they  had  derived 
from  these  performances  in  their  own  way,  namely,  by  three  hearty  cheers  at 
the  fall  of  the  curtain ;  and  the  officers,  I  am  confident,  considered  their 
trouble  more  than  repaid  by  this  expression  of  the  men's  feelings. 

The  veering  of  the  wind  to  the  northward  soon  produced  its  usual  effect  of  Wed.  27. 
reducing  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  and  the  thermometer  rapidly 
fell  till  it  had  reached  —37°.     On  the  28th,  Okotook  and  Iligliuk  coming  Thur>28. 
on  board,  an  occurrence  took  place,  which,  as  it  shews  the  disposition  of 
the  Esquimaux,  and  especially  of  one  of  the  most  intelligent  and  interesting 

2  A  2 


,__..., 


180 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


:  i 


Mil! 


1822.  among  them,  I  may  here  relate.  Some  time  before,  Iligliuk,  who,  from  the 
v^y-'w  superior  neatness  and  cleanliness  with  which  she  performed  her  work,  was  by 
this  time  in  great  request  as  a  sempstress,  had  promised  to  cover  for  me  a 
little  model  of  a  canoe,  and  had  in  fact  sent  it  to  me  by  the  serjeant  of  ma- 
rines, though  I  had  not  rightly  understood  from  the  latter  from  which  of 
the  women  it  came.  Believing  that  she  had  failed  in  her  promise,  I  now 
taxed  her  with  it,  when  she  immediately  defended  herself  with  considerable 
warmth  and  seriousness,  but  without  making  me  comprehend  her  meaning. 
Finding  that  she  was  wasting  her  words  upon  me,  she  said  no  more  till 
an  hour  afterwards,  when  the  serjeant  accidentally  coming  into  the  cabin,  she, 
with  the  utmost  composure,  but  with  a  decision  of  manner  peculiar  to  herself, 
took  hold  of  his  arm  to  engage  his  attention,  and  then  looking  him  steadfastly 
in  the  face,  accused  him  of  not  having  faithfully  executed  her  commission  to 
me.  The  mistake  was  thus  instantly  explained,  and  I  thanked  Iligliuk  for 
her  canoe  ;  but  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  describe  the  quiet,  yet  proud,  satis- 
faction displayed  in  her  countenance,  at  having  thus  cleared  herself  from  the 
imputation  of  a  breach  of  promise. 

There  being  among  the  presents  with  which  we  Avere  supplied  a  number 
of  pikes,  we  presented  two  or  three  of  these  from  each  ship  to  the  most  de- 
serving of  the  Esquimaux,  to  serve  as  staves  for  their  spears  ;  and  valuable 
ones  they  proved  to  them.  Upon  each  pike  were  marked  by  small  nails 
driven  into  the  wood  the  words  "  Fury  and  Hecla,  1822." 

Almost  the  Avhole  of  these  people  were  now  affected  with  violent  colds 
and  coughs,  occasioned  by  a  considerable  thawing  that  had  lately  taken 
place  in  their  huts,  so  as  to  wet  their  clothes  and  bedding  ;  though,  as 
will  be  seen  by  the  Meteorological  Register,  we  had  as  yet  experienced 
no  great  increase  of  temperature.  From  the  nature  of  their  habitations, 
however,  their  comfort  was  greater,  and  their  chance  of  health  better  when 
the  cold  Avasmore  severe.  On  this  account  they  began  to  make  fresh  alte- 
rations in  these  curious  dAvelling-places,  either  by  building  the  former  apart- 
ments tAvo  or  three  feet  higher,  or  adding  others  that  they  might  be  less 
crowded.  In  building  a  higher  hut  they  construct  it  over,  and,  as  it  Avere, 
concentric  Avith  the  old  one,  Avhich  is  then  removed  from  within.  It  is 
curious  to  consider  that,  in  all  these  alterations,  the  object  kept  in  view  was 
coolness,  and  this  in  houses  formed  of  snoAV ! 

Some  of  them  had  caught  a  Avolf  in  their  trap  ;  but  we  found  that  nothing 
less  than  extreme  Avant  could  have  induced  them  to  eat  the  flesh  of  that 


^Sffirorror 


of  a  North-west  passage. 

which  we  had  given  them,  as  now  that  they  had  other  food,  they  would  not  p1822- 
touch  it.    Only  four  wolves  at  this  time  remained  alive  of  the  original  pack, 
and  these  were  constantly  prowling  about  near  the  ships  or  the  village. 

The  month  of  February  closed  with  the  thermometer  at  —  32°,  and  though 
the  sun  had  now  attained  a  meridian  altitude  of  nearly  sixteen  degrees,  and 
enlivened  us  with  his  presence  above  the  horizon  for  ten  hours  in  the  day, 
no  sensible  effect  had  yet  been  produced  on  the  average  temperature  of  the 
atmosphere.  The  uniformly  white  surface  of  snow  on  which  at  this  season 
the  sun's  rays  have  to  act,  or  rather  leaving  them  nothing  to  act  upon,  is 
much  against  the  first  efforts  to  produce  a  thaw  ;  but  our  former  experience 
of  the  astonishing  rapidity  with  which  this  operation  is  carried  on,  when 
once  the  ground  begins  to  be  laid  bare,  served  in  some  measure  to  reconcile 
us  to  what  appeared  a  protraction  of  the  cold  of  winter  not  to  have  been 
expected  in  our  present  latitude. 


tiA  i 


^2W 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

CHARTS  DRAWN  BY  THE  ESQUIMAUX ILLNESS  AMONG    THEM A  JOURNEY    PERFORMED 

ACROSS  WINTER   ISLAND SUFFERINGS  OF    THE  PARTY    BY  FROST FURTHER   NOTICE 

OF  THE  ESQUIMAUX  CHARTS DEPARTURE  OF  SOME  OF  THESE  PEOPLE,  AND  A  SEPARATE 

VILLAGE    ESTABLISHED    ON    THE    ICE VARIOUS    METEOROLOGICAL    PHENOMENA 

OKOTOOK  AND   HIS  WIFE  BROUGHT    ON  BOARD ANECDOTES  RELATING   TO  THEM 

SHIPS  RELEASED  FROM  THE  ICE    BY  SAWING. 

Little  as  we  considered  ourselves  to  stand  in  need  of  any  auxiliary  re- 
sources for  the  complete  occupation  of  our  time  during1  the  winter,  it  must 
be  confessed  that  the  arrival  of  the  Esquimaux  served  in  no  small  degree  to 
enliven  us  at  this  season;  and,  from  the  quickness  with  which  the  last  month 
had  appeared  to  pass  by,  we  were  not  sorry  to  have  dispensed  with  the 
necessity  of  putting  to  the  test  with  what  degree  of  patience  we  might  other- 
wise have  borne  the  remaining  period  of  our  confinement. 

Our  invalid,  Reid,  continued  about  this  time  much  the  same  as  before, 
being  sometimes  better  and  sometimes  worse,  but  without  any  permanent 
or  material  alteration  in  either  way,  except  that  Avhich  a  long  and  tedious 
confinement  must  necessarily  produce.  We  had  now  also  an  addition  to  our 
sick-list  in  the  ship's  cook,  who  complained  of  a  severe  pain  in  the  upper 
part  of  his  thigh,  the  bone  of  which  had  been  shattered  several  years  before 
by  a  musket-ball.  It  was  for  a  few  days  uncertain  whether  this  pain  was 
rheumatic,  or  whether  any  matter  was  forming  in  the  wound.  The  latter, 
however,  proved  to  be  the  case,  and  an  incision  having  been  made,  the  cook 
was  able  to  return  to  his  duty  in  a  short  time. 

The  thermometer  rose  gradually  from  — 35°  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  of 
March  to  — 11°  at  night,  and  on  the  following  day  it  had  reached  +  2°,  being 
the  first  time  we  had  seen  it  above  zero  since  Christmas.  This  increase  of 
temperature  had  been  accompanied,  or  perhaps  caused,  by  a  change  of  wind 


1822. 
March 


Sat.  2. 


*C&>f'3Wi?~2k  Ik  ' 


184 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
March. 

Sun.  3. 


Mon. 


J\ 


■m 


from  the  north-west  by  south  to  south-east;  from  which  quarter  it  soon 
freshened  to  a  gale,  with  much  snow-drift.  On  the  3d  it  again  drew  round 
to  the  northward,  but  continued  to  blow  as  strong  as  before.  During  this 
time  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  did  not  fall  below  29.94  inches,  and  that 
during  a  short  intermission  of  the  gale  on  the  2d. 

In  the  midst  of  this  inclement  weather  a  number  of  the  Esquimaux  were  out 
upon  the  ice  to  the  southward,  some  of  them  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  and  a  half 
from  the  land,  with  large  spaces  of  clear  water  intervening  between  it  and 
them ;  the  very  ice  on  which  they  trod  being  in  rapid  motion  with  the  tide,  and 
themselves  enveloped  alternately  in  a  cloud  of  frost-smoke  or  a  tremendous 
snow-drift,  Avhich  often  obscured  them  from  our  sight.  They  seemed,  how- 
ever, to  think  nothing  of  this,  or  at  least  to  consider  themselves  amply  repaid 
for  their  risk  and  labour,  by  procuring  abundance  of  seals  or  sea-horses  on 
most  of  these  excursions.  They  were  indeed  so  well  furnished  at  this  time, 
that  even  our  biscuit  was  occasionally  refused. 

I  to-day  procured  from  little  Toonek  a  string  of  bones,  which  on  inquiry 
we  found  to  belong  to  a  land  animal  called  by  the  Esquimaux  Kablee-arioo, 
and  which  we"  certainly  had  never  met  with.  From  the  description  given  us 
by  these  people  on  this  and  several  other  occasions,  we  considered  it  likely 
to  be  the  wolverene  ;  but  it  must  be  extremely  rare  in  those  parts  of  America. 

On  the  4th  we  had  a  long  visit  from  Okotook  and  Iligliuk,  who  both  looked 
very  ill  and  were  labouring  under  severe  coughs.  In  the  course  of  our  con- 
versation I  found  from  Okotook,  that  the  man  whose  tent  I  had  visited  in  the 
summer  up  Lyon  Inlet,  was  named  Arnalooa,  and  that  he  was  uncle  to  Oko- 
took, being  the  brother  of  his  mother  Ilhimea,  now  at  Winter  Island.  We 
found  indeed  that  they  knew  the  whole  history  of  our  visit ;  for  they  not  only 
described  and  named  the  persons  we  saw,  but  related  the  exact  manner  in 
which  Mr.  Sherer's  drinking-cup  had  been  stolen,  its  being  secreted  in  the 
boot  of  Arnalooa's  wife,  and  their  expulsion  from  our  tents  in  consequence. 
We  subsequently  discovered  that  Appokiuk,  the  woman  already  mentioned  as 
having  somewhere  seen  Kabloona  oomiak,  was  one  of  Arnalooa's  wives,  though 
now  separated  from  him,  and  that  she  was  one  of  the  party  in  question  who 
had  visited  our  tents  in  the  summer,  though  our  short  intercourse  did  not 
allow  us  immediately  to  recognise  her  features.  It  turned  out  therefore  that 
the  only  oomiuls  she  had  ever  seen  were  our  own  boats  on  that  occasion  ;  and 
this  was  a  striking  instance  out  of  many  in  which  we  at  first  totally  misappre- 


IUH11 


StfiBWK 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE, 
hended  these  people's  meaning,  in  consequence  of  our  ignorance  of  their   1822- 

,  March 

language. 

Being  extremely  desirous  of  ascertaining  what  the  Esquimaux  knew  of  the 
coast  to  the  northward  of  our  present  station,  we  to-day  drew  out  roughly  on 
a  large  sheet  of  paper  the  conformation  of  the  land  in  this  neighbourhood, 
and  as  far  to  the  westward  as  Repulse  Bay,  and  then  requested  Iligliuk  to 
continue  it  to  the  northward.  She  readily  understood  our  meaning,  and  with 
a  pencil  soon  traced  various  indentations  in  the  coast,  together  with  several 
islands,  on  one  of  which  called  Amitio/ce,  at  the  distance  of  sixteen  days' 
journey,  she  informed  us  she  was  born.  As  it  would  afford  no  interest  to  re- 
late the  various  surmises,  hopes,  and  fears,  which  this  and  several  other  Esqui- 
maux charts  subsequently  gave  rise  to  in  our  minds,  it  will  only  be  necessary 
in  this  place  further  to  remark,  that  our  first  inquiries  did  not  produce  any 
very  satisfactory  information  as  to  the  relative  position  or  trending  of  the 
coast  beyond  Winter  Island,  and  that  it  was  not  till  long  after  this  time  that 
we  were  enabled  duly  to  appreciate  the  geographical  knowledge  which  they 
possessed. 

Whatever  uncertainty  existed  however  on  this  subject,  or  whatever  might 
be  the  information  we  could  hope  to  obtain  from  the  Esquimaux  in  the  course 
of  our  further  communication  with  them,  our  business  was  to  see  and  not  to 
speculate.  If,  as  might  reasonably  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  the  coast 
lately  examined,  that  upon  which  we  hoped  soon  to  recommence  our  discove- 
ries was  also  indented  by  inlets  and  fringed  with  numerous  islands,  it  had 
long  before  occurred  to  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  in  the  course  of  our  con- 
versations on  this  subject,  that  considerable  time  might  be  saved  to  the  ships, 
during  the  short  season  of  navigation  about  to  commence,  by  sending  a  party 
by  land  to  complete  as  much  as  possible  of  that  examination  before  the  ships 
were  released  from  the  ice.  As  it  was  requisite  that  this  should  be  accom- 
plished before  the  commencement  of  a  general  thaw,  by  which  the  return  of 
the  party  might  have  been  altogether  prevented,  preparations  were  now  made 
for  a  journey  of  this  nature  ;  and  Captain  Lyon  offering  his  services  to  com- 
mand the  Expedition,  the  proper  number  of  individuals  were  selected  to  com- 
mence their  arrangements  under  his  orders.  As  one  of  the  Esquimaux  with 
whom  we  were  well  acquainted  might  prove  of  service  on  such  a  journey, 
Captain  Lyon's  friend  Ayoket,  who  was  in  every  respect  the  most  eligible  for 
the  purpose,  was  informed  of  our  intentions  and  a  proposal  made  to  him  to 
accompany  the  party  to  "  Iligliuk 's  country." 

2    B 


<f~*k  a  ;   : 


186 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.       -\ye  had  now  succeeded  in  taking  the  last  wolf  in  a  trap,  the  Esquimaux 

March. 

^^rsu  having  caught  two,  and  the  other  eleven  having  been  entrapped  or  shot  near 
the  ships.  The  natives  were  greatly  relieved  by  the  extirpation  of  these 
ravenous  animals  which  were  constantly  alarming  them  at  the  huts  ;  and  we 
were  ourselves  not  sorry  to  have  got  rid  of  them  so  soon. 

Thur.  7.  On  the  7th  the  wind  got  round  from  north  to  south-west  and  increased  to  a 
strong  gale  from  that  quarter,  which  continued  without  intermission  and  with 
almost  constant  snow  the  whole  of  the  8th.  It  was  remarkable  that  the  mer- 
cury in  the  barometer  was  stationary  at  30.31  inches  for  eight  hours  on  the 
night  of  the  7th  and  the  morning  of  the  8th,  though  the  wind  had  then  been 
blowing  strong  for  more  than  half  a  day.  The  thermometer  again  rose  to  +2° 
this  morning. 

To  ascertain  the  thickness  of  the  ice  formed  in  the  bay  since  the  close  of 
the  last  autumn,  a  hole  was  dug  in  a  part  where  no  separation  had  taken  place 
since  the  commencement  of  the  winter's  frost,  and  where  in  fact  we  had  seen 
it  commence.  The  thickness  of  the  floe  was  here  four  feet  seven  inches, 
being  the  produce  of  exactly  five  calendar  months.  The  ice  was  hard,  brittle, 
and  transparent  till  within  six  or  eight  inches  of  the  lower  surface,  where  it 
became  soft  and  porous,  allowing  the  water  to  filter  slowly  through  it. 

The  Esquimaux  were  fortunate  in  killing  another  walrus  which  we  met  them 
dragging  in  high  spirits  towards  the  village.  They  usually  divide  these  huge 
animals  on  the  spot  into  four  or  five  parts,  each  of  which  with  its  proportion 
of  the  intestines  is  sewn  up  so  as  to  resemble  a  seal  at  a  little  distance.  Four 
or  five  dogs,  if  they  have  them  at  hand,  are  fastened  to  each  of  these,  and  the 
man  who  attends  them  frequently  rides  home  upon  it  as  on  a  sledge. 

Sat.  9.  The  wind  moderated  on  the  9th,  but  continued  from  the  south-west,  and  a 
great  deal  of  snow  fell.  The  mildness  of  the  weather  (the  thermometer  having 
got  as  high  as  +  13°)  continued  to  incommode  the  natives  in  their  huts 
more  and  more,  and  severe  coughs  and  catarrhs  were  still  epidemic  among 
them.  Some  of  the  women  had  quite  lost  their  voices,  and  almost  every  indi- 
vidual was  more  or  less  a  sufferer  from  the  constant  dripping  of  water  from 
the  roofs  of  their  apartments. 

Sun.  10.  On  the  evening  of  the  10th,  while  I  was  sitting  in  my  cabin,  the  door  opened 
gently  and  in  walked  Toolooak,  who  very  unceremoniously  seated  himself  on 
the  opposite  side  of  the  table,  and  soon  began  to  display  not  only  his  usual 
good  humour,  but  a  degree  of  archness  for  which  we  had  before  scarcely  given 
him  credit.     As  a  specimen  of  this,  though  by  no  means  the  only  one  with 


JfcJllMlMMlSKirHJ»ff 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

which  he  treated  us,  I  had  no  sooner  gone  into  the  gun-room  to  drink  tea,  1822- 
than  Toolooak,  who  was  now  alone  in  the  cabin,  took  it  into  his  head  to  play 
my  servant  a  trick  ;  for  which  purpose  he  boldly  rang  the  bell,  and  when  the 
servant  came,  laughed  at  him  very  heartily  for  his  pains.  After  levying  con- 
tributions by  way  of  supper  on  all  the  officers'  messes,  he  wrapped  himself  up 
in  all  the  skins  we  could  muster,  and  slept  soundly  on  my  lockers  till  the 
morning,  when  after  a  hearty  breakfast  he  took  his  departure,  well  pleased 
with  his  entertainment,  but  still  more  with  the  various  presents  he  took  with 
him. 

On  the  12th,  Okotook  came,  according  to  an  appointment  previously  made,  Tues.  12 
with  a  sledge  and  six  dogs  to  give  me  a  ride  to  the  huts,  bringing  with  him  his 
son  Sioutkuk  who,  with  ourselves,  made  up  a  weight  of  hear  four  hundred 
pounds  upon  the  sledge.  After  being  upset  twice  and  stopping  at  least  ten 
times,  notwithstanding  the  incessant  bullying  of  Okotook,  and  as  it  seemed 
to  me,  more  bodily  labour  on  his  part  to  steer  us  clear  of  accidents,  than  if 
he  had  walked  the  whole  way,  we  at  length  arrived  at  the  huts,  a  distance 
of  two  miles,  in  five-and-twenty  minutes.  Of  this  equipment,  and  their  usual 
modes  of  travelling,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  more  fully  in  another 
place. 

I  found  that  several  fresh  alterations  had  been  made  in  the  huts  since  my 
last  visit,  all  however  of  the  same  kind,  and  having  in  view  the  same  object 
as  those  last  described.      In  these  alterations  they  seem  to  consult  the  con- 
venience of  the  moment,  and  to  do  it  all  by  such  unanimous  consent  that  no 
consultation  or  difference  of  opinion  ever  appears  to  exist  about  it.     So  much 
snow-drift  had  now  collected  about  the  huts,  that  their  external  appearance 
was  as  much  altered  as  that  of  the  interior,  and  it  was  difficult  to  trace  any  re- 
semblance to  the  original  village,  or  even  to  perceive  its  present  limits.     The 
snow  was  now  as  high  as  the  roofs  on  every  side,  so  that  one  might  walk  com- 
pletely over  them,  and,  but  for  the  round  plates  of  ice  composing  the  windows, 
without  suspecting  the  little  hive  of  human  beings  that  was  comfortably  esta- 
blished below.      This  however  was  not  always  done  with  impunity,  when  the 
thawing  within  had  too  much  weakened  the  roofs,  in  which  case  a  leg  some- 
times made   its  way   through,   and  discovered  in  what  parts  repairs  were 
becoming  necessary.    The  natives  were  at  this  time  extremely  well  furnished 
with  seals'  flesh  for  food,  and  oil  for  their  lamps,  and  all  they  would  accept 
from  us  (except  meat  which  we  could  not  afford  to  give)  was  water,  and  this 

2  B  2 


r^A)L  <...-.-^. 


188 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
March. 


*#« 


they  swallowed  in  such  quantities  whenever  they  came  to  the  ships,  that  it 
was  impossible  to  furnish  them  with  half  as  much  as  they  desired. 

We  had  before  this  time  communicated  to  Ayoket  and  his  countrymen  our 
intention  of  sending  a  party  of  our  people  to  the  northward  in  the  spring ; 
and  Captain  Lyon  had  displayed  to  him  all  the  charms  of  a  brightly  polished 
brass  kettle,  of  greater  magnitude  than  had  perhaps  ever  entered  into  an 
Esquimaux  imagination,  as  an  inducement  among  various  others  for  him  to  ac- 
company the  Kabloonas  in  their  excursion.  The  prospect  of  such  riches  was 
a  temptation  almost  irresistible ;  but  enterprise  is  not  the  genius  of  an  Esqui- 
maux, and  Ayoket,we  soon  began  to  perceive,  had  no  fancy  for  the  proposed 
trip,  which  all  his  friends  persisted  in  saying  could  never  be  accomplished. 
This  was  evidently  to  be  attributed,  in  no  small  degree,  to  jealousy  of  any  one 
individual  among  them  being  thus  selected  ;  and  the  brass  kettle  was  speedily 
the  means  of  increasing  the  distance  to  "  Iligliuk's  country  "  from  sixteen 
to  twenty-four  days'  journey.  We  had  long,  indeed,  observed  that  this  feel- 
ing of  jealousy  was  easily  excited  among  these  people;  but  what  is  extraordi- 
nary, it  never  displayed  itself  (as  is  most  usual)  among  themselves,  but  was 
entirely  vented  upon  us,  who  were,  though  innocently,  the  authors  of  it.  As 
an  instance  of  this,  a  man  of  the  name  of  Karretok  refused  to  take  from  me 
a  strong  and  useful  pair  of  scissors  as  a  present,  because,  as  he  did  not  hesi- 
tate to  assure  me,  I  had  given  Okotook  a  pike  which  was  more  valuable.  To 
shew  him  that  this  temper  was  not  likely  to  produce  any  thing  to  his  advan- 
tage, I  took  back  the  scissors,  and  having  sent  him  away  went  to  my 
dinner.  Going  accidentally  on  deck  an  hour  afterwards,  1  found  Karretok 
still  on  board,  who  having  had  time  to  reflect  on  his  folly  now  came  up 
to  me  with  a  smiling  face,  and  begged  hard  for  the  scissors,  which  of  course 
he  did  not  get.  Many  similar  instances  occurred,  both  to  Captain  Lyon  and 
myself. 

To  this  discouragement  on  the  part  of  his  friends,  was  added  on  that  of 
Ayoket  the  same  wavering  and  inconstant  disposition  which  most  other 
savages  possess,  rendering  it  impossible  to  place  any  dependence  on  his  pro- 
mises and  intentions  for  two  hours  together.  Indeed  the  more  our  scheme 
was  pressed  upon  his  attention,  and  the  more  he  saw  of  the  actual  prepara- 
tions for  the  journey,  the  less  doubtful  his  intentions  became ;  and  arrange- 
ments were  therefore  made  for  completing  the  party  without  him.  For  the 
reasons  now  given,  it  was  equally  impossible  ever  to  direct  the  attention  of 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

the  Esquimaux,  with  any  hope  of  success,  to  our  scheme  of  their  conveying    1822- 
letters  to  the  Hudson's  Bay  settlements.  <-»-y^ 

On  the  13th  and  14th,  the  weather  was  extremely  mild,  the  thermometer 
getting  as  high  as  +  9£°;  and  as  this  took  place  with  a  north-west  wind,  which 
was  usually  the  coldest,  we  began  to  flatter  ourselves  that  the  spring  was  now 
indeed  advancing  by  rapid  strides.  On  the  evening  of  the  14th,  though  the 
thermometer  was  no  higher  than  +4°,  the  atmosphere  had  a  degree  of  softness 
in  it  so  pleasant  to  our  sensations  that,  as  one  of  the  quarter-masters  not  un- 
naturally however  unphilosophically  remarked,  "  it  felt  exactly  as  if  it  was 
going  to  rain  " — a  phenomenon,  however,  that  was  not  so  near  as  we  then 
expected.  This  apparent  turn  in  the  season  induced  me  to  allow  Captain 
Lyon  to  put  in  execution  a  plan  he  had  proposed,  of  going  out  with  his  in- 
tended party  for  one  day,  for  the  double  purpose  of  affording  them  a  little 
practice,  and  of  ascertaining  the  breadth  and  nature  of  the  channel  which  he 
would  have  to  cross  on  the  ice,  in  order  to  reach  the  main  land.  As  the  plan 
of  the  journey  partly  depended  upon  this,  I  agreed  to  his  proposal  of  setting 
out  for  this  purpose  on  the  following  day,  taking  with  him  a  tent,  blankets 
and  provisions  for  three  days  in  case  of  accidents. 

At  seven  A.M.  on  the  15th,  Captain  Lyon  and  his  party  left  the  ships  ;  Frid.  15 
the  thermometer  being  as  high  as  zero,  and  a  moderate  breeze  blowing 
from  the  northward  though  accompanied  by  considerable  snow-drift ;  an 
annoyance  which  it  now  required  much  less  strength  of  wind  to  create  than 
at  the  commencement  of  the  winter,  owing  to  the  snow  having  become 
more  minute.  From  the  very  hour  of  Captain  Lyon's  departure  the  ther- 
mometer began  to  fall  rapidly,  and  the  wind  to  increase ;  till  at  midnight 
the  former  had  reached  -32°  and  a  hard  gale  blew  from  the  north-west; 
upon  the  whole  it  proved  one  of  the  most  inclement  nights  for  people  to  be 
exposed  to,  that  we  had  experienced  in  our  present  quarters,  and  therefore 
created  in  our  minds  the  most  alarming  apprehensions  for  the  safety  of  our 
travellers.  It  is  scarcely  less  difficult  to  imagine  than  to  describe  the  con- 
trast between  exposure  to  all  the  horrors  of  such  tremendous  inclemency, 
and  the  fireside  comforts  we  on  board  were  enjoying.  In  this  climate  more 
frequently  than  in  any  other  does  the  mind  turn  to  the 

Poor  naked  wretches,  wheresoe'er  they  be, 
That  bide  the  pelting  of  the  pitiless  storm. 

But  now  that  some  of  our  own  companions  were  thus  exposed,  the  idea  came 


J  90 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
March. 


V1!1: 


more  forcibly  home  to  our  recollections,  together  with  the  utter  helpless- 
ness, not  to  say  hopelessness,  of  their  situation. 
Sat.  16.  The  wind  and  drift  continued  incessantly  on  the  16th  ;  and  as  the  ther- 
mometer rose  no  higher  than  —20°  during  the  day,  our  apprehensions  for 
Captain  Lyon's  party  were  by  no  means  diminished.  To  send  in  quest  of  them, 
would  have  been  only  to  incur  the  certainty  of  other  men  being  equally 
exposed.  Indeed  this  is  one  of  the  cases  in  which  no  assistance  can  be 
offered ;  for  any  persons  sent  out  with  that  hope  must  inevitably  become 
helpless  in  a  short  time,  while  the  snow-drift  would  render  it  impossible  to 
trace  those  whom  they  were  intended  to  assist.  We  had  however  prepared 
a  party  under  Lieutenant  Reid  to  be  despatched  the  instant  it  moderated, 
when  to  our  infinite  surprise  and  joy,  at  one  P.M.  Captain  Lyon  arrived  on 
board,  having  with  great  difficulty  succeeded  in  conducting  his  party  safely 
to  the  ships. 

If  I  have  succeeded  in  imparting  to  the  reader  any  idea  of  that  apprehen- 
sion for  the  safety  of  our  absentees,  which  we  ourselves  experienced,  he 
will  not  be  sorry  at  once  to  be  presented  with  Captain  Lyon's  account  of 
this  perilous  though  short  excursion  : 


HMH 


"  At  seven  A.M.,  on  the  15th,  we  proceeded  towards  the  hills  to  the  north- 
ward of  our  winter-quarters.  A  strong  wind  arose  soon  after  our  starting, 
and  blew  directly  in  our  faces,  bringing  thick  clouds  of  drift  snow  with  it. 
On  ascending  the  sloping  ground  we  found  the  sledge  too  much  for  us,  and 
it  was  with  great  difficulty  dragged  through  the  soft  snow  in  which  we 
waded  knee  deep.  The  wind  had  now  increased  to  a  heavy  gale,  our  utmost 
view  was  bounded  to  twenty  yards,  and  every  time  of  resting  to  take  breath 
we  all  received  severe  frost  bites.  The  sun  having  risen  above  the  thickest 
part  of  the  drift  snow  enabled  us  to  steer  a  direct  northerly  course,  for  we 
expected  in  that  direction  to  arrive  at  a  small  bay,  which  had  been  observed 
by  Captain  Parry  and  myself  on  our  first  arrival.  At  ten  we  were  con- 
firmed in  our  conjecture  by  descending  suddenly  and  arriving  at  a  quantity 
of  grounded  ice,  directed  by  which  we  made  our  way  round  the  head  of  the 
bay,  and  arrived  on  the  side  of  a  small  hill  a  little  after  eleven.  The  ex- 
treme severity  of  the  weather  determined  me  on  pitching  our  tent,  and  wait- 
ing until,  in  better  weather,  we  could  from  the  rising  ground  command  a 
view  of  our  future  route. 


IU! 


tA  - 


&,*m&#i\is 


TT. 


f^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

"  When  the  tent  had  been  pitched  an  hour,  and  our  party  were  all  smoking 
to  promote  warmth,    the  temperature  at  our  feet  was   1°  below  zero,  and 
over  head  amongst   the    smoke    +  7° ;  in  the  outer  air  it  was  —  5 
although   of   itself  sufficiently  cold   was   rendered  doubly  piercing  by  the 
strength  of  the  wind.     John  Lee  was  soon  seized  with  a  fit  of  shivering 
and  severe  pains  in  the  loins,  to  check  which  we  put  him  into  his  blanket 
and  covered   him   with  clothes  which   could  ill  be  spared.     A  deep  hole 
being  dug  in  the  snow  a  fire  was  made  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  and  we 
were  made  comfortable  for  a  time  by  a  warm  mess  of  soup.      I  afterwards 
found  that  it  would  be  possible  by  extending  our  excavation  to  make  a 
cavern  in  which  we  might  pass  the  night,  for  it  would  have  been  next  to 
impossible  to  continue  in  the  tent.     Some  of  the  men  were  therefore  set  to 
work,  and  had  thus  so  good  an  opportunity  of  warming  the  mselves,  that  our 
only  shovel  was  lent  from  one  to  the  other  as  a  particular  favour.  At  two  P.M. 
the  outer  air  was  —15°,  and  zero  was  the    temperature  of  the  tent,  when 
Arnold's  pocket  chronometer  stopped  from  the  effects  of  the  cold.     By  four 
P.M.  the  cavern  was  finished  and  of  sufficient  size  to  contain  us  all  in  a 
sitting  posture.     After  taking  some   hot    soup,   Lee   was  removed  to   the 
warmest  place  we  could  select  and,  making  a  fire,  we  managed  by  its  smoke, 
which  had  no  vent,  to  raise  the  temperature  to  +  20°,  while  outside  it  had 
fallen  to  -  25°.     We  now  cleaned  our  clothes  as  well  as  possible  from  the 
thick   coating   of  snow-drift,  and   closing  the   entrance  of  the  cave  with 
blocks  of  snow,  we  crept   into   our  blanket  bags,  and  huddled  close  to- 
gether to  endeavour  to  procure  a  little  sleep.     Our  small  dwelling  had  a 
very  close  feel,  which  was  perhaps  not  a  little  augmented  by  the  reflection 
that  a  spade  alone  could  liberate  us  again  after  a  night's  drift  of  snow ;  and 
our  roof  being  two   feet  thick,  and  not  of   the  most  secure    description, 
there  was  no  small  probability  of  its  breaking  down  on  us,  in  which   case, 
confined  as  we  were  in  our  bags,  and  lying  almost  upon  each  other,  we 
should  have  but  little  chance  of  extricating  ourselves. 

'  At  daylight  on  the  16th  we  found  the  temperature  at  +26°  until  we  dug 
out  the  entrance,  when  it  fell  to  +  15°,  while  outside  it  was  —25°.  We  again 
lighted  our  fire  and,  after  sitting  two  hours  in  such  thick  black  smoke  that 
we  could  not  see  our  feet,  succeeded  in  making  some  tea,  which  answered 
a  double  purpose,  as  it  served  to  thaw  some  meat  which  was  frozen  in 
the  canisters.     At  nine   A.M.   the   gale   was  unabated,  and  the  drift  as 


y5a^to«Rfcnw*.'. 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

severe  as  ever.  The  tent  was  half  buried  in  the  snow,  and  I  set  all  hands 
to  work  at  digging  out  the  sledge,  but  it  was  so  deeply  sunk  that  our 
efforts  were  unsuccessful,  and  in  the  attempt  our  faces  and  extremities  were 
most  painfully  frost-bitten.  With  all  these  difficulties  before  us,  Mr.  Palmer 
and  myself  consulted  together  as  to  whether  it  would  be  most  prudent  to 
endeavour  to  pass  another  night  in  our  present  precarious  situation,  or 
while  we  were  yet  able  to  walk  make  an  attempt  to  reach  the  ships,  which 
we  supposed  were  about  six  miles  from  us.  We  could  not  see  a  yard  of 
our  way,  yet  to  remain  appeared  worse  than  to  go  forward,  which  last  plan 
was  decided  on.  At  thirty  minutes  past  nine,  having  placed  all  our  lug- 
gage in  the  tent,  and  erected  a  small  flag  over  it,  we  set  out,  carrying  a 
few  pounds  of  bread,  a  little  rum,  and  a  spade.  The  wind  being  now  in  our 
backs,  we  walked  very  briskly,  and  having  an  occasional  glimpse  of  a  very  faint 
sun  through  the  drift,  managed  to  steer  a  tolerable  course.  James  Can- 
having  loitered  a  little  behind  us  was  suddenly  missed,  and  by  the  most  for- 
tunate chance  we  saw  him  running  across  our  path  in  search  of  us ;  for  had 
he  been  ten  yards  farther  off  he  might  have  been  lost.  After  Walking  several 
miles  we  came  to  grounded  ice,  and  saw  the  tracks  of  Esquimaux  men 
and  dogs,  but  these  were  so  confused  that  we  knew  not  which  marks  to 
follow. 

"  Not  knowing  on  which  side  of  the  ships  we  had  arrived,  we  feared  to  go  to 
the  southward  or  eastward,  and  accordingly  went  as  nearly  west  as  possible, 
in  which  direction  we  again  crossed  tracks.  We  now  wandered  amongst  the 
heavy  hummocks  of  ice  without  knowing  which  track  to  pursue,  and,  suffer- 
ing from  cold,  fatigue,  and  anxiety,  were  soon  completely  bewildered.  Se- 
veral of  our  party  began  to  exhibit  symptoms  of  that  horrid  kind  of  insensi- 
bility which  is  the  prelude  to  sleep.  They  all  professed  extreme  Avillingness 
to  do  what  they  were  told  in  order  to  keep  in  exercise,  but  none  obeyed  ;  on 
the  contrary  they  reeled  about  like  drunken  men.  The  faces  of  several 
were  severely  frost-bitten,  and  some  had  for  a  considerable  time  lost  sensa- 
tion in  their  fingers  and  toes  ;  yet  they  made  not  the  slightest  exertion  to  rub 
the  parts  affected,  and  discontinued  their  general  custom  of  warming  each 
other  on  observing  a  discoloration  of  the  skin.  We  continued  for  some 
time  to  employ  them  in  building  a  snow-wall,  ostensibly  as  a  shelter  from  the 
wind,  but  in  reality  to  give  them  exercise,  for  standing  still  must  have  proved 
fatal  to  men  in  our  circumstances.     My  attention  was  particularly  directed 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


to  Serjeant  Spackman,  who  having  been  repeatedly  warned  that  his  nose 
was  frozen  had  paid  no  attention  to  it,  owing  to  the  state  of  stupefaction 
into  which  he  had  fallen.  The  frost-bite  had  now  extended  over  one  side  of 
his  face,  which  was  frozen  as  hard  as  a  mask,  the  eye-lids  were  stiff,  and  one 
corner  of  the  upper  lip  so  drawn  up  as  to  expose  the  teeth  and  gums.  My 
hands  being  still  warm,  I  was  enabled  to  restore  the  circulation,  after  which 
I  used  all  my  endeavours  to  keep  him  in  motion,  but  he  complained  sadly  of 
giddiness  and  dimness  of  sight,  and  was  so  weak  as  to  be  unable  to  walk  of 
himself.  His  case  was  indeed  so  alarming,  that  I  expected  every  moment  he 
would  lie  down  never  to  rise  again.  Our  prospect  now  became  every 
moment  more  gloomy,  and  it  was  but  too  evident  that  four  of  our  party  could 
not  survive  another  hour.  Mr.  Palmer,  however,  endeavoured  with  myself 
to  cheer  the  people,  but  it  was  a  faint  attempt  as  we  had  not  a  single  hope  to 
give  them.  We  had  less  reason  to  fear  immediate  danger  to  ourselves,  in 
consequence  of  having  fur  coats  instead  of  woollen  ones.  Every  piece  of 
ice,  or  even  small  rock  or  stone,  was  now  taken  for  the  ships  ;  and  we  had 
great  difficulty  in  preventing  the  men  from  running  to  the  different  objects 
which  attracted  them,  and  losing  themselves  in  the  drift.  In  this  state, 
while  Mr.  Palmer  was  running  round  us  to  warm  himself,  he  suddenly  pitched 
on  a  new  beaten  track;  and  as  exercise  was  indispensable,  we  determined  on 
following  it  wherever  it  might  lead  us.  Having  taken  the  Serjeant  under 
my  coat,  he  recovered  a  little  and  we  moved  onwards,  when,  only  those  who 
have  been  in  a  similar  state  of  distress  can  imagine  our  joy  at  finding  the  path 
led  to  the  ships,  at  which  we  arrived  in  about  ten  minutes. 

"  John  Lee  had  two  of  his  fingers  so  badly  frost-bitten  as  to  lose  a  good 
deal  of  the  flesh  of  the  upper  ends,  and  we  were  for  many  days  in  fear  he 
would  be  obliged  to  have  them  amputated.  Carr,  who  had  been  the  most 
hardy  while  in  the  air,  fainted  twice  on  coming  below ;  and  all  had  severe 
frost-bites  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  which  recovered  after  the  loss  of  skin 
usual  in  those  cases," 


Notwithstanding  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  some  of  the  Esquimaux 
had,  by  the  foot  and  sledge  marks,  found  their  way  to  the  ships  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  16th,  assuring  us,  as  we  found  to  be  too  true,  that  in  consequence  Sat.  16 
of  the  gale  which  prevented  their  going  out  for  seals  they  had  not  any  food, 
nor  a  single  lamp  a-light  at  the  village.     In  the  course  of  the  following  day, 


194 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
March. 


fllWlll 


Men.  If 


we  had  further  proofs  of  the  wretchedness  which  these  poor  people  were  en- 
during at  the  huts  ;  for,  though  the  weather  was  very  little  better  than  before, 
above  forty  men  and  women  besides  some  children  came  down  to  the  ships, 
and  begged  with  more  than  their  usual  earnestness  for  something  to  eat.  It 
now  once  more  became  an  act  of  humanity,  and  consequently  of  duty,  to 
supply  them  as  well  as  we  were  able  ;  and  all  were  admitted  to  partake  of  as 
much  bread-dust  as  they  could  eat,  besides  a  quantity  which  they  took  away 
with  them.  It  had  been  long  since  Okotook  and  Iligliuk  cared  to  accept 
this  kind  of  food  from  us,  partly  because  our  respect  for  the  latter  generally 
ensured  them  something  better,  and  partly  because  of  late  they  had  procured 
plenty  of  seals ;  to-day,  however,  they  devoured  it  eagerly,  and  seemed 
very  well  satisfied  to  take  their  share  with  the  others,  When  the  usual  time 
of  departure  came,  they  all  discovered  a  wish  to  remain  on  board  ;  but  as  we 
could  not  find  lodging  for  the  whole  tribe,  they  were  obliged  very  reluctantly 
to  return.  Nannow,  a  fine  quiet  young  man  whose  native  country  is  near 
Chesterfield  Inlet,  and  who,  having  only  a  sister  here,  used  to  live  with 
Okotook,  begged  very  hard  to  remain  on  board,  but  as  I  did  not  like  to  give 
the  preference  to  one  in  particular,  he  also  took  his  leave. 

The  wind  abated  towards  night,  after  a  gale  which,  both  for  duration  and 
strength,  might  well  be  called  equinoctial.  The  indications  of  the  barometer 
on  this  occasion  deserve  to  be  noticed.  The  mercury  had  fallen  with  un- 
usual rapidity  from  29.46  inches  at  four  P.M.  on  the  14th,  to  28.80  at  eight 
A.M.  on  the  15th,  at  which  time  the  gale  may  be  said  to  have  commenced. 
What  was  remarkable,  however,  is  that  this  was  its  minimum,  and  that  from 
this  time  the  mercury  almost  constantly,  though  very  slowly,  rose  to  29.19 
on  the  evening  of  the  17th,  when  the  wind  moderated.  On  the  following 
day,  the  18th,  when  the  weather  was  quite  fine,  the  barometer  rose  very 
quickly  to  29.84  at  midnight,  and  continued  to  rise  till  it  had  reached  its 
maximum,  30  inches,  on  the  evening  of  the  19th.  It  may  be  interesting  to 
notice  that,  during  this  three  days'  gale,  which  was  certainly  well  calculated 
to  try  the  merits  of  our  warming  stove,  the  mean  temperature  of  the  Fury's 
lower  deck  had  been  from  58°  to  62°,  and  that  the  thermometer  had  never 
stood  lower  than  56°.     The  temperature  of  the  sick-bay  was  always  above  60°. 

On  the  18th,  almost  every  man  from  the  huts  was  out  seal-hunting,  and 
three  or  four,  as  the  women  informed  us,  had  gone  to  a  considerable  distance 
for  walruses,  and  with  the  intention  of  remaining  out  for  the  night  in  a  snow 
hut.     While  the  men  were  thus  employed,  their  wives  did  not  fail  to  use 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

their  endeavours  also  to  procure  food  ;  and  I  believe  that  every  female  be- 
longing to  the  village,  without  a  single  exception,  made  her  appearance  at 
the  ships  to-day,  and  was  supplied  with  a  proportion  of  bread-dust  for  her 
family.  It  was  pleasing  to  observe,  that  they  were  always  punctual  in  re- 
turning the  buckets  and  bags  which  we  lent  them  for  carrying  out  their 
provisions. 

The  fact  of  our  ships  not  having  required  pumping  out,  either  here  or  at 
Melville  Island,  for  several  months  together  during  the  winter,  naturally 
led  me  to  consider  what  was  likely  to  be  the  reason  of  this  extraordinary 
tightness.  It  is  true  indeed,  that  after  the  first  winter  a  certain  quantity  of 
ice  was  subsequently  found  mixed  with  the  coals  which  composed  our  bal- 
last, but  this  quantity  bore  a  trifling  proportion  to  the  ten  or  twelve  inches 
of  water  which  found  its  way  into  the  pump-well  daily  throughout  the  sum- 
mer. It  appears  probable,  therefore,  that  any  small  leak  through  which  the 
water  only  slowly  filters  may  become  altogether  stopped  by  its  freezing, 
whenever  the  temperature  of  the  hold  has  fallen  a  few  degrees  below  the 
freezing-point  of  sea-water.  For  the  latter  being  already  cooled  down  as 
low  as  in  its  fluid  state  it  can  be,  will  very  readily  freeze  when,  by  its 
entrance  into  the  ship,  it  meets  with  a  greater  degree  of  cold,  especially  if 
(as  is  very  frequently  the  case)  the  leak  should  be  about  a  metal  bolt  which, 
by  its  conducting  property,  would  very  much  favour  the  process  of  con- 
gelation. 

We  had  clear  and  very  moderate  weather  on  the  20th,  and  yet  the  ther-  Wed.  20 
mometer  fairly  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays  rose  only  to  —  5°,  or  about  12° 
higher  than  in  the  shade,  and  this  with  the  sun  twelve  hours  above  the 
horizon,  and  24°  high  at  noon.  At  night  it  blew  a  strong  breeze  from  the 
W.N.W.,  with  considerable  drift,  notwithstanding  which  it  is  remarkable 
that  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  remained  at  29.80  inches,  without  the 
alteration  of  a  single  hundredth  part  from  ten  P.M.  on  the  20th  till  four 
A.M.  on  the  22d,  being  an  interval  of  thirty  hours.  Except  the  breeze 
above  mentioned,  which  continued  strong  for  four  or  five  hours,  the 
weather  was  fine  during  this  interval,  and  remained  so  for  several  days 
afterwards. 

A  deeper  drift  of  snow  had  collected  round  the  ships  during  the  last  week, 
and  particularly  at  the  time  of  the  gales,  than  in  the  whole  of  the  preceding 
part  of  the  winter.  On  one  side  of  the  Hecla  was  a  bank  seven  or  eight  feet 
deep,  in  which  the  men  amused  themselves  by  excavating  houses,  with  large 

2  c  2 


t    '<k  A  :   : 


196 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


(in  i 


1822.   vaulted  apartments  like  catacombs.     The  quantity  of  snow,  however,  around 
•^y>J  the  ships  was  never  so  great  here  as  at  Melville  Island,  in  consequence  of  the 
less  frequent  drifts,  though  its  depth  on  shore  and  therefore  the  whole  quan- 
tity that  fell  was  greater. 

The  weather  continued  very  fine  for  several  days  about  this  period,  the 
wind  being  from  the  north-west,  and  the  thermometer  from  — •  8°  to  —  24°. 
Mod.  25.  On  the  25th  some  clear  water  opening  now  and  then  off  the  south-east  point, 
I  sent  Mr.  Ross  in  the  small  boat  to  endeavour  to  kill  some  dovekies,  of  which 
he  procured  one  or  two  specimens.  These  birds  and  the  ravens  were  the 
only  ones  that  kept  us  company  occasionally  throughout  the  winter. 

The  endeavours  we  had  lately  been  making  to  gain  from  the  Esquimaux 
some  knowledge  of  the  geographical  features  of  the  land  to  the  northward, 
had  at  length  been  crowned  with  even  greater  success  than  we  had  antici- 
pated, and  some  information  of  a  very  gratifying  and  interesting  nature  thus 
obtained.  I  shall  here,  therefore,  give  some  account  of  that  information, 
and  of  the  progressive  steps  by  which  it  was  communicated,  which  may,  at 
the  same  time,  serve  to  shew  the  kind  and  degree  of  dependence  that  is  to 
be  placed  in  geographical  notices  thus  obtained. 

The  first  attempt  made  in  this  way,  was  by  placing  several  sheets  of  paper 
before  Iligliuk,  and  roughly  drawing  on  a  large  scale  an  outline  of  the  land 
about  Repulse  Bay  and  Lyon  Inlet,  and  terminating  at  our  present  winter- 
quarters.  If  information  and  not  mere  curiosity  be  the  object,  this  in  my 
opinion  is  an  indispensable  precaution  ;  for  that  object  can  hardly  be  so  well 
obtained  by  leaving  a  savage  to  puzzle  his  way  over  fifty  leagues  of  coast 
already  known,  when  by  delineating  it  with  tolerable  accuracy,  his  concep- 
tions, instead  of  being  confused,  may  be  assisted.  Iligliuk  was  not  long  in 
comprehending  what  Ave  desired,  and  with  a  pencil  continued  the  outline, 
making  the  land  trend  as  we  supposed  to  the  north-eastward,  and  giving 
the  names  of  the  principal  places  as  she  proceeded.  The  scale  being  large, 
it  was  necessary  when  she  came  to  the  end  of  one  piece  of  paper  to  tack  on 
another,  till  at  length  she  had  filled  ten  or  twelve  sheets,  and  had  completely 
lost  sight  of  Winter  Island  (called  Neyuning-Eit-dua)  at  the  other  end  of  the 
table.  The  idea  entertained  from  this  first  attempt  was,  that  we  should  find 
the  coast  indented  by  several  inlets  and  in  some  parts  much  loaded  with  ice, 
especially  at  one  strait  to  the  northward  of  her  native  island  Amitioke,  which 
seemed  to  lead  in  a  direction  very  much  to  the  westward. 

Within  a  week  after  this,  several  other  charts  were  drawn  by  the  natives 


Mf  Ml -MWWIHMrSBC 


■Mtjms^a  n»irsa>f 


of  a  North-west  passage. 


in  a  similar  way,  principally  by  the  desire  of  Captain  Lyon  and  Mr. 
Griffiths,  who  took  great  pains  to  acquire  information  of  this  nature,  and 
sent  me  copies  of  these  productions.  The  coast  was  here  delineated  as 
before,  on  a  very  large  scale,  but  much  more  in  detail,  many  more  islands, 
bays,  and  names  being  inserted.  It  was  observable,  however,  that  no  two 
charts  much  resembled  each  other,  and  that  the  greater  number  of  them  still 
less  resembled  the  truth  in  those  parts  of  the  coast  with  which  we  were 
well  acquainted.  The  only  one  deserving  further  notice  in  this  place  was 
drawn  by  Iligliuk  for  Captain  Lyon,  of  which  an  accurate  reduction  is  here 
given,  and  marked  No.  1.,  the  scale  being  about  one-twelfth  of  that  of  the 
original. 

On  an  inspection  of  this  curious  chart,  it  will  appear  evident  that,  with 
respect  to  the  relative  geographical  position  of  the  lands  beyond  us,  (which 
was  in  fact  the  only  very  interesting  question  we  desired  them  to  solve,) 
it  was  calculated  to  give  us  ideas  which  our  subsequent  experience  proved 
to  be  erroneous ;  making,  for  instance,  the  direction  nearly  the  same  from 
Repulse  Bay  to  Winter  Island,  as  from  the  latter  to  Amitioke,  though  they 
are  in  fact  exactly  at  right  angles.  Being  extremely  desirous  of  obtaining 
more  certain  information  on  this  part  of  the  subject,  it  occurred  to  me 
to  attempt  the  thing  with  Iligliuk  on  a  smaller  scale,  such  as  might  enable 
her  to  keep  in  view  at  the  same  time  every  part  of  the  coast  to  be  delineated. 
This  attempt  was  also  much  favoured  by  our  having  lately  obtained  the  Es- 
quimaux words  for  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  horizon,  which  were,  there- 
fore, previously  laid  down  by  lines  on  the  chart.  Having,  in  addition  to 
this,  delineated  the  usual  portion  of  the  coast,  and  made  Iligliuk  "  box  the 
compass"  repeatedly,  so  as  to  render  her  quite  familiar  with  the  exact  rela- 
tive position  of  the  lands  we  had  laid  down,  we  desired  her  to  complete  the 
rest,  and  to  do  it  mikfcee  (small),  when,  with  a  countenance  of  the  most  grave 
attention  and  peculiar  intelligence,  she  drew  the  coast  of  the  continent 
beyond  her  own  country,  as  lying  nearly  north,  instead  of  east,  from 
Winter  Island.  The  most  important  part  still  remained,  and  it  would  have 
amused  an  unconcerned  looker-on  to  have  observed  the  anxiety  and  sus- 
pense depicted  on  the  countenances  of  our  part  of  the  group,  till  this 
was  accomplished,  for  never  were  the  tracings  of  a  pencil  watched  with  more 
eager  solicitude.  Our  surprise  and  satisfaction  may  therefore,  in  some  de- 
gree, be  imagined  when,  without  taking  it  from  the  paper,  Iligliuk  brought  the 


*&sr?* 


198 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


III 


1822. 
March, 


i  i:ili 


continental  coast  short  round  to  the  westward,  and  afterwards  to  the  S.S.W., 
so  as  to  come  within  three  or  four  days'  journey  of  Repulse  Bay.  The  coun- 
try thus  situated  upon  the  shores  of  the  Western  or  Polar  Sea  is  called 
Akkoolee,  and  is  inhabited  by  numerous  Esquimaux ;  and  half-way  between 
that  coast  and  Repulse  Bay  Iligliuk  drew  a  lake  of  considerable  size,  having 
small  streams  running  from  it  to  the  sea  on  each  side.  To  this  lake  her 
countrymen  are  annually  in  the  habit  of  resorting  during  the  summer,  and 
catch  there  large  fish  of  the  salmon  kind,  while  on  the  banks  are  found 
abundance  of  rein-deer.  To  the  westward  of  Akkoolee,  as  far  as  they  can 
see  from  the  hills,  which  she  described  as  high  ones,  nothing  can  be  distin- 
guished but  one  wide-extended  sea.  Being  desirous  of  seeing  whether 
Iligliuk  would  interfere  with  Wager  River,  as  we  know  it  to  exist,  I  re- 
quested her  to  continue  the  coast-line  to  the  southward  of  Akkoolee,  when 
she  immediately  dropped  the  pencil,  and  said  she  knew  no  more  about  it. 
A  few  days  after  this,  Ewerat  drew  a  chart  exactly  corresponding  with  Ilig- 
liuk's  in  all  material  points,  and  every  subsequent  conversation  with  these 
people  served  to  confirm  this  interesting  information.  A  copy  of  Iligliuk's 
second  chart,  being  about  half  the  size  of  the  original,  is  here  annexed,  the 
unshaded  parts  of  the  coast  being  those  previously  laid  down  for  her,  and 
the  rest  her  own  performance. 

The  new  and  satisfactory  prospect  thus  unexpectedly  opened  to  us,  of  our 
soon  rounding  the  north-eastern  point  of  America,  recalled  to  my  mind  two 
circumstances  that  had  occurred  during  the  examination  of  Lyon  Inlet,  in  the 
preceding  autumn.  The  first  was  that,  on  the  9th  of  September,  when  on 
the  summit  of  the  high  hill  which  I  ascended,  I  noticed  a  brightness  in  the 
western  sky  so  much  resembling  ice-blink,  that  I  remarked  it  to  the  men 
who  were  with  me,  and  afterwards  to  Mr.  Ross  on  my  return  to  the  tents. 
The  second  circumstance  now  alluded  to  is,  that,  from  a  still  higher  hill,  to 
which  I  despatched  Messrs.  Ross  and  Bushnan  on  the  13th,  they  saw  a  great 
deal  of  water  to  the  W.N.W.,  with  islands  and  capes  ;  but,  as  the  sun  had 
just  set,  they  could  make  out  nothing  more.  As  we  had  already  determined 
by  the  closest  examination,  that  there  was  here  no  communication  with  it, 
and  as  no  idea  could  be  entertained  of  the  sea  being  only  at  the  distance  of 
ten  or  twelve  leagues  in  that  direction,  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  could 
only  be  a  lake  of  larger  dimensions  than  the  numberless  others  with  which 
this  country  is  covered.     I  had  now,  however,  not  the  smallest  doubt  that  it 


|i   *l: 


d  tv  the*  We*s6wa/rd/  ft  *%  "%£z;>y/  Za.  'kc  et'J'rcsK 

M?£stv?ze  Jt&rk 

:eat/s.  &uC  rid 
ses  nor  Whales 


*t/  think 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE, 
was  the  sea  which  our  gentlemen  had  then  seen,  and  that  both  this,  and  the   1822« 

March 

blink  observed  by  myself,  might  be  considered  as  confirming  very  satisfac 
torily  the  accounts  given  by  the  Esquimaux. 

The  barometer  rose  to  30.41  inches  in  the  night,  being  the  maximum  indica- 
tion registered  since  the  18th  of  September  preceding.  It  was  so  far,  however, 
from  being  the  precursor  of  any  thing  unusually  fine  in  the  weather,  that  it 
blew  a  fresh  breeze  from  the  W.N.W.  on  the  26th,  which  was  followed  by  over-  Tues.  26 
cast  weather  and  small  snow.  To  this  succeeded  a  gale  from  the  northward, 
which  came  on  with  considerable  violence  on  the  27th,  and  continued  to  Wed.  27 
blow  incessantly  during  the  two  following  days,  accompanied  by  a  high 
snow-drift.  The  inclemency  of  the  weather  preventing  the  Esquimaux  from 
going  out  to  fish,  they  were  once  more  badly  off  for  food  and  fuel.  A  ge- 
neral supply  of  bread-dust  was  therefore  furnished  them  from  the  ships, 
which  they  now  had  learned  to  consider  so  much  a  thing  of  course,  that  few 
of  them  thought  it  necessary  even  to  go  through  the  forms  of  their  accus- 
tomed Coyenna  (thanks).  Siokobeut,  alias  the  Commodore,  was  detected  in 
stealing  a  piece  of  beef  from  the  Hecla's  quarter,  placing  his  little  boy 
Toonek  to  look  out  for  any  person  coming.  I  do  not  know  whether  hunger 
may  not  be  considered  some  excuse  for  this  act  of  petty  larceny,  but  at  the 
time  we  thought  it  aggravated,  in  some  degree,  by  their  having  just  before 
been  fed  with  bread-dust  on  board. 

When  the  weather  moderated,  which  was  not  till  the  night  of  the  29th, 
we  found  that  the  ice  had  once  more  separated  in  the  offing,  and  had  even 
made  some  encroachments  into  the  bay,  the  open  water  being  now  within 
two  hundred  paces  of  the  ships'  sterns.  It  is  certain  indeed  that,  but  for 
the  numerous  grounded  masses  which  had  fixed  themselves  round  the  shores 
of  the  bay,  and  which  like  so  many  piles  held  fast  the  floe  into  which  we 
were  frozen,  we  should  long  ere  this  time  have  been  drifted  out  to  sea  by 
the  total  disruption  of  the  ice  from  this  part  of  the  land.  This  observation 
is  only  meant  to  apply  to  a  bay  which,  like  our  present  one,  is  in  the  imme- 
diate neighbourhood  of  a  part  of  the  sea  that,  from  some  local  cause,  is 
frequently  open  during  the  winter,  and  where  very  high  and  rapid  tides 
greatly  favour  the  separation  of  ice  from  the  shores.  Where  on  the  con- 
trary the  tides  are  small,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  a  ship  once  frozen 
into  a  bay  in  these  regions,  however  exposed  it  may  be,  may  be  just  as  se- 
cure during  the  winter  as  in  the  most  sheltered  harbour. 

As  a  method,  and  the  only  one  that  occurred  to  me,  of  trying  the  average  Sun.  31 


>£jwins~i&  .a  :  i 


m 


1822. 
March. 


200 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


depth  of  snow  that  had  fallen  at  this  period,  I  caused  it  to  be  accurately  mea- 
sured as  it  lay  on  the  level  surface  of  the  ice  in  the  bay  in  twenty-two  dif- 
ferent places,  where  there  was  no  obstacle  to  create  a  drift.  The  mean 
depth  thus  obtained  was  four  inches  and  a  half,  which,  however,  when  com- 
pared with  that  on  shore,  even  in  parts  the  least  likely  to  collect  a  drift, 
appeared  too  small  by  half  to  be  taken  as  a  measure  of  the  actual  quantity 
that  had  fallen.  The  fact  seems  to  be  that,  while  the  irregularities  of  the 
surface  on  shore  prevent  the  possibility  of  judging  of  this  with  any  great 
accuracy,  the  smoothness  and  uniformity  of  the  surface  of  the  ice  present 
an  equal  difficulty,  though  in  a  contrary  way  ;  a  very  moderate  breeze  being 
sufficient  during  some  months  of  the  winter  to  carry  it  from  the  place  where 
it  has  fallen,  unless  it  has  time  to  consolidate  itself  before  the  coming  on  of 
a  breeze  strong  enough  to  disturb  it. 

The  appearance  of  the  Aurora  Borealis  was  less  frequent  during  March 
than  in  the  preceding  winter  months,  in  consequence  of  the  increased  dura- 
tion of  daylight  at  this  period.  Whatever  slight  variations  might  exist  in 
these  appearances,  it  still  continued  a  matter  of  constant  remark  to  us,  that 
the  phenomenon  almost  invariably  commenced  in  the  south-eastern  quarter 
of  the  heavens  ;  and  it  is  perhaps  worthy  of  notice  that  the  same  thing  was 
observed  by  Crantz  in  Greenland*.  The  arch-like  form  assumed  by  the 
Aurora  was  also  one  of  its  almost  invariable  peculiarities ;  the  legs  of  the 
arch  being  usually  situated  somewhere  between  the  east  and  west  points  of 
the  horizon,  and  almost  always  occupying  the  southern  side  of  the  heavens. 
The  only  instance  of  this  phenomenon  during  the  month  of  March,  deserving 
particular  description,  occurred  on  the  evening  of  the  30th,  when  it  made  its 
appearance  as  usual  in  the  south-eastern  horizon,  from  whence  it  soon  diffused 
itself  in  a  low  but  tolerably  regular  arch  extending  to  the  W.S.W.  Again 
at  times  it  altogether  vanished,  and  then  as  suddenly  re-appeared  much  in 
the  same  situation  as  before.  We  often  fancied  that  this  phenomenon  exhi- 
bited a  light  of  greater  actual  intensity  when  the  moon  was  above  the  hori- 
zon than  at  other  times,  though  its  appearance  was  of  course  less  splendid 
on  that  account.  Whether  this  was  in  reality  the  case  or  not,  we  had  no 
means  of  correctly  judging  ;  but  some  idea  of  its  brightness  may  be  formed 
from  the  circumstance  of  its  being  often  very  distinctly  visible  when  the 

*  See  Ceantz,  i.  48,  whose  very  words  would  truly  describe  what  we  so  frequently  noticed 
during  this  winter. 


-     •« 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

moon  was  between  her  quarters  and  the  full.  The  electrometer  was  tried 
during  the  continuance  of  this  evening's  Aurora,  but  no  effect  was  perceptible 
either  on  that  or  a  Kater's  compass. 

On  the  2d  of  April  a  thin  sheet  of  bay-ice  several  miles  square  had  formed  Tues.  2 
on  the  sea  to  the  eastward  and  southward,  where  for  two  or  three  days  past 
there  had  been  a  space  of  open  water.  This  was  occasioned  more  by  the  wind 
remaining  very  moderate,  and  the  neap-tides  occurring  about  this  time,  than 
from  any  great  degree  of  cold,  the  thermometer  seldom  falling  below  — 
—  7°.  The  wind,  however,  settling  in  the  south-east  to-day,  the  main  body 
of  ice,  which  had  been  scarcely  visible  in  the  offing,  soon  began  to  move 
in-shore,  forcing  before  it  the  young  floe  and  squeezing  it  up  into  innumer- 
able hummocks,  which  presently  being  cemented  together  by  a  fresh  forma- 
tion in  their  interstices,  constituted  an  example  of  one  of  the  ways  in  which 
these  "hummocky  floes"  are  produced,  of  which  I  have  before  so  often  had 
occasion  to  speak.  We  were  always  glad  to  see  this  squeezing  process  take 
place  while  the  ice  was  still  thin  enough  to  admit  of  it ;  as  it  thus  became 
compressed  perhaps  into  one-fiftieth  part  of  the  compass  that  it  would  other- 
wise have  occupied,  and  of  course  left  so  much  the  more  open  space  upon  the 
surface  of  the  sea.  The  temperature  of  the  water  at  the  bottom  in  eight 
fathoms  was  to-day  28°,  being  the  same  as  that  of  the  surface. 

Early  in  the  morning  the  Esquimaux  had  been  observed  in  motion 
at  the  huts  ;  and  several  sledges  drawn  by  dogs  and  heavily  laden  went 
off  to  the  westward.  On  going  out  to  the  village,  Ave  found  one-half  of  the 
people  had  quitted  their  late  habitations,  taking  with  them  every  article  of 
their  property,  and  had  gone  over  the  ice,  we  knew  not  where,  in  quest 
of  more  abundant  food.  The  wretched  appearance  which  the  interior 
of  the  huts  now  presented  baffles  all  description.  In  each  of  the  larger 
ones  some  of  the  apartments  were  either  wholly  or  in  part  deserted,  the 
very  snow  which  composed  the  beds  and  fire-places  having  been  turned 
up,  that  no  article  might  be  left  behind.  Even  the  bare  walls,  whose 
original  colour  was  scarcely  perceptible  for  lamp-black,  blood,  and  other 
filth,  were  not  left  perfect,  large  holes  having  been  made  in  the  sides  and 
roofs  for  the  convenience  of  handing  out  the  goods  and  chattels.  The  sight 
of  a  deserted  habitation  is  at  all  times  calculated  to  excite  in  the  mind  a 
sensation  of  dreariness  and  desolation,  especially  when  we  have  lately  seen  it 
filled  with  cheerful  inhabitants ;  but  the  feeling  is  even  heightened  rather 
than  diminished  when  a  small  portion  of  these  inhabitants  remain  behind  to 


<^% 


•\a&£9<r* r:  **":£.  YfiAiK  * 


ABSTRACT  of  the 

METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Winter  Island,  during  the  Month  of  March 

,  1822. 

Day 

Fahrenheit's 
Thermometer. 

■     5 

a  o 
pH  o  a; 

S3 

S  OS 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 
Weather. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity. 

1 

O 
-11 

-35 

O 
-24.25 

o 
53.0 

inches. 
29.90 

inches. 

29.83 

inches. 

29.868 

West 

fresh 

fine 

2 

+  2 

10 

3.37 

53.6 

29.85 

29.24, 

29.535 

ESE 

strong 

hazy  and  drift 

3 

-  6 

19 

14.50 

54.5 

29.52 

29.27 

29.390 

North 

strong 

hazy  and  drift 

4 

20 

29 

25.37 

56.0 

29.67 

29.58 

29.633 

NW 

light 

clear 

5 

22 

32 

25.92 

53.5 

29.82 

29.63 

29.693 

NNW 

light 

clear 

6 

17 

24 

19.83 

56.5 

30.15 

29.87 

30.047 

NW 

light 

clear 

7 

+  2 

11 

4.83 

54.0 

30.31 

30.17 

30.258 

sw 

strong 

cloudy  and  drift 

8 

11 

+  2 

+  7.33 

58.2 

30.31 

29.80 

30.087 

sw 

fresh 

cloudy 

9 

13 

—  5 

7.00 

61.2 

29.72 

29.45 

29.508 

SSWround) 
byWtoNWj 

fresh 

hazy  and  snow 

10 

-  8 

13 

-10.62 

60.0 

29.92 

29.50 

29.758 

-  NW 

fresh 

cloudy 

11 

8 

22 

13.71 

58.0 

30.00 

29.94 

29.973 

NNW 

light 

cloudy 

12 
13 

8 
+  5 

24 

11 

15.67 
0.17 

60.0 
61.2 

30.07 
29.90 

29.94 
29.26 

30.017 
29.575 

NW 
WbN  C 

modt. 

squalls 

at 
times 

clear 
cloudy 

14 

5 

01 

•>2 

1.37 

62.7 

29.47 

29.14 

29.348 

North 

light 

fine 

15 

2 

32 

12.12 

62  2 

28.97 

28.80 

28.850 

NNW 

strong 

hazy  and  drift 

16 
17 

-20 
10 

29 
30 

23.75 
17.75 

60.5 
58.0 

29.15 
29.27 

28.83 
29.16 

2S.960 
29.205 

NW 
WNW  I 

strong 

squalls 

at 
times 

hazy  and  much  drift 
cloudy 

18 

13 

25 

18.00 

56.5 

29.84 

29.32 

29.59S 

NW 

modt. 

clear 

19 

13 

27 

21.25 

57.0 

30.00 

29.86 

29.928 

NW 

light 

fine 

20 
21 

15 
6 

26 

18 

19.42 
12.42 

59.5 

57.5 

29.96 
29.80 

29.80 
29.80 

29.853 
29.800 

WNW 

WNW    | 

light 
fresh 
and 

squalls 

fine 
hazy 

22 

12 

24 

18.00 

59.2 

29.94 

29.80 

29.872 

WNW 

light 

fine 

23 

11 

23 

16.96 

59.0 

30.06 

29.95 

29.998 

NW 

light 

fine 

24 

8 

21 

14.17 

57.3 

30.22 

30.07 

30.144 

North 

light 

cloudy  and  small  snow 

25 

12 

25 

18.54 

58.0 

30.41 

30.22 

30.307 

WNW 

light 

fine 

26 

1 

20 

9.62 

56.5 

30.41 

30.24 

30.333 

WNW 

modt. 

fine 

27 

4 

9 

6.12 

58.7 

30.20 

29.64 

29.957 

North 

light 

hazy  and  small  snow 

28 

6 

10 

7.92 

57.5 

29.57 

29.05 

29.233 

NNE 

strong 

hazy  and  drift 

29 

+  6 

2 

+  2.75 

59.7 

29.10 

29.02 

29.048 

NNE 

strong 

much  drift 

30 

7 

13 

-  0.38 

60.2 

29.33 

29.12 

29.230 

NbE 

modt. 

hazy  and  drift 

31 

7 

14 

2.00 

63.5 

29.35 

29.25 

29.307 

NW 

light 

cloudy 

+13 

-35 

-11.64 

58.2 

30.41 

28.80 

29.688 

K'MfclTSBtt! 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


endure  the  wretchedness  which  such  a  scene  exhibits.  This  was  now  the 
case  at  the  village  where,  though  the  remaining  tenants  of  each  hut  had  com- 
bined to  occupy  one  of  the  apartments,  a  great  part  of  the  bed-places  were 
still  bare  and  the  wind  and  drift  blowing  in  through  the  holes  which  they 
had  not  yet  taken  the  trouble  to  stop  up.  The  old  man  Hikkeiera  and  his 
wife  occupied  a  hut  by  themselves,  without  any  lamp  or  a  single  ounce 
of  meat  belonging  to  them  ;  while  three  small  skins  on  which  the  former  was 
lying,  were  all  that  they  possessed  in  the  way  of  blankets.  Upon  the  whole, 
I  never  beheld  a  more  miserable  spectacle,  and  it  seemed  a  charity  to  hope 
that  a  violent  and  constant  cough  with  which  the  old  man  was  afflicted  would 
speedily  combine  with  his  age  and  infirmities  to  release  him  from  his  present 
suffering's.  Yet  in  the  midst  of  all  this  he  was  even  cheerful,  nor  was  there 
a  gloomy  countenance  to  be  seen  at  the  village.  Almost  all  the  men  were 
out ;  and  some  of  them  had  been  led  so  far  to  sea  upon  the'  floating  and 
detached  masses  of  ice  in  pursuit  of  walruses,  that  Captain  Lyon,  who 
observed  their  situation  from  the  ships,  had  it  in  contemplation,  in  the  course 
of  the  evening,  to  launch  one  of  the  small  boats  to  go  to  their  assistance. 
They  seemed  however  to  entertain  no  apprehensions  themselves,  from  a 
confidence  perhaps  that  the  south-east  wind  might  be  depended  upon 
for  keeping  the  ice  close  home  upon  the  shore.  It  is  certain,  notwith- 
standing, that  no  degree  of  precaution,  nor  any  knowledge  of  the  winds  and 
tides,  can  render  this  otherwise  than  a  most  perilous  mode  of  obtaining  sub- 
sistence ;  and  it  was  impossible  therefore  not  to  admire  the  fearlessness  as 
well  as  dexterity  with  which  the  Esquimaux  invariably  pursued  it. 

Having  distributed  some  bread-dust  among  the  women,  we  told  old 
Illumea  and  her  daughter  Togolat  that  we  proposed  taking  up  our  lodging 
in  their  hut  for  the  night.  It  is  a  remarkable  trait  in  the  character  of  these 
people,  that  they  always  thank  you  heartily  for  this,  as  well  as  for  eating 
any  of  their  meat;  but  both  board  and  lodging  may  be  given  to  them 
without  receiving  the  slightest  acknowledgment  either  in  word  or  deed.  As 
it  was  late  before  the  men  returned,  I  asked  Togolat  to  get  the  rest  of  the 
women  to  perform  some  of  their  games,  with  the  hope  of  seeing  something 
that  was  new.  I  had  scarcely  time  to  make  the  proposal  when  she  darted  out 
of  the  hut,  and  quickly  brought  every  female  that  was  left  at  the  village,  not 
excepting  even  the  oldest  of  them,  who  joined  in  the  performance  with  the 
same  alacrity  as  the  rest.  I  could  however  only  persuade  them  to  go  through 
a  tedious  song  we  had  often  before  heard,  which  was  now  indeed  somewhat 


204 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
April. 


■ 


modified  by  their  insisting  on  our  taking  our  turns  in  the  performance,  all 
which  did  not  fail  to  create  among  them  never-ceasing  merriment  and  laughter. 
Neither  their  want  of  food  and  fuel,  nor  the  uncertain  prospect  of  obtaining 
any  that  night,  were  sufficient  to  deprive  these  poor  creatures  of  that  cheer- 
fulness and  good-humour  which  it  seems  at  all  times  their  peculiar  happiness 
to  enjoy. 

The  night  proved  very  thick  with  small  snow,  and  as  disagreeable  and 
dangerous  for  people  adrift  upon  floating  ice  as  can  well  be  imagined.  If  the 
women  however  gave  their  husbands  a  thought  or  spoke  of  them  to  us,  it  was 
only  to  express  a  very  sincere  hope  that  some  good  news  might  shortly  arrive 
of  their  success.  Our  singing-party  had  not  long  been  broken  up  when  it 
was  suddenly  announced  by  one  of  the  children,  the  usual  heralds  on  such 
occasions,  that  the  men  had  killed  something  on  the  ice.  The  only  two  men 
who  were  at  home  instantly  scrambled  on  their  outer  jackets,  harnessed  their 
dogs,  and  set  off  to  assist  their  companions  in  bringing  home  the  game,  while 
the  women  remained  for  an  hour  in  anxious  suspense  as  to  the  extent  of  their 
husbands'  success.  At  length  one  of  the  men  arrived  with  the  positive  intel- 
ligence of  two  walruses  having  been  taken,  and  brought  with  him  a  portion 
of  these  huge  animals  as  large  as  he  could  drag  over  the  snow.  If  the 
women  were  only  cheerful  before,  they  were  now  absolutely  frantic.  A 
general  shout  of  joy  instantly  re-echoed  through  the  village  ;  they  ran  into 
each  other's  huts  to  communicate  the  welcome  intelligence,  and  actually 
hugged  one  another  in  an  ecstacy  of  delight  by  way  of  congratulation.  One 
of  them  Armload,  a  pretty  young  woman  of  nineteen  or  twenty,  knowing 
that  a  dog  belonging  to  her  husband  was  still  at  the  huts,  and  that  there  was 
no  man  to  take  him  down  on  the  ice,  ran  out  instantly  to  perform  that  office ; 
and  with  a  hardiness  not  to  be  surpassed  by  any  of  the  men  returned-, 
after  two  hours'  absence,  with  her  load  of  walrus-flesh,  and  without  even 
the  hood  thrown  over  her  head  to  shelter  her  from  the  inclemency  of  the 
weather. 

When  the  first  burst  of  joy  had  at  length  subsided,  the  women  crept  one  by 
one  into  the  apartment  where  the  first  portion  of  the  sea-horses  had  been 
conveyed,  and  which  is  always  that  of  one  of  the  men  immediately  concerned 
in  the  killing  of  them.  Here  they  obtained  blubber  enough  to  set  all  their 
lamps  alight,  besides  a  few  scraps  of  meat  for  their  children  and  themselves. 
From  this  time,  which  was  nine  o'clock,  till  past  midnight,  fresh  cargoes  were 
continually  arriving ;  the  principal  part  being  brought  in  by  the  dogs,  and 


-    '. 


L*M.WJ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

the  rest  by  the  men,  who,  tying  the  thong  which  held  it  round  their  waist,    1822- 
dragged  in  each  his  separate  portion.    Before  the  whole  was  brought  in  how-  J-v- 
ever,  some  of  them  went  out  three  times  to  the  scene  of  action  though  the 
distance  was  a  mile  and  a  half. 

Every  lamp  now  swimming  with  oil,  the  huts  exhibited  a  blaze  of  light,  Wed.  3d 
and  never  was  there  a  scene  of  more  joyous  festivity  than  while  the  opera- 
tion of  cutting  up  the  walruses  continued.  I  took  the  opportunity  which 
their  present  good  humour  afforded,  to  obtain  a  perfect  head  and  tusks  of 
one  of  these  animals,  which  we  had  not  been  able  to  do  before  ;  and  indeed, 
so  much  were  their  hearts  opened  by  the  scene  of  abundance  before  them, 
that  I  believe  they  would  have  given  us  any  thing  we  asked  for.  This  dis- 
position was  considerably  increased  also  by  their  taking  it  into  their  heads, 
that  their  success  was  in  some  way  or  other  connected  with,  or  even  owing 
to,  our  having  taken  up  our  night's  lodging  at  the  huts. 

After  viewing  all  this  festivity  for  some  time,  I  felt  disposed  to  rest ;  and 
wrapping  myself  up  in  my  fur  coat,  lay  down  on  one  of  the  beds  which  Illumea 
had  given  up  for  our  accommodation,  as  well  as  her  keipik,  or  large  deer-skin 
blanket,  which  she  rolled  up  for  my  pillow.  The  poor  old  woman  herself 
sat  up  by  her  lamp,  and  in  that  posture  seemed  perfectly  well  satisfied  to 
doze  away  the  night.  The  singularity  of  my  night's  lodging  made  me 
awake  several  times,  when  I  always  found  some  of  the  Esquimaux  eating, 
though  after  we  lay  down  they  kept  quite  quiet  for  fear  of  disturbing  us. 
Mr.  Halse,  who  was  still  more  wakeful,  told  me  that  some  of  them  were 
incessantly  employed  in  this  manner  for  more  than  three  hours.  Indeed  the 
quantity  of  meat  that  they  thus  contrive  to  get  rid  of  is  almost  beyond 
belief. 

Having  at  length  enjoyed  a  sound  nap,  I  found  on  awaking  about  five 
o'clock  that  the  men  were  already  up,  and  had  gone  out  to  renew  their 
labours  on  the  ice,  so  that  several  of  them  could  not  have  rested  more  than 
two  or  three  hours.  This  circumstance  served  to  correct  a  notion  we  had 
entertained,  that  when  once  abundantly  supplied  with  food  they  took  no 
pains  to  obtain  more  till  want  began  again  to  stare  them  in  the  face.  It  was 
now  more  pleasing  to  be  assured  that,  even  in  the  midst  of  plenty,  they  did 
not  indolently  give  themselves  up  to  repose,  but  were  willing  to  take  advan- 
tage of  every  favourable  opportunity  of  increasing  their  store.  It  is  certain 
indeed  that  were  these  people  more  provident,  (or  in  other  words  less  glut- 
tonous, for  they  do  not  waste  much,)  they  might  never  know  what  it  is  to 


«i  -.  r  <  ■  r  fr 


TT* 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

want  provisions,  even  during  the  most  inclement  part  of  the  year.  The 
state  of  the  ice  was  to-day  very  unfavourable  for  their  purpose,  being  broken 
into  pieces  so  small  that  they  could  scarcely  venture  to  walk  upon  it. 

The  phenomenon  frequently  observed  at  Melville  Island  in  the  spring, 
of  the  white  clouds  assuming  the  form  of  two  continuous  arches,  with  their 
legs  meeting  near  the  east  and  west  horizons,  was  finely  displayed  on  the 
4th,  the  height  of  the  arches  in  the  centre,  from  the  north  and  south 
horizons,  being  from  50°  to  70°.  It  was  now  more  than  a  month  since  our 
washed  clothes  had  in  part  been  dried  by  exposure  to  the  sun's  rays  under 
the  ship's  stern,  which  however  it  required  two  days  of  fine  weather  to 
effect.  As  this  space  was  small,  and  it  was  of  importance  to  get  rid  as 
soon  as  possible  of  the  drying  process  on  the  lower-deck,  we  now  built 
upon  the  ice  a  thick  wall  of  snow,  seven  feet  high,  thirty  yards  in  length, 
and  exactly  facing  the  south.  Against  this,  though  not  touching  it,  was 
suspended  a  long  black-painted  cloth,  which  absorbed  so  much  heat  from 
the  sun's  rays  that  the  clothes  hung  before  it  on  lines  were  dried  in  a 
few  hours,  though  the  thermometer  in  the  shade  was  only  from  5°  to  9° 
above  zero. 

The  morning  of  the  5th  proved  favourable  for  a  journey  I  had  in  contem- 
plation to  the  distant  huts,  to  which  Iligliuk,  who  had  come  to  Winter 
Island  the  day  before,  promised  to  be  my  guide.  At  six  o'clock  I  set  out, 
accompanied  by  Mr.  Bushnan  and  two  of  the  men,  carrying  with  us  a  supply 
of  bread-dust  besides  our  own  provisions  and  blankets.  As  the  distance 
was  too  great  for  her  son  Sioutkuk  to  walk,  we  were  uncertain  till  the 
moment  of  setting  out  how  this  was  to  be  managed,  there  being  no  sledge 
at  hand  for  the  purpose.  We  found  however  that  a  man,  whom  we  had  ob- 
served for  some  time  at  work  among  the  hummocks  of  ice  upon  the  beach, 
had  been  employed  in  cutting  out  of  that  abundant  material  a  neat  and 
serviceable  little  sledge,  hollowed  like  a  bowl  or  tray  out  of  a  solid  block, 
and  smoothly  rounded  at  the  bottom.  The  thong  to  which  the  dogs  were 
attached  was  secured  to  a  groove  cut  round  its  upper  edge  ;  and  the  young 
seal-catcher,  seated  in  this  simple  vehicle,  was  dragged  along  with  great 
convenience  and  comfort. 

The  ice  over  which  we  travelled  was  a  level  floe  that  had  never  suffered 
disturbance  since  its  first  formation  in  the  autumn,  and  with  not  more  than 
an  inch  and  a  half  of  snow  upon  it.  The  path  being  distinctly  marked  out  by 
the  people,  sledges,  and  dogs,  that  had  before  travelled  upon  it,  one  might, 


itKMirsftf 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

without  any  great  stretch  of  the  imagination,  have  almost  fancied  it  a  road 
leading  over  a  level  and  extensive  heath  towards  a  more  civilized  and  sub- 
stantial village  than  that  which  we  were  now  approaching.  Digliuk  walked 
as  nimbly  as  the  best  of  us  ;  and  after  two  hours  and  a  half  brisk  travelling-, 
we  arrived  at  the  huts,  and  were  received  by  the  women  (for  all  the  men 
were  absent)  with  every  expression  of  kindness  and  welcome.  Each  was 
desirous  of  affording  us  lodging,  and  we  had  speedily  arranged  matters  so  as 
to  put  them  to  the  least  possible  inconvenience. 

These  huts,  four  in  number,  were  in  the  mode  of  their  construction  exact 
counterparts  of  those  at  Winter  Island  on  our  first  visit,  but  being  now  new 
and  clean,  presented  a  striking  contrast  with  the  latter,  in  their  present 
disordered  and  filthy  state.  What  gave  a  peculiarity  as  well  as  beauty  also 
to  the  interior  appearance  of  these  habitations,  was  their  being  situated 
on  the  ice,  which  being  cleared  of  the  snow,  presented  a  flooring  of  that 
splendid  blue  which  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  richest  colours  that  nature 
affords.  A  seal  or  two  having  been  lately  procured,  every  lamp  was  now 
blazing,  and  every  ootkooseek  smoking  with  a  hot  mess  which,  together  with 
the  friendly  reception  we  experienced  and  a  little  warmth  and  fatigue  from 
travelling,  combined  in  conveying  to  our  minds  an  idea  of  comfort  which  we 
could  scarcely  believe  an  Esquimaux  hut  capable  of  exciting. 

On  the  arrival  of  the  men,  who  came  in  towards  evening,  with  two  seals 
as  the  reward  of  their  labour,  we  were  once  more  greeted  and  welcomed. 
Arnaneelia  in  particular,  who  was  a  quiet,  obliging,  and  even  amiable  man, 
was  delighted  to  find  that  my  quarters  were  to  be  in  his  apartment,  where 
Aneetka,  his  wife,  a  young  woman  of  about  twenty-three,  had  already  ar- 
ranged every  thing  for  my  accommodation ;  and  both  these  poor  people  now 
vied  Avith  each  other  in  their  attention  to  my  comfort.  The  other  two  apart- 
ments of  the  same  hut  were  occupied  by  Kaoongut  and  Okotook,  with  their 
respective  wives  and  families  ;  it  being  the  constant  custom  of  these  people 
thus  to  unite  in  family  groups,  whenever  the  nature  of  their  habitations 
will  allow  it.  Mr.  Bushnan  being  established  with  Okotook,  and  the  two 
men  with  Kaoongut,  we  were  thus  all  comfortably  lodged  under  the  same 
roof. 

Toolooak  having  been  concerned  in  killing  one  of  the  seals  just  brought 
in,  it  fell  to  his  mother's  lot  to  dissect  it,  the  neitiek  being  the  only  animal 
which  the  women  are  permitted  to  cut  up.  We  had  therefore  an  opportu- 
nity of  seeing  this  filthy  operation  once  more  performed,  and  entirely  by  the 


<!  I'll 


!..•'■■ 


Sat.  6. 


208 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


old  lad)'-  herself,  who  was  soon  up  to  her  elbows  in  blood  and  oil.  Before  a 
knife  is  put  into  the  animal,  as  it  lies  on  its  back,  they  pour  a  little  water  into 
its  mouth,  and  touch  each  nipper  and  the  middle  of  the  belly  with  a  little  lamp- 
black and  oil  taken  from  the  under  part  of  the  lamp.  What  benefit  was  ex- 
pected from  this  preparatory  ceremony  we  could  not  learn,  but  it  was  done 
with  a  degree  of  superstitious  care  and  seriousness  that  bespoke  its  indis- 
pensable importance.  The  boys  came  eagerly  into  the  hut  as  usual,  and  held 
out  their  foreheads  for  the  old  woman  to  stick  the  charms  upon  them  ;  and  it 
was  not  till  now  that  we  learned  from  Iligliuk  the  efficacy  of  this  very  useful 
custom.  As  soon  as  this  dirty  operation  was  at  an  end,  during  which  the  nu- 
merous by-standers  amused  themselves  in  chewing  the  intestines  of  the  seal, 
the  strangers  retired  to  their  own  huts,  each  bearing  a  small  portion  of  the 
flesh  and  blubber,  while  our  hosts  enjoyed  a  hearty  meal  of  boiled  meat 
and  hot  gravy  soup.  Young  Sioutkuk  ate  at  least  three  pounds  of  solid 
meat  in  the  first  three  hours  after  our  arrival  at  the  huts,  besides  a  tolerable 
proportion  of  soup,  all  which  his  mother  gave  him  whenever  he  asked  it 
without  the  smallest  remark  of  any  kind.  We  now  found  that  they  depended 
on  catching  seals  alone  for  their  subsistence,  there  being  no  walruses  in  this 
neighbourhood.  As  they  were  several  miles  from  any  open  water,  their 
mode  of  killing  them  was  entirely  confined  to  watching  for  the  animals 
coming  up  in  the  holes  they  make  through  the  ice. 

In  the  course  of  the  evening,  our  conversation  happened  to  turn  on  the 
Indians,  a  people  whom  none  of  these  Esquimaux  had  ever  seen  ;  but  with 
whose  ferocity  and  decided  hostility  to  their  own  nation  they  seemed  to  be 
well  acquainted.  They  described  also  their  peculiar  manner  of  paddling 
their  canoes,  and  were  aware  that  they  made  use  of  the  kind  of  snow- 
shoes  which  we  shewed  them.  When  I  related  to  them  as  well  as  I  Avas 
able  the  massacre  of  the  Esquimaux  recorded  by  Hearne,  and  gave  them 
to  understand  that  the  Indians  spared  neither  sex  nor  age,  it  seemed 
to  chill  them  with  horror,  and  I  was  almost  sorry  that  I  had  told  them  the 
story. 

The  weather  proved  very  thick  on  the  6th,  with  a  heavy  fall  of  snow,  the 
wind  still  blowing  however  from  the  N.N.W.,  and  increasing  almost  to  a 
gale  in  the  course  of  the  day  ;  so  that  when  we  set  out  on  our  return  we  could 
scarcely  distinguish  an  object  an  hundred  yards  before  us.  Toolooak  was 
deputed  to  accompany  us  with  a  sledge  for  carrying  our  baggage ;  and,  after 
some  difficulty  we  contrived  to  get  sight  of  the  island,  and  arrived  on  board 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE 

before  noon.  I  found  from  Captain  Lyon  that  nothing  worthy  of  notice  had  j^- 
occurred  during  my  absence.  The  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  seemed 
now  to  have  taken  a  favourable  turn,  the  thermometer  keeping  up  to  zero,  or 
above  it,  even  with  a  northerly  or  north-west  wind:  we  were  therefore 
enabled  for  the  first  time  permanently  to  reduce  the  consumption  of  coals  in 
each  ship,  the  lower-decks  being  now  much  too  hot  when  the  winter's  propor- 
tion was  expended. 

On  the  7th,  which  was  Easter-Sunday,  a  dinner  of  English  beef  was  directed  Sun.  7. 
to  be  served,  being  part  of  that  which  was  killed  when  the    Nautilus  leftus. 
As  we  were  apprehensive  that  this  meat  might  be  injured  as  the  warmer 
weather  advanced,  we  issued  what  remained  in  the  course  of  the  spring, 
except  enough  for  one  more  Christmas  dinner. 

On  the  morning  of  the  8th,  the  thermometer  was  observed  to  fall  from  6°  Mon.  8. 
to  2°  immediately  on  a  partial  clearing  of  the  atmosphere,  and  again  to  rise, 
on  its  becoming  overcast,  to  10°,  the  wind  continuing  the  same  both  in  direc- 
tion and  strength.  It  shifted  in  the  evening  to  the  eastward,  accompanied 
by  a  fall  of  small  snow,  which  continued  the  whole  of  the  two  following  days. 
On  the  11th  a  difference  was  observed  in  the  indications  of  the  two  thermo-  Thur.  11 
meters  on  the  ice,  the  reverse  of  that  which  generally  took  place. 

At  noon 
„  1  P.M. 
„  2  P.M. 

The  wind  was  light  from  the  W.S.W.  during  this  time,  and  though  it  blew 
rather  on  the  south  than  on  the  north  side  of  the  post,  this  seemed  by  no 
means  sufficient  to  account  for  the  difference,  as  even  a  strong  breeze  does 
not  usually  produce  such  an  effect  on  a  thermometer  in  the  shade,  though 
very  sensible  to  the  feelings.  There  was  no  snow  on  either  of  the  bulbs, 
except  a  little  which  continued  to  fall,  and  the  sun  was  peeping  out  at 
times  during  the  interval.  A  similar  difference  was  again  noticed  a  dciy  or 
two  after. 

h.    m.  North  Thermometer.  South  Thermometer. 


rtb  Thermometer. 

South  Thermometer. 

o 
20 

o 
11 

23 

13 

13.5      . 

13 

At  0  15  P.M. 

30 

« 

18 

„     0  30     „ 

24 

. 

21 

„     2     0     „ 

28 

. 

14 

„     6     0     „  .  10  .  4 

The  wind  was  very  light  from  the  east  and  south-east,  with  small  snow,  and 

2  E 


210 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


.       ,,,>    ll'iiljl: 


!■ 


1822. 
April. 


the  weather  quite  overcast,  except  towards  six  P.M.  For  two  hours  in  the 
forenoon,  when  the  sun  made  an  effort  to  appear,  a  parhelion,  tinged  with 
the  prismatic  colours,  appeared  on  each  side  of  it ;  and  nearer  to  that  object 
by  30'  was  a  halo  of  22°  35'  radius,  also  coloured,  the  red  tint  being  as  usual 
next  the  sun.  An  instance  or  two  of  the  parhelion  being  situated  without 
the  circle  have  been  mentioned  *  as  occurring  at  Melville  Island,  but  the 
phenomenon  appears  to  be  a  rare  one. 

We  were  now  glad  to  begin  making  some  shew  of  re-equipping  the  ships 
for  sea ;  for  though  this  was  a  business  that  might  if  necessary  have  been  very 
well  accomplished  in  two  or  three  weeks,  it  was  better  to  employ  the  men  in 
occupations  having  an  evident  and  determinate  object,  than  in  those  less 
obviously  useful  ones  to  which  it  was  necessary  to  resort  during  the  winter. 
We  therefore  brought  down  some  of  the  boats  to  the  ships  to  repair,  put  up 
the  forge  on  the  ice,  and  built  a  snow-house  over  it,  and  set  about  various 
other  jobs,  which  made  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ships  assume  a  busy  and 
bustling  appearance. 

I  had  to-day  a  visit  from  Okotook  and  Iligliuk,  who,  with  their  son,  came  in 
upon  their  sledge  from  the  distant  huts.  Being  desirous  of  entertaining  them 
well,  in  'return  for  their  late  hospitality,  we  provided  abundance  to  eat,  and 
shewed  them  every  thing  about  the  ship  that  we  thought  likely  to  amuse 
them.  Of  all  the  wonders  they  had  ever  witnessed  on  board,  there  was  no- 
thing which  seemed  to  impress  them  so  strongly  with  a  sense  of  our  supe- 
riority as  the  forge,  and  the  work  which  the  armourer  performed  with  it. 
The  welding  of  two  pieces  of  iron  especially  excited  their  admiration,  and 
I  never  saAv  Iligliuk  express  so  much  astonishment  at  any  thing  before. 
Even  in  this  her  superior  good  sense  was  observable,  for  it  was  evident 
that  the  utility  of  what  she  saw  going  on  was  what  forced  itself  upon  her 
mind ;  and  she  watched  every  stroke  of  the  hammer  and  each  blast  of  the 
bellows  with  extreme  eagerness,  while  numbers  of  the  other  Esquimaux 
looked  stupidly  on,  without  expressing  the  smallest  curiosity  or  interest 
in  the  operation,  except  by  desiring  to  have  some  spear-heads  fashioned 
out  by  this  means.  Iligliuk  was  always  very  much  entertained  also  by 
pictures  having  any  relation  to  the  Esquimaux  in  other  parts,  and  de- 
rived great  entertainment  from  a  description  of  any  difference  in  their 
clothes,  utensils,  or  weapons.      Of  these  the  sail  in  an  Esquimaux  boat 


Journal  of  the  Voyage  of  1819-20,  p.  172. 


.     .  V 


t  Jfr Jttfl US.S  KttirVfW 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

seemed  particularly  to  attract  her  notice  ;  but  in  general  she  had  no  inclina-  182.2 
tion  to  admit  the  inferiority  of  her  own  tribe  to  any  other.  She  was  always  ^£L 
extremely  inquisitive  about  her  own  sex,  whether  Innuees*  or  Kabloonas,  lis- 
tening with  eager  attention  to  any  account  of  their  dress  or  occupations,  and 
in  common,  I  believe,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  Esquimaux,  wondered  how  we 
came  to  travel  to  their  country  without  our  wives.  The  assurance  that  many 
among  us  were  not  married,  they  received  with  evident  incredulity. 

We  to-day  cleared  away  the  snow  that  had  been  banked  against  the  ships' 
sides,  the  use  of  which  was  proved  a  day  or  two  after  by  the  frost  making  a 
large  rent  in  the  Fury's  rudder  and  another  in  her  stem.  This  covering 
therefore  should  not  have  been  removed  so  early.  Mr.  Fisher  having  now 
concluded  most  of  the  observations  and  experiments  for  which  the  house 
was  built,  it  was  taken  down  and  the  materials  brought  on  board-,  the 
transit-instrument  and  meridian-mark  remaining  as  before,  to  enable  him  to 
commence  a  series  of  observations  for  the  pendulum,  whenever  the  weather 
should  become  warm  enough  for  the  clock  to  be  set  up  in  a  tent.  The  con- 
tinuance of  comparatively  temperate  weather,  though  it  was  much  colder 
than  we  had  expected  at  this  season,  induced  us  also  to  begin  clearing  and 
turning  up  a  small  piece  of  ground  as  a  garden  for  each  ship,  in  which  we 
hoped  to  produce  something  in  the  way  of  vegetable  diet  before  our  de- 
parture, especially  as  we  were  now  supplied  with  several  glazed  frames  for 
hot-beds.  There  was  not  at  this  time  a  bare  spot  of  ground  anywhere  to 
be  seen,  so  that  we  had  to  clear  away  the  snow,  in  some  places  two  or  three 
feet  deep,  in  order  to  find  a  space  that  would  suit  our  purpose  ;  and  it  was 
then  so  full  of  stones  and  frozen  ground  that  it  required  great  labour  even 
to  prepare  mould  enough  for  the  frames.  These  were  however  completed 
in  a  few  days  and  sown  with  mustard,  cress,  and  pease,  the  latter  having 
been  found  to  produce  the  greatest  quantity  of  green  substance  at  Melville 
Island. 

On  the  13th  a  number  of  the  natives  from  the  Winter  Island  huts  formed  Sat.  13 
a  second  detachment,  and  set  off  for  the  other  village.  They  carried 
their  goods  on  sledges  as  before,  even  to  the  exclusion  of  poor  old  Hik- 
keiera,  whom  some  of  our  gentlemen  overtook  crawling  after  his  com- 
panions with  a  stick,  and  who,  but  for  their  timely  and  humane  remon- 
strances, might  that  day  have  finished  his  pilgrimage  on  earth.  They  insisted 
however  on  his  being  placed  on  one  of  the  sledges,  Avhich  was  accordingly 

*  Esquimaux. 

2  E  2 


212 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
April. 


IHH 


Mon.  15, 


complied  with  ;  but,  on  their  arrival  at  the  village,  his  companions  left  him 
lying  there  till  their  huts  were  built.  All  the  Esquimaux  pressed  our  gen- 
tlemen very  strongly  to  sleep  at  the  village,  but  one  of  the  women  gave 
Mr.  Bird  an  indifferent  specimen  of  her  hospitality  by  picking  his  pocket  of 
a  handkerchief,  though  not  so  dexterously  as  to  escape  detection.  The  few 
who  visited  the  ships  to-day  told  us,  that  they  were  all  about  to  leave  Winter 
Island  on  the  morrow  ;  and  Okotook  and  Iligliuk,  who  had  not  yet  returned, 
Came  on  board  among  the  rest  to  pay  a  last  visit.  I  gave  the  former  a  large 
piece  of  oak-wood  for  a  bow  and  two  arrows,  a  second  iron  spear-head,  and 
various  other  useful  articles,  to  add  to  the  stock  of  wealth  he  had  from  time 
to  time  received  from  us.  As  these  good  folks  found  themselves  perfectly  at 
home  in  my  cabin,  I  was  usually  in  the  habit  of  continuing  my  occupations 
when  they  were  there,  without  being  disturbed  by  them.  Being  now  en- 
gaged in  writing,  my  attention  was  unexpectedly  directed  towards  them  by 
Iligliuk's  suddenly  starting  from  her  seat,  moving  quickly  towards  the  door, 
and  without  saying  a  word,  either  to  me  or  any  of  the  officers  present,  hasten- 
ing directly  on  deck.  Okotook  indeed,  as  he  followed  her  out  of  the  cabin, 
turned  round  and  said  "  Good-bye,"  of  which  expression  he  had  learned 
the  meaning,  and  then,  without  giving  us  time  to  return  the  compliment, 
they  both  hurried  out  of  the  ship,  leaving  us  in  some  astonishment  at  this 
singular  leave-taking  which  we  then  supposed  to  be  the  last. 

A  case  or  two  of  inflammation  in  the  eyes,  producing  partial  "  snow- 
blindness,"  having  lately  occurred,  I  directed  a  quarter  of  a  yard  of  crape, 
supplied  for  that  purpose,  to  be  furnished  to  each  man,  to  be  worn  as  a 
short  veil  over  the  eyes.  At  the  same  time  were  issued  to  each  individual 
in  the  Expedition  a  pair  of  boots  and  warm  stockings,  being  part  of  a  supply 
of  warm  clothing  with  which  we  had  been  furnished,  to  be  served  gratis  at 
my  discretion.  This  liberal  addition  to  the  men's  clothing  was  particularly 
acceptable  at  this  time,  as  we  were  shortly  about  to  commence  cutting  the 
ice  round  the  ships,  previous  to  making  any  alteration  in  the  stowage  of  their 
holds.  While  preparations  were  making  for  this  work,  it  was  suggested  to 
me  that,  strongly  as  the  ice  was  now  cemented  to  the  ships'  sides,  we  might, 
by  cutting  a  trench  round  their  bows  to  the  depth  of  three  or  four  feet,  (taking 
care  not  to  admit  the  water,)  have  an  opportunity  of  examining  the  planks, 
and  caulking  the  seams  where  they  were  most  likely  to  require  it.  This 
plan  Avas  adopted,  and  was  found  completely  to  answer  the  purpose  for 
which  it  was  intended 


^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


213 


On  the  morning  of  the  16th,  the  weather  being  extremely  fine,  Captain 
Lyon  left  the  ships,  accompanied  by  Lieutenant  Palmer  and  the  rest  of  his 
travelling  party,  and  equipped  for  remaining  the  night,  with  the  intention  of 
effecting  the  object  which  on  his  former  excursion  the  inclemency  of  the  wea- 
ther had  rendered  impracticable.  We  were  glad  to  find  that  a  very  moderate 
breeze  from  the  north-west  served  once  more  to  separate  the  ice,  which  had  for 
some  days  past  been  attached  to  the  land,  and  to  send  it  off  to  a  considerable 
distance.  The  thermometer  being  from  3°  to  9°  during  the  day,  very  little 
frost-smoke  rose  from  the  clear  water.  Some  hard  well-defined  clouds, 
being  nearly  the  first  we  had  seen  this  season,  appeared  for  a  short  time 
to-day,  and  were  welcomed  as  the  harbingers  of  returning  moisture  in  the 
atmosphere.  The  Aurora  Borealis  was  seen  at  night  to  the  southward,  and 
extending  at  times  in  a  broad  band  of  light  across  the  heavens,  but  at  a  low 
altitude  from  east  to  west. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  the  thermometer  fell  to  —12°,  being  the 
lowest  temperature  we  had  now  experienced  for  some  time.  At  ten  A.M. 
Captain  Lyon  and  his  party  returned,  having  walked  some  distance  beyond 
the  spot  where  they  had  before  been  detained,  and  determined  which  must 
be  the  route  to  be  pursued  whenever  they  set  out  on  their  intended  journey. 
They  found  the  passage  between  the  island  and  the  continent  to  be  from 
one  to  two  miles  in  breadth  ;  and  that  the  hummocky  nature  of  the  ice 
would  not,  as  we  had  hoped,  admit  of  their  cutting  off  any  of  the  distance 
to  be  travelled  between  the  island  and  the  north-eastern  point  of  land. 

We  could  now  begin  to  perceive,  from  day  to  day,  that  the  snow  on 
shore  was  diminishing.  How  slow  this  process  was  may  however  be  un- 
derstood by  the  fact,  that  it  was  necessary  to  make  a  mark  on  some  stone  to 
be  assured  that  it  was  thus  receding.  Our  snow-wall  had  indeed  settled 
down  nearly  a  foot  by  the  gradual  diminution  of  the  blocks  of  which  it 
was  composed  ;  but  the  thawing  had  been  artificially  assisted  by  the  black 
cloth  hung  against  it.  Five  ravens  were  seen  to-day  all  quite  black  ;  four 
of  them  were  flying  in  pairs. 

On  the  19th  the  wind  veered  by  north  to  east  and  south-east,  and  towards 
evening  a  good  deal  of  snow  fell  of  a  softer  and  larger  kind  than  we  had 
yet  seen  this  year.  In  the  afternoon,  before  the  snow  came  on,  the  south 
thermometer,  exposed  to  the  faint  rays  of  the  sun,  stood  for  a  short  time  as 
high  as  56°,  that  in  the  shade  being  at  14|°,  but  a  light  breeze  springing  up 
immediately  brought  the  two  thermometers  to  nearly  the  same  low  tempe- 


Wed.  17 


Thur.  18 


Frid.  19 


214 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
April. 

Sat.  20. 


Mon.  22, 


ii   i 


rature.  This  effect  was  invariably  produced  by  the  wind  suddenly  blow- 
ing on  a  thermometer,  when  the  mercury  had  been  considerably  raised  by 
exposure  to  the  sun's  rays.  On  the  20th  the  wind  blew  fresh  from  the  north- 
east, which  only  requires  to  be  noticed  because,  for  the  last  fortnight,  we 
had  scarcely  experienced  a  breeze,  which  in  the  language  of  a  sea-log  had 
sufficient  strength  to  be  called  "  moderate."  On  the  21st  Mr.  Bird  saw  a 
flock  of  seven  birds,  which  he  took  to  be  grouse. 

On  the  22d  a  number  of  the  Esquimaux  came  to  the  ships  with  a  sledge, 
and  among  the  rest  my  late  host  Arnaneelia  and  his  wife,  the  latter  having 
the  front  of  her  jacket  adorned  with  numberless  strings  of  beads  that  we 
had  given  her,  arranged  with  exact  uniformity,  to  which,  in  the  fashion  of 
their  dresses  and  the  disposition  of  their  ornaments,  these  people  always 
rigidly  adhere.  Aneetka  had  scarcely  reached  the  cabin  when  she  pro- 
duced a  little  ivory  comb  and  a  pair  of  handsome  mittens,  which  she  pre- 
sented to  Mr.  Edwards,  at  the  same  time  thanking  him  for  the  attention  he 
had  shewn  her  on  an  occasion  when  she  had  been  taken  in  a  fit  alongside 
the  Fury,  from  which  she  Avas  recovered  by  bleeding,  This  expression  of 
gratitude,  in  which  she  was  heartily  joined  by  her  husband,  was  extremely 
gratifying  to  us ;  as  it  served,  in  some  degree,  to  redeem  these  people 
in  our  estimation  from  the  imputation  of  ingratitude,  which  is  indeed  one 
of  their  greatest  failings.  They  stated  having  seen  two  rein-deer  the  pre- 
ceding day  going  over  the  ice  to  the  main  land.  They  spoke  of  this  with 
great  pleasure  ;  and  we  were  ourselves  not  displeased  with  the  prospect 
of  changing  our  diet  for  a  little  venison.  They  now  became  extremely 
urgent  with  us  for  wood  to  make  bows  and  arrows,  most  of  their  own 
having,  with  the  childishness  that  accompanied  their  first  barterings,  been 
parted  with  to  our  officers  and  men.  Having  several  broken  oars  which 
could  be  turned  to  little  or  no  account  on  board,  we  were  enabled,  at  a  small 
expense  of  useful  stores,  to  furnish  them  very  abundantly  with  wood  for 
this  purpose.  Arnaneelia  also  informed  us  that  Okotook,  who  had  been 
unwell  for  some  days,  was  now  much  worse,  and  seemed,  as  he  described 
it,  to  be  labouring  under  a  violent  pulmonary  complaint.  On  the  circum- 
stance being  mentioned  to  Mr.  Skeoch,  he  kindly  volunteered  to  go  to 
the  village,  and  accordingly  took  his  seat  on  the  sledge  accompanied  also 
by  Mr.  Sherer.  They  carried  with  them  a  quantity  of  bread-dust  to  be  dis- 
tributed among  the  Esquimaux  at  the  huts,  their  success  in  seal  catching 
having  lately  been  indifferent. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

On  the  23d,  being  St.  George's  day,  which  is  commanded  to  be   cele-    }S2% 
brated  as  the  anniversary  of  His  Majesty's  birth-day,  we    commemorated 
that  event  in  the  best  manner  our  situation  would  permit,  by  dressing  the  23 

ships  in  flags  at  the  mast-heads  and  making  a  certain  addition  to  the  allow- 
ance of  meat  and  spirits  to  the  ships'  companies.  In  the  course  of  the  af- 
ernoon  Mr.  Skeoch  returned  from  the  huts,  having  left  Okotook  somewhat 
relieved  by  a  copious  bleeding,  but  still  labouring  under  a  violent  inflamr 
matory  complaint,  requiring  more  comfort  and  attention  than  the  huts  were 
capable  of  affording.  Mr.  Skeoch  said  the  Esquimaux  had  received  him 
very  kindly,  and  expressed  many  thanks  for  his  assistance. 

In  digging  up  the  piece  of  ground  for  our  garden,  we  found  an  incre- 
dible quantity  of  bones  scattered  about  and  concealed  under  the  little  soil 
there  was.  They  were  principally  those  of  walruses  and  seals,  and  had 
evidently  been  left  a  long  time  before  by  Esquimaux,  in  the  course  of  their 
wandering  visits  to  the  island  ;  being  gradually  covered  by  the  vegetable 
mould  formed  upon  the  spot  which  they  helped  to  fertilize.  Afterwards, 
when  the  land  became  more  clear  of  snow,  this  was  found  to  be  the  case  to 
a  much  greater  extent,  every  spot  of  ground  upon  the  south-east  point, 
which  was  not  absolutely  a  rock,  being  covered  with  these  relics.  Some 
graves  were  also  discovered,  in  one  of  which  Avere  a  human  skull  appa- 
rently a  hundred  years  buried,  and  some  pieces  of  Avood  that  had  pro- 
bably been  parts  of  spears  or  arroAvs  almost  mouldered  to  dust.  Knowing 
as  Ave  do  the  antiseptic  properties  of  this  climate,  animal  or  vegetable  sub- 
stances in  this  state  of  decay  convey  to  the  mind  an  idea  of  much  greater 
age  than  they  Avould  in  any  other  part  of  the  Avorld. 

With  a  light  southerly  breeze  to-day  the  south  thermometer  stood  at 
+  12°,  and  the  north  at  +23°.  Besides  the  former  instances  of  this  dif- 
ference Avhich  I  have  already  mentioned,  several  other  though  less  striking 
ones,  occurred  in  the  course  of  the  spring,  for  Avhich  a  light  breeze  blow- 
ing on  the  thermometer  did  not  seem  satisfactorily  to  account.  Three  pair 
of  grouse  Avere  seen  by  our  gentlemen  to-day  in  the  course  of  their  Avalks, 
so  that  their  return  and  that  of  the  deer  seem  to  have  been  well  marked  at 
this  period. 

A  number  of  Esquimaux  came  to  the  ships  on  the  25th,  notAvithstanding  Thur.  25_ 
a  strong  breeze  from  the  S.W.b.W.,  with  a  considerable  snoAv-drift.     From 
these  people  we  learned  that  Okotook's  complaint  had  increased  since  Mr. 
Skeoch's  visit,  and  that  he  was  now  extremely  ill.     Mr.  Bushnan  immediately 


».<« 


$k  \ 


216 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


offered  to  go  to  the  huts  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  him  on  board,  where, 
by  Mr.  Edwards's  kind  attentions,  and  the  enjoyment  of  warmth  and 
dryness,  we  hoped  soon  to  recover  him.  Mr.  Bushnan  therefore  without 
waiting  for  the  return  of  the  sledges  set  out  for  the  village  at  an  early  hour 
in  the  forenoon,  accompanied  by  the  Serjeant  of  marines.  At  eleven  at  night 
our  party  returned  on  board,  bringing  on  a  sledge  Okotook,  Iligliuk,  and 
their  son.  That  Iligliuk  would  accompany  her  husband  I  of  course  took  for 
granted  and  wished ;  but  as  the  boy  could  do  us  no  good,  and  was  moreover 
a  desperate  eater,  I  had  desired  Mr.  Bushnan  to  try  whether  a  slight  objec- 
tion to  his  being  of  the  party  would  induce  Okotook  to  leave  him  with  his 
other  relations.  This  he  had  cautiously  done  ;  but  the  instant  the  proposal 
was  made,  Okotook,  without  any  remark,  began  to  take  off  the  clothes  he 
had  himself  just  dressed  in  to  set  out.  No  further  objection  being  made, 
however,  he  again  prepared  for  the  journey,  Iligliuk  assisting  him  with 
the  most  attentive  solicitude.  Before  the  invalid  was  suffered  to  leave 
his  apartment,  some  of  the  by-standers  sent  for  Ewerat,  now  better  known 
to  our  people  by  the  undignified  appellation  of  "the  Conjuror."  Ewerat, 
on  this  occasion,  maintained  a  degree  of  gravity  and  reserve  calculated  to 
inspire  somewhat  more  respect  than  we  had  hitherto  been  disposed  to 
entertain  for  him  in  that  capacity.  Placing  himself  at  the  door  of  the 
apartment  opposite  Okotook,  who  Avas  still  seated  on  the  bed,  he  held 
both  his  thumbs  in  his  mouth,  keeping  up  a  silent  but  solemn  converse  with 
his  toorngow*,  the  object  of  which  was,  as  Mr.  Bushnan  presently  afterwards 
found,  to  inquire  into  the  efficacy  and  propriety  of  the  sick  man's  removal. 
Presently  he  began  to  utter  a  variety  of  confused  and  inarticulate  sounds  ; 
and  it  being  at  length  understood  that  a  favourable  answer  had  been  given, 
Okotook  was  carried  out  and  placed  on  the  sledge,  Ewerat  still  mumbling 
his  thumbs  and  muttering  his  incantations  as  before.  When  the  party  took 
their  leave,  there  were  a  great  many  doleful  faces  among  those  that  remained 
behind ;  and  Mr.  Bushnan  said  that  the  whole  scene  more  resembled  the 
preparations  for  a  funeral  than  the  mere  removal  of  a  sick  man.  When  the 
sledge  moved  on,  Ewerat  was  the  only  one  who  had  not  a  "Good-bye!" 
ready,  he  being  as  seriously  engaged  as  at  first,  and  continuing  so  as  long  as 
our  people  could  observe  him. 

Okotook  was  extremely  ill  on  his  arrival,  having  been  three  hours  on  the 

*  Familiar  spirit. 


r^F 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

sledg-e,  and  lligliuk,  who,  as  Mr.  Bushnan  told  me,  had  scarcely  taken  her  A8^|- 
eyes  off  her  husband's  face  the  whole  time,  seemed  almost  worn  out  with 
fatigue  and  anxiety.  A  bed  of  wolf-skins  being  prepared  for  him,  Okotook 
was  soon  placed  upon  it,  and  such  remedies  applied  as  Mr.  Edwards  judged 
necessary  for  his  complaint,  which  was  inflammation  of  the  lungs  to  a  degree 
that,  if  left  to  itself,  or  even  to  Ewerat,  would  soon  have  proved  fatal,  or  at 
best  have  terminated  in  consumption. 

On  the  26th,  a  south-east  wind  brought  a  heavy  fall  of  snow  in  flakes  Frid.  26 
much  larger  than  before.  The  thermometers  on  the  ice  at  noon  stood  at 
23°  in  both  aspects.  We  heard  from  Illumea,  who  came  to  see  her  son 
Okotook,  that  a  part  of  the  natives  had  gone  still  farther  to  the  westward  upon 
the  ice,  one  spot  not  affording  sufficient  subsistence  for  the  Avhole  of  them. 
Our  patient  felt  much  the  better  for  a  comfortable  night's  lodging,  and  now 
submitted  with  great  patience  to  the  application  of  a  blister,  though  I  believe 
his  confidence  in  our  mode  of  cure  was  afterwards  shaken  for  a  time  by  the 
pain  which  it  occasioned.  Both  he  and  lligliuk,  however,  seemed  very  sensi- 
bly to  feel  the  comforts  and  advantages  of  their  present  quarters  ;  and  a 
"coyenna"  (thanks)  now  and  then  fell  from  their  lips.  Nothing  could 
exceed  the  attention  which  the  latter  paid  to  her  husband  ;  she  kept  her 
eyes  almost  constantly  fixed  upon  him,  and  seemed  aiiKious  to  anticipate 
every  want. 

One  of  Okotook's  brothers  had  arrived  from  the  huts,  bringing  with  him 
some  walrus-flesh  to  tempt  the  appetite  of  the  invalid,  whose  stomach,  how- 
ever, very  fortunately  for  his  complaint,  was  not  disposed  to  this  kind  of  deli- 
cacy. When  his  brother  was  about  to  return,  Okotook  took  it  into  his  head  to 
send  his  son  away  with  him,  probably  because  he  heard  they  had  the  day  be- 
fore killed  two  seals,  which  afforded  better  feeding  than  we  had  to  give  him: 
be  this  as  it  may,  we  were  not  sorry  that  he  went,  and  the  boy  himself  seemed 
no  less  pleased ;  for  without  playfellows  or  amusement  of  any  kind,  his  time 
hung  very  heavily  on  his  hands  while  he  remained  on  board.  It  was  amusing 
to  see  Okotook  take  a  dose  of  physic  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  to-day.  He 
knew  its  taste  was  not  pleasant,  but  this  was  certainly  not  all  that  he 
dreaded ;  for  before  he  put  the  cup  to  his  lips  with  one  hand,  he  held  on  by 
his  wife  with  the  other,  and  she  by  him  with  both  hers,  as  though  they  ex- 
pected an  explosion,  or  some  such  catastrophe,  as  the  immediate  effect  of  the 
potion ;  nor  did  he  venture  to  relinquish  his  hold,  till  the  taste  began  to 
leave  his  mouth.     The  quantity  of  water  which  he  drank  in  the  course  of 

2   F 


£V*Orf^itl 


218 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


' 


1822-  the  four  and  twenty  hours  is  beyond  conception ;  and  the  cabin  fire  could 
\Jv-*^  scarcely,  by  the  melting  of  snow,  furnish  enough  for  their  consumption. 
These  people  are  extremely  particular  as  to  the  purity  of  the  Avater  they 
drink.  Some  that  had  been  melted  in  our  steamer,  and  which  1  thought 
very  good,  neither  of  them  would  touch,  or  at  least  always  spat  out  again.  If 
the  water  was  much  above  the  temperature  of  32°,  they  also  disliked  it,  and 
immediately  put  snow  into  it  to  cool  it  down.  Iligliuk,  who  came  on  board 
with  one  side  of  her  hair  loose,  loosened  the  other  also  to-day,  in  conse- 
quence of  her  fancying  Okotook  worse,  though  it  was  only  the  annoyance  of 
the  blister  that  made  him  uneasy ;  for  even  in  this  sequestered  corner  of  the 
globe,  dishevelled  locks  bespeak  mourning.  It  was  not  however  with  her 
the  mere  semblance  of  grief,  for  she  was  really  much  distressed  throughout 
the  day,  all  our  endeavours  not  availing  to  make  her  understand  how  one 
pain  was  to  be  removed  by  inflicting  another. 

Sat.  27.  The  wind  still  continuing  to  the  southward  and  eastward,  and  the  weather 
extremely  mild,  on  the  27th,  pools  of  Avater  were,  by  the  melting  of  the  snoAV, 
formed  on  our  upper  deck.  The  northern  thermometer  stood  as  high  as  32|° 
at  tAvo  P.M.,  being  the  first  instance  this  season  of  its  rising  above  the 
freezing  point  in  the  shade.  The  first  snow-bunting  Avas  also  seen  to-day. 
The  mildness  of  the  atmosphere  did  not  long  continue,  for  the  wind  backing 

Sun.  28.  to  the  W.N.W.  on  the  28th,  the  thermometer  gradually  fell  till  it  had  reached 
zero  at  midnight,  and  — 6°  soon  after.  The  westerly  wind,  as  usual,  caused 
a  great  deal  of  open  Avater  in  the  ofling,  Avithin  a  few  hours  after  its  shifting 
to  that  quarter.  Another  snow-bunting  or  tAvo  Avere  seen  on  the  29th,  and 
these  little  birds  increased  almost  daily  in  numbers  from  this  time.     Snow  fell 

Mon.  29.  very  thick  on  the  29th,  and  it  Avas  generally  remarked  that  Ave  had  more  of  it 
about  this  period  than  during  the  Avhole  of  the  Avinter-months.  Our  garden- 
plots,  from  Avhich  tAvo  or  three  feet  of  snoAV  had  at  first  been  removed,  Avere 
now  more  deeply  covered  by  the  fall  of  a  single  day.  I  may  here  notice  that 
our  standing  rigging  did  not  slacken  during  any  part  of  this  Avinter  as  at  Mel- 
ville Island  ;  neither  on  the  other  hand  did  it  tighten  so  as  in  the  slightest 
degree  to  injure  the  rope,  the  hounds  of  the  masts,  or  any  of  the  iron  Avork 
of  the  dead-eyes. 

Captain  Lyon  being  desirous  of  having  some  little  clothes  made  as  models 
of  the  Esquimaux  costume,  and  thinking  Iligliuk's  present  leisure  afforded 
her  a  good  opportunity  of  making  them,  had  yesterday  obtained  her  promise 
that  she  would  do  so.    Okotook  being  noAv  very  much  better,  and  she  having 


*.**' 


9SKB 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

herself  resumed  her  usual  gaiety  in  consequence,  I  pressed  her  to  commence  1822 
her  work  and  placed  the  skins  before  her,  when  she  said  that  she  could  not  ^ 
do  them  here  as  she  had  no  needles.  These  being  supplied  her,  she  now 
complained  of  having  no  tooktdo  e-walloo  (rein-deer  sinew)  their  usual  thread. 
This  difficulty,  unfortunately  for  Iligliuk's  credit,  was  as  easily  overcome  as 
the  other ;  and  when  scissors,  pattern-clothes,  and  all  the  other  requisites 
were  laid  before  her,  she  was  at  length  driven  to  the  excuse  that  Okotook's 
illness  would  not  permit  her  to  do  it.  Seeing  us  half  laughing  at  the  absur- 
dity of  these  excuses,  and  half-angry  at  the  selfish  indolence  which  prompted 
them,  she  at  last  flatly  asserted  that  Okotook  desired  her  not  to  work, 
which,  though  we  knew  it  to  be  a  falsehood,  the  latter  did  not  deny.  We  then 
supposed  that  some  superstition  might  be  at  the  bottom  of  this  ;  but  having 
a  little  while  after,  by  way  of  experiment,  thrown  Iligliuk  some  loose  beads 
upon  the  table,  she  eagerly  employed  herself  for  half-an-hour  in  stringing 
them  that  not  one  might  be  lost;  which  proved  that  where  her  own  gratifica- 
tion or  interest  were  concerned,  Okotook's  illness  was  not  suffered  to  inter- 
fere. This  anecdote  shews  in  a  strong  light  that  deep-rooted  selfishness 
which,  in  numberless  instances,  notwithstanding  the  superiority  of  Iligliuk's 
understanding,  detracted  from  the  amiability  of  her  disposition.  The  fact 
was  that  she  did  not  feel  inclined  so  far  to  exert  herself  as  to  comply  with 
Captain  Lyon's  request ;  and  the  slight  degree  of  gratitude  and  proper  feel- 
ing which  was  requisite  to  overcome  that  disinclination,  was  altogether 
wanting. 

I  have  related  this  anecdote  just  as  it  occurred  with  the  hope  of  shewing 
the  true  disposition  of  these  people,  and  not  with  a  view  of  unduly  depre- 
ciating the  character  of  our  friend  Iligliuk.  I  am  however  compelled  to  ac- 
knowledge that,  in  proportion  as  the  superior  understanding  of  this  extraor- 
dinary woman  became  more  and  more  developed,  her  head  (for  what  female 
head  is  indifferent  to  praise  !)  began  to  be  turned  with  the  general  attention 
and  numberless  presents  she  received.  The  superior  decency  and  even 
modesty  of  her  behaviour  had  combined,  with  her  intellectual  qualities,  to 
raise  her  in  our  estimation  far  above  her  companions  ;  and  I  often  heard 
others  express  what  I  could  not  but  agree  in,  that  for  Iligliuk  alone,  of  all  the 
Esquimaux  women,  that  kind  of  respect  could  be  entertained  which  modesty 
in  a  female  never  fails  to  command  in  our  sex.  Thus  regarded,  she  had 
always  been  freely  admitted  into  the  ships,  the  quartermasters  at  the  gang- 
way never  thinking  of  refusing  entrance  to  "  the  wise  woman"  as  they  called 

2  F   2 


Hfctf 


sLVs^JWf^r  ',4:  A  :   : 


il  !  i 


1822. 
April. 


220 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


her.  Whenever  any  explanation  was  necessary  between  the  Esquimaux  and 
us,  Iligliuk  was  sent  for  quite  as  an  interpreter ;  information  was  chiefly  ob- 
tained through  her,  and  she  thus  found  herself  rising  into  a  degree  of  conse- 
quence to  which,  but  for  us,  she  could  never  have  attained.  Notwithstanding 
a  more  than  ordinary  share  of  good  sense  on  her  part,  it  will  not  therefore 
be  wondered  at  if  she  became  giddy  with  her  exaltation,  assuming  certain 
airs  which,  though  infinitely  diversified  in  their  operation  according  to  circum- 
stances, perhaps  universally  attend  a  too  sudden  accession  of  good  fortune  in 
every  child  of  Adam  from  the  equator  to  the  poles.  The  consequence  was 
that  Iligliuk  was  soon  spoiled  ;  considered  her  admission  into  the  ships  and 
most  of  the  cabins  no  longer  as  an  indulgence  but  a  right ;  ceased  to  return 
the  slightest  acknowledgment  for  any  kindness  or  presents  ;  became  listless 
and  inattentive  in  unravelling  the  meaning  of  our  questions,  and  careless 
whether  her  answers  conveyed  the  information  we  desired.  In  short,  Iligliuk 
in  February  and  Iligliuk  in  April  were  confessedly  very  different  persons; 
and  it  was  at  last  amusing  to  recollect,  though  not  very  easy  to  persuade  one's 
self,  that  the  woman  who  now  sat  demurely  in  a  chair  so  confidently  expect- 
ing the  notice  of  those  around  her,  and  she  who  had  at  first  with  eager  and 
wild  delight  assisted  in  cutting  snow  for  the  building  of  a  hut,  and  with 
the  hope  of  obtaining  a  single  needle,  were  actually  one  and  the  same 
individual. 

Togolat  came  down  to  the  ships  to-day  to  see  her  brother  Okotook  ;  she 
was  accompanied  by  Arnalooa,  and  on  their  arrival  they  were  both  sent  for 
into  the  cabin.  We  observed  however  that  they  required  an  unusual  degree 
of  solicitation  to  make  them  go  near  Okotook,  or  even  to  the  side  of  the  cabin 
where  he  lay  concealed  by  a  skreen  ;  and  after  all,  they  remained  in  the  op- 
posite corner  next  the  door  ;  and  having  talked  freely  to  the  invalid  for  some 
time,  took  their  leave  without  seeing  him.  In  the  evening,  after  they  were 
gone,  we  found  that  this  unfortunate  though  well-intended  visit  was  occasion- 
ing great  distress  to  Okotook,  who  talked  for  two  hours  almost  incessantly 
about  "  Arnalooa's  having  seen  him,"  which  it  seems  ought  not  to  have  been 
the  case.  What  misfortune  was  to  be  apprehended  in  consequence  of  this 
event  we  could  not  learn  ;  but  he  spoke  of  it  in  a  kind  of  agony,  and  was  evi- 
dently labouring  under  the  influence  of  some  powerful  though  absurd  super- 
stition respecting  it.  Towards  night  he  suffered  a  dreadful  bleeding  at  the 
nose  followed  by  much  sickness  at  the  stomach  which,  together  with  the 
phantom  of  Arnalooa  which  still  haunted  his  imagination,  combined  to  make 


I 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

him  extremely  unwell  for  some  hours.     The  next  day  however  he  was  free    ]82.f 
from  complaint  of  any  kind,  and  began  once  more  to  put  on  a  smiling  coun 
tenance. 

The  caulking  of  our  bows  being  now  completed,  the  ships  were  released  Tues.  30 
from  the  ice  by  sawing  round  them  ;  an  operation  which  caused  them  to  rise 
in  the  water  six  inches  and  a  half,  in  consequence  of  the  increased  buoyancy 
occasioned  by  the  winter's  expenditure. 


.£  yfi'JijSit^g'  *Zk  A  '.    : 


"'"I! 'HI!1 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on 

board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Winter  Island,  during  the  Month  of  April,  1822. 

Day 

Fahrenheit's 
momete 

Ther- 

£  o  QJ 

ri  -  u 

a  3  <u 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 
Weather. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Maxi- 

Mini- 

Mean. 

Direction^ 

Velocity. 

I    1 

-  4 

O 
-    8 

o       1 
-6.37 

o 
61.7 

inches 
29.20 

inches 
29.03 

inches 

29.132, 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy 

1    2 

+  1 

10 

3.5S 

62  2 

29.74 

29.29 

29.566 

N¥ 

light 

hazy  and  snow 

3 

5 

2 

+0.S3; 

64.5 

29.83 

29.79 

29.813 

East 

modt. 

hazy 

4 

5 

10 

-1.17 

64.0 

29.87 

29.83 

29.843 

CAM.  NE 
£PM.  NW 

light 

clear 

5 

9 

5 

+2.08 

65.0 

29.90 

29.80 

•29.875 

North 

light 

clear 

9 

5 

3.75 

64.2 

29.75 

29.40 

29.592 

NNW 

fresh 

hazy  and  snow 

7 

0 

6 

-3.00 

68.6 

29.34 

29.24 

29.278, 

NNW 

fresh 

hazy  and  snow 

8 

131 

+  1 

+7.42 

69.2 

29.48 

29.28 

29.387 

North 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

9 

9 

-  9 

3.87 

66.0 

29.71 

29.51 

29.620 

ENE 

modt. 

cloudy 

10 

12 

+  3 

6.08 

62.5 

29.90 

29-74 

29.840 

North 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

11 

13 

2 

7.71 

68.2 

29.98 

29.90 

29.920 

WSW 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

12 

17 

-  oi 

7.21 

64.0 

29.97 

29.92 

29.948 

ESE 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

1  13 

6 

1 

1.87 

63.2 

30.10 

30.00 

30.000 

East 

light 

fine 

14 

9 

4 

1.75 

61.5 

30.04 

29.90 

29.955 

NNE 

light 

cloudy 

15 

10 

2i 

*2 

2.96 

57.5 

29.84 

29.82 

29. S3) 

NNW 

light 

cloudy 

16 

9 

12 

0.33 

60.7 

29.80 

29.60 

29.695 

WNW 

light 

fine 

17 

11 

12 

0.79 

61.1 

29.72 

29.60 

29.060 

waw 

light 

cloudy 

18 

10 

1 

4.46 

58.5 

29.84 

29.71 

29.798 

sw 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

19 

11 

7 

4.67 

62.0 

29.80 

29.76 

29.783 

ground  the 
(_  compass 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

20 

12 

+  5 

8.5S 

61.5 

29.  SO 

29.71 

29.752 

ENE 

fresh 

cloudy  and  drift 

21 

15 

5 

8.08 

61.7 

30.01 

29.80 

29.910 

NE 

light 

cloudy 

22 

19 

5 

10.50 

61.2 

30.03 

30.00 

30.022 

South 

light 

cloudy  and  snow    . 

23 

21 

2 

30.17 

61.5 

29.94 

29.80 

29.885 

C  round  the 
X  compass 

light 

variable,  calm  at  times 

24 

13 

-   1 

5.87 

61.7 

29.77 

29.73 

29.742 

SW 

modt. 

cloudy 

25 

19 

+  6 

13.67 

60.0 

29.78 

29.70 

29.733 

SW 

fresh 

hazy  and  drift 

26 

25 

16 

21.12 

G3.0 

29.76 

29.57 

29.645 

SSE 

fresh 

hazy  and  drift 

27 

29 

22 

24.33 

63.5 

29.55 

29.49  29.508 

SE 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

28 

20 

0 

9.96 

64.5 

29.73 

29.52  29.023 

West 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

29 

9 

-  5 

3.42 

58.5 

29.80 

29.7429.780 

West 

modt. 

cloudy 

30 

16 

4 

7.88 

59.5 

30.08 

29.83 

29.973 

NW 

light 

cloudy 

+29 

-12 

+5.51 

62.7 

30.10 

1 
29.05  29.738 

1 

KJ#>  c **: 


juts? 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERT 


CHAPTER   IX. 


INCREASED     EXTENT    OP    OPEN    WATER    IN     THE    OFFING A    TRAVELLING-PARTY    DE- 
SPATCHED TO  THE  NORTHWARD UNSUCCESSFUL  ATTEMPT   TO  RAISE  VEGETABLES  ON 

SHORE DECEASE  OF  JAMES  PRINGLE A   PARTY    OF    ESQUIMAUX   BUILD   HUTS   NEAR 

THE  SHIPS RETURN  OF  THE  TRAVELLERS,  AND  ACCOUNT  OF  THEIR  JOURNEY FIRST 

APPEARANCE    OF  THE   PLANTS BIRDS  BECOME    NUMEROUS COMMENCE    CUTTING   A 

CANAL  THROUGH   THE    ICE    FOR   LIBERATING   THE    SHIPS ILLNESS   AND    DECEASE   OF 

JOHN  REID  AND  WILLIAM  SOUTER BREAKING-UP  OF  THE  ICE  IN  THE  BAY ACCOUNT 

OF  WINTER  ISLAND ABSTRACT  OF  OBSERVATIONS  MADE  THERE. 


For  the  last  three  weeks  of  the  month  of  April  the  mean  daily  temperature    1822. 
of  the  atmosphere  had  continued  rather  above  zero,  and  after  the  2d  of  May  kL^Xj 
the  thermometer  permanently  continued  above  that  point  of  the  scale  ;  in  Wed-  *' 
which  respect  we  were  just  a  fortnight  in  advance  of  the  summer  of  1820  at 
Melville  Island,  the  difference  of  latitude  between  the  two  places  being  8|°. 
Notwithstanding  this  comparison,  which  we  could  not  help  thinking  unfa- 
vourable to  our  present  station,  or  at  least  to  the  present  season,  it  was  fully 
compensated  by  the  enlivening  prospect  from  the  south-east  point,  where 
there  was,  on  the  1st  of  May,  so  large  a  space  of  clear  water  in  sight,  that 
it  was  generally  remarked  we  had  not  seen  any  so  extensive  since  we  entered 
Hudson's  Strait.     A  thin  sheet  of  young  ice  continued  to  form  on  the  sur- 
face at  night,  but  usually  disappeared  again  in  the  course  of  the  day.     After 
sunset,  on  the  evening  of  the  2d,  a  thin  horizontal  streak  or  band  of  vapour  Thur.  2. 
appeared  along  the  lower  parts  of  the  land :   as  the  night  advanced  it  be- 
came thicker  and  more  diffused,  and  at  length,  for  the  first  time  this  season, 
the  ships  were  for  an  hour  or  two  enveloped  in  fog. 

Okotook  being  now   left  without  any    of  his   own  companions,  Iligliuk 
having  accompanied  some  of  the  women  to  the  village,  passed  a  restless  and 


Illllihl! 


M 


1822. 
May. 


Frid. 


224 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


uncomfortable  day.  His  complaint  being  removed,  and  the  sun  shining 
bright  into  the  cabin,  he  frequently  got  up  and  walked  about,  casting  many 
a  wishful  look  through  the  Avindows,  and  expressing  great  anxiety  to  go  on 
deck,  which  however  Mr.  Edwards  would  not  permit  him  to  do.  He  had 
indeed  by  this  time  learned  to  entertain  no  inconsiderable  degree  of  super- 
stitious reverence  for  that  gentleman's  directions,  probably  of  the  same 
nature  as  those  with  which  Ewerat  might  have  inspired  him  in  similar  cases; 
and  he  was  therefore  induced,  without  difficulty,  to  give  up  the  thoughts  of 
going  on  deck.  He  would  then  lie  down  again,  and  continue  muttering  to 
himself  in  a  low  tone  of  voice  for  an  hour  together,  repeatedly  men- 
tioning the  name  of  his  son,  whom  we  fancied  he  wished  to  have  Avith  him. 
It  Avas  therefore  no  less  a  relief  to  us  than  to  him  Avhen,  in  the  evening 
some  of  the  natives  arrived,  bringing  with  them  a  piece  of  fine  venison 
which,  as  Ave  Avere  informed,  they  had  been  to  a  considerable  distance  to 
fetch,  it  being  part  of  a  store  concealed  under  a  heap  of  stones  the  pre- 
ceding autumn.  Okotook  Avas  once  more  happy  Avhen  his  friends  arrived, 
Avillingly  admitted  them  to  his  bed-side,  and  talked  for  tAVo  hours  Avith 
great  curiosity  and  interest  of  what  had  been  going  on  at  the  huts  during 
his  absence.  We  had  occasion  to  remark  that,  from  some  superstitious  no- 
tion, Okotook  would  on  no  account  permit  the  other  young  men  to  drink  out 
of  the  same  cup  Avith  himself:  the  objection  lying  wholly  on  his  side,  it 
had  evidently  no  relation  to  any  idea  of  contagion.  Toolooak  slept  on  the 
same  bed  Avith  our  patient,  and  the  others  were  comfortably  lodged  on  the 
loAver  deck. 

On  the  folloAving  morning  Ave  found  that  our  invalid  was  determined  no 
longer  to  suffer  his  present  confinement,  and  that  he  had  settled  Avith  his 
companions  that  he  should  accompany  them  on  their  return.  His  original 
complaint  being  entirely  removed,  and  nothing  remaining  but  debility, 
Mr.  Edwards  thought  it  advisable  rather  to  let  him  go  Avithout  objection,  than 
to  run  any  risk  of  his  incurring  fresh  mental  disquietude  by  remaining  on 
board  alone.  He  Avas  accordingly  seated  on  the  sledge,  where  hoAvever  they 
alloAved  him  to  remain  an  hour  before  they  could  make  it  convenient  to  set 
out.  Previous  to  his  departure  he  received  several  useful  presents,  notwith- 
standing Avhich,  on  leaving  the  ship,  he  did  not  say  a  Avord  as  an  acknow- 
ledgment ;  and,  as  he  soon  after  removed  to  a  more  distant  station,  this  Avas 
the  last  Ave  saAv  of  Okotook. 

The  northern  thermometer  on  the  ice  stood  for  a  short  time  to-day,  above  40°, 


( 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

The  diminution  of  snow  from  the  rocks  was  now  going  on  much  more  rapidly,  J  822 
and  on  mild  days,  such  as  this,  a  difference  could  be  perceived  in  the  aspect  Ji% 
of  the  land  in  the  course  of  four  or  five  hours.  Whatever  thawing  took 
place,  however,  the  snow  seemed  to  be  no  sooner  dissolved  into  water  than 
it  was  also  converted  into  vapour ;  for  not  a  pool  or  stream  of  any  kind  Avas 
yet  to  be  seen.  I  must  however  make  an  exception  in  favour  of  a  place 
upon  the  ice  where  a  line  of  sand  had  purposely  been  laid  a  day  or  two 
before,  reaching  nearly  across  the  bay,  and  passing  just  outside  the  ships, 
with  the  intention  of  facilitating  the  thawing  process  by  artificial  means,  and 
of  thus  hastening  the  time  of  our  release.  Here  the  sand  soon  made  a 
trench  for  itself  of  considerable  depth,  in  consequence  of  the  heat  absorbed 
by  it,  but  it  required  some  labour  occasionally  to  clear  out  the  snow-drift 
which  subsequently  collected  there.  Even  this  labour  we  soon  after  ceased 
to  bestow  upon  it,  finding  that  nature  would  require  our  assistance  on  a 
much  larger  scale  if  we  desired  to  hasten  our  departure.  There  seemed  no 
doubt,  however,  that  in  some  cases  the  plan  might  be  of  essential  service. 
The  first  flock  of  fifteen  ducks,  which  proved  to  be  of  the  long-tailed  spe- 
cies, were  seen  to-day,  as  also  two  silvery  gulls.  The  wind  becoming  va- 
riable, and  at  length  settling  from  the  eastward,  the  ice  closed  in  with  the 
land  ;  but  we  now  saw  this  without  anxiety,  as  there  was  no  longer  any  frost 
that  could  cement  it  to  the  shore. 

On  the  5th  the  first  pool,  from  which  perhaps  a  gill  of  water  might  have  s 
been  taken  up  by  a  sponge,  was  seen  upon  the  rocks.  The  mercury  in  the 
barometer  which  had  been  very  slowly  rising  from  30.08  inches  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  1st,  had  for  the  third  time  this  winter  reached  30.40  at  midnight 
on  the  5th,  at  which  it  continued  for  six  or  seven  hours  and  then  fell  much 
more  rapidly.  The  wind  had  during  this  *time  been  moderate,  and  the 
weather  remained  fine  for  several  days,  though  the  barometer  even  with  a 
northerly  wind  had  fallen  to  29.70  inches  on  the  8th.  The  weather  was  mild 
and  pleasant  to  the  feelings  to-day,  the  thermometer  being  as  high  as  43°  in 
the  shade  and  57°  in  the  sun. 

On  the  7th  the  average  depth  of  snow  upon  the  ice  was  found  to  be  eight  Tues.  7 
inches,  being  nearly  double  what  it  was  on  the  31st  of  March.     The  weather  Wed.  8 
being  now  to  all  appearance  tolerably  settled,  I  determined  on  sending  away 
our  travelling-party  under  Captain  Lyon.    It  consisted  of  Lieutenant  Palmer, 
five  seamen,  and  three  marines,  the  whole  being  victualled  for  twenty  days, 
and  furnished  with  a  tent,  fuel,  and  every  other  convenience  of  which  such  a 

2   G 


(iiU'i 
i 


li'lfl 


226 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
May. 


journey  would  admit.  The  baggage  was  placed  on  light  sledges,  resembling 
those  used  by  Captain  Franklin  on  his  late  journey  to  the  shores  of  the 
Polar  Sea,  made  out  of  staves  shaved  thin,  six  feet  eight  inches  long,  four- 
teen inches  broad,  and  turned  up  before.  Being  secured  entirely  with 
thongs  of  hide  sunk  by  grooves  into  the  wood  to  keep  them  from  wearing, 
they  were  perfectly  flexible,  so  as  to  be  in  no  danger  of  breaking  on  un- 
even ground.  It  is  astonishing  to  see  with  what  ease  such  a  sledge  is 
dragged  along,  the  friction  of  so  considerable  a  surface  being  more  than 
compensated  by  its  passing  over  the  snow  without  sinking.  Each  indi- 
vidual of  the  party  was  furnished  with  one  of  these,  which  also  served  to 
sleep  and  sit  upon ;  the  weight  dragged  by  each  of  the  men  being  about  one 
hundred  and  twenty  pounds,  and  that  of  the  officers  from  ninety  to  ninety- 
five.  Each  person  had  also  a  pair  of  snoAv-shoes,  a  deer-skin  jacket  and 
boots  for  sleeping  in,  and  another  pair  of  boots  of  water-tight  seal-skin. 

The  general  tenor  of  Captain  Lyon's  instructions  was,  "  after  crossing  to 
the  continent,  to  proceed  along  that  coast  to  the  northward,  carefully  exa- 
mining any  bend  or  inlet  he  might  meet  with,  so  as  to  leave  no  doubt  if  pos- 
sible of  its  actual  extent  and  communications,  thereby  preventing  the  ne- 
cessity of  the  ships  entering  it  on  their  arrival  there."  I  added  also  the 
necessary  directions  for  remarking  every  thing  of  interest  relating  to  the 
tides,  and  the  natural  productions  of  the  country  ;  and  I  limited  Captain 
Lyon  to  the  end  of  the  month  in  returning,  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  detain- 
ing the  Expedition. 

Their  preparations  being  completed,  our  travellers  left  the  ships  under  a 
salute  of  three  cheers  from  both  the  crews,  and  accompanied  by  a  large  party 
of  officers  and  men  to  assist  them  for  the  first  few  hours.  A  day  or  two  after 
their  departure  a  supply  of  provisions  was  lodged  at  the  garden,  according  to 
apian  previously  agreed  on,  in  case  of  our  being  forced  out  to  sea  with  the 
ice  before  their  return.  Arrangements  were  also  made  for  putting  an  officer 
and  two  men  on  shore  as  a  guard  to  this  as  well  as  to  the  clock,  tent,  or  any 
other  articles  that  might  be  left  behind,  in  the  event  of  an  occurrence  of  this 
nature. 
Sun.  12.  It  now  became  too  evident  that  the  climate  with  which  our  gardeners  had 
to  contend,  would  not  allow  them  to  furnish  us  with  many  ounces  of  vegetable 
substance,  in  any  reasonable  time  to  which  our  stay  here  might  be  prolonged. 
A  register-thermometer  left  for  four  and  twenty-hours  under  the  glasses  of 
the  beds  (they  can  scarcely  be  called  hot-beds)  ranged  from  25°  to  100°,  the 


JK*3«i*:sifcKsra£ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

frames  being  closely  covered  with  Russia  mats  after  sunset.  The  only  water 
we  could  procure  for  the  seeds  was  by  melting  snow  ;  and  it  would  have  made 
a  horticulturist  smile  to  see  a  fire  of  turf  made  daily  at  our  garden  for 
this  purpose.  The  snow-drift  too  had  not  yet  ceased  to  be  an  additional  an- 
noyance, half  a  day's  labour  being  sometimes  required  after  the  snow  had 
ceased,  to  admit  the  sun's  rays  by  removing  it  from  the  frames. 

On  the  13th  at  noon  the  thermometer  in  the  sun  stood  at  55°,  that  in  the  Mon.  13. 
shade  being  at  27°.  At  seven  in  the  evening  the  electrometer  was  tried  in 
the  usual  manner,  without  any  effect  being  perceptible  on  the  gold  leaf.  On  Tues.  14. 
the  following  evening,  when  the  wind  had  backed  to  the  southward,  and  the 
sky  was  overcast  with  clouds,  it  was  again  tried  with  no  greater  success,  and 
the  chain  was  now  removed  from  the  mast-head,  the  ships  being  nearly  ready 
for  sea. 

In  the  course  of  the  forenoon  of  the  15th,  a  message  to  our  medical  gen- Wed.  15. 
tlemen  announced  the  fall  of  James  Pringle,  one  of  the  seamen  of  the  Hecla, 
from  her  mi z en-top-mast  head  to  the  deck  ;  and  in  a  few  minutes  after  I  was 
much  shocked  in  receiving  Lieutenant  Hoppner's  report  of  his  death,  no 
sign  of  life  having  indeed  appeared  in  him  from  the  first  moment  after  his  fall. 
On  examination  it  was  found  that  the  base  of  the  skull  was  fractured,  and 
the  neck  also  dislocated.  A  grave  was  directed  to  be  dug  near  the  observa- 
tory, and  arrangements  were  made  for  the  funeral  taking  place  on  the  follow- 
ing Sunday. 

On  the  16th,  Ewerat,  with  his  wife  and  family,  arrived  at  the  ships,  bring- Thur.  16. 
ing  with  them  all  their  goods  and  chattels,  and  with  the  intention  of  taking 
up  their  abode  upon  the  ice  near  us.  They  accordingly  built  their  hut  about 
a  hundred  yards  from  the  Fury's  stern,  but  whether  with  the  view  of  living 
upon  us,  or  the  seals  that  frequent  the  bay,  we  were  at  first  at  a  loss  to  con- 
jecture. Ewerat's  household  consisted  not  only  of  his  own  family,  but  also 
of  Appokiuk  and  Itkamuk,  the  former  of  whom  having  no  husband,  and  the 
latter  no  relative,  they  both  seemed  to  be  fairly  "  on  the  parish."  Besides 
this  establishment,  a  second,  on  a  smaller  scale,  also  made  its  appearance  in 
our  neighbourhood,  consisting  of  a  very  little  man  named  Koo-il-li-ti-ak, 
nick-named  by  the  sailors  "  John  Bull,"  and  his  pretty  little  wife  Arnalooa, 
whose  zeal  in  bringing  up  her  husband's  share  of  the  sea-horses,  I  have 
before  described.  These  persons,  being  eight  in  number,  had,  deter- 
mined on  travelling  to  Amitioke  for  the  ensuing  summer,  influenced,  pro- 
bably in  some   degree,  by  the  hope  of  falling  in  with  us  again,  as  they 

2   G  2 


>  1 1 


228 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
May. 


Sat.  18. 


knew  that  we  were  going  in  that  direction.  Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  it 
was  soon  evident  that  they  intended  making  the  most  of  us  while  we  re- 
Frid.  17.  mained  neighbours  ;  for  on  the  17th,  though  the  weather  was  favourable  and 
they  had  no  food  of  their  own,  they  made  no  effort  to  procure  any,  except 
from  the  ships,  to  which  the  women  brought  their  ootkooseeks  for  bread-dust. 
Though  1  objected  to  encouraging  this,  and  told  them  we  should  give  them 
nothing  if  they  did  not  also  labour  for  themselves,  they  were  all  such 
favourites  with  our  people,  that  1  believe  they  found  it  answer  very  well; 
contriving  not  only  to  get  plenty  of  food,  but  also  a  number  of  useful  presents. 
They  made,  indeed,  some  return  for  this,  by  the  usual  barter  of  mittens,  of 
which  our  people  were  now  furnished  with  an  abundant  supply. 

A  great  deal  of  snow  fell  in  the  course  of  the  last  two  days,  and  our  un- 
fortunate gardens  were  once  more  buried  beneath  it.  On  the  evening  of  the 
16th,  something  like  small  rain  was  falling  for  a  few  minutes,  being  the  first 
we  had  seen  this  season  ;  but  it  soon  assumed  the  less  equivocal  form  of 
sleet,  the  thermometer  being  at  31°. 

The  observations  on  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  tide  had  been  constantly  made 
and  registered  throughout  the  winter,  and  were  continued  till  the  ships  were 
ready  for  sea  *.  This  part  of  the  phenomenon  Ave  were,  therefore,  well  ac- 
quainted with,  and  had  found  it  very  regular.  In  the  set  o£  the  tides,  how- 
ever, (the  most  perplexing  question,  in  my  opinion,  which  the  navigator  in 
an  unknown  sea  has  to  solve,)  we  found  much  greater  difficulty  to  obtain  the 
desired  information.  The  sea  having  been  occasionally  open  for  days  to- 
gether, it  could  not  be  said  that,  even  during  the  winter,  opportunities  did 
not  occur  of  settling  this  point — at  least  of  making  observations  on  the  di- 
rection of  the  current,  with  reference  to  the  times  of  high  and  low  water  by 
the  shore.  Notwithstanding  this,  however,  it  was  impossible  to  discover 
from  our  register  any  thing  like  that  regularity  in  the  set  of  the  stream  which, 
with  so  considerable  a  rise  of  tide,  (amounting  at  the  equinox  to  nearly  six- 
teen feet,)  is  observed  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Our  former  experience 
had,  indeed,  taught  us  to  expect  that  some  irregularity  would  be  produced 
by  the  influence  of  the  winds,  which  here,  in  a  degree  unknown  in  any  but 
the  icy  seas,  tend  immediately  to  produce  a  superficial  current  in  the  water, 
and  consequently  to  set  in  motion  any  floating  body,  by  which  a  mark  may 
be  taken,  in  order  to  observe  the  direction  of  the  stream.     Even  this,  how- 

*  See  the  Tide-table  in  the  Appendix. 


XZR. 


m 


■zr. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE, 
ever,  did  not  seem  sufficient  to  account  for  the  singular  fact  that  frequently,    1822 

May. 

for  twenty  hours  out  of  the  four-and-twenty,  the  stream  set  to  the  southward 
even  against  a  breeze  from  that  quarter,  though  of  course  more  decidedly  so 
when  the  wind  was  northerly.  The  only  way,  therefore,  in  which  we  could 
venture  upon  any  conclusion  as  to  the  true  direction  of  the  flood-tide, was  from 
the  circumstance  of  the  stream  generally  setting  to  the  southward  at  a  rate 
somewhat  less  rapid  upon  the  ebb  than  on  the  flood,  by  which  it  appeared 
that  the  latter  came  from  the  northward. 

On  the  19th,  after  an  impressive  sermon  delivered  by  Mr.  Fisher,  the  Sun.  19 
last  mournful  duties  were  performed  over  the  remains  of  our  deceased 
shipmate.  The  procession  consisted  of  all  the  seamen,  marines,  and  offi- 
cers of  both  ships,  and  the  ensigns  and  pendants  remained  lowered  during 
the  rest  of  a  day  distinguished  to  us  by  this  sad  event.  Nothing  worthy  of 
notice  occurred  till  the  evening  of  the  21st  when,  soon  after  eight  o'clock,  Tues.  21 
Captain  Lyon  and  his  party  were  seen  on  their  return  over  the  hills  and,  being 
met  by  a  number  of  the  officers  and  men  from  the  ships,  arrived  on  board 
before  ten,  when  I  was  happy  to  find  our  travellers  in  good  health,  excepting 
a  little  snow-blindness  and  "  foot-foundering,"  of  which  they  soon  recovered. 
I  will  not  further  anticipate  Captain  Lyon's  Account,  which  is  here  annexed, 
than  to  remark  that  this  journey  served  to  excite  very  reasonable  hopes  that 
he  had  seen  the  north-eastern  extreme  of  the  great  peninsula,  round  which 
we  entertained  the  most  sanguine  expectations  of  shortly  finding  the  desired 
passage  into  the  Polar  Sea. 


"  Leaving  the  ships  on  the  evening  of  the  8th  of  May,  the  fatigue-party 
drew  our  sledges  for  three  hours,  which  brought  us  to  the  most  level  part  of 
the  island.  I  should  have  taken  them  a  short  distance  farther  had  I  not  ob- 
served that  James  Pringle  stopped  behind  and  lay  on  the  snow,  apparently 
suffering  from  sickness  or  fatigue  ;  they  were  in  consequence  ordered  to  re- 
turn to  his  assistance.  Again  advancing  for  two  hours,  we  pitched  our  tent 
for  the  night  at  the  head  of  a  small  bay,  the  wind  continuing  fresh  from  the 
northward. 

"  At  six  A.M.  on  the  9th  we  again  set  out  and  proceeded  onwards  for 
four  hours  over  a  plain,  which  terminated  in  a  low  rocky  point  stretching  a 
short  distance  into  Hoppner's  Strait,  which  separates  Winter  Island  from  the 
main  land.     We  here  rested  for  the  day  ;  no  change  had  taken  place  in  the 


230 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


I 


uiim 


10. 


weather,  but  as  the  surface  of  the  snow  was  slightly  incrusted  with  ice, 
there  was  no  drift  to  incommode  us.  As  no  water  was  to  be  procured  we 
were  under  the  necessity  of  thawing  snow. 

"  Leaving  this  point,  which  I  named  Point  Belford,  at  half-past  six  we 
entered  the  heavy  ice  in  the  strait,  in  order  to  cross  at  the  narrowest  part. 
It  was,  however,  Avith  great  difficulty  we  made  our  way  amongst  the  high 
and  irregular  masses  of  ice  which  filled  the  strait,  and  two  hours  and  a  half 
elapsed  before  we  arrived  at  a  small  island,  although  the  distance  could  not 
have  exceeded  two  miles.  All  our  party  being  much  fatigued  we  here 
rested  for  the  night.  Our  snow-shoes  were  much  damaged,  and  we  were 
sensible  that  without  their  help  we  could  not  have  drawn  our  loads  amongst 
the  hummocks.  On  the  ice  were  observed  numerous  tracks  of  wolves,  foxes, 
and  hares  ;  we  also  saw  the  foot  marks  of  a  young  bear  and  its  mother,  and 
a  hare  was  afterwards  seen  near  the  same  spot.  From  an  elevated  ground 
we  took  the  bearings  of  the  islands  in  Hoppner's  Strait,  which  I  named 
Bird's  Isles. 

"  The  morning  of  the  10th  brought  no  change  in  the  Avind,  but  the  wea- 
ther Avas  clear  and  fine.  At  seven  A.M.  we  moved  onAvards,  and  crossed  a 
second  strait  of  a  mile  in  breadth,  also  filled  Avith  heavy  ice.  This  occupied 
an  hour  ;  and  Ave  then  kept  along  shore  for  some  distant  hills  on  the  main 
land,  near  Avhich  Ave  expected  our  forenoon's  journey  Avould  terminate.  In 
the  course  of  our  walk  ten  deer  Avere  seen  ;  they  appeared  in  very  poor  case, 
had  not  cast  their  Avinter  coat,  and  Avere  extremely  timid.  At  eleven  we 
stopped  to  dine.  Our  road  had  been  over  very  irregular  ground,  on  Avhich 
the  snow  lay  in  heavy  ridges.  The  beach  Avas  Ioav,  and  from  the  nature  of 
the  ice  that  lay  on  it  appeared  to  be  very  shalloAV.  Several  of  the  party  were 
slightly  affected  by  snoAv  blindness,  Avhich  I  conceive  Avas  in  a  great  measure 
to  be  attributed  to  the  long  continuance  of  the  north  Avind,  Avhich  had  been 
bloAving  for  some  hours  directly  in  our  faces.  The  latitude  by  observation 
liere  Avas  66°  25'  10"  and  long.  0°  11'  15"  Avest  of  the  ships. 

At  six  P.M.  on  again  proceeding,  a  solitary  deer  ran  near  us  for  above  a 
mile,  regulating  his  pace  by  ours,  but  seldom  coming  within  gun-shot ;  soon 
afterwards  three  others  crossed  our  path.  Having  Avalked  about  three  miles 
from  the  place  of  observation,  Ave  arrived  at  the  foot  of  a  hill  we  had  set  from 
Point  Belford  ;  this  place  Avas  distant  tAvo  or  three  miles  from  the  beach, 
which  still  continued  its  flat  appearance.  At  about  three  or  four  miles  from 
the  shore,   and  bearing  S.E.b.E.,  Ave  observed  a  chain  of  four  Ioav  isles,  or 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

shoals,  of  about  four  or  five  miles  in  length,  from  N.E.  to  S.W.  Leaving-  the 
hill  we  proceeded  N.E.b.N.  until  half-past  nine  P.M.,  and  then  pitched  our 
tent.  We  were  on  a  rising  ground,  and  the  wind  was  painfully  severe  from 
the  north,  with  the  thermometer  at  18°  ;  at  midnight  the  temperature  fell  to 
12°,  and  at  six  A.M.  on  the  11th  it  was  14°.  At  thirty  minutes  past  seven 
A.M.  we  again  crossed  the  hills,  and  at  ten  saw  a  bay  before  us,  having  a 
gradual  descent  from  the  hills  to  its  head,  at  which  we  stopped  a  little  before 
noon,  having  come  about  N.N.E.  over  the  high  ground.  At  noon  the  ther- 
mometer was  22°. 

"  By  meridian  altitude  the  latitude  was  66°  31'  20",  and  by  sights  for  the 
chronometer  the  longitude  was  0°  00'  50"  west  of  the  ships.  Five  of  our 
party  here  suffered  most  severely  from  snow-blindness,  notwithstanding  the 
constant  care  which  had  been  taken  to  shade  their  eyes.  It  was  now  im- 
possible to  proceed,  and  before  night  two  men  became  quite  blind.  All  suf- 
fered the  most  acute  pain,  and  their  faces  and  eyes  were  much  swollen  and 
inflamed.  As  we  could  only  obtain  water  by  thawing  snow,  and  as  we  were 
limited  in  the  expenditure  of  our  small  stock  of  fuel,  it  was  out  of  our  power 
to  afford  enough  to  bathe  the  eyes  of  our  invalids.  The  wind  gradually  sub- 
sided on  the  12th,  thermometer  at  six  A  M.  14°,  and  at  noon  22°.  The  people 
continued  to  suffer  all  day,  but  in  the  evening,  the  snow  having  melted  a 
little  on  the  rocks,  they  were  enabled  to  bathe  their  faces,  which  afforded  great 
relief.  Near  our  tent  were  some  Esquimaux  land-marks,  and  a  mass  of  stones, 
built  in  the  form  of  a  grave  ;  one  flat  slab  which  composed  a  side  was  about 
five  feet  by  two  ;  we  searched  for  the  body,  but  the  ground  was  too  much 
frozen  to  be  broken  up.  From  an  eminence  two  miles  north-east  of  the  tent 
we  found  that  the  southern  boundary  of  this  place  (which  I  named  Blake's 
Bay,)  bore  S.^W. ;  thermometer  at  nine  P.M.  18°,  at  midnight  8°. 

"  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  13th  seven  deer  passed  near  the  tent ;  at  six 
A.M.  thermometer  10°.  Although  the  eyes  of  the  people  were  not  by  any 
means  free  from  inflammation,  yet  they  were  so  far  recovered  as  to  enable  us 
to  proceed,  the  sufferers  being  directed  by  looking  down  on  the  sledge  imme- 
diately before  them.  Having  rounded  the  bay  by  half-past  seven,  we  walked 
along  a  very  flat  beach,  off  which  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  was  a  continued 
chain  of  low  islands  and  shoals  for  two  or  three  leagues.  At  the  expiration 
of  four  hours  we  stopped  on  a  rocky  point,  round  which  were  the  remains  of 
several  Esquimaux  summer  habitations.  Thermometer  at  noon  24°:  This 
was  the  first  day  we  had  obtained  water  sufficient  for  our  consumption. 


<c^?  i  *&MJk  hjvs&'K" 


/jj^./-* 


if 


1  ii  i 


232 


3822. 
May. 


14. 


15. 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"  At  six  P.M.,  proceeding  in  an  E.N.E.  direction,  farther  inland  we  came 
at  about  seven  miles'  distance  to  a  gradual  ascent,  and  soon  arrived  on  a  high 
hill,  from  which  the  sea  was  distant  about  three  miles.  The  land  was  at  first 
tolerably  regular,  but  as  we  proceeded  the  rocks  became  bold  and  abrupt, 
and  the  snow  was  nearly  all  thawed  from  their  eastern  face.  From  the  bare 
state  of  the  bluff  we  found  it  Avas  a  favourite  resort  of  the  deer,  of  Avhich  we 
saw  several,  as  affording  them  some  withered  grasses  and  moss  which  the 
the  thaw  had  left  exposed,  or  which  were  buried  so  small  a  depth  beneath 
the  snow  as  to  be  easily  procured  by  scraping  with  the  feet.  At  half-past 
ten  we  stopped  for  the  night,  the  thermometer  being  at  14°. 

"  The  morning  of  the  14th  was  calm  but  cloudy,  and  at  six  A.M.  the  ther- 
mometer 11°.  At  half-past  seven  we  descended  the  rocks,  which  I  named 
Adderley's  Bluff,  and  found  them  precipitous  near  the  sea.  Passing 
amongst  the  heavy  grounded  ice  which  lay  at  their  foot,  our  road  became 
very  difficult  and  fatiguing,  the  snow  lying  in  such  deep  ridges  as  to  oblige 
us  to  take  a  very  circuitous  route.  Having  walked  four  hours,  and  crossed 
two  small  bays,  we  stopped  before  noon  on  a  low  point.  At  noon,  thermo- 
meter 26°,  latitude  by  meridian  altitude,  66°  37'  50",  and  longitude,  by  chro- 
nometer, 0°3l/  45"  east  of  the  ships. 

"  At  six  P.M.  we  again  moved  forward  and,  crossing  a  bay  of  smooth  floe 
ice  for  two  miles,  came  to  a  small  rocky  isle,  due  north  of  the  place  of  ob- 
servation. This  island  lay  across  the  mouth  of  a  very  snug  little  cove, 
which  from  its  appearance  we  supposed  likely  to  afford  safe  anchorage  for 
ships.  Off  the  isle,  on  an  E.b.S.  bearing,  is  a  small  rocky  shoal.  Leaving 
this  we  crossed  a  second  bay  of  a  mile  in  breadth,  the  ice  of  which  gave  the 
same  indications  of  deep  water.  After  four  hours'  walk  we  rested  for  the 
night.  At  ten  P.M.  thermometer  8°,  weather  cloudy,  and  much  scud  flying 
from  the  south-east. 

"  Small  snow  began  to  fall  on  the  15th,  and  the  wind  came  from  the  east- 
ward. At  six  A.M.,  thermometer  28°.  At  half-past  eight  we  started  and 
crossed  the  ice  about  half  a  mile  to  a  small  island,  whence  we  observed  the 
sea  to  run  up  W.N.W.  Mr.  Palmer  and  myself  walked  to  its  head,  a  dis- 
tance of  about  two  miles  and  a  half,  when  Ave  found  it  shalloAv,  and  full  of 
low  gravelly  isles.  The  breadth  Avas  about  four  miles.  We  here  took  bear- 
ings, and  then  crossed  the  flat  sea  ice  N.b.E.,  four  miles,  to  the  foot  of  a 
high  hill.  The  most  distant  eastern  land  bore  N.E.  Before  Ave  had  crossed 
over  the  mouth  of  the  bay,  which  I  named  after  Lieutenant  Palmer,  the 


?2gv>^:v 


\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


233 


weather  became  so  very  unsettled  as  at  times  to  hide  the  land  a-head  of  us. 
At  eleven  A.M.  we  stopped,  thermometer  30°.  Heavy  snow  and  drift  were 
now  falling,  and  the  weather  continued  unchanged  for  sixty-eight  hours, 
during  which  we  were  confined  to  a  tent  shaped  like  the  roof  of  a  house, 
and  eleven  feet  by  six  in  breadth,  in  a  sitting  posture,  and  all  our  clothes 
became  thoroughly  wet  from  the  thawing  of  the  snow  on  the  canvass.  On 
the  forenoon  of  the  18th  the  weather  improved,  and  the  wind  came  round  to  is. 
N.N.E.  Mr.  Palmer  and  myself  ascended  the  highest  hill,  two  miles  east  of 
the  tent,  and  thence  took  bearings  of  the  distant  land  as  laid  down  in  the 
charts.  The  hills  appeared  to  cease  at  the  range  on  which  we  stood,  and 
the  land  a^ far  as  the  first  point,  which  was  named  Point  Elizabeth,  was  a 
dead  flat.  The  high  distant  land  to  the  N.E.  appeared  as  if  detached  from 
the  plain,  and  as  I  was  afterwards  enabled  to  observe,  proved  to  be  a  cape, 
which  I  named  Cape  Wilson.  We  had  from  this  place  seen  above  two 
days'  journey  to  the  eastward  ;  and  as  our  provisions  were  half  and  our 
wood  nearly  all  expended,  I  thought  it  prudent  to  return,  as  there  was  every 
probability  that  the  weather  might  prove  equally  precarious  in  our  journey 
homewards,  or  that  snow  blindness  might  again  detain  us.  We  therefore 
made  across  Palmer  Bay  in  our  way  back,  and  at  the  same  time  to  avoid  the 
various  bays  and  turnings  of  the  land,  we  struck  more  inland.  By  the  even- 
ing of  the  20th  we  had  arrived  within  three  miles  of  Hoppner's  Strait.  20. 
From  our  resting-place  I  observed  that  on  the  low  islands,  (which  I  had  set 
on  the  10th,  and  now  named  Turton's  Shoals,)  much  heavy  ice  was  thrown 
up,  in  all  probability  by  the  open  water,  which  Avas  observed  in  that  direction 
to  extend  as  far  as  Winter  Island. 

"On  the  21st  we  resolved  to  make  a  forced  march  for  the  ships,  as  some   21. 
of  the  people  yet  suffered  from  sore  eyes,  and  our  clothes  and  blankets  had 
been  wet  for  several  days.    We  therefore  started  at  seven  A.M.,  and  crossing 
to  Winter  Island,  proceeded  until  past  noon,  when  having  rested  for  two 
hours,  we  again  pushed  on  for  the  ships  and  reached  them  at  nine  P.M. 

"  It  was  a  matter  of  regret,  that  the  unfavourable  state  of  the  season  and 
the  abundance  of  snow,  which  every  where  covered  the  ground,  had  pre- 
cluded all  possibility  of  making  any  remarks  on  the  state  or  productions  of 
the  country  over  which  we  had  passed.  Such  rocks  as  were  exposed  were 
of  gneiss,  and  we  also  observed  a  few  detached  masses  of  granite.  From 
some  pieces  of  decomposing  feldspar  which  Avere  found  projecting  through 
the  snow,  we  picked  a  few  lumps  of  iron  pyrites  of  the  size  of  a  pea.     Not  a 

2  H 


3:«l 


GZ3  i  *  5  *f  A  %.\3&>C 


■■'/ X  ;  .' ,^  V  %k 


■i 


234 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
May. 


IN 


HIS  I 


single  plant  was  found  in  a  state  of  vegetation,  which  may  perhaps  account 
for  the  almost  total  absence  of  birds,  as  we  only  saw  one  raven  and  three 
snow  buntings.  The  deer  were  all  in  a  most  wretched  condition,  and  sub- 
sistence was  barely  afforded  them  from  the  withered  plants  of  the  last  season  ; 
yet  it  may  be  inferred  that  these  animals  are  numerous  in  the  summer,  from 
the  circumstance  of  our  finding  on  almost  every  elevated  ridge  of  hills  the 
remains  of  Esquimaux  dwellings,  and  the  piles  of  stones  behind  which  the 
hunters  are  used  to  conceal  themselves.  We  only  twice  procured  water  at 
noon,  and  many  hours  of  painful  thirst  were  in  consequence  experienced.  I 
cannot  conclude  this  account  without  particularly  noticing  the  great  assist- 
ance derived  from  our  snow  shoes,  without  which  it  would  not  have  been 
possible  to  proceed  even  a  fourth  of  the  distance  we  passed  over,  the  snow 
being,  at  this  season,  very  deep  and  soft." 


Tues.  23.  On  the  23d,  our  neighbours  the  Esquimaux,  who  had  long  by  their  own 
account  been  setting  off  for  Amitioke,  at  length  began  in  earnest  to  pack  up 
for  their  departure.  As  soon  as  their  preparations  were  finished,  1  sent  for 
them  all  on  board,  and  gave  them  one  of  their  own  sledges,  of  which  they 
were  much  in  want  for  carrying  their  goods,  a  couple  of  boarding-pikes,  some 
knives,  and  several  tin  canisters  filled  with  bread-dust  for  their  journey. 
These  presents  had  scarcely  been  made  them  when  we  had  reason  to  appre- 
hend so  sudden  an  influx  of  wealth  might  produce  serious  effects,  especially 
upon  the  women,  whose  joy  threw  them  into  immoderate  fits  of  laughter, 
almost  amounting  to  hysterics,  which  were  succeeded  by  a  flood  of  tears. 
The  men  seemed  thankful,  though  less  noisy  in  the  expression  of  their 
acknowledgments.  As  soon  as  some  degree  of  composure  was  restored, 
we  accompanied  them  to  their  baggage,  which  they  had  stowed  on  two  of 
the  small  travelling  sledges  given  them  by  Captain  Lyon,  but  which  they 
now  shifted  to  their  own.  When  all  was  ready,  and  some  other  valuable 
presents  had  been  added  to  their  stock  by  Captain  Lyon,  they  proceeded  to 
the  northward,  the  women  assisting  to  drag  the  sledge,  for  they  had  only  one 
large  dog  and  one  puppy.  On  taking  their  departure,  these  good-humoured 
and  ever-cheerful  people  greeted  us  with  three  cheers  in  the  true  Kabloona 
style,  a  mode  of  salutation  they  had  witnessed  once  or  twice  among  us,  and 

Frid.  24.  frequently  practised  for  their  amusement  and  ours.  On  the  24th  we  found 
they  had  only  proceeded  a  few  miles,  as  "John  Bull"  once  more  made  his 


**|L*fc 


?5S 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

appearance  on  board,  and  returned  to  his  companions  in  the  evening.  From  1822 
this  specimen  of  their  travelling,  of  which  Ave  had  as  yet  little  experience, 
we  had  great  reason  to  hope  that  their  days'  journeys  would  be  found  but 
short  ones,  and  that  therefore  our  distance  round  the  north-eastern  point  of 
the  American  continent  was  not  very  considerable.  The  snow  felt  softer,  and 
more  melting  was  going  on  to-day  than  on  any  before  observed,  though  only 
a  few  black  tips  of  the  rocks  were  yet  visible  on  shore.  The  animals  now 
began  to  appear  in  greater  numbers ;  for  on  the  25th,  a  flock  of  nearly  two  Sat.  25. 
hundred  long-tailed  ducks  were  swimming  about  in  the  open  water  to  the 
south-east  of  the  point.  Some  of  the  Esquimaux  who  came  from  the  nearest 
western  village,  also  reported  having  seen  a  great  many  rein-deer  ;  but  they 
had  not  yet  succeeded  in  killing  any. 

On  the  27th,  at  noon,  the  thermometer  in  the  shade  rose  as  high  as  36°,  Mon.  27. 
the  wind  being  from  the  S.W.,  but  on  its  changing  to  the  N.W.  on  the  fol- 
lowing day,  the  temperature  fell  to  12°  at  midnight.  The  thermometer 
indeed,  at  this  time,  seemed  as  it  were  to  struggle  to  rise  above  the  freezing 
point  in  the  course  of  the  day,  and  not  always  with  success.  On  the  30th,  Thur.  30, 
the  first  five  grouse  were  killed.  These  birds  were  entirely  white  in  their 
plumage,  except  near  the  tip  of  the  tail,  where  the  feathers  were  of  a  glossy 
black.  They  were  in  very  good  condition  and  weighed  from  seventeen  to 
eighteen  ounces  each.  Several  ducks  and  silvery  gulls  were  also  seen  about 
the  point,  and  Mr.  Fife  fired  at  a  swan. 

At  the  close  of  the  month  of  May  it  was  a  matter  of  general  observation,  Frid.3I. 
and  of  course  of  general  regret,  how  few  symptoms  of  thawing  had  yet 
appeared  either  on  shore  or  on  the  ice.  Naturally  pursuing  our  usual  com- 
parison with  the  circumstances  of  the  former  winter  passed  in  these  regions, 
it  was  impossible  not  to  recollect  that  Melville  Island  had,  on  the  same  day 
two  years  before,  advanced  full  as  far  as  the  country  now  before  us,  in 
throwing  off  its  winter  covering.  The  parts  of  the  land  which  were  now  the 
most  bare  were  the  smooth  round  tops  of  the  hills,  on  which  here  and  there 
occurred  a  little  pool  of  water,  from  which,  taking  all  together  within  half  a 
mile  round  the  ships,  we  should  at  this  time  have  had  great  difficulty  in 
filling  half  a  tun.  There  were  also  on  the  lower  lands  a  few  dark  un- 
covered patches,  looking,  when  viewed  from  the  hills,  like  islets  in  an  ex- 
tensive sea.  Vegetation  seemed  labouring  to  commence,  and  a  few  tufts 
of  the  saxifraga  oppositifolia,  when  closely  examined,  discovered  some  signs 
of  life.     A  botanist,  in  short,  might  have  considered  vegetation  as  begun, 

2   H  2 


.<C^t-  i  *>?  rf  >i  %A3g;* 


JUT^r  ^ 


Jane. 
Sat.  1. 


236 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


but  in  the  popular  acceptation  of  the  word  it  certainly  had  not.  Such 
was  the  state  of  things  on  shore  at  the  conclusion  of  the  month  of  May. 
Upon  the  ice  appearances  were  not  more  promising.  Except  in  the  im- 
mediate neighbourhood  of  the  ships,  where  from  the  constant  trampling, 
and  the  laying  of  various  stores  upon  the  ice,  some  heat  had  artificially 
been  absorbed,  it  would  have  been  difficult  to  point  out  in  what  respect 
any  advances  towards  dissolution  had  been  made  upon  the  upper  surface, 
where  six  or  seven  inches  of  snow  yet  remained  in  every  part.  Here  again, 
without  any  undue  partiality  for  our  old  winter-quarters,  it  was  natural  as 
well  as  reasonable  to  bear  in  mind,  that  before  this  time  we  had  there  ex- 
perienced several  hours  of  hard  rain,  than  which  nothing  proves  more  ef- 
fectual in  dissolving  the  ice.  The  consequence  was  that,  for  the  last  week 
in  May,  at  Melville  Island,  the  surface  of  the  ice  had  assumed  quite  a  green 
appearance ;  while  here  it  was  still  as  white  as  a  covering  of  snow  could 
make  it. 

Under  these  circumstances  I  came  to  the  determination,  now  that  the 
ships  were  ready  for  sea,  to  try  what  could  be  effected  towards  their  re- 
lease, by  sawing  and  cutting  the  ice  ;  for  it  was  vexatious  to  see  open 
water  daily  in  the  offing,  and  not  to  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  it.  Ar- 
rangements were  therefore  made  for  getting  every  thing,  except  the  tent 
and  instruments,  on  board  the  next  day,  and  for  commencing  this  more  la- 
borious occupation  on  the  following  Monday. 

We  were  not  the  only  inhabitants  of  these  regions  that  seemed  to  think 
it  high  time  for  the  summer  to  have  arrived,  for  there  was  to-day  quite  a 
general  muster  of  the  birds  about  the  island.  A  great  many  ducks  and 
silvery  gulls,  two  swans,  two  pair  of  ring-plovers,  several  ravens  and  grouse 
were  seen,  besides  the  usual  flocks  of  the  cheerful  little  snow-buntings. 
Mr.  Ross  killed  a  raven  and  a  pair  of  grouse  ;  the  former  of  these  was  quite 
black,  and  one  of  the  latter,  a  female  bird,  had  a  few  speckled  feathers  on 
each  wing,  the  tail  being  black  near  the  tip.  Captain  Lyon  was  out  for  se- 
veral hours  with  his  gun  and  met  with  eight  rein-deer,  but  found  them  too 
Avild  to  be  approached.  The  thermometer  got  up  to  41°  in  the  warmest  part 
of  the  day,  but  remained  so  high  as  this  only  for  a  short  time,  a  light  breeze 
of  wind  immediately  bringing  it  down  to  35°. 

On  the  1st  of  June,  having  launched  a  boat  at  the  mouth  of  the  bay,  I 
went  to  sound  in  that  neighbourhood  and  along  the  eastern  side  of  the 
island,  preparatory  to  marking  out  the  intended  canal.     We  now  found  that 


*.**: 


ttgR 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL 

<ept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Winter  Is! 

and,  during  the  Month  of  May,   1822. 

j       Fahrenheit's 
Thermometer. 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 
Weather. 

Day 

Maxi- 

Mini- 

Mean. 

Maxi- 

Mini. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity. 

1 

O 

+10 

O 
-5 

O 
+7.67 

inchcs 

30.12 

inches 
30.08 

inches 

30.098 

NW 

modt. 

clear 

2 

23 

3 

13.42 

30.12 

30.08 

30.10J 

N¥ 

light 

fine  and  clear 

3 

33 

+17 

25.90 

30.16 

30.10 

30.137 

WbN 

light 

cloudy 

4 

27 

20 

22.92 

30.30 

30.20 

30.252 

NE 

light 

cloudy 

5 

43 

20 

28.33 

30.40 

30.27 

30.342 

NW 

light 

cloudy 

C 

24 

18 

21.0-1 

30.40 

30.12 

30.287 

NE 

modt. 

hazy 

7 

30 

16 

22.92 

30.10 

29.79 

29.970 

NE 

fresh 

cloudy 

8 

28 

30 

21.75 

29.72 

29.70 

29.704 

NNE 

modt. 

fine 

9 

32 

20 

25.42 

29.73 

29.08 

29.703 

NNE 

a.m.  modt-  ? 
p.m.  liBht  J 

fine 

10 

28 

10 

21.42 

29.85 

29.75 

29.813 

NNW 

modt. 

fine 

11 

25 

8 

16.67 

30.00 

29.88 

29.932 

NNW 

modt. 

cloudy 

12 

23 

5 

15.75 

30.02 

30.00 

30.003 

NNW 

modt. 

fine 

13 

30 

5 

17.25 

29.98 

29.92 

29.968 

NNW 

light 

fine 

14 

32 

3 

22.25 

29.90 

29.70 

29.817 

West  round  by  ? 
South  to  SSE.  j 

light 

cloudy 

15 

29 

20 

25.17 

29.01 

29.47 

29.540 

SE 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

10 

34 

23 

28.00 

29.40 

29.30 

29.323 

ESE 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

17 

29 

20 

25.50 

29.60 

29.30 

29.467 

North 

strong 

cloudy — much  drift 

18 

29 

13 

22.83 

29.63 

29.60 

29.608 

NW 

modt. 

clear 

19 

21 

10 

15.83 

29.60 

29.62 

29.653 

WNW 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

20 

26 

6 

17.08 

30.00 

29.80 

29.900 

NNW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

21 

31 

6 

20.21 

30.08 

30.00 

30.050 

NNW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

22 

39| 

9 

27.96 

30.05 

29.87 

29.940 

wsw 

light 

™     cloudy 

23 

45 

25 

36.08 

29.80 

29.64 

29.697 

West 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

24 

46 

25 

32.29 

29.43 

29.37 

29.400 

NE 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

25 

30 

18 

25.42 

29.70 

29.40 

29.582 

NW 

modt. 

clear 

26 

31 

13 

25.07 

29.72 

29.71 

29.718 

West 

light 

fine 

27 

36 

11 

29.17 

29.74 

29.56 

29.017 

SW 

modt. 

cloudy 

28 

31 

12 

23.12 

29.73 

29.58 

29.068 

NNW 

modt. 

cloudy 

29 

36 

10 

25.00 

29.84 

29.70 

29.783 

NW 

light 

fine 

30 

32 

12 

24.33 

29.86 

29.80 

29.S22 

North 

light 

fine 

31 

41 

13 

29.17 

29.96 

29.82 

29.910 

West 

light 

fine 

46 

-5 

23.09 

30.40 

29.30 

29.833 

:L  yfiJW?y*Mf 


238 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
June. 


"Sun.  2. 


the  heavy  ice  at  the  entrance  of  the  bay,  on  its  south-east  side,  was  aground 
on  rocks,  having  on  them  in  several  parts  only  seventeen  feet  water  at  low 
tide  ;  and  in  one  place,  which  till  now  had  been  covered  by  the  ice  and 
snow,  the  gneiss  peeped  above  the  surface  at  half-ebb.  On  the  eastern 
side  of  the  island,  along  which  we  rowed  two  or  three  miles,  the  soundings 
are  regular  and  deep  in  most  places  near  the  shore.  A  good  deal  of  ice 
still  remained  attached  to  the  land  ;  but  as  far  as  we  could  distinguish  to 
the  N.N.E.  there  was  a  lane  of  clear  water,  wide  enough  for  the  naviga- 
tion of  the  ships.  We  met  Avith  large  flocks  of  king,  eider,  and  long-tailed 
ducks,  the  two  former  species  having  made  their  appearance  only  a  day 
or  two  before.  From  this  time  we  generally  procured  a  few  ducks  daily  for 
the  use  of  the  ships,  the  whole  being  served  in  lieu  of  other  meat,  accord- 
ing to  the  "  game-laws"  already  established.  We  saw  besides  numbers  of 
the  larus  argentatus,  and  at  the  mouth  of  the  bay,  in  seven  fathoms  water, 
a  fish  supposed  to  be  a  salmon,  three  feet  long,  swimming  near  the  bottom. 
The  clearness  of  the  water  here  allowed  the  rocks  at  the  bottom  to  be  plainly 
distinguished  at  that  depth. 

On   the   2d,    at  three   P.M.,    a  thin  white   cloud  was  observed  to    ex- 
tend across  the  northern  sky,  from  north-east  to    south-west,    being  then 


about  65° 


high 


in  the   centre.     The  whole  of  the  heavens  to  the  south- 


ward of  this  was  covered  with  a  similar  kind  of  cloud,  that  to  the  north- 
ward exhibiting  a  clear  blue  sky.  The  edge,  which  was  well  defined, 
formed  a  very  perfect  arch,  and  here  the  cloud  was  much  more  dense  than 
in  any  other  place,  reminding  one  of  a  veil  of  gauze,  of  which  there  were 
more  folds  in  that  part  than  elsewhere.  Though  the  wind  was  with  us  at 
W.b.N.,  it  blew  gently  over  to  the  S.S.E.,  still  retaining  its  perfect  and 
continuous  arch-like  form  at  the  margin.  In  a  quarter  of  an  hour  it  had 
got  20°  on  the  south  side  of  the  zenith,  in  forty  minutes  was  only  25°  high, 
and  in  an  hour  and  a  quarter  had  totally  disappeared  beneath  the  southern 
horizon,  leaving  the  whole  of  the  heavens  perfectly  cloudless,  This  was 
the  most  striking  phenomenon  of  the  kind  we  had  ever  witnessed,  and 
while  the  arch  remained  near  the  zenith  this  magnificent  canopy  had  a  sin- 
gularly grand  and  imposing  appearance. 
Mon.  3.  On  the  morning  of  the  3d  at  six  A.M.  both  the  ships'  companies,  under 
their  respective  officers,  were  set  to  work  upon  the  ice.  A  line  was  accu- 
rately marked  out  from  each  of  the  Fury's  quarters,  where  they  were  fifty 
feet  apart,  diverging  to  two  hundred  and  fifty  at  the  edge  of  the  floe,  the 


1 1  I'diM 


*..  • 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OP  DISCOVERY. 

latter  being  distant  from  the  ships  two  thousand  and  twenty  feet,  or  just  1822 
one-third  of  a  nautical  mile.  It  was  proposed  to  make  a  cut  through  the 
ice  with  the  saws,  along  the  two  lines  thus  marked  out,  and  then  a  trans- 
verse section  here  and  there,  the  divergency  of  the  sides  being  intended 
to  facilitate  the  removal  of  the  pieces  thus  detached,  by  first  pulling  them 
out  with  strong  purchases,  and  then  floating  them  down  the  canal  to  the  sea 
without.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  alacrity  with  which  this  laborious 
work  was  undertaken,  and  continued  daily  from  six  in  the  morning  till  eight 
at  night,  with  the  intermission  only  of  meal-times  :  nor  could  any  thing 
be  more  lively  and  interesting  than  the  scene  which  now  presented  itself  to 
an  observer  on  the  south-east  point.  The  day  was  beautifully  clear,  the 
sea  open  as  far  as  the  eye  could  stretch  to  the  northward,  and  the  "  busy 
hum"  of  our  people's  voices  could  at  times  be  heard,  mingling  with  the 
cheerful  though  fantastic  songs  with  which  the  Greenland  sailors  are  ac- 
customed at  once  to  beguile  their  labour,  and  to  keep  the  necessary  time 
in  the  action  of  sawing  the  ice.  The  whole  prospect,  together  with  the 
hopes  and  associations  excited  by  it,  was  to  persons  cooped  up  as  Ave  had 
been,  exhilarating  almost  beyond  conception. 

In  the  course  of  the  first  week  we  had  completed  the  two  side  cuts,  and  Sun.  9 
also  two  shorter  ones  in  the  space  between  the  ships  ;  making  in  all  a  length 
of  two  thousand  three  hundred  feet  on  each  side  of  the  intended  canal,  the 
thickness  of  the  ice  being  in  general  four  feet,  but  in  one  or  two  places 
(where  the  junction  of  the  sea-ice  with  the  bay-floe  had  occasioned  some 
squeezing)  above  ten  feet  and  a  half,  scarcely  allowing  our  longest  saws  to 
work.  Laborious  as  this  part  of  the  operation  had  been,  we  soon  found  it 
likely  to  prove  the  least  troublesome  of  the  whole ;  for  on  endeavouring  to 
pull  out  the  pieces  in  the  manner  at  first  intended,  every  effort  failed,  till  at 
length  we  were  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  cutting  each  block  diagonally  be- 
fore it  could  be  moved  from  its  place.  After  a  week's  experience,  we  also 
learned  that  much  time  had  been  lost  in  completing  the  whole  of  the  lateral 
cuts  at  once  ;  for  these,  partly  from  frost,  and  partly  by  the  closing  together  of 
the  sides  of  the  canal,  all  required  sawing  a  second  and  in  some  places  even 
a  third  time.  It  was  surprising  also  to  see  how  powerful  a  resistance  was 
occasioned  by  the  "sludge"  produced  in  sawing,  or  as  the  sailors  called  it, 
the  "  saw-dust,"  continuing  in  the  cut  and  appearing  to  act  like  oil  inter- 
posed between  two  plates  of  glass,  in  keeping  the  masses  united.  In  some 
cases  also,  a  saw  was  squeezed  so  tight  by  the  pressure  of  the  ice  in  the 


^Lv^J^r^rak   \ 


240 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1322. 
June. 


cut,  that,  it  became  necessary  to  enter  a  second  in  order  to  release  it,  by 
sawing  out  a  circular  plug  of  ice  completely  round  it.  Fatiguing  as  this 
work  proved  to  the  men,  I  directed  it  to  be  continued  to-day,  the  sea  re- 
maining so  open  on  the  outside  as  to  give  every  encouragement  to  our 
exertions. 

While  we  were  thus  making  trial  of  what  art  could  effect  towards  our  re- 
lease, nature  seemed  to  be  more  than  usually  tardy  in  rendering  her  assist- 
ance. The  snow  was  still  leaving  the  land  by  very  slow  degrees,  and  some 
small  rain  fell  for  a  short  time  on  the  7th,  but  the  mean  temperature  of  the 
twenty-four  hours  seldom  rose  above  the  freezing  point.  So  small  indeed 
was  the  quantity  of  water  now  to  be  obtained  on  shore,  that  being  apprehen- 
sive of  actually  going  to  sea  without  any  in  the  holds,  each  ship  commenced 
melting  snow  in  her  coppers  for  filling  the  tanks,  the  crews  being  necessarily 
put  on  an  allowance  till  this  was  somewhat  advanced.  The  first  flower  of 
the  saxifraga  oppositifolia  was  brought  on  board  as  a  matter  of  curiosity  by 
our  botanists,  on  the  9th,  or  one  day  later  than  it  made  its  appearance  at  Mel- 
ville Island  in  1820. 

One  of  our  people,  in  walking  over  the  island,  met  with  a  swan's  nest, 
which  Captain  Lyon  went  out  to  see  and  made  a  drawing  of  it.  It  was 
built  of  moss-peat,  being  no  less  than  five  feet  ten  inches  in  length,  four  feet 
nine  inches  wide,  and  two  feet  deep,  as  shewn  in  the  annexed  sketch  by 
Captain  Lyon. 


The  hole  of  entrance  in  the  top  was  eighteen  inches  wide.  Two  eggs,  each 
weighing  about  eight  ounces,  were  found  in  the  nest,  in  which  the  old  birds 
were  also  sitting  at  first,  but  too  wild  to  be  approached.  The  eggs  are  of  a 
cream  or  brownish-white  colour,  in  some  parts  a  little  clouded  by  a  darker 


•L* 


"Szs: 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

tinge.     The  female  subsequently  laid  a  third  egg,  and  soon  afterwards  both 
birds  appeared  to  have  wholly  deserted  the  nest. 

In  the  second  week  our  progress  with  the  canal  had  been  consider-  Sun.  16 
able,  it  being  now  completed  within  two  hundred  yards  of  the  Fury's 
stern.  As  the  men  had  continued  this  cold  and  wet  work  without  inter- 
mission for  thirteen  days  together,  they  were  now  allowed  a  half  holiday, 
of  which  they  began  to  stand  in  need.  Several  patients,  as  might  have 
been  expected,  had  been  added  to  the  sick  lists  of  both  ships,  but  by 
timely  and  skilful  attention  the  complaints  had  hitherto  been  overcome. 
The  opening  we  had  already  made  in  the  ice  now  rendered  it  so  much 
weaker,  and  consequently  so  much  more  liable  to  disruption  than  before,  that 
I  considered  it  prudent  to  remove  the  tent,  observatory,  and  instruments  on 
board,  as  we  might  at  any  time  have  been  forced  to  sea  without  a  moment's 
warning.  Mr.  Fisher,  therefore,  having  completed  the  desired  observations, 
every  thing  was  re-embarked  except  the  transit  instrument  and  meridian- 
mark,  these  being  left  to  the  last  for  continuing  the  determination  of  the 
rates  of  the  chronometers.  Among  the  things  now  brought  on  board  were 
the  garden  frames,  from  which  about  four  pounds  of  wretched  pea-leaves, 
and  mustard  and  cress,  had  been  produced  in  each  garden,  by  dint  of  nine 
weeks'  labour  and  attention. 

Having  thus  reported  our  own  progress  for  the  last  week,  I  cannot  omit 
saying  something  of  that  which  nature  had  been  making  in  the  same  interval. 
A  few  more  flowers  of  the  saxifraga  oppositifolia  had  here  and  there  been 
procured ;  but  they  were  still  curiosities,  the  more  so  as  being  almost  the 
only  ones  that  had  yet  made  their  appearance.  Some  water  had  now  been 
obtained  from  the  shore,  by  baling  a  gallon  or  two  from  each  little  pool, 
and  carrying  a  cask  about  on  a  sledge  to  be  thus  filled.  At  Melville  Island, 
at  the  same  period,  the  ravines  were  beginning  to  be  dangerous  to  pass,  and 
were  actually  impassable  during  the  third  week  in  June. 

The  sea  still  continued  open  in  the  offing,  whenever  the  wind  blew  from 
the  northward  or  westward,  and  the  ducks,  of  the  three  species  before  men- 
tioned, had  even  increased  in  numbers.  Sand-pipers  had  also  become 
numerous  on  shore,  and  a  turnstone,  being  one  of  a  single  pair,  was  killed. 
No  grouse  had  been  seen  since  those  last  noticed.  A  quantity  of  tangle- 
weed  appearing  in  the  canal,  some  pieces  of  it  were  pulled  up  and  mea- 
sured ;  the  length  of  one  of  these  was  twenty -seven  feet  and  a  half,  of  which 

On  the  17th  we  were  enabled  to  unhang  the  Mon.  17, 


the  stalk  occupied  twelve. 


242 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.    Fury's  rudder  and  to  haul  it  up  on  the    ice,  as  well  for  the  purpose  of  a 

June.  ...  .  ,  „ 

v«*-r^  general  examination,  as  to  put  on  an  iron  plate  where  the  frost  had  cracked 

it  since  the  removal  of  the  snow.     We  found  it  quite  sound  and  serviceable 

in  every  other  part,  and  it  was  therefore  shipped  again  in  a  couple  of  hours. 

Tues.  18.  On  the  18th,  the  wind  getting  round  to  the  south-east  and  east,  a  thick 
fog,  being  the  first  very  decided  one  this  season,  prevailed  during  great 
part  of  the  day,  and  froze  hard  on  the  rigging  after  sunset,  the  thermometer 

Wed.  19.  getting  down  to  31°.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  day's  labour  on  the  19th 
we  had  every  prospect  of  getting  to  sea  in  forty-eight  hours  more  ;  but  early 

Thw. 20.  on  the  following  morning,  when  the  ebb  or  north-easterly  tide  had  made, 
and  was  assisted  by  a  breeze  from  the  south  ward,  the  whole  body  of  sea- 
ice  came  forcibly  in  contact  with  the  bay-floe ;  which  was  now  so  weakened 
by  our  cutting,  as  to  split  the  whole  way  from  the  edge  up  to  the  Hecla's 
stern,  a  little  to  the  westward  of  the  canal,  the  latter  being  almost  imme- 
diately closed  with  a  considerable  crush,  but  without  affecting  the  ships 
which  lay  beyond  it.  The  closing  of  our  artificial  canal  had  the  effect  of 
partially  opening  a  natural  one  at  the  place  where  the  ice  had  just  been 
detached  ;*  but,  as  this  was  incomplete,  coming  gradually  up  to  a  point 
astern  of  the  Hecla,  we  were  at  a  loss  to  know  on  which  of  the  two  our 
labour  would  best  be  employed.  An  attempt  was  first  made  by  four  strong 
purchases,  stretched  from  side  to  side  across  the  new  crack,  to  pull  the 
parts  together  again,  and  thus  to  leave  our  original  canal  in  statu  quo.  All 
our  power  however  being  insufficient  to  accomplish  this,  we  commenced 
with  the  saws  upon  the  upper  part  of  the  crack,  with  the  intention  of  widen- 
ing it  sufficiently  for  the  passage  of  the  ships.  In  this  work  we  had  made 
considerable  progress  when,  towards  evening,  it  was  perceived  that  this  was 
now  closing  and  our  former  canal  re-opening  by  the  action  of  the  wind  and 
tide.  Relinquishing  our  last  attempt  therefore,  we  lost  no  time  in  floating 
some  heavy  pieces  of  ice  into  the  canal,  to  serve  as  wedges  for  keeping  the 
sides  apart,  in  case  of  any  fresh  pressure  from  without  again  disposing  them 
to  close. 

The  fog  still  continued  and  some  heavy  rain  fell  at  night,  both  of  which 
made  a  striking  alteration  in  the  appearance  of  the  land  and  ice.  The  snow 
which  was  before  hard  enough  to  bear  a  man  in  walking,  now  allowed  him 
to  sink  almost  to  the  middle  ;  and  after  this  time  the  water  was  very  abundant 
on  shore,  occurring  in  numerous  small  streams  and  ponds  in  almost  every  part. 
Frid.21.      At  two  A.M.  on  the  21st,  the  piece  of  the  floe  which  formed  the  separa- 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

tion  between  the  two  canals  drifted  bodily  outwards,  as  far  as  the  rocks  at  *822- 
the  mouth  of  the  bay  and  the  ice  that  lay  upon  them  would  permit,  taking 
Avith  it  a  heavy-grounded  mass  that  lay  near  the  Hecla,  and  on  which  it  had 
before  been  turning  as  on  a  pile  or  pivot :  shortly  after  a  second  mass  on 
the  eastern  side  of  the  canal  broke  off,  the  separation  taking  place  upon  the 
line  where  the  ice  had  been  weakened  by  the  sand  we  had  laid  upon  it. 
Our  work  was  now  at  an  end,  and  we  had  only  to  wait  for  a  northerly  or 
westerly  wind  to  release  us  from  our  present  "  besetment,"  for  in  fact  it 
was  now  nothing  more.  Directions  were  therefore  given  for  closely  watch- 
ing the  motion  of  the  ice,  both  from  the  ships  as  well  as  by  regular  visits 
to  the  shore,  at  the  end  of  every  watch. 

It  now  becomes  my  painful  duty  to  turn  from  these  busy  occupations, 
where  animation,  cheerfulness,  and  hope  prevailed,  to  the  sad  and  solemn 
scenes  of  sickness   and   death  ;   for  with  both  of  these  did  it  please  the 
Almighty  to  visit  us  at  this  period  !     William  Souter,  quarter-master  of  the 
Fury,who  in  the  early  part  of  this  week  had  complained  of  a  slight  sickness  at 
the  stomach,  and  having  been  quite  relieved  was  in  consequence  discharged 
to  duty,  was  again,  on  the  morning  of  the  21st,  affected  in  a  similar  manner 
while  on  deck.     Mr.  Ross,  observing  that  he  was  unwell,  desired  him  to  go 
below,  to  which  at  first  Souter  objected,  saying  that  it  Avould  soon  go  off; 
but  Mr.  Ross  very  properly,  in  compliance  with  my  general  orders  on  this 
head,  insisted  on  his  going  to  Mr.  Skeoch.     He  was  soon  relieved  by  the 
treatment  which  Mr.  Edwards  adopted,  and  continued  well  till  the  night  of 
the  22d,  when  some  dangerous  symptoms  having  appeared  and  continued  for  Sat.  22. 
several  hours,  Mr.  Fisher  of  the  Hecla  was  on  the  following  day  called  in  on 
a  consultation.     In  the  evening  of  the  23d,  the  symptoms  once  more  ap-  Sun.  23 
peared  to  assume  a  less  threatening  aspect,  and  a  hope  was  indulged  that  no 
inflammation  in  the  bowels  had  yet  taken  place,  which  there  had  before  been 
great  reason  to  apprehend.     As  the  ship  was  ready  for  sea,  and  no  work  of 
any  consequence  remained  to  be  done,  every  thing  was  kept  as  quiet  as  pos- 
sible on  board,  that  the  patient  might  suffer  no  disturbance.     On  the  24th,  Mon.  24 
Souter's  alarming  symptoms  had  so  much  subsided,  that  increasing  hopes 
were  entertained  of  his  continuing  to  do  well ;  these  flattering  appearances, 
however,  received  a  sudden  check  about  noon  on  the  25th,  after  Avhich  Tues.  25. 
time  he  began  rapidly  though  gradually  to  droop,  and  between  six  and  seven 
in  the  evening  breathed  his  last. 

The  impossibility  of  removing  Souter  from  the  sick  bay,  after  the  last 

2  I  2 


(G^  1  i  j*  ■:'  »?  t 


*r±vM*v,   i 


244 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
June. 


.< 


alarming  change  took  place,  rendered  his  death,  or  rather  the  convulsive 
struggles  which  for  some  hours  preceded  that  event,  a  dreadful  trial  to  poor 
Reid,  whose  state  had  for  some  time  past  been  scarcely  better,  the  difficulty 
in  his  breathing  having  increased  to  a  most  distressing  degree.  Worn  out  as 
he  was  by  bodily  suffering  and  extreme  debility,  it  is  probable  that  the  de- 
pression of  spirits  occasioned  by  Souter's  death  served  to  hasten  his  own 

Wed.  26.  dissolution,  which  took  place  about  the  same  hour  the  following  evening. 
The  slow  degrees,  by  which  Reid's  death  had  been  long  approaching,  had 
served  in  some  measure  to  prepare  his  mind  for  that  awful  event ;  though  like 
other  consumptive  persons,  he  would  sometimes  entertain  very  sanguine 
hopes  of  his  recovery,  and  this  he  continued  to  do  till  about  the  time  of 
Souter's  illness.  When  Souter  was  dying,  Reid  remarked  that  he  should  not 
be  long  after  him  ;  and  on  the  26th,  when  Mr.  Fisher  had  attended  and 
prayed  with  him,  he  said  that  he  should  go  at  one  bell,  (half-past  six)  and 
then  enumerated  all  his  clothes  to  one  of  the  men,  who  at  his  request  wrote 
them  down  for  him.  After  four  o'clock  he  did  not  speak,  and  gradually  sink- 
ing expired  at  the  time  he  had  mentioned. 

Frid.  28.  On  the  28th,  the  remains  of  our  deceased  shipmates  were  committed  to 
the  earth,  with  every  solemnity  that  so  mournful  an  occasion  demanded. 
They  were  interred  in  one  grave,  on  a  rising  ground  a  few  hundred  yards 
from  the  sea  to  the  north-eastward  of  the  ships.  A  handsome  tomb  of  stone 
and  mortar  was  built  over  the  spot,  having  at  one  end  a  stone  let  in,  with  the 
usual  information  engraved  on  it.  The  sides  were  plaistered  with  a  kind  of 
viscous  clay  found  in  one  of  the  ponds,  and  the  top  covered  with  tufts  of  the 
purple  saxifrage.  The  duties  of  the  ships  now  permitting  it,  Captain  Lyon 
employed  his  men  in  building  a  similar  tomb  over  the  grave  of  Pringle. 

Scarcely  had  these  melancholy  duties  been  performed  when  the  wind, 
which  had  been  stationary  at  south  for  several  hours,  began  to  veer  a  little 
to  the  westward  and  the  weather  gradually  to  clear  up  ;  and  by  six  P.M. 
a  fresh  breeze  blew  from  the  W.S.W.,  so  that  we  had  now  every  reason 
to  expect  an  almost  immediate  opening  of  the  ice.  It  is  remarkable  that 
previous  to  this  change  the  winds  had  been  almost  constantly  between  the 
S.E.  and  E.N.E.  for  ten  days ;  a  circumstance  we  had  never  before  expe- 
rienced in  these  seas,  and  which  certainly  produced  more  melting  than  a 
period  of  two  months  would  have  done  with  the  wind  to  the  northward 
and  westward.  The  alteration  which  the  surface  of  the  land  had  undergone 
in  this  interval  is  indeed  almost  inconceivable,  except  to  those  who  have 


>  ■••. 


^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

experienced  the  rapidity  with  which  such  changes  do  take  place,  when  once  1822- 
they  fairly  begin  in  these  regions.  The  whole  aspect  of  the  island  was  so 
thoroughly  metamorphosed,  in  consequence  of  the  disappearance  of  the 
snow,  that  the  very  spots  on  which  we  had  been  in  the  frequent  habit  of 
walking  for  the  last  nine  months,  could  now  scarcely  be  recognised  ;  and  I 
believe  not  one  among  us,  if  removed  from  Winter  Island  in  May  and 
brought  back  in  July,  would,  from  the  mere  aspect  of  the  land,  have  very 
easily  discovered  the  scene  of  our  winter's  rambles. 

Some  other  birds  had  now  also  arrived  in  our  neighbourhood  ;  among  Sat.  29. 
these  the  golden  plovers  and  phalaropes  were  tolerably  abundant,  as  also 
boatswains,  terns,  and  dovekies  ;  the  latter  had  been  absent  for  some  time  ; 
and  it  was  curious  to  observe  that  in  the  interval  they  had  nearly  re-as- 
sumed their  summer  plumage.  Some  brent-geese  and  black-throated  divers 
were  found  to  frequent  the  ponds  on  shore,  and  a  single  specimen  of  the 
Larus  Sabini  was  procured,  being  the  only  individual  of  that  species  seen  on 
the  island.  Iligliuk  had  recognised  the  bird,  (which  the  Esquimaux  call 
Erkeet-yuggee-ari-oo,)  by  the  engraving  of  it,  and  said  we  should  find  them 
to  the  northward,  which  piece  of  information  we  afterwards  found  to  be 
correct.  We  were  surprised  that  no  more  grouse  had  been  seen,  and  some- 
what disappointed  at  having  only  procured  a  single  deer,  which  the  Hecla's 
sportsmen  were  fortunate  in  shooting  on  the  29th ;  but  of  these  animals 
very  few  had  been  met  Avith.  Two  or  three  foxes  had  lately  been  seen, 
one  of  which  was  of  a  darkish  colour  and  the  others  quite  white.  The 
vegetation  had  also  felt  the  good  effects  of  the  late  mild  and  moist  weather, 
and  a  number  of  plants  were  now  appearing  in  flower.  Among  these,  spe- 
cimens of  the  potentilla  nivea,  saxifraga  ccespitosa,  draba  alpina,  and  oxytropis 
arctica,  had  been  procured  within  the  last  three  or  four  days. 

The  westerly  wind  did  not  long  continue,  but  again  veered  to  the  south-  Sun.  30. 
ward  and  then  to  the  east.  On  the  30th  it  suddenly  backed  to  N.N.E., 
from  which  quarter  it  soon  freshened  to  a  strong  gale  with  heavy  snow  and 
sleet.  This  inclement  weather  did  us  some  service  in  clearing  part  of  our 
passage  out  of  the  bay,  which  the  late  winds  had  blocked  up  with  ice;  but  to 
the  eastward  of  the  island,  the  main  body  remained  quite  close  to  the  shore. 
In  the  course  of  the  night  the  wind  veered  to  the  north,  giving  us  every 
hope  of  being  speedily  at  liberty  to  put  to  sea. 

Previously  to  leaving  our  present  winter-quarters,  where  we  had  now  nearly 
completed  our  ninth  month,  I  shall  offer  a  few  remarks  on  the  extent  and 


**Y* 


C^liA  5  *f  '1  HJv5&>£ 


1;-/:;^,    - 


1822. 
June. 


'■*i 


246 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


geographical  position  of  Winter  Island,  and  on  such  of  its  natural  produc- 
'  tions  as  I  have  not  had  an  opportunity  of  mentioning  in  the  preceding  part 
of  this  narrative. 

Winter  Island  is  ten  miles  and  a  half  in  length  from  N.W.b.N.  to  S.E.b.S., 
and  its  average  breadth  from  eight  to  ten  miles.  It  is  what  seamen  call  rather 
low  land  ;  the  height  of  the  S.E.  point,  which  I  named  Cape  Fisher,  out  of 
respect  to  our  chaplain  and  astronomer,  being  seventy-six  feet,  and  none  of  the 
hills  above  three  times  that  height.  The  outline  of  the  land  is  smooth,  and 
in  the  summer,  when  free  from  snow,  presents  a  brown  appearance.  Several 
miles  of  the  north-west  end  of  the  island  are  so  low  and  level  that,  when  the 
snow  lay  thick  upon  it,  our  travellers  could  only  distinguish  it  from  the  sea 
by  the  absence  of  hummocks  of  ice. 

The  basis  of  the  island  is  gneiss-rock,  much  of  which  is  of  a  grey  colour, 
but  in  many  places  also  the  feldspar  is  so  predominant  as  to  give  a  bright 
red  appearance  to  the  rocks,  especially  about  Cape  Fisher,  where  also  some 
broad  veins  of  quartz  are  seen  intersecting  the  gneiss  ;  and  both  this  and 
the  feldspar  are  very  commonly  accompanied  by  a  green  substance,  which 
we  took  to  be  pistacite,  and  which  usually  occurs  as  a  thin  lamina  adhering 
strongly  to  the  others.  In  many  specimens  these  three  are  united,  the 
feldspar  and  quartz  displaying  tolerably  perfect  crystals.  In  some  of  the 
gneiss  small  red  garnets  are  abundant,  as  also  in  mica-slate.  In  lumps  of 
granite,  which  are  found  detached  upon  the  surface,  the  mica  sometimes 
occurs  in  white  plates,  and  in  other  specimens  is  of  a  dirty  brown  colour. 
There  are  several  varieties  of  mica-slate,  and  some  of  these  have  a  bril- 
liant metallic  appearance  like  silver ;  those  which  are  most  so,  crumble 
very  easily  to  pieces.  The  most  common  stone  next  to  those  already 
mentioned  is  lime,  which  is  principally  schistose  and  of  a  white  colour. 
Many  pieces  of  this  substance  on  being  broken  present  impressions  of 
fossil-shells,  and  some  have  also  brown  waved  lines  running  quite  through 
them.  Nodules  of  flint  occur  in  some  masses  of  lime,  but  they  are  not 
common.  Iron  pyrites  is  found  in  large  lumps  of  black  stone,  tinged 
externally  with  the  oxide  of  iron ;  it  is  here  and  there  met  with  in  small 
perfect  cubes.  To  this  list  I  shall  only  venture  to  add  grey  and  red  sand- 
stone ;  and  refer  to  the  Appendix  for  a  more  detailed  account  of  the 
mineral  productions  of  the  island.  Of  those  of  the  animal  and  vegetable 
kingdoms  I  have  already,  in  the  course  of  the  foregoing  narrative,  given  all 
the  information  we  could  collect. 


*  *& 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE 


Mean  latitude  of  the  )  By  218  meridian  altitudes  of©   and  -)f         .       66  11  26.8  North. 

Fury's  Station,       J  By  Mr.  Fisher's  observations,  reduced  to  the  ship   66  11   24.5        „ 

]  By  1 2  obs.  of  Jupiter's  Satellites,  by  Mr.  Fisher  S2  53  45.5  West. 

Mean  longitude  of  I  By  944  sets  of  observations,  comprehendirg  9460 

the  Fury's  Station.    I        lunar  distances  from  O  and  •)(• 83  10  26.2        „ 

J  Used  in  the  construction  of  the  charts  *  ...     83  09  49.6        ,, 

Mean  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle,  by  Mr.  Fisher 87  49  33      North. 

Variation  of  the  magnetic  needle,  being  a  mean  between  Mr.  Fisher's  ob- 
servations, and  those  by  myself  and  the  officers      56   18  30        West 

Mean  time  of  high-water  on  full  and  change  days 12h-  llm- 

Rise  of  the  highest  spring-tide 15ft-    8in- 

„     of  the  lowest  neap-tide 3     1 

The  flood  comes  from  the  northward,  and  runs,  at  spring-tides,  between  two  and  three  knots. 
the  Tide  Table  in  the  Apfendix.) 


*  See  this  further  explained  at  the  end  of  the  Table  of  Lunar  Observations  made  in  the  spring 
of  1822. 


m 


T 


ABSTRACT 

of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Winter  Island,  during  the 

Month  of  June,  1822. 

Pay 

1 

Fahrenheit's 
mometer 

rher- 

Barometer. 

Prevailing- 
Winds. 

Prevailing  Weather. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity 

o 
+42 

+2°1 

o 
34.08 

inches 
29.90 

inches 
29.94 

[  incites 
29.950 

sw 

light 

cloudy 

2 

36 

27 

30.12 

29.90   29.81 

29.852 

North 

light 

cloudy 

1    3 

46 

26 

31.92 

29.83   29. 7S 

29.810 

From  »W     f 

round  by  West  J- 
to  South        ) 

light 

cloudy 

4 

m 

29 

35.29 

29.80    29.78 

29.793 

North 

modt. 

cloudy 

5 

37 

23 

29.96 

29.76   29.63 

29.683 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy,  snow  at  times 

1     6 

40 

23 

30.00 

29.70 

29.67 

29.690 

NW 

light 

cloudy 

7 

47 

20 

33.46 

29.67 

29.60 

29.632 

SSW 

light 

cloudy 

8 

32 

22 

20.42 

29.55 

29.50 

29.530 

West 

fresh 

cloudy 

9 

32 

22 

27.00 

29.83 

20.53 

29.662 

North 

modt. 

cloudy 

10 

36 

21 

29.58 

30.00 

29.90 

29.9C7 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy 
cloudy,  snow  at  times 

11 

41 

25 

32.92 

29.90 

29.72 

29.783 

NW 

modt. 

12 

36 

25 

30.33 

29.90 

29.55 

29.713 

North— round   l 
by  VV  to  SW    I 

fresh 

cloudy 

13 

1 

38 

24 

32.33 

30.00 

29.90 

29.95S 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy 

14 

42 

26 

31.25 

29.95 

29.80 

29.905 

round  the        1 
compass         f 

light 

cloudy 

15 

31 

22 

27.00 

29.76 

29.58 

29.607 

NNE 

fresh 

cloudy 

16 

46 

24 

37.00 

29.60 

29.52 

29.517 

West 

light 

fine 

17 

45 

31 

37.92 

29.76 

29.65 

29.703 

NW 

light 

fine 

18 

50 

32 

39.25 

29.80 

29.76 

29.777 

ESE 

light 

foggy 

19 

46 

31 

37.92 

29.89 

29.75 

29.785 

ESE 

light 

foggy 

20 

42 

33 

36.75 

£9.  SI 

29.75 

29.808 

ESE 

light 

cloudy 

21 

39 

31 

34.83 

29.90 

29.84 

29.807 

ESE 

light 

hazy 

22 

40 

30 

35.33 

29.80 

29.72 

29.780 

ENE 

moi't. 

cloudy 

23 

40 

29 

35.46 

29.71 

29.68 

29.692 

East 

modt. 

cloudy 

24 

42 

32 

36.50 

29.77 

29.70  29.733 

SE 

fresh 

hazy  and  rain 

25 

45 

30 

37.67 

29.71 

29.70  29.702 

S.Easterly 

lisht 

calm  at 
times 

hazy 

26 

44 

32 

37.00 

29.67 

29.02  29.640 

ENE 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

27 

43 

31 

36.67 

29.59 

29. 5S 

29.588 

SE 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

28 

49 

31 

38.50 

29.60 

29.49  29.552 

SW 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

29 

44 

32 

37.75 

2^.58 

29.50 

29.537 

a.m.  West  } 
p.m.  South  J 

light 

cloudy 

30 

32 

30 

31.00 

29.41 

29.10 

29.220 

NNE 

fresh 

hazy,  snow  and  sleet 

50 

20 

33.97 

30.00 

29.10 

29.717 

51 


*  **: 


SOI  €Si  : 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


249 


km  v*  ,* v^r* 


\ 


^r    **  J 

1 

|r  |    1 

■  /Hu 

fcvl 

CHAPTER  X. 

DEPARTURE    FROM    WINTER    ISLAND MEET    WITH    SOME    ESQUIMAUX    TRAVELLING    TO 

THE    NORTHWARD OBSTRUCTIONS    AND    DANGER    FROM    THE    ICE    AND    TIDES DIS- 
COVERY   OF    THE    BARROW  RIVER,    AND     ITS    FALL FAVOURABLE    PASSAGE    TO    THE 

NORTHWARD — ARRIVAL    OFF    THE  STRAIT  OF   THE   FURY  AND  HECLA PROGRESS   OP- 
POSED BY  A  FIXED  BARRIER  OF  ICE COMMUNICATE  WITH  THE  NATIVES  OF  IGLOOLIK 

■ UNSUCCESSFUL  ATTEMPTS  TO   GET  BETWEEN  THE  ICE  AND  THE    LAND — LAND    UPON 

THE  CALTHORPE  ISLANDS THE    FURY    DRIFTED    BY  THE   ICE  BETWEEN  TWO    ISLANDS 

ACCOUNT  OF  A  JOURNEY    PERFORMED    IN    SLEDGES    UP    AN    INLET    TO    THE    WEST- 
WARD. 


WM 

T* 

ft 

?'i%w  IS 

The  gale  which  had  for  some  time  been  blowing  from  the  northward  veered 
to  the  N.W.b.W.,  and  increased  in  strength  on  the  1st  of  July,  which  soon 
began  to  produce  the  effect  of  drifting  the  ice  off  the  land.  In  the  course 
of  the  day,  a  wide  lane  of  water  was  thus  opened  to  the  eastward  of  the 
island,  but  the  weather  was  too  inclement  to  think  of  moving  the  ships. 
The  wind  continued  to  blow  very  hard  during  the  night,  with  snow  and 
sleet,  but  began  to  moderate  about  four  A.M.  on  the  2d.  At  six  o'clock,  the  Tues.  2. 
report  from  the  hill  being  favourable,  and  the  wind  and  weather  now  also 
sufficiently  so,  we  moved  out  of  our  winter's  dock,  which  was  indeed  in  part 
broken  to  pieces  by  the  swell  that  had  lately  set  into  the  bay.  At  seven  we 
made  sail  with  a  fresh  breeze  from  W.N.W.,  and  having  cleared  the  rocks  at 
the  entrance  of  the  bay,  ran  quickly  to  the  northward  and  eastward.  At 
noon  we  had  Adderley's  Bluff  due  north  of  us,  distant  eight  miles,  and  from 
Captain  Lyon's  chart  and  description  easily  recognised  Point  Elizabeth 
beyond  it.  We  now  found  that  the  land  was  completely  lined  with  ice, 
extending  in  most  places  from  two  to  live  miles  to  sea- ward,  and  apparently 
attached  to  the  shores  as  firmly  as  any  we  had  seen.  The  part  next  the 
land,  consisting  of  a  strip  one  or  two  miles  in  width,  was  smooth  and  level 
and  covered  with  numerous  ponds  of  water,  all  which  shewed  it  to  have  been 


2    K 


r  k  %L.\3a'f<~.*:  ^r-i  y  a  :r,ar.M-+&L  a 


250 


1822. 
July. 


Wed.  3 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


of  the  last  winter's  formation.  The  outer  band  of  ice  was  of  the  "  hum- 
mocky"  kind,  which  I  have  shewn  to  be  produced  by  external  pressure,  or 
by  the  cementing  together  of  a  number  of  broken  masses  left  in  the  autumn 
by  the  succeeding  winter's  frost.  The  ice  in  the  offing  was  also  of  the  latter 
kind  and  drifting  rapidly  about  with  the  tides,  leaving  us  a  navigable 
channel  varying  in  width  from  two  miles  to  three  or  four  hundred  yards. 

Having  passed  Adderley's  Bluff,  which  is  much  the  highest  land  hereabouts, 
we  soon  found  the  ice  closing  in  to  the  land-floe,  and  therefore  made  the 
ships  fast  to  the  latter,  after  a  fine  run  of  ten  leagues  without  any  obstruc- 
tion. The  soundings  here  were  extraordinary,  considering  the  bold  appear- 
ance of  the  land  ;  for  at  the  distance  of  two  miles  from  it  we  had  only  eleven 
fathoms,  on  a  bottom  of  small  stones  and  shells  ;  and  by  the  boats  we  found 
from  ten  to  twenty-two  fathoms  along  the  edge  of  the  floe.  On  their  return 
we  were  again  able  to  get  under  way,  and  after  gaining  another  mile  or  two 
made  fast  as  before.  Soon  after  the  sea-ice  came  in  upon  us,  but  with  so 
little  force  or  at  least  in  so  many  broken  pieces  as  to  do  the  ships  no  injury, 
though  it  appeared  to  be  approaching  in  a  very  threatening  manner.  This 
motion  in  the  ice  was  occasioned  by  the  making  of  the  flood-tide,  which  here 
as  at  Winter  Island  we  found  to  come  from  the  northward. 

The  ice  remained  close  till  half-past  four  A.M.  on  the  3d,  when,  after  hav- 
ing sent  a  boat  to  sound,  we  cast  off  and  ran  along  the  margin  of  the  floe. 
In  an  hour  and  a  half  we  were  obliged  again  to  make  fast,  to  allow  a  stream 
of  ice  to  drift  past  us  with  the  tide,  after  which  we  once  more  pushed  forward 
for  a  short  time.  Between  Cape  Wilson  and  Point  Elizabeth  the  land  forms 
a  considerable  indentation,  and  is  here  moderately  high.  In  the  course  of 
the  forenoon,  as  we  ran  along,  a  man  was  observed  standing  on  a  hummock 
of  ice  in-shore  of  us.  As  we  concluded  it  to  be  one  of  our  friends  on  their 
way  from  Winter  Island,  we  hoisted  our  colours  but  could  not  afford  to 
heave-to.  At  noon  we  were  in  latitude,  by  observation,  66°  50'  40",  and  lon- 
-gitude,  by  chronometers,  81°  51'  12". 

The  closeness  of  the  ice  again  obliging  us  to  make  fast,  we  soon  after 
perceived  a  party  of  people  with  a  sledge  upon  the  land-floe  in  the  same 
direction  as  before.  I  therefore  sent  Mr.  Bushnan  with  some  of  our  men 
to  meet  them  and  to  bring  them  on  board,  being  desirous  of  ascertaining 
whereabouts  according  to  their  geography  we  now  were.  We  found  the 
party  to  consist,  as  Ave  expected,  of  those  who  had  taken  leave  of  us  forty 
days  before,  on  their  departure  to  the  northward,  and  who  now  readily 


*.*§' 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

accompanied  our  people  to  the  ships;  leaving  only  Togolat's  idiot-boy  by  the  1822 
sledge,  tying  him  to  a  dog  and  the  dog  to  the  ice.  As  soon  as  they  came 
under  the  bows  they  halted  in  a  line  and,  according  to  their  former  promise, 
gave  three  cheers,  which  salutation  a  few  of  us  on  the  forecastle  did  not  fail 
to  return.  As  soon  as  they  got  on  board  they  expressed  extreme  joy  at 
seeing  us  again,  repeated  each  of  our  names  with  great  earnestness,  and 
were  indeed  much  gratified  by  this  unexpected  rencontre.  Ewerat  being 
now  mounted  on  the  plank  which  goes  across  the  gunwales  of  our  ships 
for  conning  them  conveniently  among  the  ice,  explained  in  a  very  clear  and 
pilot-like  manner,  that  the  island  which  we  observed  to  lie  off  Cape  Wilson 
was  that  marked  by  Iligliuk  in  one  of  her  charts,  (No.  1.)  and  there  called 
Awlikteewik,  pronounced  by  Ewerat  Ow-littee-week.  On  asking  how  many 
days'  journey  it  was  still  to  Amitioke,  they  all  agreed  in  saying  ten;  and 
back  to  Winter  Island  oonooktoot,  (a  great  many,)  so  that  we  had  good  reason 
to  hope  we  were  not  far  from  the  former  place.  I  may  at  once  remark, 
however,  that  great  caution  is  requisite  in  judging  of  the  information  these 
people  give  of  the  distances  from  one  place  to  another,  as  expressed  by  the 
number  of  seeniks  (sleeps)  or  days'  journeys,  to  which  in  other  countries  a 
definite  value  is  affixed.  No  two  Esquimaux  will1  give  the  same  account 
in  this  respect,  though  each  is  equally  desirous  of  furnishing  correct  infor- 
mation ;  for  besides  their  deficiency  as  arithmeticians,  which  renders  the 
enumeration  of  ten  a  labour,  and  of  fifteen  almost  an  impossibility  to  many 
of  them,  each  individual  forms  his  idea  of  the  distance,  according  to  the 
season  of  the  year,  and  consequently  the  mode  of  travelling  in  which  his 
own  journey  has  been  performed.  Instances  of  this  kind  will  be  observed  in 
the  charts  of  the  Esquimaux,  in  which  they  not_only  differ  from  each  other 
in  this  respect,  but  the  same  individual  differs  from  himself  at  different  times. 
It  is  only,  therefore,  by  a  careful  comparison  of  the  various  accounts,  and 
by  making  allowance  for  the  different  circumstances  under  which  the  journeys 
have  been  made,  that  these  apparent  inconsistencies  can  be  reconciled,  and 
an  approximation  to  the  truth  obtained. 

Many  of  our  officers  and  men  cordially  greeted  these  poor  people  as  old 
acquaintance  they  were  glad  to  see  again,  and  they  were  loaded  as  usual 
with  numerous  presents,  of  which  the  only  danger  to  be  apprehended  was 
lest  they  should  go  mad  on  account  of  them.  The  women  screamed  in  a 
convulsive  manner  at  every  thing  they  received,  and  cried  for  five  minutes 
together  with  the  excess  of  their  joy ;  and  to  the  honour  of  "  John  Bull"  be 

2  K  2 


«2^  i  »*  •'  ^  (4  V^'^'  r-  «S":£  i-  /.  j^/T .,'  'Mtf 


252 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


\^y^j 


1822.  jt  recorded,  he  sent  by  one  of  the  men  as  he  left  the  ship  a  piece  of  seal- 
skin, as  a  present  to  Parree,  being  the  first  offering  of  real  gratitude,  and 
without  any  expectation  of  return,  that  I  had  ever  received  from  any  of 
them.  I  never  saw  them  express  more  surprise  than  on  being  assured  that 
we  had  left  Winter  Island  only  a  single  day ;  a  circumstance  which  might  well 
excite  their  wonder,  considering  that  they  had  themselves  been  above  forty 
in  reaching  our  present  station.  They  had  obtained  one  rein-deer,  and  had 
now  a  large  seal  on  their  sledge,  to  which  we  added  a  quantity  of  bread- 
dust  that  seemed  acceptable  enough  to  them.  As  our  way  lay  in  the  same 
direction  as  theirs,  I  would  gladly  have  taken  their  whole  establishment  on 
board  the  ships  to  convey  them  to  Amitioke,  but  for  the  uncertain  nature  of 
this  navigation,  which  might  eventually  have  put  it  out  of  my  power  to  land 
them  at  the  precise  place  of  their  destination.  The  ice  again  opening  we 
were  now  obliged  to  dismiss  them  after  half  an  hour's  visit,  when,  having  run 
to  the  Hecla's  bows  to  see  Captain  Lyon  and  his  people,  they  returned  to 
their  sledge  as  fast  as  their  loads  of  presents  would  allow  them.  I  here 
annex  a  chart  drawn  by  Ewerat,  which  served  as  satisfactory  confirmation  of 
Iligliuk's. 

After  sailing  two  miles  towards  Cape  Wilson,  we  found  the  ice  again  closing 
in  with  the  land-floe  and  drifting  to  the  south-west  with  this  extraordinary 
flood-tide,  which  we  here  found  to  monopolize  full  three-fourths  of  the  four- 
and-twenty  hours,  besides  running  in  general  much  more  rapidly  than  the 
other.  After  the  Fury  was  secured,  the  ice  swept  the  Hecla  alongside  of  her, 
before  Captain  Lyon  had  time  to  secure  his  hawsers,  the  tide  running  full 
a  knot  and  a  half.  Much  havoc  is  usually  to  be  apprehended  in  such  cases  ; 
after  some  grinding  and  squeezing,  therefore,  we  considered  ourselves  to 
have  escaped  very  well  with  the  loss  of  one  of  the  Hecla's  boats  torn  to  pieces 
by  the  Fury's  anchor  ;  but  were  soon  afterwards  much  mortified  in  disco- 
vering that  the  latter  was  rendered  unserviceable  also,  by  being  badly 
cracked  in  the  shank. 

At  midnight  the  ice  began  drifting  to  the  north-east  with  the  ebb-tide, 
which  seemed  to  set  more  in  earnest  than  we  had  ever  seen  it  do  before, 
though  for  what  reason  was  not  apparent.  In  consequence  of  this  movement, 
a  number  of  heavy  floe-pieces  came  with  great  violence  against  our  sterns  at 
fifteen  minutes  past  one  A.M.  on  the  4th,  setting  along  the  edge  of  the  land-ice, 
and  threatening  to  carry  us  away,  with  an  equal  strain  on  each  of  five  stout 
hawsers.     The  uncertainty  respecting  the  soundings  off  Owlitteeweek,  where 


Thur.  4. 


■■■■■in 


».*§• 


feWNgWi 


Ji'wtrat  has  ,w» 


Vawy  Be 


•I  Seals 


M  Walruses.  ^ 


Huveftme  floagnaJ* ' 


w 


ill 


II 





'<»;:  :; 


*.■*: 


^nm 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

the  numerous  grounded  masses  indicated  shoal  water,  alone  prevented  our   1822 
casting  off  and  suffering  the  ships  to  drive  to  the  north-east ;  but  the  danger 
of  drifting,  thus  hampered,   into   shoal  water   and  in  a  strong   tide-way  is 
evident. 

Between  three  and  four  A.M.  the  tide  slackened,  having  run  less  than 
four  hours  to  the  north-east ;  and  at  five  the  ice  opened,  enabling  us  to  cast 
off,  but  with  so  light  an  air  of  wind  from  the  south-east  as  scarcely  to  allow 
us  to  stem  the  flood.  At  half-past  six  the  ice  again  began  to  close,  and  the 
signal  was  made  to  secure  the  ships  to  the  floe.  The  depth  of  water,  however, 
which  the  heavy  ice  draws  giving  the  tide  a  much  greater  hold  of  it  than  of  the 
ships,  the  latter  were  unable  with  the  present  light  breeze  to  get  out  of  its  way. 
In  consequence  of  this  the  Hecla  which,  from  her  situation,  had  taken  the 
lead,  was  quickly  beset  at  the  distance  of  one-third  of  a  mile  from  the  land- 
ice,  and  drifted  several  miles  back  to  the  south-west,  in  spite  of  every  en- 
deavour to  reach  the  floe.  The  Fury,  having  just  succeeded  in  running  out  a 
line  and  securing  her  hawsers  to  it  before  the  ice  came  upon  her,  held  on  in 
this  situation,  and  was  thus  separated  from  her  consort. 

Though  we  had  succeeded  in  placing  the  Fury  in  a  considerable  indenta- 
tion of  the  floe,  the  ice  during  the  forenoon  drove  violently  into  it,  and  se- 
veral heavy  masses  coming  in  contact  with  our  quarter  heeled  the  ship  at 
times  a  couple  of  streaks,  forcing  some  of  the  pieces  also  to  turn  over  end  and 
sink  under  her  bilge,  but  without  doing  any  injury.  The  first  time  that  this 
occurred  there  was  great  reason  to  apprehend  our  being  forced  from  the  floe, 
with  all  the  ship's  company  absent,  they  having  just  been  sent  to  endeavour 
to  save  some  whale-lines  that  had  been  carried  away.  I  afterwards  found 
that  many  of  Captain  Lyon's  men  had  been  also  exposed  to  this  risk  for  se- 
veral hours,  in  the  course  of  their  frequent  but  unavailing  endeavours  to 
secure  their  ship  by  a  hawser  to  the  floe. 

Our  latitude  observed  at  noon  was  66°  54'  17",  and  the  longitude,  by  chro- 
nometers, 81°  44'  50",  our  soundings  being  thirty-eight  fathoms,  on  a  bottom 
of  sand  and  small  stones.  Neither  on  this  nor  on  any  other  occasion  during 
our  continuance  about  this  parallel  of  latitude,  did  we  ever  distinguish  any 
appearance  of  land  to  the  eastward,  though  the  weather  was  frequently  very 
favourable. 

After  eleven  A.M.  the  ice  had  remained  quite  stationary  during  the  whole 
period  of  the  ebb-tide,  which  seemed  not  to  have  power  to  set  it  against  a 
light  air  of  north-easterly  wind,  and  the  same  thing  occurred  at  night.     On 


In 


I  I! 


254 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
July. 

Frid.  5. 


the  morning  of  the  5th  it  once  more  opened  out,  leaving  a  lane  of  water 
which  appeared  to  reach  within  two  miles  of  the  island  of  Owl ittee week. 
As  we  could  there  discover  a  bight  in  the  floe,  in  which  better  security- 
could  be  found  from  the  ice  than  in  our  present  exposed  situation,  we  made 
sail  for  it,  after  sending  a  boat  a-head  with  signals  to  make  known  the  sound- 
ings ;  the  depth  of  water  proved  regular,  shoaling  gradually  from  thirty- 
eight  fathoms,  as  far  as  our  boat  could  go.  As  we  proceeded  the  ice  conti- 
nued to  open,  allowing  us  to  make  fast  in  a  very  good  situation  only  one 
mile  and  a  quarter  from  the  island,  and  in  eleven  fathoms  water,  from  which 
we  afterwards  warped  into  nine  to  endeavour  to  get  out  of  the  tide,  which  we 
here  observed  to  run  Avith  unabated  rapidity.  We  now  for  the  first  time 
secured  the  ship  to  the  smooth  and  level  land-floe,  which  continued  to  run 
alonff  the  shore  at  the  distance  before  described.  The  Hecla  still  remained 
beset  and  had  now  drifted  to  the  distance  of  twelve  miles  from  us. 

In  the  afternoon  I  sent  Lieutenant  Reid,  accompanied  by  a  party  of  other 
officers,  to  the  island,  for  the  purpose  of  examining  its  natural  productions, 
as  well  as  with  the  hope  of  procuring  some  game,  a  herd  of  deer  having  been 
observed  from  the  ship.  Our  gentlemen  returned  at  night,  having  succeeded 
in  killing  one  of  these  which  gave  us  fifty-eight  pounds  of  lean  venison ; 
and  they  also  brought  several  ducks.  The  birds,  which  were  extremely  nu- 
merous at  this  station,  consisted  principally  of  the  king,  eider,  and  long- 
tailed  ducks,  the  latter  being  much  the  most  abundant,  and  occupying  almost 
constantly  a  part  of  the  open  water  in  the  bight  of  the  ice  where  we  lay. 
These  were,  however,  not  so  tame  as  the  other  two  species,  which  would 
almost  at  first  allow  themselves  to  be  knocked  down  with  a  boat-hook,  and 
could  afterwards  be  easily  approached  in  a  boat  under  sail,  provided  the  little 
chattering  long-tailed  ducks  did  not  give  the  alarm.  The  tern  were  also 
tolerably  numerous,  and  a  few  silvery  gulls  were  seen.  On  shore  a  number 
of  red  and  black-throated  divers  frequented  the  ponds  ;  two  or  three  indivi- 
duals of  the  Lanes  Sabini  were  seen,  and  Mr.  Edwards  noticed  some  others 
which,  from  their  size  and  colour,  he  took  to  be  snow-geese.  The  island  of 
Owlitteeweek,  which  is  high  on  its  N.N.E.  but  very  low  on  the  south  side,  is 
composed  of  gneiss,  the  rocks  presenting  on  their  surface  a  wavy  or  serpen- 
tine appearance.  The  vegetation  was  found  to  be  poor  and  backward,  and 
very  few  specimens  of  plants  were  here  added  to  our  collections. 

As  might  be  expected  from  the  appearance  of  the  island,  the  water  is  not 
deep  at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  shore  on  the  south,  S.E.,  and  S. W. 


^Y^^y&Z+gttfiGZ&r*^. 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


2.55 


sides  where  there  was  the  largest  collection  of  heavy  masses  of  grounded  ice    1*W. 
that  I  ever  saw  m  one  place.     In  sounding  near  these,  however,  our  boats  vj& 

dtelLr       SS  fiVe  &th°mS'  an<1  "lat  by  a  rCgUlar  decrea5e  Awards 

For  the  first  time  since  we  had  come  on  this  coast,  we  found  the  ebb-tide 
running  full  as  strong  as  the  flood,  and  setting  more  out  from  the  land  or  to 
the  eastward  than  before.  This  latter  alteration  was  probably  occasioned 
merely  by  a  turn  given  it  in  running  from  the  northward,  between  Cane 
Wilson  ami  the  island,  though  at  the  time  we  were  willing  to  hope  that 
it  indicated  some  favourable  turn  in  the  laud  immediately  beyond  the  Cape 

»17, ,  ?  ,  y  With°Ut  distUrbance  from  (he  «•  »  good  opportunity  was 
affo.ded  of  tan,  the  time  of  high  and  low  water  compared  with  that  of 
the  stream.  The  result  of  several  observations  all  nearly  agreeing  is  ccr 
tanfly  a  curious  and  uncommon  one  ;  for  we  found  that  the  water  continued 
to  rise  or  fall  from  an  hour  and  a  half  to  an  hour  and  three-quarters  after  the 
succeeding  stream  had  commenced.  Various  other  instances  of  simfiar  anl 
mahes  ,„  the  phenomena  of  the  tides  upon  this  part  of  the  American  coast 
were  observed  m  the  course  of  the  following  week's  navigation 

S  W  SLTT*  "J  f6  6t>  *e  HCCla  aPPeW'ed  t0  be  d^ti"S  farth«  *<>  *e  Sat.  6, 
8.W.  than  before  ;  but  we  did  not  know  whether  this  might  not  be  attributed 

IriL  LTT  T7?  ^  a  TCTy  eXtraordin-y  d<^  of  refraction  oc- 
curring to-day  ,„  all  objects  near  the  horizon.  For  some  hours  her  masts 
seemed  thrown  up  ,„to  one  peaked  body,  like  an  immense  steeple,  and  I 
other  times,  she  seemed  altogether  flattened  down  into  the  form  of  a  low  and 
preposterously  bug  ship  without  masts.  The  wind  was  light  aud  several 
times  veered  round  the  compass  in  the  course  of  the  day,  with  now  and  then 
a  little  moist  feeling  in  the  atmosphere. 

The   latitude   of  this   place  was   66°  55'  58",   the  longitude,   by  chrono- 

rSTs? 2£  *ST  Mr'  FiSher  f0U"d  the  di"  °f  L  "^*  neX 
bei„l  !V  m  the  var.at.on  was  62°  17  westerly.  The  opportunity 
being a  favourable  one  for  obtaining  the  deviation  of  the  needle  on  eai 

n  on  L  h  r'9  "ead'  SeVefal  h°UrS  Were  thus  eniP'oyed  this  after- 
noon    the  observations  are  inserted  in  the  proper  table  in  the  Appendix. 

a  ntce  Zt  TT"  °,  ri?  ^  ^  the  ebb-tide  bad  made  very  strong,   S„,  7. 
awav      Th  ^'T^*  ?"*  '  mi'e  '°n»"  ™M*^  h">k*  *  »d    driftl 
tS         ?  7  bemg  fortanately  just  clear  of  our  bows,  we  had  time 

sheer  out  of  its  way,  or  we  should  immediately  have  been  carried  anion- 


,;,   , 


;-.; 


Hlhi 


A 


Ml* 


iiflu 


JglK-^^fr-ffPy?^- 


\m 


TTk 


256 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


iimi 


1822.  the  loose  ice  in  the  offing  and  beset.  This  escape  we  considered  the  more 
vi^L-  fortunate  as  the  Hecla  was  soon  after  observed  to  be  under  sail,  and  rapidly 
nearing  us  in  a  clear  lane  of  water.  The  ice  at  this  time  appearing  less 
close  than  it  had  hitherto  been,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  island,  I  left 
the  ship  in  a  boat,  to  examine  the  state  of  it  by  rowing  round  the  point,  that 
in  the  event  of  its  proving  favourable  not  a  moment  might  be  lost  in  pushing 
on  to  the  northward  whenever  the  Hecla  joined  us.  After  rowing  about 
four  miles  to  the  N.N.E.,  and  finding  a  lane  of  open  water  sufficiently  wide 
for  the  ships  with  a  free  wind,  as  well  as  a  proper  depth  of  water  along  the 
land-ice,  I  returned  on  board,  in  order  to  take  advantage  of  the  first  of  the 
ebb-tide  in  getting  the  ships  along  the  coast.  I  was  happy  to  find  from 
Captain  Lyon,  who  had  joined  an  hour  before  my  return,  that  the  Hecla  had 
escaped  from  her  "besetment"  without  injury  or  loss  of  any  kind,  though  she 
had  remained  drifting  about  the  whole  time  till  the  morning  of  the  6th,  not- 
withstanding the  constant  exertions  and  fatigue  of  the  officers  and  men  in 
endeavouring  to  secure  her  to  the  floe. 

The  ships  being  immediately  got  under  sail,  we  rounded  the  point  in  seven 
fathoms  water,  at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile  from  the  grounded  ice,  and 
soon  afterwards  deepened  to  fifteen  and  eighteen  fathoms.  The  wind  fail- 
ing, however,  and  the  ice  having  closed  the  land  since  my  return  in  the 
boat,  we  were  soon  obliged  to  haul  in-shore  and  pick  up  the  best  births  we 
could  find  among  the  grounded  masses,  where  we  lay  in  from  ten  to  twelve 
fathoms  but  much  exposed  to  the  pressure  of  the  sea-ice.  Fortunately, 
however,  this  did  not  come  any  closer,  and  we  remained  undisturbed ; 
which  circumstance  was  partly  owing  to  a  fresh  breeze  from  the  north- 
west that  sprung  up  in  the  evening,  and  continued  to  blow  during  the  night. 
This  had,  also,  the  good  effect  of  driving  the  ice  some  distance  off  the  land, 
of  which  we  did  not  fail  to  take  advantage ;  and  at  half  an  hour  before  mid- 
night cast  off  and  made  sail  with  the  young  ebb-tide.  The  weather  was 
dull  and  overcast,  with  a  dense  fog  hanging  over  most  parts  of  the  land. 

Mon.  8.  Our  progress  however  was  but  small ;  for  about  three  A.M.  on  the  8th, 
after  advancing  only  four  or  five  miles,  we  had  reached  the  end  of  the 
open  water  and  were  therefore  obliged  to  shorten  sail,  with  no  pleasing 
prospect  before  us  as  to  the  birth  we  might  expect  to  find  for  our  security. 
On  this  northern  side  of  Cape  Wilson  the  land  ice  had  assumed  a  different  and 
more  dangerous  character  than  before.  The  whole  way  from  Winter  Island 
its  margin  bore  evident  marks  of  tremendous  external  pressure,  but  it  had 


t>u 


1 1  I'l'JlHlj 


**«:*ot 


\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


257 


hitherto  afforded  numerous  bays  or  indentations,  into  which  a  ship  might 
be  taken  with  some  hope  of  finding  shelter  from  the  sea  ice.  Here  however 
the  floe,  besides  being  infinitely  heavier  and  more  "  hummocky,"  (for  it 
was  in  many  places  from  eight  to  twelve  feet  above  the  water,)  was  also  so 
straight  along  its  edge  as  to  offer  not  the  smallest  security ;  while  the  enor- 
mous masses,  every  where  piled  up  by  recent  pressure,  appeared  like  so 
many  beacons  placed  to  warn  a  ship  of  the  fate  she  might  expect  to  meet,  if 
obliged  to  make  fast  in  so  exposed  a  situation.  Such  however  is  the  nature 
of  this  navigation,  and  the  necessity  of  pushing  on  to  the  last  moment  of 
any  clear  water  appearing,  that  to  bestow  a  thought  on  our  next  place  of  se- 
curity, until  that  moment  arrives,  would  be  to  lose  opportunities  which  no 
exertions  could  regain,  and  ultimately  to  incur  certain  failure.  We  therefore 
made  fast  on  this  occasion  in  the  first  place  that  presented  itself,  for  there 
was  in  fact  no  choice  ;  neither  was  there  any  time  to  lose,  as  the  ice  was 
beginning  to  close,  and  would  soon  commence  drifting  to  the  southward,  so 
that  our  only  chance  of  holding  on  consisted  in  securing  our  hawsers  as 
quickly  and  effectually  as  possible. 

The  place  where  we  now  lay  was  distant  about  a  mile  and  three  quar- 
ters from  the  land,  and  we  had  twenty-one  fathoms,  the  soundings  having 
deepened  to  this  as  we  receded  from  Owlitteeweek.  At  the  distance  of  a  mile 
and  a  half  outside  of  the  land  ice,  we  found  from  thirty-five  to  thirty-nine 
fathoms,  being  the  deepest  casts  we  had  obtained  since  leaving  the  imme- 
diate neighbourhood  of  Winter  Island.  The  ebb-tide  here  set  to  the 
N.N.E.,  the  flood  to  the  S.S.W.,  as  before;  but  the  former  now  ran  about 
five  hours  to  the  other's  seven  ;  it  was  not  however  so  strong  by  more  than 
half  a  knot,  so  that  the  southerly  set  still  considerably  predominated. 

The  ebb  did  not  slacken  till  forty  minutes  past  five  A.M.,  when  the  stream 
almost  immediately  began  to  set  to  the  southward,  bringing  with  it  as  usual 
the  whole  body  of  drift  ice  trailing  along  the  edge  of  the  land  floe,  and 
quickly  filling  the  narrow  channel  through  which  we  had  lately  been  making 
our  way  to  the  northward.  Fresh  hawsers  were  now  run  out  and  secured 
to  the  hummocks  with  all  possible  strength  and  care,  and  the  ships  so  placed 
that  their  sides  might  bear  pretty  equally  fore  and  aft  against  the  softest 
parts  of  the  floe.  Notwithstanding  these  precautions,  at  nine  A.M.  the 
Hecla  broke  adrift  and,  as  we  were  soon  after  informed  by  signal,  with  some 
damage  to  her  rudder  and  the  loss  of  seven  hawsers.  I  subsequently  re- 
ceived from  Captain  Lyon  the  following  account:— 

2  L 


1822. 
July. 


; 

i 

m" 

c  vfij.&rs-*k 


■ 


1822. 
July. 


■I 


258 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"  The  flood-tide  coming  down  loaded  with  a  more  than  ordinary  quantity 
of  ice  pressed  the  ship  very  much  between  six  and  seven  A.M.,  and  ren- 
dered it  necessary  to  run  out  the  stream  cable,  in  addition  to  the  hawsers 
which  were  fast  to  the  land  ice.  This  was  scarcely  accomplished  when  a 
very  heavy  and  extensive  floe  took  the  ship  on  her  broadside  and,  being 
backed  by  another  large  body  of  ice,  gradually  lifted  her  stern  as  if  by  the 
action  of  a  wedge.  The  weight  every  moment  increasing  obliged  us  to  veer 
on  the  hawsers,  whose  friction  was  so  great  as  nearly  to  cut  through  the 
bitt-heads,  and  ultimately  set  them  on  fire,  so  that  it  became  requisite  for 
people  to  attend  with  buckets  of  water.  The  pressure  was  at  length  too 
powerful  for  resistance,  and  the  stream  cable,  with  two  six  and  one  five 
inch  hawsers,  went  at  the  same  moment.  Three  others  soon  followed.  The 
sea  was  too  full  of  ice  to  allow  the  ship  to  drive,  and  the  only  way  by 
which  she  could  yield  to  the  enormous  weight  which  oppressed  her  was  by 
leaning  over  on  the  land  ice,  while  her  stern  at  the  same  time  was  entirely 
lifted  more  than  five  feet  out  of  the  water.  The  lower  deck  beams  now 
complained  very  much,  and  the  Avhole  frame  of  the  ship  underwent  a  trial 
which  would  have  proved  fatal  to  any  less  strengthened  vessel.  At  this 
moment  the  rudder  was  unhung  with  a  sudden  jerk,  which  broke  up  the 
rudder  case  and  struck  the  driver  boom  with  great  force.  In  this  state  I 
made  known  our  situation  by  telegraph,  as  I  clearly  saw  that  in  the  event  of 
another  floe  backing  the  one  which  lifted  us,  the  ship  must  inevitably  turn 
over,  or  part  in  mid-ships.  The  pressure  which  had  been  so  dangerous  at 
length  proved  our  friend,  for  by  its  increasing  weight  the  floe  on  which  we 
were  borne  burst  upwards,  unable  to  resist  its  force.  The  ship  righted  and, 
a  small  slack  opening  in  the  water,  drove  several  miles  to  the  southward 
before  she  could  be  again  secured  to  get  the  rudder  hung ;  circumstances 
much  to  be  regretted  at  the  moment,  as  our  people  had  been  employed 
with  but  little  intermission  for  three  days  and  nights,  attending  to  the  safety 
of  the  ship  in  this  dangerous  tideway." 


The  Hecla  having  been  thus  carried  adrift  by  the  irresistible  pressure 
of  the  ice,  which  still  continued  to  bear  down  upon  us  with  the  same 
violence  as  before,  it  became  evident  that  all  ordinary  m«ans  must  now 
prove  insufficient  to  retain  the  Fury  in  her  present  station.  The  inade- 
quacy of  any  number  of  hawsers  to  bear  the  requisite  strain,  arises  princi- 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

pally  from  the  impossibility   of  keeping  them   all   equally  tight,  in   conse-    1822 
quence  of  the  frequent  changes  in  the  direction  of  a  ship's  head  by  the  irre- 
gular pressure  of  the  ice.     The  only  method  therefore,  by  which  it  seemed 
practicable  to  prevent  being  forced  adrift,  was  to  run  out  a  bower   cable  to 
some  of  the  numerous  large  hummocks  upon  the  land-floe,  which  was  ac- 
cordingly done,  and  all  the  hawsers  then  got  on  board.      In  the  course  of  the 
afternoon  the  Fury  withstood  several  very  violent  pressures,  which  gave  us 
some  reason  to  apprehend  damage  to  the  windlass,  if  not  to  the  ship's  bows, 
so  heavy  was  the  strain  at  times  upon  the  cable,  but  fortunately  every  thing 
held  on.     As  soon  as  the  ebb-tide  had  made,  we   took  the  opportunity  af- 
forded by  a  small  lane  of  open  water,  to  endeavour  to  save  the  Hecla's  haw- 
sers that  had  been  carried  away,  which  service  was  performed  in  a  couple  of 
hours  by  the  boats  under  the  command  of  Lieutenant  Reid  ;  and  to  avoid  de- 
tention to  the  Hecla  a  staff  was  erected  on  the  spot,  with  a  note  for  Captain 
Lyon's  information.     The  Hecla  had  in   the  mean  time  been  driven  several 
miles  back  to  the  southward,  after  vainly  endeavouring  for  some  hours  to 
secure  fresh  hawsers  to  the  land-floe,  and  at  the  frequent  and  indescribably 
painful  risk  of  having  her  men  separated  from  their  ship  by  the  rapid  and 
irregular  motion  of  the  ice.     In  the  course  of  the  evening  an  immense  floe 
was  separated  from  the  land,  just  beyond  us  to  the  northward  and,  drifting  out 
into  the  main  stream  of  the  tide,  left  the  first  clear  space  completely  as  far  as 
the  shore,  that  we  had   yet  seen  since  leaving  Winter  Island.     This  occur- 
rence, though  it  gave  us  evident  proof  that  the  disruption  of  the  ice  was 
rapidly  going  on,  at  the  same  time  increased  the  hazard  of  this  navigation  ; 
for  the  pressure  of  such  a  floe  in  motion  in  a  strong  tide-way  would  be  suf- 
ficient to  crush  the  stoutest  ship,  while  the  absence  of  land-ice  in   that  part 
would  render  her  more   liable   than  before  to  be  forced  upon  the  rocky 
shore.     The  wind  came  from  the  S.S.W.  at  night,  with  clear  and  delightful 
weather,  and  a  sky  that  might  vie  in  beauty  with  that  of  an  Italian  landscape. 
The  flood-tide  was  less  strong,  and  therefore  gave  us  less  disturbance  than 
that  of  the  morning. 

At  half-past  eight  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  a  considerable  space  of  open  Tues.  9 
water  being  left  to  the  northward  of  us  by  the  ice  that  had  broken  off  the 
preceding  night,  I  left  the  Fury  in  a  boat  for  the  purpose  of  sounding  along 
the  shore  in  that  direction,  in  readiness  for  moving  whenever  the  Hecla  should 
be  enabled  to  rejoin  us.  I  found  the  soundings  regular  in  almost  every  part, 
and  had  just  landed  to  obtain  a  view  from  an  eminence,  when  I  was  recalled 

2  L  2 


a*  v*r*c 


260 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
July. 


I.i 


by  a  signal  from  the  Fury,  appointed  to  inform  me  of  the  approach  of  any  ice. 
On  my  return,  1  found  the  external  body  once  more  in  rapid  motion  to  the 
southward  with  the  flood-tide,  and  assuming  its  usual  threatening  appearance. 
For  an  hour  or  two  the  Fury  was  continually  grazed,  and  sometimes  heeled 
over  by  a  degree  of  pressure  which,  under  any  other  circumstances,  would  not 
have  been  considered  a  moderate  one,  but  which  the  last  two  or  three  days' 
navigation  had  taught  us  to  disregard,  when  compared  with  what  we  had 
reason  almost  every  moment  to  expect.  A  little  before  noon  a  heavy  floe 
some  miles  in  length,  being  probably  a  part  of  that  lately  detached  from  the 
shore,  came  driving  down  fast  toAvards  us,  giving  us  serious  reason  to  appre- 
hend some  more  fatal  catastrophe  than  any  we  had  yet  encountered.  In  a 
few  minutes  it  came  in  contact,  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  and  a  half  an  hour,  with 
a  point  of  the  land-ice  left  the  preceding  night  by  its  own  separation,  break- 
ing it  up  with  a  tremendous  crash,  and  forcing  numberless  immense  masses, 
perhaps  many  tons  in  weight,  to  the  height  of  fifty  or  sixty  feet,  from  whence 
they  again  rolled  down  on  the  inner  or  land  side,  and  were  quickly  succeeded 
by  a  fresh  supply.  While  we  were  obliged  to  be  quiet  spectators  of  this 
grand  but  terrific  sight,  being  within  five  or  six  hundred  yards  of  the  point, 
the  danger  to  ourselves  was  two-fold  ;  first,  lest  the  floe  should  now  swing  in, 
and  serve  us  much  in  the  same  manner;  and  secondly,  lest  its  pressure  should 
detach  the  land  ice  to  which  we  were  secured,  and  thus  set  us  adrift  and  at 
the  mercy  of  the  tides.  Happily  however  neither  of  these  occurred,  the  floe 
remaining  stationary  for  the  rest  of  the  tide  and  setting  off  with  the  ebb 
which  made  soon  after.  In  the  meanwhile  the  Hecla  had  been  enabled  to 
get  under  sail,  and  was  making  considerable  progress  towards  us,  which  de- 
termined me  to  move  the  Fury  as  soon  as  possible  from  her  present  situation 
into  the  bight  I  had  sounded  in  the  morning;  where  we  made  fast  in  five  and 
a  half  fathoms  alongside  some  very  heavy  grounded  ice,  one  third  of  a  mile 
from  a  point  of  land  lying  next  to  the  northward  of  Cape  Wilson,  and  which  is 
low  for  a  short  distance  next  the  sea.  At  nine  o'clock  a  large  mass  of  ice  fell 
off  the  land-floe  and  struck  our  stern  ;  and  a  "  calf"  lying  under  it,  having 
lost  its  superincumbent  weight,  rose  to  the  surface  with  considerable  force 
lifting  our  rudder  violently  in  its  passage  but  doing  no  material  injury. 
Wed.  10.  Early  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  the  breeze  having  freshened  up  from 
the  S.S.W.,  the  prospect  to  the  northward  was  truly  gratifying;  and  at  fifteen 
minutes  after  one  A.M.,  when  the  Hecla  had  nearly  joined  us,  we  made 
all  sail  alongshore,  soon  deepening  the  water  to  twenty  fathoms,  and  after- 


fcJKA^^^V 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

wards  to  thirty-five  no  bottom,  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  and  three  quar-  182 
ters  from  the  land.  Very  little  snoAV  was  now  lying  upon  the  ground,  and 
numerous  streams  of  water  rushing  down  the  hills,  and  sparkling  in  the  beams 
of  the  morning  sun,  relieved  in  some  measure  the  melancholy  stillness  which 
otherwise  reigned  on  this  desolate  shore.  At  three  A.M.,  we  had  sailed  as 
near  the  end  of  the  open  water  as  Ave  could  safely  venture,  though  in  a  sea 
without  so  strong  a  tide-way  we  might  still  perhaps  have  threaded  a  passage 
through  the  ice  some  miles  farther.  Here  however  it  was  indispensably  ne-e 
cessary  if  possible  to  secure  the  ships  before  the  strength  of  the  flood-tide 
should  come  on,  and  we  accordingly  hauled  in-shore  for  that  purpose.  The 
land  along  which  we  had  been  sailing  was  that  from  which  the  ice  had  been 
principally  detached,  so  that  we  had  doubts  of  finding  either  the  means  of 
holding  fast  or  any  security  from  driving  on  shore.  On  sending  the  boats  to 
examine  the  soundings,  however,  both  were  fortunately  discovered,  there 
being  abreast  of  the  ships  a  number  of  heavy  insulated  masses  of  ice  lying 
aground*,  with  small  but  sufficient  patches  of  the  land-floe  within  them 
still  adhering  to  the  beach.  We  here  made  fast  in  six  fathoms,  about  a 
hundred  yards  from  the  shore,  and  were  not  sorry  to  obtain  a  little  rest,  as 
well  as  a  temporary  cessation  from  anxiety  respecting  the  immediate  safety 
of  the  ships.  It  was  low  water  by  the  shore  at  fifty  minutes  past  nine  A.M., 
having  fallen  two  feet  in  one  hour  and  ten  minutes. 

After  noon  we  landed  to  take  a  walk,  and  found  the  mineralogical  cha- 
racter of  this  part  of  the  coast  nearly  the  same  as  before,  the  rocks  being 
composed  of  greyish  gneiss  with  fragments  of  granite,  quartz,  mica-slate, 
some  iron-pyrites,  and  most  of  the  other  substances  observed  at  Winter- 
Island,  lying  scattered  on  the  surface.  Many  of  the  stones  found  in  the 
streams  were  coated  with  a  thin  crust  of  the  oxide  of  iron.  There  was  no 
absolute  want  of  vegetation,  many  considerable  patches  occurring  entirely 
covered  with  moss,  grass,  and  other  plants  ;  but  the  whole  of  these  were  in  a 
remarkably  backward  state,  the  saxifraga  oppositifolia  being,  I  believe,  the  only 
one  as  yet  in  flower.  The  andromeda  tetragona  was  here  very  abundant,  and 
numerous  tufts  of  sorrel  were  just  putting  forth  their  first  red  leaves.  A 
number  of  rein-deer  were  seen,  but  they  proved  too  wild  for  us,  and  birds 
were  unusually  scarce.   Captain  Lyon  picked  up  an  Esquimaux  lamp,  curious 

*  These  for  distinction's  sake  we  were  in  the  habit  of  calling  "  bergs,"  though  we  saw  none 
of  the  immense  bodies  properly  so  called,  after  reaching  about  the  middle  of  Hudson's  Strait. 


A  JU 


262 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
July. 


on  account  of  its  being  made  of  two  pieces  of  red  granite  firmly  cemented 
together,  instead  of  pot-stone  as  usual. 

At  high  water  this  evening,  which  took  place  at  four  P.M.,  the  berg  on 
which  our  chief  dependence  was  placed  for  security  from  external  pressure, 
rolled  completely  over,  but  still  held  fast  on  the  ground.  By  the  swell 
thus  occasioned  a  disruption  of  some  of  the  land-ice  also  took  place,  which 
for  some  time  threatened  to  carry  us  adrift.  At  the  same  time  a  heavy 
floe  coming  in  promoted  by  its  pressure  this  unwelcome  disturbance,  and 
releasing  a  "  calf"  under  the  Fury's  stern,  made  it  rise  with  consider- 
able violence  against  her  counter.  The  stream-cable  was  now  fastened 
round  the  berg,  as  the  only  remaining  security  against  our  being  forced  on 
shore,  should  the  land-ice  wholly  desert  us ;  but  the  water  falling  from  this 
time  gave  us  some  hours'  respite. 

The  northerly  breeze  kept  the  ice  moving  to  the  southward  during  the 
whole  of  the  ebb-tide,  as  had  been  so  often  remarked  before,  shewing  how 
weak  the  stream  of  that  tide  is  on  this  coast,  comparatively  with  the  other,  and 
the  consequent  necessity  of  holding  on  somewhere  or  other  at  all  risks,  when 
the  state  of  the  ice  does  not  admit  of  making  any  progress  to  the  northward. 
If  the  safety  of  a  ship  were  alone  to  be  consulted,  it  would  undoubtedly 
answer  that  purpose  most  effectually,  to  let  her  float  about  among  the  loose 
ice  in  the  offing;  but  a  very  few  days'  drift  would  in  this  case  carry  her  to 
Southampton  Island,  and  the  labour  of  weeks  thus  be  inevitably  lost. 
Thur.  11.  At  high  water  on  the  11th  the  ice,  to  which  the  Hecla's  hawsers  were 
secured,  was  dislodged  from  the  shore,  partly  by  the  rise  of  tide,  and  partly 
by  some  heavy  floe-pieces  coming  against  it :  she  therefore  shifted  her  birth 
a  little  to  the  northward  of  us,  in  order  to  avoid  the  danger  of  our  being 
too  near  each  other,  for  our  situation  was  now  extremely  precarious. 
Several  patients  were  about  this  time  added  to  our  sick-list,  with  lum- 
bago and  disordered  bowels,  occasioned  by  the  incessant  exertions  and 
exposure  that  had  of  late  been  required  of  them.  The  weather  continued 
what  the  Greenland  sailors  call  "  too  fine,"  the  wind  being  too  light  to 
blow  the  ice  off  the  land,  and  enable  us  to  pursue  our  way  to  the  northward. 
Our  latitude  was  here  67°  1 1'  30";  the  longitude,  by  chronometers,  81°  24'37"; 
and  the  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle  70°  28'  12"  westerly ;  being  a  very 
rapid  increase  in  this  phenomenon  since  our  last  observations  on  the  ice. 
The  back  land  seen  from  the  ships  hereabouts  is  about  nine  hundred  feet 
above  the  sea,  but  shelving  pretty  gradually  down  towards  the  water.     Here 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

and  there  occur  some  beaches  of  rounded  stones  ;  but  the  chief  part  of  the    1822 
shore  presents  a  smooth  gneiss  rock,   having  numerous  streams   of  water 
trickling  over  it.     We  were  not,  however,  under  the  necessity  of  going  even 
thus  far  for  a  supply  of  this  necessary  article,  abundance  of  the  purest  kind 
being  found  on  every  large  piece  of  ice  at  this  season. 

At  half  an  hour  before  midnight,  when  it  was  just  low  water  by  our  mark 
on  the  ice,  a  violent  rush  of  tide  suddenly  came  from  the  northward,  threat- 
ening to  carry  us  adrift  with  three  stout  hawsers  a-head.  This  kind  of 
occurrence  which,  in  a  smaller  degree,  was  a  very  common  one,  added  much 
to  the  anxious  nature  of  this  navigation  ;  for  as  it  happened  indifferently  at 
all  times  of  tide,  the  most  incessant  attention  and  exertion  were  barely 
sufficient  to  enable  us  to  obviate  its  effects.  It  was  as  easy  to  account  for 
this  irregularity,  as  it  was  difficult  to  resist  its  impetuosity.  It  frequently 
happened  that  some  heavy  floe-pieces,  drifting  down  towards  us,  wedged 
themselves  in  between  the  grounded  masses  that  lay  a-head  of  the  ships, 
where  they  produced  the  effect  of  turning  the  stream  of  tide  by  forming  a 
temporary  dam.  By  the  continual  pressure  of  the  water  these  would  often 
at  length  break,  or  otherwise  disengage  themselves,  occasioning  a  violent 
rush  of  the  tide  through  the  now  unobstructed  passage,  and  frequently 
forcing  themselves  with  extreme  violence  against  the  ships'  bows. 

As  the  time  of  high  water  approached,  on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  the  Frid.  12 
land-ice  began  to  float  off,  scarcely  giving  us  time  to  cast  off  the  hawsers 
from  it,  and  leaving  the  whole  line  of  the  shore  entirely  bare.  Having  now 
nothing  to  steady  us  towards  the  shore,  an  eddy  of  the  tide  carried  the  Fury 
with  some  violence  against  the  largest  berg,  nearly  destroying  one  of  our 
quarter-boats.  For  a  feAV  minutes  her  situation  was  a  most  disagreeable 
one,  for  the  heavy  floe-pieces  now  setting  in  from  the  offing  caused  the 
berg,  alongside  of  which  we  were  immoveably  fixed,  to  take  a  roll  outward, 
and  a  similar  one  in  the  opposite  direction  would  inevitably  have  placed  us  in 
some  very  awkward  predicament. 

As  soon  as  the  stream  of  ebb  had  cleared  the  shore  a  little,  we  cast  off  and 
shifted  our  birth  one  mile  farther  to  the  northward,  being  at  noon,  by  observa- 
tion, in  lat.  67Q  12'  38".  At  four  P.M.,  the  prospect  having  very  much  im- 
proved, we  again  made  sail  with  a  light  air  of  south-easterly  wind  ;  and  after 
running  four  or  five  miles  in  regular  soundings,  found  the  ice  too  close  to 
proceed  much  farther,  and  at  the  same  time  observed  an  opening  in  the  land, 
appearing  like  a  river,  a  little  beyond  us.     No  land-ice  being  in  sight,  the 


^c  >    (tn^f 


-  *  fa  ^VJ^Kr  C  s  4  "hoi 


264 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
Julv. 


signal  was  made  to  prepare  to  anchor ;  and  in  the  mean  time  I  left  the  ship 
in  a  boat  to  examine  the  soundings  of  the  coast.  On  approaching  the  open- 
ing we  found  so  strong  a  current  setting  out  of  it,  as  to  induce  me  to  taste 
the  water  which  proved  scarcely  brackish,  and  a  little  closer  in  perfectly 
fresh,  though  the  depth  was  from  fourteen  to  fifteen  fathoms.  As  this  stream 
was  a  sufficient  security  against  any  ice  coming  in,  I  determined  to  anchor 
the  ships  somewhere  in  its  neighbourhood  ;  and  having  laid  down  a  buoy  in 
twelve  fathoms,  off  the  north  point  of  the  entrance,  returned  on  board,  when 
I  found  all  the  boats  a-head  endeavouring  to  tow  the  ships  in-shore.  This 
could  be  effected,  however,  only  by  getting  them  across  the  stream  of  the 
inlet  to  the  northern  shore ;  and  here  finding  some  land-ice,  the  ships  were 
secured  late  at  night,  after  several  hours  of  extreme  labour  to  the  people  in 
the  boats. 
Sat.  13.  On  the  morning  of  the  13th,  the  ice  being  still  close  in  with  the  land  just 
to  the  northward  of  us,  I  determined  on  examining  the  supposed  river  in  the 
boats,  and  at  the  same  time  to  try  our  luck  with  the  seines,  as  the  place 
appeared  a  likely  one  for  salmon.  Accompanied  by  several  of  the  officers, 
therefore,  as  well  as  by  Captain  Lyon  in  his  own  boat,  I  left  the  Fury  at  half- 
past  eight  A.M.,  and  was  soon  followed  by  a  second  boat  from  each  ship. 
Immediately  on  opening  the  inlet  we  encountered  a  rapid  current  setting 
outwards,  and  after  rowing  a  mile  and  a  half  to  the  N.W.b.W.,  the  breadth 
of  the  stream  varying  from  one-third  of  a  mile  to  four  or  five  hundred  yards, 
came  to  some  shoal  water  extending  quite  across.  Landing  on  the  south 
shore  and  hauling  the  boats  up  above  high-water  mark,  we  rambled  up 
the  banks  of  the  stream,  which  are  low  next  the  water,  but  rise  almost 
immediately  to  the  height  of  about  two  hundred  feet.  As  we  proceeded  we 
gradually  heard  the  noise  of  a  fall  of  water ;  and  being  presently  obliged  to 
strike  more  inland,  as  the  bank  became  more  precipitous,  soon  obtained  a 
fresh  view  of  the  stream  running  on  a  much  higher  level  than  before,  and 
dashing  with  great  impetuosity  down  two  small  cataracts.  Just  below  this, 
however,  where  the  river  turns  almost  at  a  right  angle,  we  perceived  a  much 
greater  spray,  as  well  as  a  louder  sound  ;  and  having  walked  a  short  distance 
down  the  bank,  suddenly  came  upon  the  principal  fall,  of  whose  magnificence 
I  am  at  a  loss  to  give  any  adequate  description.  At  the  head  of  the  fall,  or 
where  it  commences  its  principal  descent,  the  river  is  contracted  to  about  one 
hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  breadth,  the  channel  being  hollowed  out  through  a 
solid  rock  of  gneiss.  After  falling  about  fifteen  feet  at  an  angle  of  30°  with  a 


t  **J* 


^gggjg 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


vertical  line,  the  width  of  the  stream  is  still  narrowed  to  about  forty  yards, 
and  then,  as  if  mustering  its  whole  force  previous  to  its  final  descent,  is  pre- 
cipitated in  one  vast  continuous  sheet  of  water  almost  perpendicular  for 
ninety  feet  more.  So  nearly,  indeed,  is  the  rock  perpendicular,  that  we  were 
enabled  to  let  down  a  sounding  lead  and  line,  for  the  purpose  of  measuring 
its  awtual  height,  while  a  man  descended  from  crag  to  crag  with  a  second  line 
attached  to  him,  to  see  when  the  lead  touched  the  water  below.  The  dashing 
of  the  water  from  such  a  height,  produced  the  usual  accompaniment  of  a  cloud 
of  spray,  broad  columns  of  which  were  constantly  forced  up,  like  the  suc- 
cessive rushes  of  smoke  from  a  vast  furnace,  and  on  this,  near  the  top,  a  vivid 
iris  or  rainbow  was  occasionally  formed  by  the  bright  rays  of  an  unclouded 
sun.  "  The  roaring  of  the  mountain-cataract,"  which  constitutes  a  principal 
feature  of  the  sublime  in  scenery  of  this  magnificent  nature,  was  here  almost 
deafening,  and  as  we  were  able  to  approach  the  head  of  the  fall,  even  as 
close  as  a  single  yard,  the  very  rock  seemed  to  suffer  a  concussion  under  our 
feet.  The  basin  that  receives  the  water  at  the  foot  of  the  fall  is  nearly  of  a 
circular  form,  and  about  four  hundred  yards  in  diameter,  being  rather  wider 
than  the  river  immediately  below  it.  The  fall  is  about  three-quarters  of  a 
mile  above  our  landing-place,  or  two  miles  and  a  quarter  from  the  entrance  of 
the  river. 

After  remaining  nearly  an  hour,  fixed  as  it  were  to  the  spot  by  the  no- 
velty and  magnificence  of  the  scene  before  us,  we  continued  our  walk  up- 
wards along  the  banks;  and  after  passing  the  two  smaller  cataracts,  found  the 
river  again  increased  in  width  to  above  two  hundred  yards,  winding  in  the  most 
romantic  manner  imaginable  among  the  hills,  and  preserving  a  smooth  and  un- 
ruffled surface  for  a  distance  of  three  or  four  miles  that  we  traced  it  to  the 
south-west  above  the  fall.  What  added  extremely  to  the  beauty  of  this 
picturesque  river,  which  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  named  after  our  mutual 
friend,  Mr.  Barrow,  Secretary  to  the  Admiralty,  was  the  richness  of  the 
vegetation  on  its  banks,  the  enlivening  brilliancy  of  a  cloudless  sky,  and 
the  animation  given  to  the  scene  by  several  rein-deer  that  were  grazing 
beside  the  stream.  Our  sportsmen  were  fortunate  in  obtaining  four  of  these 
animals;  but  we  had  no  success  with  the  seines,  the  ground  proving  alto- 
gether too  rocky  to  use  them  with  advantage  or  safety.  The  eider-ducks 
were  here  tolerably  numerous,  and  we  also  met  with  some  black-throated 
divers,  golden  plovers,  and  snow-buntings.     On  first  entering  the  river  two 

2  M 


266 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


jaly.'  birds  flew  over  our  heads,  appearing  larger  than  eider-ducks,  but  with  much 
v-y^/  less  white  on  their  backs  and  wings,  and  without  the  duck  bill.  On  our 
return  down  the  river  Captain  Lyon  landed  on  the  opposite  side,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  making  a  drawing  of  the  fall  in  the  best  point  of  view ;  and  we 
then  returned  on  board  at  thirty  minutes  past  two  P.M.,  after  the  most  gra- 
tifying visit  we  had  ever  paid  to  the  shore  in  these  regions. 

The  entrance  of  this  river  lies  in  lat.  67°  18' 05",  and  in  longitude,  by 
chronometers,  81°  25'  20".  We  found  at  half  tide  from  ten  to  twelve  feet 
water  in  mid-channel,  for  a  mile  below  the  first  shallows,  and  it  then 
quickly  deepens  to  as  many  fathoms.  The  banks  of  the  river  had  still 
a  good  deal  of  snow  cleaving  to  them  in  some  places,  and  we  narrowly 
escaped  being  swamped  by  a  heavy  mass  falling  off  into  the  water,  just  after 
we  had  rowed  away  from  the  spot.  The  mineralogical  character  of  the  land 
in  this  neighbourhood  continued  the  same  as  that  last  described. 

We  found  on  our  return  that  a  fresh  southerly  breeze,  which  had  been  blow- 
ing for  several  hours,  had  driven  the  ice  to  some  distance  from  the  land  ;  so 
that  at  four  P.M.,  as  soon  as  the  flood-tide  had  slackened,  we  cast  off  and  made 
all  possible  sail  to  the  northward,  steering  for  a  headland  remarkable  for  hav- 
ing a  patch  of  land  towards  the  sea  that  appeared  insular  in  sailing  alongshore. 
As  we  approached  this  headland,  which  I  named  after  my  friend  Mr.  Edward 
Leycester  Penrhvn,  the  prospect  became  more  and  more  enlivening;  for 
the  sea  was  found  to  be  navigable  in  a  degree  very  seldom  experienced  in 
these  regions,  and,  the  land  trending  two  or  three  points  to  the  westward 
of  north,  gave  us  reason  to  hope  we  should  now  be  enabled  to  take  a  decided 
and  final  turn  in  that  anxiously-desired  direction.  As  we  rounded  Cape 
Penrhyn  at  seven  P.M.,  we  began  gradually  to  lose  sight  of  the  external 
body  of  ice,  sailing  close  along  that  which  was  still  attached  in  very  heavy 
floes  to  this  part  of  the  coast.  A  headland,  four  leagues  to  the  northward  of 
Cape  Penrhyn,  was  named  after  Mr.  Robert  Brown,  a  gentleman  with 
whose  knowledge  and  labours  in  the  department  of  botany  every  naturalist 
is  acquainted.  Both  wind  and  tide  being  favourable,  our  progress  was  rapid 
and  unobstructed,  and  nothing  could  exceed  the  interest  and  delight  with 
which  so  unusual  an  event  was  hailed  by  us.  Before  midnight  the  wind 
came  more  off  the  land,  and  then  became  light  and  variable,  after  which  it 
settled  in  the  north-west  with  thick  weather  for  several  hours. 
Sun.  14.      As,  however,  we  had  now  a  channel  open  between  the  ice  and  the  land, 


.       OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

not  less  than  nine  miles  in  breadth,  we  were  enabled  to  stand  off  and|on  by 
the  soundings,  and  even  to  make  considerable  progress  to  windward.  The 
coast  was  here  again  nearly  clear  of  land-ice,  and  wherever  a  patch  did  occur, 
the  rest  seemed  to  have  been  divided  from  it  very  lately,  the  margin  being 
free  from  any  appearance  of  rubbing  or  external  pressure.  The  weather 
clearing  up  in  the  course  of  the  forenoon,  on  the  14th,  we  perceived  the  land 
continued  nearly  its  former  trending,  and  that  the  navigable  channel  was 
from  four  to  five  leagues  wide,  the  situation  of  the  main  body  of  the  ice  being 
clearly  marked  out  by  a  bright  "  blink,"  in  its  usual  arch-like  form,  over- 
spreading the  whole  eastern  horizon.  Our  northern  extreme  now  in  sight 
was  a  piece  of  low  sandy -looking  land,  which  had  the  appearance  of 
being  detached  from  the  higher  and  darker  land  to  the  westward ;  and 
by  comparing  its  situation  with  that  of  the  island  of  Amitioke,  laid  down 
in  the  Esquimaux  charts,  it  seemed  probable  that  it  was  this  station  which 
we  had  now  reached.  A  strip  of  the  same  kind  of  low  land  as  that  above 
mentioned  was,  also,  observed  to  run  along  the  continental  shore,  between 
the  hills  and  the  sea,  for  several  leagues  to  the  southward  of  our  present 
station.  It  was  here,  indeed,  that,  in  sailing  to  the  northward,  we  began 
gradually  to  lose  sight  of  the  bold  primitive  mountains  of  the  main- 
land, the  intervening  strip  of  low  and  yellow-looking  shore  becoming  more 
and  more  broad,  and  the  soundings  oft"  the  coast  altering  their  character  at 
the  same  time  as  might  be  expected,  but  still  preserving  their  regularity  ac- 
cording to  the  distance  from  the  land.  We  observed  at  noon  in  lat.  68°  02' 
45",  our  longitude,  by  chronometers,  being  82°  13' 32",  by  which  it  appeared 
that  we  had  been  favoured  with  an  unobstructed  run  of  fifty  miles,  an  event 
of  no  trifling  importance  in  this  tedious  and  uncertain  navigation.  The  sea- 
horses, of  which  we  had  occasionally  seen  a  few  for  one  or  two  days  past, 
were  here  much  more  numerous ;  which  rather  served  to  confirm  us  in  the  be- 
lief that  we  were  now  off  Amitioke,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  the  Es- 
quimaux had  represented  them  as  abundant.  From  this  part  of  the  coast 
northwards,  as  far  at  least  as  Igloolik,  these  animals  are  perhaps  indeed  as 
numerous  as  in  any  part  of  the  world. 

We  continued  beating  to  the  northward  under  all  sail  during  the  night,  Mon.  15. 
the  wind   remaining  steadily  from    that  quarter   with   smooth   water  and 
extremely  fine  weather.     Our  latitude  by  observation  at  noon  was  68°  22'  21", 
and  the  longitude  by  chronometers,  81°  56'  55".     The  land  continued  to  be 
of  the  same  character  as  before  described,  the  hills  at  the  back  having  now 

a  m  2 


^T£  Yfi:jwrs~ni 


1822. 
July. 


268 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


receded  to  a  considerable  distance  from  the  coast,  and  the  low  shore,  after 
making  a  large  bend,  again  projecting  a  good  deal  to  the  eastward. 

In  the  course  of  this  day  the  walruses  became  more  and  more  numerous 
every  hour,  lying  in  large  herds  upon  the  loose  pieces  of  drift-ice  ;  and  it 
having  fallen  calm  at  one  P.M.,  we  despatched  our  boats  to  endeavour  to 
kill  some  for  the  sake  of  the  oil  which  they  afford.  On  approaching  the 
ice  our  people  found  them  huddled  close  to,  and  even  lying  upon,  one 
another  in  separate  droves  of  from  twelve  to  thirty,  the  whole  number 
near  the  boats  being  perhaps  about  two  hundred.  Most  of  them  waited 
quietly  to  be  fired  at;  and  even  after  one  or  two  discharges  did  not  seem  to 
be  greatly  disturbed,  but  allowed  the  people  to  land  on  the  ice  near  them, 
and,  when  approached,  shewed  an  evident  disposition  to  give  battle.  After 
they  had  got  into  the  water,  three  were  struck  with  harpoons  and  killed  from 
the  boats.  When  first  wounded  they  became  quite  furious,  and  one,  which 
had  been  struck  from  Captain  Lyon's  boat,  made  a  resolute  attack  upon  her, 
and  injured  several  of  the  planks  with  its  enormous  tusks.  A  number  of  the 
others  came  round  them,  also  repeatedly  striking  the  wounded  animals  with 
their  tusks,  Avith  the  intention  either  of  getting  them  away  or  else  of  joining 
in  the  attack  upon  them.  Many  of  these  animals  had  young  ones  which, 
when  assaulted,  they  either  took  between  their  fore-flippers  to  carry  off, 
or  bore  away  on  their  backs.  Both  of  those  killed  by  the  Fury's  boats 
were  females,  and  the  weight  of  the  largest  was  fifteen  hundred- weight  and 
two  quarters  nearly ;  but  it  was  by  no  means  remarkable  for  the  largeness  of 
its  dimensions.  The  peculiar  barking-noise  made  by  the  walrus,  when  irri- 
tated, may  be  heard,  on  a  calm  day,  with  great  distinctness  at  the  distance  of 
two  miles  at  least.  We  found  musquet-balls  the  most  certain  and  expeditious 
way  of  despatching  them  after  they  had  been  once  struck  with  the  harpoon, 
the  thickness  of  their  skin  being  such,  that  whale-lances  generally  bend  with- 
out penetrating  it.  One  of  these  creatures,  being  accidentally  touched  by  one 
of  the  oars  in  Lieutenant  Nias's  boat,  took  hold  of  it  between  its  flippers  and 
forcibly  twisting  it  out  of  the  man's  hand,  snapped  it  in  two.  They  produced 
us  very  little  oil,  the  blubber  being  thin  and  poor  at  this  season,  but  were 
welcome  in  a  way  that  had  not  been  anticipated  ;  for  some  quarters  of  this 
"  marine  beef,"  as  Captain  Cook  has  called  it,  being  hung  up  for  steaks,  the 
meat  was  not  only  eaten,  but  eagerly  sought  after  on  this  and  every  other 
occasion  throughout  the  voyage,  by  all  those  among  us  who  could  overcome 
the  prejudice  arising  chiefly  from  the  dark'  colour  of  the  flesh.     In  no  other 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

respect  that  I  could  ever  discover,  is  the  meat  of  the  walrus  when  fresh-    1822- 
killed  in  the  slightest  degree  offensive  or  unpalatable.     The  heart  and  liver  v-A^ 
are  indeed  excellent. 

While  our  boats  were  thus  engaged  a  light  air,  that  had  sprung  up  from  the 
southward,  gradually  increased,  and  as  soon  as  our  game  was  hoisted  in  we 
bore  up  under  all  sail  along  the  land,  which  still  continued  so  extremely  low 
that  as  the  sun  got  round  ahead  we  could  scarcely  distinguish  its  points,  and 
ran  along  chiefly  guided  by  the  soundings.  In  the  course  of  the  night  we 
passed  thousands  of  walruses,  large  herds  of  which  were  lying  with  their 
young  on  almost  every  loose  piece  of  ice  we  saw.  At  midnight  we  were 
abreast  of  three  small  islets,  which  I  consider  to  be  the  northernmost  of  those 
called  by  the  Esquimaux  "  Ooglit,"  and  so  marked  in  the  chart.  We  saw 
something  like  huts  or  tents  upon  them,  but  no  other  signs  of  inhabitants: 
we  know  however  that  they  are  at  times  a  principal  resort  of  many  of  the 
Esquimaux ;  and  Iligliuk  first  directed  our  attention  to  them  as  the  birth- 
place of  her  son. 

After  an  unobstructed  night's  run,  during  which  we  met  with  no  ice  ex- Tues.  16. 
cept  in  some  loose  "  streams,"  the  water  became  so  much  shoaler  as  to  make 
it  necessary  to  proceed  with  greater  caution.     Though  the  land  along  which 
we  had  been  sailing  had  all  been  nearly  equally  low,  we  now  began  to  de- 
crease our  soundings  to  nine,  eight,  and  seven  fathoms,  and  the  water  ap- 
peared much  discoloured  in  some  places.     About  this  time  also  a  great  deal 
of  high  land  came  in  sight  to  the  northward  and  eastward,  which,  on  the 
first  inspection  of  the  Esquimaux  charts,  we  took  to  be  the  large  portion  of 
land   called  Keiyuk-tarruoke  * ,  between   which   and  the  continent  the   pro- 
mised strait  lay  that  was  to  lead  us  to  the  westward.     So  far  all  was  satis- 
factory; but  after  sailing  a  few  miles   farther  it  is  impossible   to  describe 
our  disappointment  and  mortification  in  perceiving  an  unbroken  sheet  of  ice 
extending  completely  across  the    supposed  passage  from   one  land   to  the 
other.     It  is  important  here  to  notice  that  our  chief  disappointment  arose, 
not  from  the  mere  presence  of  ice  blocking  up  the  desired  passage,  to  which 
our  most  anxious  hopes  had  long  by  anticipation  been   directed,  but  from 
the  nature  of  the  ice  which  constituted  our  present  impediment.     This  con- 
sisted of  a  floe  so  level  and  continuous,  that  a  single  glance  was  sufficient  to 

*  This  name  being  applied  by  the  Esquimaux  to  several  other  portions  of  land,  all  of  which 
are  insular,  or  nearly  so,  it  is  probable  that  the  word  simply  signifies  an  island. 


•    :  \  v  \j&i 


1822. 
July. 


270 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


assure  us  of  the  disagreeable  fact,  that  it  was  the  ice  formed  in  its  present 
situation  during  the  winter,  and  still  firmly  attached  to  the  land  on  every 
side.  It  was  certain,  from  its  continuous  appearance  for  some  miles  that  we 
ran  along  its  edge,  that  it  had  suffered  no  disruption  this  season,  which  cir- 
cumstance involved  the  necessity  of  our  awaiting  that  operation  which 
nature  seemed  scarcely  yet  to  have  commenced  in  this  neighbourhood,  be- 
fore we  could  hope  to  sail  round  the  north-eastern  point  of  the  American 
Continent. 

At  thirty  minutes  past  nine  A.M.  we  observed  several  tents  on  the  low 
shore  immediately  abreast  of  us,  and  presently  afterwards  five  canoes  made 
their  appearance  at  the  edge  of  the  land-ice  intervening  between  us  and  the 
beach.  As  soon  therefore  as  we  had  satisfactorily  made  out  the  position  and 
state  of  the  ice,  I  left  the  Fury  in  a  boat,  accompanied  by  some  of  the 
officers,  and  being  joined  by  Captain  Lyon  went  to  meet  the  Esquimaux, 
being  extremely  desirous  of  learning  from  them  all  the  particulars  of  our 
situation.  We  soon  found  by  the  cautious  manner  in  which  the  canoes  ap- 
proached us,  that  our  Winter  Island  friends  had  not  yet  reached  this  neigh- 
bourhood. In  a  few  minutes  after  we  had  joined  them,  however,  a  few 
presents  served  to  dissipate  all  their  apprehensions,  if  indeed  people  could 
be  said  to  entertain  any  who  thus  fearlessly  met  us  half  way  ;  and  we  imme- 
diately persuaded  them  to  turn  back  with  us  to  the  shore.  Being  under  sail 
in  the  boat,  with  a  fresh  breeze,  we  took  two  of  the  canoes  in  tow  and 
dragged  them  along  at  a  great  rate,  much  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Esqui- 
maux, who  were  very  assiduous  in  piloting  us  to  the  best  landing-place  upon 
the  ice,  where  we  were  met  by  several  of  their  companions  and  conducted 
to  the  tents.  Before  we  had  reached  the  shore  however  we  had  obtained 
one  very  interesting  piece  of  information,  namely,  that  it  was  Igloolik  on 
which  we  were  now  about  to  land,  and  that  we  must  therefore  have  made 
a  very  near  approach  to  the  strait  which,  as  we  hoped,  was  to  conduct  us 
once  more  intd  the  Polar  Sea. 

We  found  here  two  divisions  of  tents,  there  being  eleven  where  we 
landed,  and  five  more  about  half  a  mile  to  the  northward.  They  were 
situated  on  a  low  narrow  bank,  not  more  than  twenty  feet  above  the  level  of 
the  sea,  and  running  along  the  island  parallel  to  the  beach,  from  which  it  is 
distant  only  a  few  yards.  Within  this  bank  were  numerous  ponds  of  water 
and  much  swampy  ground,  and  beyond  these,  at  the  back  the  island  gradu- 
ally rises  to  a  somewhat  greater  height.     By  the  time  we  reached  the  tents 


ZJtr&iEfXW&'V'w 


.r*ry< 


Bijljl 

Pj 

1         :     ■   I,   ■' 

§3 

i 


1 IMllr  111 


S.f ,"   '       '  ,    „ii.'.  I'  >'l  ■ 

M!,.'.!:iV\;'';^.l|fe;}.f:  # 


its 


Mcisf':?;si 


#:- 


£■«;:;; 


JMj 


^  '-  ': 

1  '    ■■ 


^';aiiiiii 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

we  were  surrounded  by  a  crowd  of  men,  women,  and  children,  all  carrying 
some  trifling  article  which  they  offered  in  barter,  a  business  they  seemed  to 
understand  as  well,  and  to  need  much  more  than  their  countrymen  to  the 
southward.  It  is  pleasing  as  well  as  remarkable  to  find  these  people,  even 
at  our  first  intercourse  with  them,  always  appearing  to  entertain  a  sort  of 
intuitive  idea  of  the  friendly  disposition  of  the  Kabloonas  towards  them,  and 
of  their  wish  as  well  as  their  ability  to  enrich  them.  No  sooner  therefore  is 
the  first  of  these  ideas  confirmed  by  kind  and  friendly  behaviour  than  they 
begin  to  try  what  they  can  get  from  their  new  visitors.  We  were  of  course 
not  backward  in  promoting  a  good  understanding  by  means  of  such  presents 
as  we  had  brought  with  us,  but  they  seemed  to  have  no  idea  of  our  giving 
them  any  thing  gratis,  always  offering  some  trifle  in  exchange,  and  expressing 
hesitation  and  surprise  when  we  declined  accepting  it.  This  was  not  to  be 
wondered  at  among  people  who  scarcely  know  what  a  free  gift  is  among 
themselves  ;  but  they  were  not  long  in  getting  rid  of  all  delicacy  or  hesita- 
tion on  this  score. 

The  tents,  which  varied  in  size  according  to  the  number  of  occupants, 
consisted  of  several  seal  and  walrus  skins,  the  former  dressed  without  the 
hair,  and  the  latter  with  the  thick  outer  coat  taken  off,  and  the  rest  shaved 
thin  so  as  to  allow  of  the  transmission  of  light  through  it.  These  were  put 
together  in  a  clumsy  and  irregular  patchwork,  forming  a  sort  of  bag  of  a  shape 
rather  oval  than  round,  and  supported  near  the  middle  by  a  rude  tent-pole 
composed  of  several  deer's  horns  or  the  bones  of  other  animals  lashed  toge- 
ther. At  the  upper  end  of  this  is  attached  another  short  piece  of  bone  at 
right  angles,  for  the  purpose  of  extending  the  skins  a  little  at  the  top,  which 
is  generally  from  six  to  seven  feet  from  the  ground.  The  lower  part  of  the 
tent-pole  rests  on  a  large  stone  to  keep  it  from  sinking  into  the  ground,  and 
being  no  way  secured,  is  frequently  knocked  down  by  persons  accidentally 
coming  against  it,  and  again  re-placed  upon  the  stone.  The  lower  borders  of 
the  skins  are  held  down  by  stones  laid  on  them  outside ;  and  to  keep  the 
whole  fabric  in  an  erect  position,  a  line  of  thong  is  extended  from  the  top, 
on  the  side  where  the  door  is,  to  a  larger  stone  placed  at  some  distance.  The 
door  consists  merely  of  two  flaps,  contrived  so  as  to  overlap  one  another,  and 
to  be  secured  by  a  stone  laid  upon  them  at  the  bottom.  This  entrance  faces 
the  south  or  south-east ;  and  as  the  wind  was  now  blowing  fresh  from  that 
quarter  and  thick  snow  beginning  to  fall,  these  habitations  did  not  impress 
us  at  first  sight  with  a  very  favourable  idea  of  the  comfort  and  accommodation 


272 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


H«< 


1822.  afforded  by  them.  The  interior  of  the  tents  may  be  described  in  few  words. 
J^XL,  On  one  side  of  the  end  next  the  door  is  the  usual  stone  lamp  resting  on 
any  other  rough  stones,  with  the  ootkoosee/c  or  cooking-pot  suspended  over 
it ;  and  round  this  are  huddled  together  in  great  confusion  the  rest  of  the 
women's  utensils,  together  with  great  lumps  of  raw  sea-horse  flesh  and  blub- 
ber, which  at  this  season  they  enjoyed  in  most  disgusting  abundance.  At 
the  inner  end  of  the  tent,  which  is  also  the  broadest,  and  occupying  about 
one-third  of  the  whole  apartment,  their  skins  are  laid  as  a  bed,  having  under 
them  some  of  the  androineda  tetragona  when  the  ground  is  hard,  but  in  this 
case  placed  on  the  bare  dry  shingle.  Comfortless  as  these  simple  habitations 
appeared  to  us  in  a  snow-storm,  they  are  in  general  not  deficient  in  warmth 
as  summer  residences  ;  and  being  easily  removed  from  place  to  place,  they  are 
certainly  well  suited  to  the  wants  and  habits  of  this  wandering  people. 
When  a  larger  habitation  than  usual  is  required  they  contrive,  by  putting 
two  of  these  together,  to  form  a  sort  of  double  tent,  somewhat  resembling  a 
marquee,  and  supported  by  two  poles.  The  difference  between  these  tents 
and  the  one  I  had  seen  in  Lyon  Inlet  the  preceding  autumn,  struck  me  as 
remarkable,  these  having  no  wall  of  stones  around  them,  as  is  usual  in  many 
that  we  have  before  met  with,  nor  do  I  know  their  reason  for  adopting  this 
different  mode  of  construction. 

Even  if  it  were  not  the  natural  and  happy  disposition  of  these  people  to  be 
pleased,  and  to  place  implicit  confidence  wherever  kind  treatment  is  experi- 
enced, that  confidence  would  soon  have  been  ensured  by  our  knowledge  of  their 
friends  and  relations  to  the  southward,  and  the  information  which  we  were 
enabled  to  give  respecting  their  late  and  intended  movements.  This,  while  it 
excited  in  them  extreme  surprise,  served  also  at  once  to  remove  all  distrust  or 
apprehension,  so  that  we  soon  found  ourselves  on  the  best  terms  imaginable. 
In  return  for  all  this  interesting  information,  they  gave  us  the  names  of  the 
different  portions  of  land  in  sight,  many  of  which  being  recognised  in  their 
countrymen's  charts,  we  no  longer  entertained  a  doubt  of  our  being  near  the 
eastern  entrance  of  the  strait  to  which  all  our  hopes  were  directed.  We 
now  found  also  that  a  point  of  land  in  sight,  a  few  miles  to  the  southward  of 
the  tents,  was  near  that  marked  Ping-it-ka4ik  on  Ewerat's  Chart,  and  that 
therefore  the  low  shore  along  which  we  had  been  constantly  sailing  the 
preceding  night,  was  certainly  a  part  of  the  Continent. 

By  the  time  we  had  distributed  most  of  our  presents,  and  told  some  long 
stories  about  Winter-Island,  to  all  which  they  listened  with  eager  delight  and 


SIO^U    ^*T^ 


r^VAC^^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


273 


interest,  we  found  the  weather  becoming  so  inclement  as  to  determine  us  to 
make  the  best  of  our  way  on  board,  and  to  take  a  more  favourable  opportunity 
of  renewing  our  visit  to  the  Esquimaux.     The  weather  became  more  severe 
and  the  wind  drew  more  directly   upon  the  ice,  as  we  rowed  out,  so   that 
the  signal  guns  fired  occasionally  by  the  ships  to  point  out  their  situation 
to  us,  were  less  and  less  distinctly  heard.    After  pulling  out  for  an  hour  and  a 
half,  Captain  Lyon,  who  had  a  boat's  crew  composed  of  officers,  and  had  un- 
fortunately broken  one  of  his  oars,  was  under  the  necessity  of  returning  to 
the  shore.     My  anxiety  lest  the  ships  should  be  ventured  too  near  the  shore, 
from  a  desire  to  pick  up  the  boats,  induced  me  to  persevere  an  hour  longer! 
when  the  wind  having  increased  to  a  gale,  which  prevented  our  hearing  any 
of  the  guns,  I  reluctantly  bore  up  for  our  former  landing-place.     So  rapidly, 
however,  had  the  sea  broken  up  the  whole  margin  of  the  land-ice,  that  this 
could  no  longer  be  recognised,  and  it  was  with  our  utmost  exertions  that  Ave 
at  length  succeeded  in  reaching  any  part  of  the  fixed  floe,  in  consequence  of 
the   quantity  of  loose   and  drifting  masses  now  occupying  its  margin.     In 
forcing  through  these,  the  boat  was  stove  by  a  sharp  corner  of  a  piece  of  ice, 
and  was  full  of  water  up  to  the  thwarts  when  we  reached  the  grounded  ice! 
After  repairing  this  damage  and  securing  the  boat,  we  walked  to  the  shore, 
where  I  was  happy  to  see  the  Hecla's  boat  safely  hauled  up.      Captain  Lyon 
and  his  party  having  quartered  themselves  at  the  southern  tents,  we  took  up 
our  lodgings  at  the  others,  to  which  we  were  welcomed  in  the  kindest  and 
most  hospitable  manner.     That  we  might  incommode  the  Esquimaux  as  little 
as  possible,  we  divided  into  parties  of  two  in  each  tent,  though  they  would 
willingly  have  accommodated  twice  that  number.     Immediately  on  our  arrival, 
they  offered  us  dry  boots,  and  it  was  not  long  before  we  were  entirely  «  rigged 
out"  in  their  dresses,  which,  thoroughly  drenched  as  we  were  by  the  Tea, 
proved  no   small   comfort   to   us.     With  these,  and  a  seal-skin  or  two  as  a 
blanket,  we  kept  ourselves  tolerably  warm  during  a  most  inclement  night;  and 
the  tents,  which  but  a  few  hours  before  we  had  looked  upon  as  the  most  com- 
fortless habitations  imaginable,  now  afforded  us  a  sufficient  and  most  accept- 
able shelter. 

The  evening  was  passed  in  dealing  out  our  information  from  the  southward, 
and  never  did  any  arrival  excite  more  anxious  inquiries  than  those  we  were 
now  obliged  to  answer.  So  intimate  was  the  knowledge  we  possessed  re- 
specting many  of  their  relationships,  that  by  the  help  of  a  memorandum  book  in 
which  these  had  been  inserted,  I  believe  we  almost  at  times  excited  a  degree 

2  N 


^1 

i  'l 

SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

of  superstitious  alarm  in  their  minds.  This  sort  of  gossip  and  incessant  chat- 
tering and  laughing  continued  till  near  midnight,  when  the  numerous  visitors 
in  our  tents  began  to  retire  to  their  own  and  to  leave  us  to  our  repose, 

Awaking  at  four  A.M.  on  the  17th,  I  found  that  the  weather  had  mode- 
rated and  cleared  up  and  the  ships  soon  after  appearing  in  sight;  we  called 
our  boat's  crew  up,  and  sent  one  of  the  Esquimaux  round  to  the  other  tents  • 
to  inform  Captain  Lyon  of  our  setting  out.  Several  of  the  natives  ac- 
companied us  to  our  boat  which  they  cheerfully  helped  us  to  launch,  and 
then  went  round  to  another  part  of  the  beach  for  their  own  canoes.  A  thick 
fog  had  come  on  before  this  time,  notwithstanding  which  however  we  ma- 
naged to  find  the  ships,  and  got  on  board  by  seven  o'clock.  Five  canoes  ar- 
rived soon  after,  and  the  wind  being  now  light  and  variable,  we  lay  to  for  an 
hour  to  repay  our  kind  friends  for  the  hospitable  reception  they  had  given 
us.  After  supplying  them  abundantly  with  tin  canisters,  knives,  and  pieces 
of  iron-hoop,  we  hauled  to  the  north-eastward  to  continue  our  examination  of 
the  state  of  the  ice,  in  hopes  of  finding  that  the  late  gale  had  in  this  respect 
done  us  some  service. 

Lieutenant  Nias  informed  me  on  my  return  that  the  ships  had,  as  I  appre- 
hended, experienced  considerable  difficulty  in  beating  off  the  shore  and  the 
ice,  upon  which  the  gale  had  directly  blown  with  a  good  deal  of  sea.  The 
Hecla  had  indeed  been  once  driven  upon  the  margin  of  the  floe,  where 
she  remained  in  a  very  awkward  situation  for  half  an  hour,  and  then  fortu- 
nately effected  her  escape  ;  after  which  by  carrying  a  press  of  canvass  both 
ships  succeeded  in  gaining  an  offing,  though  not  without  much  fatigue  from 
constant  wet  and  exertion. 

The  fog  continued  with  a  light  and  variable  easterly  wind  during  the  rest 
of  the  day,  so  that  we  could  see  but  a  short  distance.  As  far  as  we  could  dis- 
tinguish at  intervals,  however,  the  land-ice  appeared  to  stretch  quite  across 
the  mouth  of  the  strait  as  before.  The  soundings  were  regular  in  the  offing, 
varying  from  thirty-six  to  fifty-five  fathoms  according  to  our  distance  from  the 
Thur.  18.  island.  On  the  18th  the  weather  was  at  times  sufficiently  clear  to  allow  us  a 
glimpse  of  the  eastern  land,  a  part  of  which  appeared  to  be  composed  of 
islands  lying  off  the  higher  and  continuous  shore  of  Keiyuk-tarruoke,  and  as 
it  was  possible  that  this  shore  might  be  gained  by  sailing  round  these  and 
getting  within  them,  I  determined  on  making  the  attempt ;  and  acquainting 
Captain  Lyon  with  my  intentions,  appointed  Igloolik  as  our  rendezvous  in 
case  of  separation.     This  latter  contingency  seemed  now  the  more  likely  as 


=55! 


illiilllll 

: S;li!s:f  lit 


ill::!! 


i  ill  # 

!    ISllI 

lilfiiliSlii 
iililSfliSi 

111  It 

Illiilllll 

Slsllliliill'. 

||a||||;|j;|i 

isilliiillllll 


TO'lMllillitlS 

illiilllll 


* ; wfi 

m 


|;:is||:|,  .5 

111 


III 


IlllJjjiiV :::.:,; ..,     ; 

IS    ; 

i 

ill     •         ■    I       I i 


I 

i|  il    '  !i!iPf'Si;.:;;,."/':.;.:"::...     ■ 
i  S ;  If  !i  :»  Si;!':':.)'-  ,■■ 

III  li;!; -a  s'v;; '  ill]  a  I  "::'::■:■■:  :;:ii.:"'  H :" 

lll||lll:lia:r;:;;;;;:.i';;:  ;;:■>:;;:;::' '':::,>:'!  |   :;:i 


.'     ■     '  : 

s;;i'iiii;.,>:;i':; 

I'llli  lllllilllllllll:!:;!11:^!!^";-  :;,:".■ 

II         I     II  IllllfliliiilliiSllilllhir'"-  '•    Jfi:  Iff    " 

II    II I  l!  fl  I ;  :! :  "'  I  ■;  „  ., ':-:■■■■■ 

:i*i;:;:;s'i:ii   ..■■■■.  :■■':.; ,  ■■■;  ":.' 

liisiisiiiyii  ■  i 
WBBffl  '"■■ 

i!ti||!|||i|i|5illi:i,i;i:":;'s::-.':     ;"':::.::,: 

"'». *:!«!;:i:i!l:!!^ 


« 


I 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


275 


1822. 
July. 


well  in  consequence  of  the  continuance  of  the  foggy  weather,  as  on  account 
of  the  sea  being  entirely  free  from  drift-ice  in  this  neighbourhood. 

We  continued  to  beat  to  the  south-eastward  during  the  night,  the  weather 
being  less  foggy,  but, the  atmosphere  still  moist  and  uncomfortable.  In  the 
first  watch  we  came  to  a  line  of  tangle-weed  floating  on  the  surface,  extend- 
ing many  miles  in  length,  and  marking  by  its  position  the  margin  of  a  strong 
tide  setting  the  ships  towards  the  islands  round  which  we  were  trying  to 
beat.  We  frequently  shoaled  in  a  single  cast  from  fifteen  to  eight  and  a 
half  fathoms,  and  were  several  times  obliged  to  keep  before  the  wind  to 
deepen  the  water.  This  tide  appeared  the  more  striking,  as  near  Igloo! ik 
we  could  not  perceive  the  ships  to  be  influenced  by  any  stream  or  current : 
here  however  it  proved  so  strong  that  we  could  make  little  or  no  way  against 
it  till  after  midnight. 

The  favourable  tide  continued  till  about  six  A.M.  on  the  19th,  when  we  Frid 
had  made  considerable  progress,  but  without  much  hope  of  succeeding  in 
our  project  of  getting  within  the  islands.  This,  as  we  advanced,  proved  more 
and  more  impracticable,  as  we  found  that  the  land-ice  still  occupied  all  the 
intervals  between  the  islands  as  well  as  between  them  and  Keiyuk-tarruoke, 
and  in  many  places  still  projected  also  a  mile  or  two  to  seaward.  In  the 
course  of  the  forenoon  the  weather  cleared  up,  and  at  noon,  having  still  con- 
tinued to  sail  to  the  eastward,  we  observed  in  lat.  69°  25'  05",  the  longi- 
tude, by  chronometers,  being  79°  57'  10".  In  this  situation  a  great  deal  of 
land  chiefly  low,  and  much  of  it  apparently  insular,  was  in  sight  to  the  east- 
ward ;  but  the  distance  at  which  we  were  kept  by  the  ice  prevented  our  fairly 
examining  it.  In  the  evening,  however,  having  run  as  far  to  the  eastward  as 
the  longitude  of  79°  22'  16"  by  good  observations,  we  found  ourselves  pretty 
well  embayed,  the  land  extending  as  far  round  as  a  S.b.E.  bearing.  The  ice 
was  here  also  for  the  first  time  loose  and  detached,  occasionally  streaming  off 
from  the  land,  but  not  open  enough  to  allow  of  our  Avorking  among  it.  In 
hopes  therefore  of  its  being  entirely  drifted  from  the  land  by  the  northerly 
breeze  that  had  lately  sprung  up,  we  lay  to  during  the  night,  watching  for 
an  opportunity  to  get  within  it,  being  determined  to  leave  nothing  undone 
that  might  eventually  facilitate  our  progress  alongshore  to  the  westward. 
The  soundings  were  here  small,  varying  rapidly  as  the  ships  were  swept  over 
the  ground  by  the  tide,  but  seldom  amounting  to  twenty  fathoms.  The  bot- 
tom was  covered  with  broken  shells,  of  which  great  numbers  always  came 
up  with  the  lead.      Having  a  deep  cast  of  thirty-five  fathoms,  Dr.  Marcet's 

2  N  2 


19. 


I«i| 


; 

PJj 

1^ 

;| 

■  ma 

six    ^.;*ii 


•     :    « 


276 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Sat.  20, 


Sun.  21. 


bottle  was  sent  down  near  the  bottom,  where  the  temperature  of  the  water 
was  found  to  be  31|°,  that  of  the  surface  at  the  time  being  34f°  by  the  same 
thermometer.  A  great  number  of  walruses  were  lying  on  pieces  of  ice,  and 
a  few  king-ducks  and  silvery  gulls  flying  near  the  ships. 

On  the  morning  of  the  20th  great  quantities  of  ice  continued  to  stream  off 
from  the  land,  but  as  it  was  much  too  close  to  allow  us  to  Avork  in-shore 
through  it,  we  were  under  the  necessity  of  standing  back  a  little  to  the 
westward,  to  avoid  hampering  the  ships,  and  in  hopes  of  the  ice  thus  drift- 
ing past  us  to  the  southward.  We  first,  however,  hove  to  for  half  an  hour 
to  obtain  upon  a  floe  of  ice  the  true  variation,  Avhich  proved  to  be  79°  20'  52" 
westerly,  and  then  pushed  to  the  westward  till  we  found  the  ships  a  little 
more  at  liberty.  In  the  course  of  this  day's  navigation  we  met  with  many 
large  floes,  some  of  Avhich  appeared  to  have  been  recently  detached  from  the 
land. 

I  cannot  delay  any  longer  to  remark  how  valuable  the  geographical  infor- 
mation received  from  the  Esquimaux  had  now  proved  to  us,  especially  at 
this  particular  crisis.  On  our  arrival  off  Igloolik  we  had  suddenly  been 
arrested  in  our  progress  by  an  impenetrable  barrier  of  ice,  appearing  to 
occupy  the  entrance  of  a  large  inlet  or  strait  leading  in  the  very  direction 
in  which  it  was  our  business  to  seek  and  to  force  a  passage.  On  tracing  the 
northern  land  as  far  as  the  ice  would  permit,  we  now  had  it  in  sight  reaching 
over  nearly  the  whole  extent  of  the  eastern  horizon,  and  almost  to  a  south 
bearing,  rendering  it  at  least  as  likely  as  not  that  it  would  be  found  to  con- 
tinue as  far  as  Fox's  Farthest,  or  even  to  join  the  land  in  that  neighbour- 
hood. It  is  true  that,  in  any  case,  nothing  short  of  actual  examination  was  to  be 
deemed  conclusive  or  admissible  by  us,  and  that  therefore  it  was  our  business 
to  wait  till  such  examination  could  be  effected :  but  who  that  can  place  himself 
for  a  moment  in  our  situation  will  fail  to  appreciate  the  value  of  that  infor- 
mation, which  left  no  doubt  of  the  geographical  position  of  the  lands  before 
us,  as  respected  the  existence  of  the  strait,  and  thus  saved  us  the  inconceiv- 
able suspense  and  anxiety  which  entire  ignorance  on  this  subject  would  not 
fail  to  have  occasioned  ? 

Finding  that  a  further  examination  of  the  eastern  lands  could  not  at  present 
be  carried  on,  without  incurring  the  risk  of  hampering  the  ships  at  a  time 
when,  for  aught  that  we  knew,  the  ice  might  be  breaking  up  at  the  entrance 
of  the  strait,  we  stood  back  to  the  westward,  and,  having  fetched  near  the 
middle  of  Igloolik,  were  gratified  in  observing  that  a  large  "  patch"  of  the 


^^Jk'M^^a^^'^M^Xtf^^^^^\^^^        <MJt>x  \r*P#\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


277 


fixed  ice*  had  broken  off  and  drifted  out  of  sight  during  our  absence.  At 
nine  A.M.  we  saw  eleven  canoes  coming  off  from  the  shore,  our  distance  from 
the  tents  being  about  four  miles,  where  our  soundings  were  from  eleven  to 
twelve  fathoms,  having]  shoaled  gradually  in  the  last  two  or  three  miles  from 
forty-two  to  that  depth.  As  the  new  line  of  ice  left  us  something  to  examine, 
we  bore  up  along  its  edge  for  that  purpose,  as  well  as  to  avoid  the  disturb- 
ance of  our  friends,  who  were  approaching  us  with  loud  shouts  during  the 
time  of  divine  service.  After  this  the  wind  backed  more  to  the  south- 
ward, and  thick  snow  coming  on  so  as  to  prevent  our  seeing  ahead,  we  hove 
to  for  the  canoes  which  had  in  the  mean  time  communicated  with  the  Hecla. 
We  now  hoisted  two  of  them  on  board,  their  owners  Kd-kee  and  Nu-ydk-ka 
being  very  well  pleased  with  the  expedient  to  avoid  damaging  them  along- 
side. Above  an  hour  was  occupied  in  endeavouring  to  gain  additional  infor- 
mation respecting  the  land  to  the  westward,  and  the  time  when  we  might 
expect  the  ice  to  break  up  in  the  strait,  after  which  we  dismissed  them  with 
various  useful  presents,  the  atmosphere  becoming  extremely  thick  with  snow, 
and  threatening  a  repetition  of  the  same  inclement  weather  as  we  had  lately 
experienced.  The  snow  ceasing,  however,  in  the  course  of  the  evening  we 
found  ourselves  close  to  a  small  island  called  by  the  Esquimaux  See-o-icak, 
and  laid  down  by  Iligliuk  in  her  chart  with  astonishing  precision.  This 
little  island  which,  from  its  extreme  lowness,  and  being  situated  just  in  the 
middle  of  the  month  of  the  strait,  is  somewhat  dangerous,  subsequently 
received  the  name  of  Tern  Island,  from  the  immense  number  of  those  birds 
found  upon  it.  It  is  almost  entirely  surrounded  with  shoals,  particularly  on 
its  southern  and  eastern  sides,  but  attention  to  the  leads  is  sufficient  to  pre- 
vent danger,  and  the  grounded  ice  is  in  general  a  tolerably  safe  beacon. 
The  wind  having  now  veered  to  the  northward  and  westward,  with  clear 
weather,  I  directed  the  ships  to  be  made  fast  to  the  fixed  ice  between  Tern 
Island  and  another  to  the  northward  of  Igloolik,  this  being  a  favourable  situ- 
ation for  observing  any  alteration  that  might  take  place.  I  was  desirous 
moreover  of  obtaining  good  observations  for  our  position  and  angles  for  the 
survey,  which  the  state  of  the  weather  had  prevented  our  doing  since  our 
arrival  off  the  strait. 

About  this  time  we  began  to  insert  in  the  log  the  true  courses  only,  and  to 
conduct  the  ships  by  a  kind  of  dial-plate  purposely  constructed,  of  which 

*  The  expression  "  fixed  ice""  appearing  better  suited  to  our  present  obstacle  than  that  of 
"  land  ice,"  I  shall  in  future  adopt  it  in  speaking  of  this  barrier. 


1822. 
July. 


■ 


v  M**~xm  *m*  JrL  i 


278 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Mon.  22, 


the  sight- vane  was  kept  constantly  directed  towards  the  sun  when  that  object 
was  visible,  and  set  according  to  its  azimuth  at  the  corresponding  apparent 
time.  This  method  was  now  resorted  to,  not  so  much  on  account  of  any  in- 
creased sluggishness  in  the  traversing  of  the  compasses,  though  this  indeed 
was  at  times  considerable,  as  from  the  extreme  practical  inconvenience  of  ap- 
plying to  compass-courses  a  large  and  ever-varying  correction  for  the  effect 
of  local  attraction  on  different  directions  of  the  ship's  head.  We  were  not 
at  this  time  aware  that  the  needles  were,  in  this  neighbourhood,  subject  to 
be  influenced  by  other  local  attractions  than  those  produced  by  the  iron  in 
the  ships. 

We  lay  here  in  fifty-two  fathoms,  on  a  bottom  of  soft  greenish  mud.  Some 
water  brought  up  from  a  depth  of  fifty  fathoms  was  at  the  temperature  of 
31 1°,  that  of  the  surface  being  80|°  by  the  same  thermometer,  and  of  the  air 
32°.  We  had  now  the  first  opportunity  of  closely  examining  the  thickness 
of  the  ice  that  opposed  so  complete  a  barrier  to  our  progress  to  the  westward, 
and  were  not  a  little  pleased  to  find  that  it  scarcely  exceeded  a  foot  in  any 
part,  and  was  generally  much  thinner  than  this,  besides  being  full  of  pools 
of  water  that  were  rapidly  dissolving  it  into  holes.  We  now  also  remarked 
that  the  tides  were  extremely  small  in  this  place,  compared  with  those  to 
which  we  had  lately  been  accustomed ;  and  it  was  evident  that  to  this  cir- 
cumstance might  partly  at  least  be  attributed  the  late  retention  of  the  ice, 
which  must  have  been  immediately  broken  up  by  a  stream  of  any  considerable 
rapidity.  The  wind  freshening  up  strong  from  the  north-west,  with  a  return 
of  thick  weather,  we  escaped,  by  making  fast  to  the  ice,  a  very  inclement  and 
disagreeable  night. 

The  weather  cleared  up  sufficiently  on  the  22d  to  allow  us  to  obtain  ob- 
servations, though  the  ice  was  found  to  be  so  much  in  motion  that  we  could 
only  use  the  instruments  by  removing  them  several  hundred  yards  from  the 
sea.  The  margin  of  the  floe  had  a  waving  motion  with  the  swell,  which  I 
have  before  mentioned  as  peculiar  to  thin  salt-water  ice.  We  were  here  in 
lat.  69°  33'  27",  and  in  longitude,  by  chronometers,  81°  09'  13";  the  dip 
of  the  magnetic  needle  being  87°  37'  09" ;  and  the  variation  82°  21'  51"  wes- 
terly. The  weather  clearing  still  more  in  the  afternoon  we  had  the  first 
distinct,  though  still  very  distant,  view  of  the  land  to  the  westward,  in 
which  a  number  of  breaks  and  openings  appeared,  leaving  us  in  doubt  of 
the  exact  situation  of  the  strait,  which  lay  somewhere  between  a  "West  and 
N.W.b.W.,  bearing  from  our  present   station.     The  wind  becoming  light 


*.  WJkte&SXW^A \tt*i*£S*X&^\&Jr& vM  > .  ^  •  r&*\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


279 


1822. 
July. 


v~rv/ 


and  variable  in  the  evening  we  cast  off  from  the  ice,  and  soon  after 
Mr.  Ross  was  so  fortunate  as  to  obtain  a  whole  flock  of  the  Larits  Sabini, 
thus  confirming  the  accuracy  of  Iligiiuk's  information  respecting  this  rare 
and  elegant  bird.  They  were  in  company  with  a  number  of  tern  and  boat- 
swains, but  still  keeping  in  a  separate  flock.  We  did  not  see  many  wal- 
ruses in  the  offing  ;  those  animals  appearing  to  prefer  the  shoaler  water  im- 
mediately off  Igloolik,  where  they  are  found  in  such  numbers  as  to  afford  an 
easy,  abundant,  and  luxurious  subsistence  to  the  Esquimaux.  In  the  offing 
we  more  frequently  met  with  seals,  and  generally  of  a  large  size,  lying 
upon  the  ice  ;  but  these  creatures  are  so  watchful,  that  it  is  difficult  to  ap- 
proach them  within  gun-shot  before  they  tumble  themselves  into  their  holes. 

On  the  23d  we  went  on  shore  to  pay  another  visit  to  the  Esquimaux,  who  Tues.  23. 
came  down  on  the  ice  in  great  numbers  to  receive  us,  repeatedly  stroking 
down  the  front  of  their  jackets  with  the  palm  of  the  hand  as  they  advanced,  a 
custom  not  before  mentioned,  as  we  had  some  doubt  about  it  at  Winter  Island, 
and  which  they  soon  discontinued  here.  They  also  frequently  called  out 
thna,  a  word  which,  according  to  Hearne,  signifies  in  the  Esquimaux  lan- 
guage, "  What  cheer!"  and  which  Captain  Franklin  heard  frequently  used 
on  first  accosting  the  natives  at  the  mouth  of  the  Copper-Mine  River.  It  seems 
to  be  among  these  people  a  salutation  equivalent  to  that  understood  by  these 
travellers,  or  at  least  some  equally  civil  and  friendly  one,  for  nothing  could 
exceed  the  attention  which  they  paid  us  on  landing.  Some  individual  al- 
ways attached  himself  to  each  of  us  immediately  on  our  leaving  the  boat, 
pointing  out  the  best  road,  and  taking  us  by  the  hand  or  arm  to  help  us 
over  the  streams  of  water  or  fissures  in  the  ice,  and  attending  us  wherever 
we  went  during  our  stay  on  shore. 

The  day  proving  extremely  fine  and  pleasant,  every  thing  assumed  a 
different  appearance  from  that  at  our  former  visit,  and  we  passed  some 
hours  on  shore  very  agreeably.  About  half  a  mile  inland  of  the  tents, 
and  situated  upon  the  rising  ground  beyond  the  swamps  and  ponds  before 
mentioned,  we  found  the  ruins  of  several  winter  habitations,  which  upon 
land  so  low  as  Igloolik,  formed  very  conspicuous  objects  at  the  distance  of 
several  miles  to  sea-ward.  These  were  of  the  same  circular  and  dome-like 
form  as  the  snow-huts,  but  built  with  much  more  durable  materials ;  the 
lower  part  or  foundation  being  of  stones,  and  the  rest  of  the  various  bones 
of  the  whale  and  walrus,  gradually  inclining  inwards  and  meeting  at  the 
top.     The  crevices,  as  well  as  the  whole  of  the  outside,  were  then  covered 


■W^JP  ^ 


280 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


with  turf  which,  with  the  additional  coating  of  snow  in  the  winter,  serves 
to  exclude  the  cold  air  very  effectually.  The  entrance  is  towards  the  south, 
and  consists  of  a  passage  ten  feet  long,  and  not  more  than  two  in  height 
and  breadth,  built  of  flat  slabs  of  stone,  having  the  same  external  covering 
as  that  of  the  huts.  The  beds  are  raised  by  stones  two  feet  from  the 
ground,  and  occupy  about  one-third  of  the  apartment  at  the  inner  end, 
and  the  windows  and  a  part  of  the  roofs  had  been  taken  aAvay  for  the  con- 
venience of  removing  their  furniture  in  the  spring.  It  was  a  natural  infe- 
rence from  the  nature  of  these  habitations  that  these  people,  or  at  least  a 
portion  of  them,  were  constant  residents  on  this  spot,  which  indeed  seemed 
admirably  calculated  to  afford  in  luxurious  profusion  all  that  constitutes 
Esquimaux  felicity.  This  however  did  not  afterwards  prove  to  be  absolutely 
the  case  ;  for  though  Igloolik,  (as  perhaps  the  name  may  imply,)  is  certainly 
one  of  their  principal  and  favourite  rendezvous,  yet  we  subsequently  found 
the  island  entirely  deserted  by  them  at  the  same  season. 

In  every  direction  around  the  huts  were  lying  innumerable  bones  of  wal- 
ruses and  seals,  together  with  skulls  of  dogs,  bears,  and  foxes,  on  many  of 
which  a  part  of  the  putrid  flesh  still  remaining  sent  forth  the  most  offen- 
sive effluvia.  We  were  not  a  little  surprised  to  find  also  a  number  of  human 
skulls  lying  about  among  the  rest,  within  a  few  yards  of  the  huts ;  and  were 
somewhat  inclined  to  be  out  of  humour  on  this  account  with  our  new 
friends,  who  not  only  treated  the  matter  with  the  utmost  indifference,  but 
on  observing  that  we  were  inclined  to  add  some  of  them  to  our  collections, 
went  eagerly  about  to  look  for  them,  and  tumbled,  perhaps  the  craniums  of 
some  of  their  own  relations,  into  our  bag  without  delicacy  or  remorse.  In 
various  other  parts  of  the  island  we  soon  after  met  with  similar  relics  no 
better  disposed  of ;  but  we  had  yet  to  learn  how  little  pains  these  people 
take  to  place  their  dead  out  of  the  reach  of  hungry  bears  or  anatomical 
collectors. 

We  found  here  a  very  abundant  vegetation,  which  is  much  favoured  by 
the  numerous  streamlets  and  ponds,  as  well  as  by  the  manure  afforded  by 
the  permanent  residence  of  the  Esquimaux  near  this  spot.  In  some  places 
Avere  many  hundred  yards  of  square  space  covered  with  moss  of  a  beautiful 
soft  velvet-like  appearance,  and  of  a  bright  green  colour  such  as  I  never 
saw  before  ;  and  perhaps  indeed  moss  cannot  well  be  more  luxuriant.  As 
I  shall  have  abundant  opportunities  of  speaking  more  in  detail  of  the  natural 
productions  of  this  island,  with  which  we  unfortunately  became  much  better 


«M^^W-^  *  *n  ■**  vr  fs  *  ^.-»>n^v.        •  uAt  ,\  •  >  *ev 


\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


281 


1822. 
July. 


acquainted  than  we  Avished,  I  shall  only  add  in  this  place,  that  the  minera- 
logical  character  Avas  essentially  different  from  that  last  examined  to  the 
southAvard,  consisting  almost  entirely  of  innumerable  fragments  of  thin 
schistose  limestone,  on  many  of  which  are  fossil  impressions,  and  in  others 
the  cellular  structure  usually  exhibited  by  madreporite.  For  the  reasons 
just  stated  I  shall  also  defer  speaking  of  the  geographical  position  of  Igloo- 
lik,  and  of  the  observations  now  made  here  on  the  tides  ;  a  cursory  and 
unconnected  notice  or  tAvo  on  this  subject  being  of  little  or  no  importance, 
where  more  ample  information  can  be  obtained. 

The  account  we  gave  of  our  visit  to  the  shore  naturally  exciting  the  Wed.  24. 
curiosity  and  interest  of  those  who  had  not  yet  landed,  and  the  ice  remain- 
ing unchanged  on  the  24th,  a  couple  of  boats  Avere  despatched  from  each 
ship  Avith  a  large  party  of  the  officers  and  men,  Avhile  the  ships  stood  off  and 
on.  On  the  return  of  the  boats  in  the  evening,  I  found  from  Lieutenant 
Reid  that  a  neAV  family  of  the  natives  had  arrived  to-day  from  the  main- 
land, bringing  with  them  a  quantity  of  fine  salmon  and  venison,  of  Avhich 
some  very  acceptable  samples  were  procured  for  both  ships.  Being  de- 
sirous of  following  up  so  agreeable  a  kind  of  barter,  I  went  on  shore 
the  next  morning  for  that  purpose,  but  could  only  procure  a  very  small  Thur.  25. 
quantity  of  fish  from  the  tent  of  the  new-comer,  a  middle-aged,  noisy,  but 
remarkably  intelligent  and  energetic  man,  named  Toottmak.  After  some 
conversation,  we  found  from  this  man  that  in  order  to  obtain  a  fresh  supply 
of  fish,  three  days  would  be  required  ;  this  prevented  my  putting  in  execu- 
tion a  plan  of  going  out  to  the  place  where  the  fish  Avere  caught,  which  we  at 
first  understood  to  be  near  at  hand.  We  therefore  employed  all  our  elo- 
quence in  endeavouring  to  procure  a  supply  of  this  kind  by  means  of  the 
Equimaux  themselves,  in  which  we  at  length  so  far  succeeded  that  Toole- 
mak  promised,  for  certain  valuable  considerations  of  Avood  and  iron,  to  set 
out  on  this  errand  the  folloAving  day. 

The  weather  being  remarkably  fine  and  pleasant,  we  amused  ourselves  for 
an  hour  or  two  in  paddling  about  in  canoes  in  a  small  lake,  and  soon  found 
that  the  art  is  not  so  difficult  to  acquire  as  their  unsteadiness  at  first  inclines 
one  to  suppose.  A  great  deal  undoubtedly  depends  on  the  habit  of  keeping 
the  body  in  a  central  and  erect  position,  and  care  should  also  be  taken  to 
avoid  touching  the  rim  of  the  hole,  because  this,  from  its  height,  acts  as  a 
lever  in  oversetting  the  canoe.  They  are  by  no  means,  however,  so  "  crank" 
as  they  appear,  easily  coming  down  to  their  "  bearings,"  but  then  requiring 

2  O 


"k"*i 


JP 


Ifeai 


i 

i  fcjt 

1 

VZi 

"i  d 

1 

ft 

Kx 

1 

; 

\L 

UP^^I  J 


S233 


■ 


282 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOYERY 


Mil 


lH«i 


1  III! 


1,8^2-  considerable  force  to  press  them  farther.  The  greatest  difficulty  we  expe- 
^w;  rienced  in  the  management  of  them  was  to  prevent  "  broaching  to"  when 
going  before  the  wind,  the  rower  sitting  so  near  the  centre  as  to  exert  his 
power  to  great  disadvantage  in  turning  their  heads  in  any  direction.  Pad- 
dling head  to  wind  is  by  far  the  most  easy  and  pleasant.  Nothing  is  more 
likely  to  overset  a  canoe  than  Avhat  we  call  "catching  a  crab"  with  the 
paddle,  which  is  therefore  to  be  carefully  avoided;  but  I  believe  that  any 
seaman  might,  after  a  few  months'  practice,  render  himself  as  expert  as  the 
Esquimaux  in  the  management  of  these  frail  coracles,  at  least  for  every  pur- 
pose to  which  they  are  commonly  applied. 

Shortly  after  I  returned  on  board  Captain  Lyon  made  the  signal  to  "  com- 
municate with  me,"  for  the  purpose  of  offering  his  services  to  accompany  our 
fisherman  on  his  proposed  journey,  attended  by  one  of  the  Hecla's  men  ;  to 
which,  in  the  present  unfavourable  state  of  the  ice,  I  gladly  consented,  as 
the  most  likely  means  of  procuring  information  of  interest  during  this  our 
unavoidable  detention.  I  therefore  gave  Captain  Lyon  an  order  to  this 
effect,  directing  his  attention  to  the  acquirement  of  geographical  and  natural 
knowledge ;  and  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  occasioning  detention  to  the 
Expedition,  limiting  the  time  of  his  absence  to  the  morning  of  the  30th. 
Being  equipped  with  a  small  tent,  blankets,  and  four  days'  provision,  Captain 
Lyon  left  us  at  ten  P.M.,  when  I  made  sail  to  re-examine  the  margin  of  the  ice. 
Frid.  26.  We  had  a  great  deal  of  rain  and  sleet  on  the  26th,  which  we  regretted  on 
Captain  Lyon's  account,  but  considered  favourable  for  the  dissolution  of  the 
ice.  On  reaching  the  margin  of  the  floe  a  slight  difference  was  perceptible 
as  to  its  extent  sea- ward,  which  was  to  be  attributed  to  its  breaking  off  by 
piece-meal,  an  operation  that  was  continually  though  slowly  going  on,  while 
its  general  position  and  continuity  from  side  to  side  of  the  strait  remained 
as  before.  The  sea  was  still  entirely  free  from  drift  or  moving  ice  as  far  as 
we  could  distinguish  from  the  mast-head  in  clear  weather  ;  and  we  now  began 
to  remark  that,  whenever  a  mass  was  separated  from  the  fixed  floe,  it  drifted 
away  to  the  south-east  and  never  returned.  The  consequence  was  that  this 
portion  of  the  sea  was  at  all  times  unincumbered,  and  more  constantly  and 
completely  navigable  than  any  part  of  the  polar  regions  in  this  latitude  we 
had  ever  visited.  Of  the  cause  of  this  extraordinary  fact  we  were  as  yet 
entirely  ignorant. 

In  the  afternoon,  the  wind  continuing  to  the  north-eastward  with  moist 
and  unpleasant  weather,  we  stood  towards  Tern  Island,  and  after  sending  a 


€ *£» jfesaSft*^* \*^2T£Ml&^y&A \ *  yi>Vt>^ '•  > *ry 


\) 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


283 


boat  in  to  sound  about  the  heavy  ice  near  it,  made  fast  in  six  fathoms,  at   1822- 
the  distance  of  one  mile  from  the  shore,  to  which  a  party  was  then  de-  v-»-y^J 
spatched  to  examine  this  little  spot.    They  found  it  occupied  by  innumerable 
tern,  and  the  eggs  and  young  of  that  bird  were  met  with  at  every  step.     On 
the  following  day,  a  number  of  officers  and  men  landed  from  each  ship  to  Sat.  27. 
procure  some  of  these  birds,  which,  after   skinning  and  purging  them  in 
salt  water,  were    considered    a  very   acceptable   addition  to  our  sea-pies. 
Flying  about   in  vast  numbers,  they  became  an  easy  prey   to  our   sports- 
men by  the  boldness  with  which  they  came  down  in  defence  of  their  eggs 
and  young.     A  little  Scotch  terrier  belonging  to  Lieutenant  Reid  was  the 
object  of  their  particular  attack,  and  they  fearlessly  pounced  upon  him  two 
or  three  at  a  time,  and  pecked  his  back  before  he  was  aware  of  it.    The  nest 
in  which  the  eggs  were  deposited,  and  each  of  which  generally  contained 
two,  consisted  merely  of  a  small  indentation  in  the  ground  without  any 
down,  feathers,  or  other  materials.     The   colour  of  the  eggs  is  a  brownish- 
green,  with  dark  brown  irregular  spots  all  over  them,  but  in  the  same  nest 
one  is  sometimes  much  more  green  than  the  other,  so  that  it  might  be  taken 
for  the  egg  of  a  different  bird.     Three  eggs  were  rarely  met  with  in  the 
same  nest.     Besides  these  we  found  a  great  many  ducks'  eggs,  supposed  to 
be  those  of  the  eider  from  the  down  which  formed  the  nest,  and  which  was 
usually  laid  between  two  stones.     These  eggs  had  been  still  more  numerous 
than  at  present ;  for  the  Esquimaux,  knowing  the  season  in  which  they  would 
be  in  perfection,  had  already  been  before  us  on  the  island,  and  on  one  spot 
on  the  beach  above  a  hundred  of  these  egg-shells  were  lying,  as  a  memorial 
of  a  recent  feast.     In  some  of  the  ducks'  nests  we  found  springes  or  snares 
for  catching  the  old  bird,  consisting  of  thin  flexible  strips  of  whale-bone, 
with  a  running  eye  at  one  end  and  the  other  fastened  to  a  stone.     Some  of 
these  were  double,  the  nooses  being  laid  near  each  other  in  the  middle  of 
the  nest.     The  usual  number  of  eggs  in  one  duck's  nest  was  two  or  three  ; 
but  four  were  found  in  a  single  instance.     We  had  taken  it  into  our  heads 
that  this  island  would  be  found  the  grand  breeding-place  of  the  Larus  Sabini, 
but  though  these  were  in  consequence  eagerly  looked  after,  only  a  single 
individual  of  that  species  was  seen  and  killed  by  Mr.  Elder ;  it  was  flying 
in  company  with  innumerable  tern. 

Tern  Island  is  about  three  quarters  of  a  mile  in  length  from  N.W.  to  S.E. ; 
it  is  extremely  narrow,  and  in  no  part  more  than  twenty  or  five  and  twenty 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.     Through  the  middle  of  it  runs  a  lagoon 

202 


'tin 


?5^ 


w.jjivj1 


(H 


284 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


communicating  with  the  sea;  and  therefore  admitting  the  tide,  notwithstand- 
ing which  we  were  forcibly  struck  with  the  fact,  that  an  immense  mass  of 
consolidated  drift-snow  still  remained  undissolved  in  it.  This  circumstance 
may  perhaps  appear  too  trifling  to  have  been  noticed  in  so  particular  a  manner; 
but  to  us  who  anxiously  watched  every  operation  connected  with  the  annual 
process  of  dissolution,  on  which  all  our  hopes  depended,  it  could  not  fail  to 
convey  an  impression  of  being  a  very  unusual  occurrence,  and  to  imply 
either  a  very  backward  summer  or  an  extraordinary  accumulation  of  snow  in 
the  winter.  To  one  or  both  of  these  I  am  still  inclined  very  confidently  to 
attribute  it;  for  in  the  locality  of  this  island,  low  and  open  as  it  is  to  the 
sun's  rays,  and  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  a  more  extensive  open 
sea  than  any  known  in  this  latitude,  there  is  certainly  every  thing  that 
would,  a  priori,  have  been  considered  calculated  to  accelerate  rather  than  to 
retard  the  process  of  dissolution. 

The  mineralogical  character  of  this  islet  is  similar  to  that  of  Igloolik  ;  but 
among  the  pieces  of  limestone  of  which  it  is  principally  composed,  lumps  of 
granite,  gneiss,  hornblende  and  mica-slate  were  also  numerous,  and  I  picked 
up  a  piece  of  common  iron  pyrites.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  vegetation  also 
in  some  parts,  and  our  plant-collectors  derived  considerable  amusement  from 
their  walk.  We  observed  a  number  of  roots  of  scurvy-grass  (cochlearia 
fenestrataj  growing  on  the  beach  where  nothing  else  would,  but  the  leaves 
were  as  yet  scarcely  developed,  and  therefore  of  no  service  to  us.  Some 
Esquimaux  circles  of  stones  were  observed  in  two  or  three  places  on  the 
island,  which  shewed  that  they  occasionally  resort  to  it ;  but  it  is  not  much 
frequented  by  them. 

Having  seen  all  that  this  little  spot  produced,  we  sailed  over  to  the  eastern 
islands,  three  of  which  are  conspicuous  as  forming  one  side  of  the  entrance 
of  the  strait,  and  are  laid  down  with  extraordinary  precision  in  Ewerat's 
chart  already  inserted  in  this  narrative,  (No.  3.)  These  islands,  which  I 
named  the  Calthorpe  Islands,  out  of  respect  to  Lord  Calthorpe,  had 
attracted  our  attention  by  two  of  them  appearing  at  a  distance  to  be  of  the 
primitive  formation,  which  had  for  some  time  forsaken  us.  Finding  that  a 
great  deal  of  ice  had  been  detached  and  drifted  away  since  our  last  attempt 
in  this  neighbourhood,  we  were  now  enabled  to  approach  the  middle  island  of 
the  three  as  near  as  the  depth  of  water  would  admit;  and  in  the  evening  made 
the  ships  fast  to  the  fixed  ice  in  twelve  fathoms,  at  the  distance  of  a  long  mile 
from  the  shore.     The  depth  was  regular  and  the  bottom  good  in  every  part. 


I 


^KA^^XO^lwjfcl^V/y*^*^^/,        M^t, t  •  >*;v. 


s, 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


285 


1822. 
July. 


Sun.  28. 


On  the  28th,  after  divine  service,  we  landed  on  the  middle  island,  which 
was  found  to  be  composed  of  gneiss  rock,  and  in  every  respect  a  counter- 
part of  Winter  Island  in  its  other  mineral  productions.  To  save  Iligliuk's 
credit,  who  had  described  these  islands  as  inhabited,  we  found  the  south 
end  covered  with  winter  huts,  of  precisely  the  same  kind  and  materials 
as  those  described  at  Igloolik,  but  so  overgrown  with  long  rich  grass 
as  to  indicate  their  having  been  two  or  three  years  deserted.  Number- 
less skulls  and  bones  were  lying  about  them  as  usual,  and  some  stone 
lamps  and  glass  beads  had  also  been  left  among  the  ruins.  Leading  from 
the  huts  towards  the  highest  part  of  the  island,  was  a  curious  path  made 
by  the  natives,  two  feet  in  width,  and  formed  by  removing  the  stones  in 
places  where  they  were  naturally  abundant,  and  where  the  ground  was  bare, 
by  placing  two  regular  and  parallel  rows  at  that  distance  apart.  The  only 
conjecture  we  could  form  respecting  the  use  of  this  artificial  road  was  that  it 
might  be  intended  for  a  deer-path,  (those  animals  preferring  a  regular  or 
beaten  track  to  any  other,)  by  which  means  the  Esquimaux  might  perhaps 
kill  them  from  their  usual  ambush  of  stones.  From  the  top  of  this  island,, 
which  is  not  more  than  a  mile  in  length,  we  obtained  a  commanding  view 
and  good  angles  of  all  the  surrounding  lands.  Immediately  to  the  eastward 
appeared  a  piece  of  low  land  that  seemed  insular,  with  a  great  extent  of 
coast  of  the  same  kind  at  the  back  of  it,  which  we  could  trace  till  lost  in  the 
distance.  Only  two  islands  of  the  four  more  immediately  forming  this  group 
are  of  the  high  and  rugged  primitive  formation,  the  outer  one,  which  from  the 
quantity  of  sea-weed  floating  near  it,  we  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Tangle 
Island,  being  low  and  of  the  same  character  as  Igloolik,  with  much  shoal 
water  about  it.  Large  flocks  of  long-tailed,  king,  and  eider  ducks  were  about 
these  islands,  but  all  too  wild  to  be  approached,  and  we  procured  no  game 
by  this  visit  to  the  shore. 

It  blew  fresh  from  the  eastward  during  the  night,  with  continued  rain,  all  Mon.  29. 
which  we  considered  favourable  for  dissolving  and  dislodging  the  ice,  though 
very  comfortless  for  Captain  Lyon  on  his  excursion.  The  weather  at  length 
clearing  up  in  the  afternoon,  I  determined  on  beating  to  the  eastward,  to  see 
if  more  of  the  land  in  that  direction  could  be  made  out  than  the  unfavourable 
position  of  the  ice  would  permit  at  our  last  visit.  In  the  mean  time,  I 
directed  Lieutenant  Hoppner  to  stand  over  to  Igloolik  in  the  Hecla,  to  see  if 
Captain  Lyon  had  returned,  and  if  not,  to  leave  an  officer  with  a  small  party 
at  the  tents,  with  signals  to  announce  his  arrival.     The  Fury  then  made  sail 


1    ,    ; 


■5W 


^^ 


SB 


286 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1I8^2-    and  stood  to  the  eastward,  encountering  the  usual  strength  of  tide  off  the 

July.  ,  .  . 

^w  south-west  point  of  Tangle  Island,  and  soon  after  a  great  quantity  of  heavy 
drift  ice  apparently  not  long  detached  from  some  land.  In  endeavouring  to 
beat  between  this  and  the  island,  which  is  very  shoal  on  that  side,  we 
gradually  decreased  our  soundings  every  tack,  till  we  had  only  four  fathoms 
and  a  half,  at  the  distance  of  a  full  mile  from  the  shore.  To  avoid  the  risk 
of  grounding  in  this  rapid  tide-way,  we  were  then  obliged  to  bear  away  for 
a  narrow  "  neck  "  to  leeward,  through  which  the  ship  was  at  length  forced, 
and  we  soon  got  into  clear  water  beyond. 
Tues.  30.  Advancing  to  the  eastward  during  the  night  we  again  came  to  quantities 
of  loose  ice  on  the  morning  of  the  30th,  through  which  we  sailed  for  several 
hours.  This  ice  was  of  the  heavy  "  hummocky"  kind,  but  all  in  small  de- 
tached masses,  the  natural  effect  of  the  strong  current  by  which  it  was  here 
hurried  to  and  fro.  My  object  in  endeavouring  to  examine  as  much  as  pos- 
sible of  the  land  in  this  direction,  was  not  confined  simply  to  a  general  desire 
of  increasing  our  geographical  knowledge  by  all  the  means  within  our  reach, 
but  extended  also  to  a  possibility  of  our  being  obliged  after  all  to  pursue  the 
circuitous  route  round  Keiyuk-tarruoke,  should  unforeseen  obstacles  eventu- 
ally oppose  our  progress  to  the  westward,  through  the  more  direct  channel 
now  before  us.  It  was  not  without  extreme  mortification  therefore  that  we 
once  more  found  the  unfavourable  state  of  the  ice,  combining  with  the  uni- 
form lowness  of  the  land  in  this  neighbourhood,  to  baffle  all  our  endeavours 
in  pursuit  of  this  object.  Having  before  eight  A.M.  been  obliged  to  heave 
to  on  account  of  the  closeness  of  the  ice,  we  could  distinguish  what  we 
considered  the  extreme  point  of  land  stretching  as  far  as  a  N.|E.  bear- 
ing, and  to  the  eastward  of  this  was  an  apparent  opening  occupying 
about  four  points  of  the  compass.  Next  to  the  southward  was  a  large 
smooth-topped  portion  of  low  land  that  appeared  insular,  but  so  choked  on 
every  side  with  ice  that  we  could  not  get  nearer  to  it  than  three  or  four 
leagues,  being  in  lat.  69°  26'  40",  longitude,  by  chronometers,  79°  19'  44", 
and  having  no  soundings  Avith  thirty  fathoms  of  line. 

The  opening  above  mentioned  appeared,  from  the  strength  and  direction 
of  the  tide,  to  be  that  which  must  be  pursued  in  any  attempt  to  circumnavi- 
gate Keiyuk-tarruoke  ;  but  the  unpromising  state  of  the  ice  in  this  direction, 
and  the  precarious  nature  of  the  navigation,  on  account  of  the  strong  tides 
and  the  shelving  character  of  the  lands,  did  not  offer  any  encouragement  to 
make  that  attempt  while  a  chance  remained  of  effecting  the  more  direct  pas- 


^_»»^^^Ww^'vi»«5r£^v^»^v^.       ^vA^^T^r^i 


w 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


287 


1822. 
July. 


sage.  To  the  latter  therefore  our  hopes  and  expectations  were  now  re-di- 
rected, if  indeed  it  could  be  said  that  they  had  ever  been  placed  elsewhere  ; 
and  I  determined  to  avoid,  if  possible,  the  entanglement  of  the  Fury  among 
the  ice  which  now  surrounded  her  on  every  side,  and  to  stand  back  to 
Igloolik  to  hear  what  information  Captain  Lyon's  journey  might  have  pro^ 
cured  for  us.  Before  we  could  get  into  tolerably  clear  water,  however,  we 
had  to  run  several  miles  to  the  southward,  and  then  hoping  to  sail  without 
farther  incumbrance  shaped  a  direct  course  for  Igloolik. 

The  wind  proved  light  and  variable  during  the  night,  with  continued  fog ;  Wed.  31. 
so  that  on  the  morning  of  the  31st,  when  we  were  wholly  ignorant  in  what 
direction  the  tides  had  been  taking  us,  we  suddenly  found  ourselves  sur- 
rounded by  a  great  body  of  heavy  ice,  which  seemed  to  have  been  brought 
about  us  almost  by  the  effect  of  magic,  for  the  ship  had  long  ceased  to  move 
through  the  water,  though,  by  the  rapid  change  of  soundings,  quickly  altering 
her  position  over  the  ground.  In  a  few  minutes  there  was  barely  room  for 
turning  the  ship  round,  and  we  therefore  made  her  fast  to  a  heavy  floe,  a 
mile  or  two  in  circumference,  when  the  fog,  partially  clearing  away  for  a 
short  time,  discovered  to  us  Tangle  Island  four  or  five  miles  to  the  westward, 
and  the  open  sea  one  mile  to  the  southward,  or  directly  to  windward  of  us. 
At  half-past  eight  A.M.  the  ice  slackening  round  the  floe,  we  furled  sails  and 
began  to  warp  towards  the  open  water.  While  thus  employed  we  continued 
to  drift  nearer  and  nearer  to  the  island,  and  at  the  same  time  to  drive  be- 
tween this  and  the  next  one  to  the  eastward,  decreasing  the  soundings 
regularly  from  twenty-five  to  thirteen  fathoms  in  the  course  of  the  day.  We 
continued  our  work  till  eight  P.M.  when,  after  eleven  hours  of  incessant 
exertion  and  the  most  inclement  weather,  and  just  as  we  had  got  within  a 
hundred  yards  of  the  clear  water,  a  body  of  loose  ice  came  drifting  down  with 
the  tide  and  enclosed  us  more  effectually  than  at  first.  The  wind  was  now 
increasing  to  a  gale  from  the  south-east,  and  the  ship  beginning  to  drive 
faster  between  the  islands  ;  but  having  made  every  thing  as  snug  as  circum- 
stances would  permit,  and  prepared  to  unship  the  rudder  in  case  of  her  tak- 
ing the  ground,  we  could  do  nothing  but  quietly  await  the  result.  The  night, 
however,  though  a  most  inclement  and  anxious  one,  afforded  our  people  all 
the  rest  they  so  much  required  ;  for  by  a  providential  concurrence  of  circum- 
stanceSj  we  had  been  brought  into  our  present  dilemma  on  the  only  side  of 
Tangle  Island  which   is   not  shoal  and  dangerous,  and  the  ice  becoming 


liiil, 


F5* 


■5T! 


an 


•jewmn 


288 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
Aug-ust. 


■I 


Thur.  1. 


July  25. 


somewhat  choked  in  an  hour  or  two,  we  had  no  less  than  ten  fathoms  during 
the  night,  and  altered  our  position  very  little. 

Our  situation,  however,  was  still  a  very  precarious  one,  as  any  movement 
of  the  ice  to  leeWard  must  place  us  directly  between  the  points  of  the  islands, 
where  the  breadth  did  not  exceed  a  mile,  and  from  the  nature  of  the  land 
the  passage  was  probably  a  shoal  one.  On  the  weather  clearing  up  on  the 
morning  of  the  1st  of  August  we  found  that  such  a  movement  was  just  about 
to  take  place,  the  passage  being  already  nearly  cleared,  and  the  ice  around 
the  ship  beginning  to  give  us  notice  of  some  alteration.  Soon  after  a  favour- 
able slack  took  place,  when,  preferring  the  chance  of  sailing  to  that  of  driv- 
ing through  the  unknown  channel,  which  there  was  no  time  to  sound,  we 
cast  off  and,  being  guided  by  the  leads  and  the  colour  of  the  water,  ran  safely 
through  in  five  fathoms  and  a  quarter,  at  the  distance  of  one-third  of  a  mile 
from  Tangle  Island,  and  immediately  gained  the  open  sea  beyond.  Just  at 
this  time  Ave  observed  the  Hecla  standing  towards  us  and  re-joined  her  at  a 
quarter  before  eleven,  when  Captain  Lyon  came  on  board  to  communicate 
the  result  of  his  late  journey,  of  which  he  furnished  me  with  the  following 
account,  accompanied  by  a  sketch  of  the  lands  he  had  seen,  as  far  as  the 
extremely  unfavourable  state  of  the  weather  would  permit. 

"  Accompanied  by  George  Dunn,  I  found  Toolemak  on  landing,  who 
welcomed  us  to  his  tent  in  which  for  two  hours  it  was  scarcely  possible  to 
move  in  consequence  of  the  crowd  who  came  to  gaze  at  us.  A  new  deer- 
skin was  spread  for  me,  and  Dunn  having  found  a  corner  for  himself,  we 
all  lay  down  to  sleep,  not  however  until  our  host,  his  wife,  their  little 
son,  and  a  dog,  had  turned  in  beside  me  under  cover  of  a  fine  warm  skin,  all 
naked  except  the  lady,  who  with  the  decorum  natural  to  her  sex  had  kept  on 
a  part  of  her  clothes.  It  rained  incessantly  during  the  night  and  the  morn- 
ing of  the  26th  was  in  consequence  very  unfavourable  for  our  purposed  ex- 
pedition. At  ten  A.M.  we  started  and  found  the  sledge  on  a  beach  near 
the  southern  ice.  Four  men  were  to  accompany  us  on  this  vehicle,  and  the 
good-natured  fellows  volunteered  to  carry  our  luggage.  A  second  sledge 
was  under  the  charge  of  three  boys  who  had  eight  dogs,  while  our  team 
consisted  of  eleven.  The  weather  was  so  thick  that  at  times  Ave  could  not 
see  a  quarter  of  a  mile  before  us  but  yet  Avent  rapidly  forward  to  the  WNW., 
Avhen,  after  about  six  hours,  Ave  came  to  high  bold  land  and  a  great  num- 


I" 


I 


WJkte^x&^Ji\itti*fs*X&&V\teM^ vm .a* . vr  •  >*sv. 


k, 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


289 


ber  of  islands  of  reddish  granite,  wild  and  barren  in  the  extreme.  We  here 
found  the  ice  in  a  very  decayed  state  and  in  many  places  the  holes  and  fis- 
sures were  difficult  if  not  dangerous  to  pass.  At  the  expiration  of  eight 
hours  our  impediments  in  this  respect  had  increased  to  such  a  degree  as  to 
stop  our  farther  progress.  Dunn,  the  old  man  and  myself  therefore  walked 
over  a  small  island,  beyond  which  we  saw  a  sheet  of  water  which  precluded 
any  farther  advance  otherwise  than  by  boats.  At  about  three  miles  west  of 
this  were  two  bluffs  separated  by  an  apparent  strait  of  half  a  mile  in  width, 
on  the  other  side  of  which  lay  a  flat  field  of  ice  over  which  was  land  in  the 
distance.     The  old  man  gave  the  name  of  Khemig  to  the  two  bluffs. 

"  In  the  hope  that  the  morning  would  prove  more  favourable  for  our  see- 
ing the  land,  the  only  advantage  now  to  be  derived  from  our  visit  since  the 
fishing-place  was  not  attainable,  it  was  decided  to  pass  the  night  on  one  of 
the  rocky  islands.  The  Esquimaux  having  brought  no  provision  with  them, 
I  distributed  our  four  days'  allowance  of  meat  in  equal  proportions  to  the 
whole  party,  who  afterwards  lay  down  to  sleep  on  the  rocks,  having  merely 
a  piece  of  skin  to  keep  the  rain  from  their  faces.  In  this  comfortless  state 
they  remained  very  quietly  for  eight  hours.  Our  little  hunting-tent  just 
held  Dunn  and  myself,  although  not  in  a  very  convenient  manner,  but  it 
answered  the  purpose  of  keeping  us  dry  except  from  a  stream  of  water  that 
ran  under  us  all  night. 

"  The  morning  of  the  27th  was  rather  fine  for  a  short  time,  and  we  saw 
above  thirty  islands,  which  I  named  Coxe's  Group,  varying  in  size  from  one 
hundred  yards  to  a  mile  or  more  in  length.  Two  deer  were  observed  on 
the  northern  land  which  was  called  Khead-laghioo  by  the  Esquimaux,  and 
Toolemak  accompanied  Dunn  in  chase  of  them.  One  was  killed  by  the 
latter  as  he  informed  me,  in  consequence  of  the  old  man's  lying  behind  a 
stone  and  imitating  the  peculiar  bellow  of  these  animals,  until  it  was  led  by 
its  curiosity  to  come  within  a  short  gun-shot.  On  crossing  to  bring  over  our 
game  we  found  the  old  Esquimaux  had  skinned  and  broken  up  the  deer 
after  his  own  manner,  and  my  companions  being  without  food  I  divided  it 
into  shares.  The  entrails  and  paunch  I  Avas  about  to  leave  on  the  plain,  but 
was  reminded  by  the  anxious  looks  of  the  natives,  that  these  offals  are 
described  by  Crantz  as  delicacies,  under  the  name  of  Nerdb/ca,  or  "  the  eat- 
able," an  appellation  which  also  distinguishes  them  at  Igloolik.  I  accord- 
ingly assigned  these  choice  morsels  to  a  young  man  of  our  party  who  bore 
them  off  in  triumph. 

2  p 


1822. 
July. 


27. 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
July. 


*'  Arriving  on  the  ice  a  skin  was  taken  from  the  sledge  as  a  seat,  and  we  all 
squatted  down  to  a  repast  which  was  quite  new  to  me.  In  ten  minutes  the 
natives  had  picked  the  deer's  bones  so  clean  that  even  the  hungry  dogs  dis^ 
dained  to  gnaw  them  a  second  time.  Dunn  and  myself  made  our  breakfast 
on  a  choice  slice  cut  from  the  spine,  and  found  it  so  good,  the  wind-pipe  in 
particular,  that  at  dinner-time  we  preferred  the  same  food  to  our  share  of  the 
preserved  meat  which  we  had  saved  from  the  preceding  night.  Of  the  ne- 
rooka  I  also  tasted  a  small  portion  on  the  principle  that  no  man  who  wishes 
to  conciliate  or  inquire  into  the  manners  of  savages  should  refuse  to  fare  as 
they  do.  I  found  this  substance  acid  and  rather  pungent,  resembling  as  near 
as  1  could  judge  a  mixture  of  sorrel  and  radish  leaves.  I  conceive  that  the 
acidity  recommends  it  to  these  people. 

"  As  we  sat  I  observed  the  musquitoes  to  be  very  numerous,  but  they  were 
lying  in  a  half  torpid  state  on  the  ice  and  incapable  of  molesting  us.  I 
obtained  the  meridian  altitude  which  gave  the  lat.  69°  26'  48"  N. ;  the 
western  extreme  of  Igloolik  bearing  E.S.E.  about  fourteen  miles.  Soon  after 
noon  we  set  forward  on  our  return  and,  without  seeing  any  object  but  the 
flat  and  decaying  ice,  passed  from  land  to  land  with  our  former  celerity, 
dashing  through  large  pools  of  water  much  oftener  than  was  altogether 
agreeable  to  men  who  had  not  been  dry  for  above  thirty  hours,  or  warm  for 
a  still  longer  period.  Our  eleven  dogs  were  large  fine-looking  animals,  and 
an  old  one  of  peculiar  sagacity  Was  placed  at  their  head  by  having  a  longer 
trace,  so  as  to  lead  them  over  the  safest  and  driest  places,  for  these  animals 
have  a  great  dread  of  water.  The  leader  was  instant  in  obeying  the  voice 
of  the  driver,  who  did  not  beat  but  repeatedly  talked  to  and  called  it  by 
name.  If  was  beautiful  to  observe  the  sledges  racing  to  the  same  object, 
the  dogs  and  men  in  full  cry,  and  the  vehicles  splashing  through  the  water 
with  the  velocity  of  rival  stage  coaches. 

"  We  were  joyfully  welcomed  to  the  dwelling  of  Ooyarra  whose  guest  I  was 
now  to  become,  and  the  place  of  honour,  the  deer-skin  seat,  was  cleared  for 
my  reception.  His  two  wives,  Kai-mob-khiak  and  Awd-run-ni,  occupied  one 
end,  for  it  was  a  double  tent ;  while  at  the  opposite  extremity  the  parents  of 
the  senior  wife  were  established.  The  old  mother  Now-kit-yoo  assisted  the 
young  women  in  pulling  off  our  wet  clothes  and  boots,  which  latter  being  of 
native  manufacture,  she  new  soled  and  mended  without  any  request  on  our 
side,  considering  us  as  a  part  of  the  family.  Our  knapsacks  and  clothes 
being  wet,  we  gladly  turned,  in  presence  of  a  dozen  or  more  of  visitors,  into 


t 


iMfU' 


j  oa^xa^'w^«g^^^y>>v\fe^^ »*4jfe>x  •  /  *r^. 


\ 


is 

~ll 

' 

! 

'  -_w^ 


>■■'- 


VM^^W^i^'i .« w fS+XM&Ty&Jw^ ^kAJt^  '•  J  *r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


291 


28. 


our  blanket-bags,  which  had  been  better  preserved.  Dunn  slept  in  the  little  1822- 
tent  to  watch  our  goods,  and  I  had  a  small  portion  of  Ooyarra's  screened  off  vJUl/ 
for  me  by  a  seal's  skin.  Tired  as  I  was,  sleep  was  denied  me  ;  for  I  was 
obliged  on  the  arrival  of  each  new  set  of  people  to  answer  their  questions 
as  to  how  I  possibly  could  have  got  into  the  bag,  the  manner  in  which  I  had 
wrapped  it  round  me  for  warmth  leading  them  to  suppose  I  was  sewed  up 
in  it.  My  host  and  his  wives  having  retired  to  another  tent  and  my  visitors 
taking  compassion  on  me,  I  went  comfortably  to  sleep;  but  at  midnight  was 
awakened  by  a  feeling  of  great  warmth,  and  to  my  surprise  found  myself 
covered  by  a  large  deer-skin,  under  which  lay  my  friend,  his  two  wives,  and 
their  favourite  puppy,  all  fast  asleep  and  stark  naked.  Supposing  this  was 
all  according  to  rule,  I  left  them  to  repose  in  peace  and  resigned,  myself  to 
sleep. 

'  On  rising,  Dunn  and  I  washed  with  soap  in  a  pond,  which  caused  great 
speculations  amongst  the  by-standers,  on  some  of  whom  we  afterwards  per- 
formed miracles  in  the  cleansing  way.  A  large  assemblage  being  collected  to 
hear  me  talk  of  Neyuning-Eitua,  or  Winter  Island,  and  to  see  us  eat,  the  women 
volunteered  to  cook  for  us  ;  and  as  we  preferred  a  fire  in  the  open  air  to  their 
lamps,  the  good-natured  creatures  sat  an  hour  in  the  rain  to  stew  some  veni- 
son which  we  had  saved  from  our  shares  of  the  deer.  The  fires  in  summer 
when  in  the  open  air,  are  generally  made  of  bones  previously  well  rubbed 
with  blubber,  and  the  female  who  attends  the  cooking  chews  a  large  piece, 
from  which,  as  she  extracts  the  oil,  she  spurts  it  on  the  flame.  At  our  meals 
I  found  every  person  much  pleased  with  biscuit,  which  was  supposed  to  be 
the  dried  flesh  of  the  musk  ox  by  those  who  had  never  seen  that  animal, 
and  it  was  with  great  difficulty  I  explained  that  it  was  made  from  the  seeds 
of  a  little  tree  and  pounded  to  its  present  state. 

After  noon,  as  I  lay  half-asleep,  a  man  came  and,  taking  me  by  the 
hand,  desired  Dunn  to  follow.  He  led  to  a  tent  which  from  the  stillness 
within  I  conjectured  was  untenanted.  Several  men  stood  near  the  door ; 
and  on  entering  I  found  eighteen  women  assembled  and  seated  in  regular 
order,  with  the  seniors  in  front.  In  the  centre  near  the  tent-pole  stood  two 
men  who,  when  I  was  seated  on  a  large  stone,  walked  slowly  round  and  one 
began  dancing  in  the  usual  manner  to  the  favourite  tune  of  '  Amna  aya.' 
The  second  person,  as  I  soon  found,  was  the  dancer's  assistant,  andjwhen 
the  principal  had  pretty  well  exhausted  himself,  he  walked  gravely  up  to 
him  and,  taking  his  head  between  his  hands,  performed  a  ceremony  called 

2  P  2 


h'llwiiili 


'% 


., 


p^ 


sn 


292 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
July. 


■I 


Kob-nik,  which  is  rubbing  noses,  to  the  great  amazement  and  amidst  the 
plaudits  of  the  whole  company.  After  this,  as  if  much  refreshed,  he  re- 
sumed his  performance,  occasionally  however  taking  a  koonik  to  enliven 
himself  and  the  spectators.  The  nxhbee,  if  I  may  be  excused  the  expression, 
was  at  length  brought  forward  and  put  in  the  place  of  the  first  dancer,  who 
rushed  out  of  the  tent  to  cool  himself.  In  this  manner  five  or  six  couples 
exhibited  alternately,  obtaining  more  or  less  applause  according  to  the  oddity 
of  their  grimaces.  At  length  a  witty  fellow,  in  consequence  of  some  whis- 
pering and  tittering  amongst  the  ladies,  advanced  and  gave  me  the  koonik, 
which  challenge  I  was  obliged  to  answer  by  standing  up  to  dance,  and  my 
nose  was  in  its  turn  most  severely  rubbed,  to  the  great  delight  of  all 
present. 

"  Having  been  as  patient  as  could  be  wished  for  above  an  hour,  and  being 
quite  overpowered  by  the  heat  of  the  crowded  tent,  I  made  a  hasty  retreat, 
after  having  distributed  needles  to  all  the  females,  and  exacting  kooniks  from 
all  the  prettiest  in  return.  A  general  outcry  was  now  made  for  Dunn,  a  most 
quiet  north  countryman,  to  exhibit  also ;  but  he,  having  seen  the  liberties 
which  had  been  taken  with  my  nose,  very  prudently  made  his  retreat,  anti- 
cipating what  would  be  his  fate  if  he  remained. 

"  During  a  short  interval  of  fine  weather  we  hung  out  our  clothes  to  dry, 
and  the  contents  of  our  knapsacks,  instruments,  knives,  and  beads,  were 
strewed  on  the  ground  while  we  went  inland  to  shoot  a  few  ducks.  We  cau- 
tioned no  one  against  thieving,  and  were  so  much  at  their  mercy  that  every 
thing  might  have  been  taken  without  a  possibility  of  detection,  yet  not  a 
single  article  was  found  to  have  been  removed  from  its  place  at  our  return. 
At  night  I  was  attended  by  the  same  bedfellows  as  before  ;  the  young  puppy 
however,  being  now  better  acquainted,  took  up  his  quarters  in  my  blanket- 
bag,  as  from  thence  he  could  the  more  easily  reach  a  quantity  of  walrus- 
flesh  which  lay  near  my  head,  and  I  was  awakened  more  than  once  by  find- 
ing him  gnawing  a  lump  by  my  side. 

H  On  the  morning  of  the  29th  I  was  really  glad  to  find  that  the  ships  were 
not  yet  in  sight,  as  I  should  be  enabled  to  pass  another  day  amongst  the 
hospitable  natives.  While  making  my  rounds  I  met  several  others  who  were 
also  visiting,  and  who  each  invited  me  to  call  at  his  tent  in  its  turn.  Where- 
ever  I  entered  the  master  rose  and  resigned  his  seat  next  his  wife  or  wives, 
and  stood  before  me  or  squatted  on  a  stone  near  the  door.  I  was  then 
told  to  'speak!'  or  in  fact  to  give  a  history  of  all  I  knew  of  the  distant 


1   *  ■••.         a^xa^:^^^ 


\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


293 


tribe,  which  from  constant  repetition  I  could  now  manage  pretty  well.  In 
one  tent  I  found  a  man  mending  his  paddle,  which  was  ingeniously  made  of 
various  little  scraps  of  wood,  ivory,  and  bone,  lashed  together.  He  put  it 
into  my  hands  to  repair,  taking  it  for  granted  that  a  kabloona  would  succeed 
much  better  than  himself.  An  hour  afterwards  the  poor  fellow  came  and  took 
me  by  the  hand  to  his  tent,  where  I  found  a  large  pot  of  walrus  flesh  evi- 
dently cooked  for  me.  His  wife  licked  a  piece  and  offered  it,  but  on  his 
saying  something  to  her  took  out  another,  and  having  pared  off  the  outside 
gave  me  the  clean  part,  which,  had  it  been  carrion,  I  would  not  have  hurt 
these  poor  creatures  by  refusing.  The  men  shewed  me  some  curious  puz- 
zles with  knots  on  their  fingers,  and  I  did  what  I  could  in  return.  The 
little  girls  were  very  expert  in  a  singular  but  dirty  amusement,  which  con- 
sisted in  drawing  a  piece  of  sinew  up  their  nostrils,  and  producing  the  end 
out  of  their  mouths.  The  elder  people  were  for  the  most  part  in  chase  of 
the  tormentors  which  swarmed  in  their  head  and  clothes  ;  and  I  saw  for  the 
first  time  an  ingenious  contrivance  for  detaching  them  from  the  back,  or 
such  parts  of  the  body  as  the  hands  could  not  reach.  This  was  the  rib  of  a 
seal,  having  a  bunch  of  the  whitest  of  a  deer's  hair  attached  to  one  end  of 
it,  and  on  this  rubbing  the  places  which  require  it  the  little  animals  stick 
to  it:  from  their  colour  they  are  easily  detected,  and  of  course  consigned 
to  the  mouths  of  the  hunters. 

"  The  weather  clearing  in  the  afternoon  one  ship  was  seen  in  the  distance, 
which  diffused  a  general  joy  amongst  the  people,  who  ran  about  screaming 
and  dancing  with  delight.  While  lounging  along  the  beach  and  waiting  the 
arrival  of  the  ship,  I  proposed  a  game  at  '  leap-frog,'  which  was  quite  new 
to  the  natives,  and  in  learning  which  some  terrible  falls  were  made.  Even 
the  women  with  the  children  at  their  backs  Avould  not  be  outdone  by  the 
men,  and  they  formed  a  grotesque  party  of  opposition  jumpers.  Tired  with 
a  long  exhibition  I  retreated  to  the  tent,  but  was  allowed  a  very  short  re- 
pose, as  I  was  soon  informed  that  the  people  from  the  farthest  tents  were 
come  to  see  my  performance,  and  on  going  out  I  found  five  men  stationed 
at  proper  distances  with  their  heads  down  for  me  to  go  over  them,  which  I 
did  amidst  loud  cries  of  hoyenna  (thanks). 

"  As  the  ship  drew  near  in  the  evening  I  perceived  her  to  be  the  Hecla, 
but  not  expecting  a  boat  so  late  lay  down  to  sleep.  I  soon  found  my  mis- 
take, for  a  large  party  came  drumming  on  the  side  of  the  tent,  and  crying 
out  that  a  "  little  ship"  was  coming,  and  in  fact  I  found  the  boat  nearly  on 


1822. 
July. 


'!■■! 


294 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


1822. 
July. 


shore.  Ooyarra's  senior  wife  now  anxiously  begged  to  tattoo  a  tittle 
figure  on  my  arm,  which  she  had  no  sooner  done  than  the  youngest  insisted 
on  making  the  same  mark  ;  and  while  all  around  were  running  about  and 
screaming  in  the  greatest  confusion,  these  two  poor  creatures  sat  quietly 
down  to  embellish  me.  When  the  boat  landed  a  general  rush  was  made  for 
the  privilege  of  carrying  our  things  down  to  it.  Awarunni,  who  owned  the 
little  dog  which  slept  with  me,  ran  and  threw  him  as  a  present  into  the  boat ; 
when  after  a  general  koonik  we  pushed  off,  fully  sensible  of  the  kind  hos. 
pitality  we  had  received.  Toolemak  and  Ooyarra  came  on  board  in  my  boat, 
in  order  to  pass  the  night  and  receive  presents,  and  we  left  the  beach  under 
three  hearty  cheers. 

'■'  Having  given  so  long  an  account  of  my  adventures,  it  is  high  time  to  turn 
to  objects  of  more  importance  to  the  Expedition.  I  had  found  the  ice  over 
which  we  passed  flat,  unbroken,  but  much  decayed  into  holes.  The  ge- 
neral thickness  was  still  from  one  to  three  feet,  and  amongst  the  islands 
much  greater,  owing  to  the  packing  incidental  to  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  tides, 
Astronomical  or  other  observations  for  fixing  the  position  of  the  land  could 
not  be  obtained  in  consequence  of  the  state  of  the  weather,  which,  with 
the  kind  of  fatality  that  had  attended  all  my  excursions,  had  been  more  than 
usually  severe  and  foggy.  I  had  seen  enough  to  awaken  curiosity  but 
nothing  to  satisfy  it ;  therefore  it  would  be  requisite  for  other  visits  to  be 
made  to  a  spot  to  which  the  Esquimaux  attached  some  importance." 


1411 


'  fc.  ^3*;u^Xifr^^*^^  f^: 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  during  the  Month  of  July,  1822. 

Day 

Place. 

Fahrenheit's 
Thermometer. 

Mean 
Temp, 
of  Sea 
Water. 

Barometer. 

Prevailing" 
Winds. 

Prevailing 
Weather 

.Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini, 
muiu. 

Mean. 

Direction.        Velocity. 

1 

■»    Winter 

o 
+37 

+30 

+32.33 

-31.00 

inches. 

29.09 

inches. 

29.06 

inches. 

129.077 

NW 

strong 

cloudy  and  snow 

2 

J    Island. 

36 

31 

33.50 

30.00 

29. 

29.05 

29.170 

NWbW 

afresh' 

cloudy 

3 

-j 

40 

31 

35.29 

30.08 

29.48 

29.32 

29.377 

NW 

modt. 

fine 

4 

48 

31 

38.67 

30.25 

29.50 

29.30 

29.390 

NE 

light 

|hazy  and  snow. 

5 

51 

33 

38.69 

30.17 

29.78 

29.58 

29.674 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy; 

6 

i 

52 

33 

41.75 

30.50 

29.82 

29.75 

29.787 

N  round  by ) 
WtoWbSJ 

modt. 

cloudy 

7 

Eastern 

54 

33 

41.42 

30.70 

29.74 

29.70 

29.715 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy 

8 

Coast 

47 

33 

SO 

30.95 

29.80 

29.69 

29.752 

NNE 

light 

cloudy 

9 

►        of 
Melville 

46 

L35 

40.25 

30.77 

29.82 

29.64 

29.765 

South. 

light 

fine] 

10 

49 

33 

39.17 

31.95 

29.70 

29.52 

29.607 

NNE 

light 

cloudy 

11 

Peninsula. 

47 

34 

38.92 

32.55 

29.83 

29.69 

29.780 

North 

light 

cloudy 

12 

45 

33 

39.75 

33.40 

29.96 

29.89 

29.918 

South 

light 

cloudy 

13 

47 

36 

42.08 

33.00 

29.92 

29.61 

29.815 

South 

modt. 

fine 

14 

39 

34 

35.92 

33.83 

29.63 

29.60 

29.605 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy 

15 

42 

32 

35.58 

34.67 

29.64 

29.54 

29.607 

South 

modt. 

fine 

16 

35 

31 

32.80 

31.75 

29.50 

29.08 

29.312 

South 

modt. 

cloudy  and  snow 

ir 

36 

30 

31.96 

31.08 

29.35 

29.12 

29.268 

A.M.  SbE  1 
P.M.NNW) 

light 

hazy  and  snow 

18 

34 

31 

32.75 

31.50 

29.53 

29.36 

29.427 

ESE 

fresh 

foffgy 

19 

40; 

33 

35.92 

33.64 

29.47 

29.20 

29.317 

NNE 

modt. 

cloudy 

20 
21 

Off  the 

Eastern 

44 
36 

S3 
30 

35.83 
32.58 

33.58 
31.40 

29.12 
29.17 

29.09 
29.10 

29.103 
29.133 

NbW 

Round  the ) 
Compass  J 

modt. 
modt. 

cloudy 
cloudy^ 

22 

Entrance 

44 

30 

35.08 

30.96 

29.40 

29.19 

29.310 

NWbW 

light 

cloudy 

23 

of 

44 

30 

36.67 

32.58 

29.58 

29.44 

29.513 

Westerly 

light& 
varia. 

cloudy  and  rain 

24 

• 
the  Strait 

44 

30 

36.08 

31.09 

29.78 

29.52 

29.667 

SE 

light 

fine 

25 

of  the 

44 

32 

37.58 

33.33 

29.87 

29.80 

29.843 

NbW 

light 

cloudy 

26 

Fury  and 

35 

32 

33.50 

31.83 

29.86 

29.80 

29.815 

NE 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

27 

Hecla. 

37 

33 

34.67 

31.25 

29.96 

29.70 

29. £63 

Easterly 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

28 

37| 

33 

35.37 

31.62 

29.62 

29.40 

29.473 

North 

modt. 

hazy  and  rain 

29 

40 

31 

34.96 

32.58 

29.64 

29.47 

29.598 

ESE 

modt. 

hazy  and  rain 

30 

39 

31 

35.71 

32.75 

29.60 

29.46 

29.515 

Northerly 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

31 

; 

35 

31 

32.92 

31.79 

29.42 

29.38 

29.400 

SE 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

+54 

+30 

+36.34 

-31.85 

29.96 

29.05 

29.535 

II 11 


!!, 


'  :  II ...  ri!H 


296 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


INI,,. 


CHAPTER  XL 

REMARKABLE    INSTANCE    OF    LOCAL   ATTRACTION  ON   THE    MAGNETIC    NEEDLESS OCCA- 
SIONAL   SEPARATION    OF     A     PORTION      OF     THE     FIXED     ICE A    WHALE     KILLED 

OTHER    CHARTS     DRAWN    BY    THE     ESQUIMAUX ACCOUNT     OF     A    JOURNEY    TO    THE 

NARROWS    OF    THE    STRAIT DISCOVERY    OF    THE    SEA    TO     THE    WESTWARD TOTAL 

DISRUPTION    OF    THE    ICE    AT    THE    EASTERN    ENTRANCE   OF   THE   STRAIT A   SECOND 

INSTANCE    OF    LOCAL    ATTRACTION    ON    THE    COMPASSES SAIL    THROUGH    THE    NAR- 
ROWS, AND  AGAIN  STOPPED  BY  FIXED  ICE ACCOUNT    OF    SEVERAL    LAND    JOURNEYS 

AND    BOAT     EXCURSIONS OBSERVATIONS     ON    THE     TIDES CONTINUED     OBSTACLES 

FROM    FIXED    ICE. 


1822. 
-August. 

Thur.  1. 


The  information  obtained  by  Captain  Lyon  on  his  late  journey  with  the 
Esquimaux,  served  very  strongly  to  confirm  all  that  had  before  been  under- 
stood from  those  people,  respecting  the  existence  of  the  desired  passage  to 
the  westward  in  this  neighbourhood,  though  the  impossibility  of  Captain 
Lyon's  proceeding  farther  in  that  direction,  combined  with  our  imperfect 
knowledge  of  the  language,  still  left  us  in  some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  posi- 
tion of  the  strait  in  question.  It  was  certain  however  that  it  lay  somewhere 
in  the  direction  to  which  we  had  already  been  so  long  and  so  anxiously 
looking,  and  that  its  eastern  entrance  was  still  occupied  by  many  miles  of 
fixed  and  therefore  impenetrable  ice;  but  the  very  impediment  that  had 
arrested  Captain  Lyon's  progress,  as  well  as  our  own  daily  observations  on 
the  state  of  the  ice  near  its  outer  margin,  appeared  to  offer  a  considerable 
hope  that  this  obstacle  must,  in  the  common  course  of  nature,  very  soon  dis- 
appear, even  by  the  gradual  process  of  dissolution,  if  it  were  not  more  speedily 
removed  by  one  grand  and  total  disruption.  While  therefore  Captain  Lyon 
was  acquainting  me  with  his  late  proceedings,  we  shaped  a  course  for  Igloolik, 
in  order  to  continue  our  look-out  upon  the  ice,  and  made  the  tents  very  accu- 
rately by  the  compass,  after  a  run  of  five  leagues,  when  the  Hecla  hauled 


Ml 


I -Hal 


^*3*rfS^xu^:a\**«tti^ 


Si 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


297 


in-shore  to  pick  up  one  of  her  men  that  had  been  left  there  to  procure  game,    1822- 

^-^  A  li  0*11  el- 

and  the  Fury  stood  towards  the  margin  of  the  ice.  ^v' 

Just  before  we  reached  the  edge  of  the  floe  the  weather  continuing  ex- 
tremely thick  with  hard  rain,  I  desired  Mr.  Crozier  to  set  the  extremes  of 
the  loom  hanging  over  Igloolik,  which  was  then  on  our  lee  quarter.  He  ac- 
cordingly did  so,  but  presently  afterwards  remarked  that  the  compasses, 
(both  Walker's  azimuth  and  Alexander's  steering,)  indicated  the  ship's 
head  to  be  S.W.,  which  was  about  the  middle  point  on  which,  but  a  few 
minutes  before,  he  had  set  the  loom  of  the  land  two  or  three  points  abaft 
the  beam.  Knowing,  by  the  true  direction  in  which  we  were  sailing, 
that  the  ship's  course  by  the  compass,  if  unaffected  by  any  foreign  local 
attraction,  should  have  been  about  east,  which  in  fact  the  needles  had  in- 
dicated previous  to  the  change  remarked  by  Mr.  Crozier,  I  tried  what  tap- 
ping with  the  hand,  the  usual  expedient  in  cases  of  mere  sluggishness, 
would  do,  but  Avithout  producing  any  effect.  Being  now  obliged  to  tack 
for  the  ice,  Ave  carefully  Avatched  the  compasses  in  standing  off,  and  having 
sailed  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  observed  them  both  gradually  return  to 
their  correct  position.  Being  thus  satisfied  that  some  extraordinary  local  at- 
traction Avas  influencing  the  needles,  Ave  again  tacked  to  repeat  the  experi- 
ment, and  Avith  a  nearly  similar  result.  The  observations  Avere  then  continued 
on  one  or  tAVo  successive  tacks,  the  ship  being  steadily  steered  upon  a 
giAren  point  by  some  object  a-head  ;  and  an  account  of  the  Avhole  is  here 
subjoined  in  one  connected  vieAv.  The  observations  Avere  made  betAveen 
six  and  nine  P.M.,  the  wind  being  moderate  at  east,  (true,)  the  Aveather 
very  rainy,  the  soundings  fifty-tAVO  fathoms,  and  the  nearest  land  distant 
from  six  to  eight  miles.  The  space  sailed  over  during  the  time  the  changes 
were  taking  place  did  not  exceed  a  quarter  of  a  mile. 


Starboard  tack,  compasses  first  indicating  the  ship's  head  East, 
Larboard     ......  NWbN 

Starboard   ......  East 


then  changed  to  SW. 

SWfW. 

sse" 


Bore  aAvay  to  endeavour  to  cross  our  original  track. 


T    ,       .  .     ,  I  Alexander  s  compass 
Larboard  tack  >„r  „  r 

J  Walker's 

Starboard  „      both  compasses 

T    ,       .  ")  Alexander's 

Larb0ard   "    jwalker's 


NWbN 

WbS. 

NW 

WSW. 

East 

SWiS. 

NWfN 

SWbWfW- 

NW 

SWbWi-W. 

1  ■'  ,  h 


2    Q 


"B?" 


m 


ar 


nns* 


298 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


NEbE-3E 


EfE. 


Hiliim 


ID!1 


Frid.  2. 


1822.     Starboard  tack,  both  compasses 
"v^JjjUJL"       Alexander's  a  minute  or  two  after  returned  to  NEbEf  E,  and  Walker's  to  EiN. 

Alexander's  compass  was  placed  on  the  binnacle,  the  other  stood  about  five  feet  higher,  in  its 
usual  place. 

In  order  to  follow  up  the  observations  on  this  phenomenon  on  some  other 
day,  I  sent  a  boat  to  fix  a  flag  upon  the  ice,  by  way  of  marking  the  spot,  but 
the  margin  was  so  broken  up  [that  it  was  impracticable  to  land  upon  it :  a 
light  buoy  was  therefore  moored  for  the  same  purpose,  though  with  little 
chance  of  retaining  its  station  on  account  of  the  depth  of  the  water.  During 
the  remainder  of  the  night,  when  the  wind  and  weather  obliged  us  to  keep 
more  to  the  northward,  the  compasses  were  not  thus  influenced  *. 

The  weather  clearing  up  on  the  morning  of  the  2d  we  found  that  a  strip  of 
ice  about  half  a  mile  in  width  had  been  lately  separated  from  the  fixed  ice, 
but  ths  to  our  impatience  appeared  like  a  drop  of  water  in  the  ocean.  Con- 
siderable "streams"  and  "  patches"  were  also  drifting  along  the  margin 
during  the  day,  and  we  were  employed  in  beating  through  them  in  order  to 
make  fast  to  the  floe,  the  weather  being  unfavourable  for  keeping  under  way. 
In  the  evening  we  secured  the  ships  to  the  ice,  being  in  twenty-three  fa- 
thoms at  the  distance  of  two  miles  to  the  westward  of  Tern  Island.  For 
several  hours  in  the  course  of  this  day,  there  was  something  in  the  atmo- 
sphere which  distorted  objects  into  very  curious  shapes.  The  principal  fea- 
ture in  this  phenomenon  was  a  constant  waving  tremulous  motion  near  the 
horizon,  causing  the  whole  body  of  ice  to  appear  at  times  as  if  turning  round, 
and  making  one  almost  giddy  to  look  steadfastly  at  it.  The  distant  land  was 
sometimes  flattened  down  so  as  to  appear  like  a  single  thick  black  line  upon 
the  horizon  ;  then  again  it  would  assume  a  shape  of  this  kind, 


while  its  real  outline,  when  not  thus  distorted,  was  this, 


*  The  spots  near  which  this  local  attraction  was  found  are  designated  on  the  chart  by  this 
■mark  ©.  , .    . 


«Ml^W-^  v^^lVlV^/^^jy^^Tv^^s^^VtAc-  k  j£*\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


299 


The  tremulous  appearance  is  in  a  greater  or  less  degree  a  very  common  phe-  1822- 
nomenon  in  the  Polar  Seas.  Such  indeed  is  the  frequent  occurrence  of  ex-  JJf£' 
traordinary  and  variable  terrestrial  refraction,  and  the  consequent  uncertainty 
with  respect  to  the  dip  of  the  horizon,  that  observations  made  by  the  horizon 
of  the  sea,  even  when  wholly  free  from  ice,  cannot  be  depended  on  within 
two  or  three  minutes.  There  is  however  practically  little  or  nothing  to  re- 
gret on  this  account,  from  the  almost  constant  opportunities  that  occur  in 
these  seas  of  resorting  to  the  more  accurate  method  of  observation  by  artifi- 
cial horizons. 

The  wind  backing  by  the  N.E.  to  N.N.W.  during  the  night,  we  had  on  Sat.  3. 
the  3d  a  clear  and  pleasant  day  which,  as  the  ice  remained  in  the  same  state 
as  before,  induced  us  to  pay  another  visit  to  Tern  Island.  We  here  found 
the  scurvy-grass  so  much  improved  in  luxuriance  that  a  number  of  men  from 
each  ship  were  employed  all  day  in  picking  it  for  the  purpose  of  boiling 
with  our  pea-soup.  Every  body  seemed  to  agree  that  the  taste  of  this  plant 
somewhat  resembled  turnip-tops,  but  it  possesses  it  in  a  very  small  degree, 
and  whatever  may  be  its  anti-scorbutic  qualities  has  little  or  nothing  to  recom- 
mend it  to  the  palate.  The  leaves  were  in  general  numerous,  but  not  exceed- 
ing two-eighths  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and  in  many  tufts  there  was  nothing 
but  the  flower  and  stalks ;  but  these  as  well  as  the  root  were  all  committed  to 
our  coppers,  being  the  only  general  supply  of  the  kind  obtained  during  this 
voyage.  The  tern  had  now  almost  entirely  deserted  the  island,  and  we  saw 
no  other  birds  except  a  flock  or  two  of  phalaropes  and  a  few  silvery  gulls. 

In  the  evening  the  wind  having  settled  to  the  southward  and  eastward, 
which  was  directly  upon  the  ice,  I  ordered  the  ships  to  be  got  under  way, 
for  the  purpose  of  keeping  them  always  at  liberty  for  any  change  that  might 
occur.  The  Fury  being  in  an  awkward  lee  bight,  we  had  to  send  a  kedge 
out  for  casting  ;  but  being  after  all  obliged  to  make  sail  on  an  unfavourable 
tack  were  again  carried  into  the  ice,  which  was  now  in  so  thin  and  "  rotten" 
a  state,  that  the  ship  forced  her  way  several  hundred  yards  into  it  before  she 
stopped,  and  then  lay  during  the  night  thus  immoveably  though  quite  safely 
beset.  The  Hecla  having  cleared  the  floe,  I  made  Captain  Lyon's  signal  to 
act  as  appeared  best  to  him  ;  and  he  accordingly  kept  under  sail  as  at  first 
intended. 

The  present  state  of  the  ice,  at  which  I  have  just  hinted,  served  no  less 
to  excite  our  surprise  than  to  keep  alive  our  hopes  and  expectations.  The 
spaces   occupied  respectively  by  ice  and  holes  were  about  equal  ;  and  so 

2  Q   2 


300 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Sun.  4. 


Mil 


1822.  extensive  and  dangerous  were  the  latter,  that  the  men  could  with  extreme 
'  difficulty  walk  twenty  or  thirty  yards  from  the  ship  to  place  the  anchors,  and 
that  at  no  small  risk  of  falling  through.  The  shape  of  the  ponds  and  holes 
being  serpentine  and  various,  and  their  blue  colour  forming  a  striking  con- 
trast with  the  whiteness  of  the  snow  that  lay  on  the  ice,  gave  the  floe  when 
viewed  from  the  mast-head  an  appearance  not  unlike  that  of  the  fancy-patterns 
one  sometimes  sees  on  cloths  or  paper-hangings.  "We  were  astonished  there- 
fore to  find  with  what  tenacity  a  field  of  ice,  whose  parts  appeared  thus  loosely 
joined,  still  continued  to  hang  together,  notwithstanding  the  action  of  the 
swell  that  almost  constantly  set  upon  its  margin. 

The  weather,  which  had  for  several  hours  been  rainy  and  thick,  cleared  up 
about  noon  on  the  4th,  in  consequence  of  the  wind  shifting  to  the  N.W., 
when  we  made  sail  from  the  floe  in  order  to  look  for  our  buoy,  and  to  con- 
tinue our  observations  on  the  magnetic  attraction  in  that  neighbourhood. 
After  making  several  tacks  as  near  the  place  as  the  bearings  of  the  land  and 
the  soundings  could  direct  us,  but  without  discovering  the  buoy,  we  were 
obliged  for  the  present  to  give  up  the  attempt ;  having,  to  our  great  satisfac- 
tion, observed  a  floe  at  least  three  miles  in  length  and  two  in  breadth  just 
detached  from  the  fixed  ice,  and  rendering  it  necessary  for  us  to  work  out  of 
its  way,  lest  it  should  force  us  towards  the  shore.  We  only,  therefore, 
waited  to  put  down  some  nets  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  bottom,  and  then 
hauled  round  the  floe.  A  quantity  of  shells,  among  which  were  a  few  of  the 
new  species  of  anomia  discovered  on  the  last  voyage,  with  some  shrimps  and 
echini,  were  all  that  we  could  thus  fish  up.  Having  cleared  the  end  of  the 
floe,  which  drifted  rapidly  away  and,  as  usual  here,  never  made  its  appear- 
ance afterwards,  we  made  the  ships  fast  to  the  fixed  ice  at  eight  P.M.,  having 
by  the  late  disruption  made  considerable  progress  in  the  direction  of  the 
strait. 
Mon.  5.  At  nine  A.M.,  on  the  5th,  the  temperature  of  some  sea-water  brought  up 
from  near  the  bottom  in  fifty-seven  fathoms,  was  32|°,  that  of  the  air  being 
34°,  and  of  the  surface  30|°.  The  specific  gravity  of  the  former  was  found 
by  Mr.  Fisher  to  be  1.0286,  at  the  temperature  of  40°*.  What  made  the 
temperature  and  specific  gravity  of  the  sea-water  here  a  particular  object  of 
curiosity  was  the  fact  before  conjectured,  but  now  satisfactorily  confirmed, 

*  The  specific  gravity  of  the  surface-water  in  this  neighbourhood  will  be  found,  for  a  few 
days  about  this  time,  in  the  Meteorological  Abstract. 


:K  rt&s^W^Ji^^imt^^j*^  \  j  «ay' 


x 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


301 


that  the  stream  or  current  sometimes  set  out  from  under  the  ice,  and  in  a 
south-easterly  direction,  though  at  a  rate  considerably  varying  for  a  day  or 
two  together.  The  station  now  occupied  by  the  ships,  and  the  present 
clearness  of  the  weather,  enabled  us  to  obtain  a  tolerably  distinct  view  of  the 
lands  to  the  westward ;  but  the  constant  fogs  and  rain  experienced  by  Cap- 
tain Lyon  on  his  late  excursion  rendered  it  impossible  for  him,  at  this  dis 
tance,  to  recognise  the  place  he  had  visited  ;  and  the  observation  he  had 
obtained,  giving  the  latitude  much  to  the  southward  of  the  only  apparent 
opening  now  before  us,  threw  a  shade  of  mystery  over  the  unknown  passage, 
which  redoubled  our  impatience  to  examine  it. 

We  had  for  several  days  past  occasionally  seen  black  Avhales  about  the 
ships,  and  our  boats  were  kept  in  constant  readiness  to  strike  one,  for  the 
sake  of  the  oil,  in  which  endeavour  they  at  length  succeeded  this  morning. 
The  usual  signal  being  exhibited,  all  the  boats  were  sent  to  their  assistance, 
and  in  less  than  an  hour  and  a  half  had  killed  and  secured  the  fish,  which 
proved  a  moderate-sized  one  of  above  "  nine  feet  bone,"  exactly  suiting  our 
purpose.  The  operation  of  "flinching"  this  animal,  which  was  thirty-nine 
feet  and  a  half  in  length,  occupied  most  of  the  afternoon,  each  ship  taking 
half  the  blubber  and  hauling  it  on  the  ice,  to  "  make  off,"  or  put  into  casks. 
We  also  made  fires  on  the  ice,  in  order  to  boil  a  portion  of  the  blubber  into 
oil,  for  the  convenience  of  stowage  ;  but  this  method  being  found  a  wasteful 
one  until  it  is  left  several  days  to  drain,  we  boiled  only  a  hundred  and 
twenty  gallons  each,  and  then  put  the  rest  into  tanks  and  casks,  being  a 
supply  sufficient  for  at  least  two  years. 

The  latitude  of  our  present  station  was  69°  32'  10";  the  longitude,  by  chro- 
nometers, 81°  23'  06";  the  dip  of  the  magnetic  needle  88°  06'  26";  and  the  vari- 
ation 86°05' 43"  westerly  ;  the  latter  phenomenon  having  considerably  increased 
since  our  last  observations.  In  the  course  of  the  night  Mr.  Ross  was  again 
fortunate  in  procuring  one  or  two  specimens  of  the  Larus  Sabini,  out  of  a 
flock  of  forty  that  flew  past  the  ship  from  the  westward.  Mr.  Ross  remarked 
that  they  had  no  other  birds  in  company,  and  flew  high  as  if  migrating, 
but  afterwards  alighted  in  the  open  water  at  some  distance  from  the  edge  of 
the  ice.  The  operation  of  "flinching"  a  whale,  which  in  Davis's  Strait 
and  the  Greenland  Seas  collects  a  large  assemblage  of  birds  about  the  ship 
had  not  the  same  effect  here,  five  or  six  of  the  Larus  Argentatus  being  all 
that  were  thus  attracted.  Fulmar  petrels,  the  usual  visitants  on  such  oc- 
casions, are  never  seen  here,  which  seemed  to  us    the  more  remarkable 


1822. 
August. 


: 

K?m 


p^a^sr 


3-K 


-3RP 


302 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.    as  they  had  generally  been  our  companions  in  most  other  parts  of  the  polar 

v^v-s-/  regions  that  we  had  visited.  We  had  to-day,  for  the  first  time  this  sum- 
mer, seen  a  number  of  white  whales  (delphinus  albicans)  near  the  ice  ;  but 
found  them  as  usual  so  extremely  wary  as  to  elude  every  endeavour  to 
strike  them,  though  the  boats  frequently  made  the  attempt,  this  being  the 
only  large  sea-animal  inhabiting  these  regions  which  we  had  never  yet 
taken. 

Tues.  6.  On  the  forenoon  of  the  6th  a  halo  was  observed  round  the  sun,  and  on 
the  eastern  side  of  it  a  slightly-coloured  parhelion,  distant  from  the  sun 

Wed.  7.  24°.  17.  Some  water,  brought  up  on  the  7th,  from  sixty  fathoms  or  near  the 
bottom,  was  at  the  temperature  of  31°. 6,  that  of  the  surface  being  31°.3, 
and  of  the  air  35°.  As  soon  as  we  had  completed  the  stowage  of  the  blub- 
ber, and  washed  the  ships  and  people's  clothes,  we  cast  off,  taking  in  tow 
the  carcass  of  the  whale  (technically  called  the  "  crang")  for  our  friends  at 
Igloolik,  and  with  the  intention  also  of  looking  for  the  buoy  that  had  been 
laid  down  in  that  neighbourhood.  In  the  latter  attempt  we  again  failed, 
the  buoy  having  probably  been  swept  away  by  the  drift-ice  ;  nor  could  we 
afterwards  hit  upon  the  exact  spot  where  the  attraction  on  the  needles  had 
been  observed.  The  wind  dying  away  when  the  ships  were  off  the  north- 
east end  of  the  island,  the  boats  were  despatched  to  tow  the  whale  on 
shore,  while  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  went  a-head  to  meet  some  of  the 
canoes  that  were  paddling  towards  us.  We  soon  joined  eleven  of  them,  and 
on  our  informing  the  Esquimaux  of  the  prize  the  boats  were  bringing  them, 
they  paddled  off  with  great  delight.  When  they  arrived  at  the  spot  and 
had  civilly  asked  permission  to  eat  some  of  it,  they  dropped  their  canoes 
astern  to  the  whale's  tail,  from  which  they  cut  off  enormous  lumps  of  flesh 
and  ravenously  devoured  it ;  after  which  they  followed  our  boats  in-shore, 
where  the  carcass  was  made  fast  to  a  mass  of  grounded  ice  for  their  future 
disposal.  In  the  mean  time  Captain  Lyon  and  myself  had  rowed  up  to  the 
station  formerly  occupied  by  the  tents,  which  however  we  now  found  wholly 
deserted  by  the  natives,  who  had  left  only  a  sledge  or  two,  and  a  quantity  of 
blubber  here  and  there  under  the  stones  before  used  for  the  tents. 

Thur.  8.  A  fresh  breeze  having  sprung  up  from  the  southward,  Ave  stood  off  and 
on  for  the  night,  and  on  the  8th  again  made  the  ice,  in  which  no  change 
was  perceptible.  We  hoped  however  that  some  service  would  be  done  us 
by  the  swell,  though  its  effects  would  only  be  rendered  apparent  when 
the  wind  veered  to    the  westward.      This  taking  place   on   the  following 


Ml 


m 


3*  M  MXW^yi\tt*lT£SV^&&T\&J^  ***J&X  r>  f  *rv 


s 


% 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


303 


day,  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  another  large  "  patch"  from  one  to 
two  miles  in  width  separated  from  the  fixed  ice,  and  soon  drifted  out  of  sight 
to  the  south-east.     As  we  made  several    tacks  off  the  island  next  to  the 
northward  of  Igloolik,  called  by  the  Esquimaux  Neerlo-Nakto,  two  canoes 
came  off  to  us,  in  one  of  which  was  Toolemak.     He  and  his  companions 
came  on  board  the  Fury,  when  I  employed  him  for  a  couple  of  hours  in 
drawing  a  chart  of  the  strait.     Toolemak,  though  a  sensible  and  intelligent 
man,  we  soon  found  to  be  no  draftsman,  so  that  his  performance  in  this 
way,  if  taken  alone,  was  not  a  very  intelligible  delineation  of  the  coast. 
By  dint  however  of  a  great  deal  of  talking  on  his  part,  and  some  exercise 
of  patience  on  ours,  we  at  length  obtained  a  copious  verbal  illustration  of 
his  sketch,  which  confirmed  all  our  former  accounts  respecting  the  existence 
of  a  passage  to  the  westward  in  this  immediate  neighbourhood,  and  the 
large  extent  of  the  land  called  Keiyuk-tarruoke  on  the  northern  side  of  the 
strait.   The  word  Khemig  he  applied  either  to  the  strait  or  to  some  place  about 
its  shores,  as  he  had  before  done  to  Captain  Lyon  ;  but  the  weather  was  at 
this  time  unfortunately  too  thick  to  allow  of  his  pointing  out  the  exact  di- 
rection in  which  this  interesting  spot  lay.     This  piece  of  information  was, 
just  at  the  moment,  desirable  only  as  a  matter  of  extreme   curiosity  and 
almost  painful  interest,  as  it  was   certain  that  the  passage  was  at  present 
inaccessible  to  ships  on  account  of  the  ice.     Toolemak  also  agreed  with  our 
other  Esquimaux  informants  in  stating,  that  from  the  coast  of  Akkoolee  no 
land  is  visible  to  the  westward ;  nor  was  any  ever  heard  of  in  that  direction 
by  the  Esquimaux.     This  fact  they  uniformly  assert  with  a  whine  of  sorrow, 
meaning  thereby  to  intimate  that  their  knowledge  and  resources  are  there 
both  at  an  end.     Toolemak  represented  the  coast  of  Keiyuk-tarruoke  as 
abounding  with  whales  and  narwhals,  and  repeatedly  mentioned  that  ice- 
bergs were  seen  on  its  northern  side,  as  before  described  by  Okotook.     The 
only  actual  addition  to  our  former  information  was  respecting  some  Esqui- 
maux inhabiting  an  island  of  considerable  size,   at  a  great  distance  to  the 
eastward  or  north-east.     These  people  they  call  by  the  name  of  Sedd-lir- 
me-oo,  a  general  term  by  which  they  distinguish  all  Esquimaux  not  belongs 
ing  to  their  own  tribe,  and  of  whom,  with  their  accustomed  self-conceit, 
they  invariably  speak  with  undisguised   contempt.     It  is  remarkable  that 
even  the  natives  of  Southampton  Island,  notwithstanding  their  proximity  to 
the  continental  coast,  come  under  this  denomination  ;  there  being  no  inter- 
course whatever,  as  far  as  we  could  learn,  between  the  two  tribes. 


1822. 
August. 

Frid.  9. 


I 


304 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1833. 

August. 


Sat.  10. 


' 


The  ships  being  close  to  the  edge  of  the  floe  in  the  evening,  I  directed 
them  to  be  made  fast ;  but  the  boat  that  went  to  make  holes  for  the  ice- 
anchors,  returning  with  the  information  that  the  ice  was  in  too  "  rotten"  a  state 
to  hold  them,  we  ran  the  ships  into  the  floe  under  all  sail,  where  they  easily 
made  a  dock  for  themselves,  and  remained  quietly  for  the  night,  which 
proved  extremely  fine  and  clear.  A  number  of  shrimps,  echini,  and  other 
marine  insects  were  brought  up  in  a  net  from  the  bottom. 

Some  water  brought  up  on  the  10th  from  a  depth  of  forty  fathoms  was  at 
the  temperature  of  32°,  that  of  the  surface  being  the  same,  and  of  the  at- 
mosphere 40°.  In  the  evening  we  made  sail  and  ran  along  the  margin  of  the 
ice,  and  soon  after  had  the  satisfaction  of  observing  that  another  large  floe 
was  just  on  the  point  of  being  detached.  On  arriving  at  its  northern  end, 
we  found  that  it  still  wanted  a  little  to  complete  the  separation,  and  with  a 
view  of  applying  the  requisite  force,  or  at  least  all  that  we  had  at  our  dis- 
posal, the  ships  were  made  fast  to  it  by  several  hawsers,  and  all  their  sails 
set  aback,  the  wind  blowing  fresh  from  the  westward.  This  expedient  soon 
produced  the  desired  effect ;  the  floe  beginning  to  disjoin  in  less  than  ten 
minutes,  and  the  whole  of  it  then  drifting  away  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  and  a 
half  an  hour,  so  that  at  midnight  we  were  enabled  to  cast  off  and  make  sail 
to  windward  of  it. 

This  last  disruption,  while  it  gave  us  another  short  step  to  the  westward', 
allowed  us  also  to  approach  Neerlo-Nakto  as  near  as  the  soundings,  which  are 
here  quite  shoal,  would  permit ;  and  at  noon  on  the  11th  we  made  the  ships 
fast  to  the  ice  in  eight  fathoms,  on  a  bottom  of  small  lime-stones,  and  went 
on  shore  to  examine  the  productions  of  the  island,  and  obtain  a  more  exten- 
sive view  of  the  neighbouring  lands.  We  found  it  to  resemble  Igloolik  in 
its  general  character,  but  discovering  an  approach  to  the  primitive  formation 
not  perceptible  at  the  latter  island,  numerous  large  masses  of  granite,  gneiss, 
and  quartz  appearing  on  the  surface  intermixed  with  the  fragments  of  lime 
of  which  it  is  principally  composed.  The  island  is  extremely  low,  and  its 
surface  is  covered  with  numberless  small  and  one  very  large  pond  of  fresh 
water,  the  resort  of  black  and  red-throated  divers  and  of  the  loner-tailed 
ducks.  A  large  flock  of  brent-geese  were  seen,  and  two  or  three  procured 
from  some  of  the  Esquimaux  whom  we  found  on  the  island,  and  who  had 
caught  them  with  the  snares  of  whalebone  before  described.  Large  flocks 
of  eider  and  king-ducks  were  also  flying  about ;  but  the  natives  being  in  the 
habit  of  visiting  the  island  for  the  sake  of  the  birds  and  their  eggs,  had 


fc.^^;^^Xt3^^\iie^Jg£>^^^>^v^;.  i      ^^tv^ 


•tei 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


305 


made  them  so  wild  that  we  procured  but  few.  Captain  Lyon's  party  were  lf 
fortunate  in  killing  two  deer,  giving  each  ship  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds 
of  fine  venison  exclusive  of  the  heads  and  hearts,  which  as  a  matter  of  good 
policy  were  considered  the  lawful  perquisites  of  the  sportsmen.  Including 
these  and  the  entrails,  the  weight  of  each  deer  was  estimated  at  two  hundred 
and  twenty  pounds,  which  may  be  considered  a  favourable  specimen  of  the 
rein-deer  here  at  their  best  season.  One  of  these  animals  took  the  water  in 
a  large  pond,  and  was  not  obtained  without  much  wading. 

The  Esquimaux  we  met  on  the  island  at  first  landing  were  four  young  men, 
of  which  two  were  brothers  of  our  little  friend  "  John  Bull,"  and  had  just 
arrived  from  Amitioke.  From  them  we  learned  that  Ewerat  and  his  party 
had  reached  the  place  of  their  destination,  and  would  probably  come  on  to 
Igloolik  in  the  course  of  the  summer.  One  of  the  young  men  who  insisted 
on  attending  me  about  the  island  the  whole  afternoon,  made  himself  useful 
in  giving  the  Esquimaux  names  of  the  different  lands  in  sight.  On  being 
desired  to  inform  us  where  Khemig  lay,  he  pointed  in  the  exact  direction  in 
which  we  had  from  the  ships  always  supposed  the  strait  to  be  ;  that  is,  about 
N.W.b.W.  from  Neerlo-nakto,  upon  which  bearing  was  a  high  rocky  hill  of 
a  remarkable  form,  and  the  most  conspicuous  object  in  sight  in  coming  off 
the  strait  from  the  eastward.  It  is  essential  here  to  remark,  that  about  tliis 
period  two  or  three  charts  had  been  drawn  on  board  the  Hecla  by  different 
natives,  of  whom  Toolemak  was  one,  and  they  all  pointed,  in  the  direction 
I  have  just  mentioned  to  Khemig,  which  was  now  understood  to  be  an  island 
lying  in  the  strait,  as  in  fact  it  afterwards  proved.  This  information  so 
repeatedly  and  explicitly  obtained,  while  it  satisfied  me  more  and  more  of 
our  being  in  the  right  track,  could  not  fail  also  to  add  to  my  perplexity  re- 
specting the  place  visited  by  Captain  Lyon, — a  place  evidently  bearing  a 
similar  name  and  frequented  by  the  Esquimaux  on  their  way  to  Akkoolee,  but 
lying  by  observation  at  least  fifteen  miles  to  the  southward  of  the  strait  now 
before  us.  The  clearing  up  of  all  obscurity  on  this  point  was  desirable  at 
the  present  moment,  more  as  an  object  of  curiosity  or  geographical  research, 
than  as  affecting  the  movements  of  the  Expedition  ;  for  these  too  evidently 
depended  on  necessity  not  choice  ;  it  being  impossible,  supposing  even  the 
existence  of  half  a  dozen  different  channels,  to  navigate  any  but  that  in 
which  nature  should  open  her  barriers.  That  this  operation  was  going  on 
more  rapidly  here  than  in  the  passage  to  the  southward  of  Igloolik,  and 
that  from  their  comparative  size  and  openness,  as  well  as  from  the  current 


1822. 
Erust. 


il'kl 

L>  i 

mil 

■laal 

■  -!*1 

'  ''' 

"u'fci 

Km 

!' 


i 


vn 


■...jmWI, 

!T'v.  ; 

.,, 

i                      , 

m** 

■^    Z 

tl 

K 

ji    ; 

lv 

1 

;■•:; 

:  1 

306 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


observed  to  set  from  the  westward  at  our  present  station,  the  probability 
was  much  in  favour  of  this  channel  being  the  first  cleared,  was  too  plain  to 
admit  doubt ;  and  I  therefore  entertained  none  as  to  the  point  towards  which 
all  our  efforts  should  be  directed.  If  after  all  there  should  be  two  channels 
in  this  neighbourhood,  both  leading  into  the  Polar  Sea,  one  perhaps  to  the 
north  and  the  other  to  the  south  of  an  island,  (which  in  the  present  state  of 
our  knowledge  seemed  the  only  reasonable  conclusion,)  the  propriety  of 
pushing  through  that  which  was  first  opened  still  remained  the  same  ;  for 
the  quitting  of  the  continental  shore  for  a  few  miles  could  not,  in  such  a 
navigation  as  this,  be  put  in  competition  with  the  value  of  a  day  or  even  an 
hour  of  our  remaining  navigable  season. 

Convinced,  however,  as  I  was  of  the  expediency  of  pursuing  this  line  of 
conduct,  which  in  truth  seemed  the  only  practicable  one,  yet  every  hour's 
delay  added  an  indescribable  weight  to  my  anxiety.  For  the  same  train  of 
reasoning,  by  which  Ave  flatter  ourselves  into  a  belief  of  having  done  our  best 
to  avoid  an  evil,  does  not  always  furnish  a  proportionate  degree  of  patience  to 
enable  us  quietly  to  endure  it ;  and,  stopped  as  we  had  now  been,  at  the  very 
threshold  of  the  North-West  Passage,  for  nearly  four  weeks,  without  advanc- 
ing twice  as  many  miles  to  the  westward,  suspense  at  such  a  crisis  was  scarce- 
ly the  less  painful  because  we  knew  it  to  be  inevitable.  The  decayed  state 
of  the  ice,  which  even  a  fortnight  before,  had  rendered  travelling  extremely 
dangerous,  could  alone,  therefore,  under  these  vexatious  circumstances,  have 
prevented  my  despatching  another  party,  for  the  express  purpose  of  deciding 
the  question  respecting  the  Strait :  for,  highly  as  we  had  a  right  to  value 
the  repeated  and  concurrent  testimony  of  so  many  intelligent  Esquimaux,  it 
was  impossible  to  feel  satisfied  on  such  a  subject,  while  our  own  ocular  evi- 
dence was  still  wanting.  Observing,  however,  to-day,  from  an  eminence 
on  which  we  took  the  angles  for  the  survey,  that  the  ice  within  the  line  of  the 
island  appeared  much  less  decayed  than  that  in  the  stream  of  the  Strait,  I 
determined  on  attempting,  by  this  means,  a  journey  to  the  westward,  endea- 
vouring first  to  reach  some  Islands  in  that  direction  ;  and  then,  by  passing 
from  one  to  the  other,  at  length  to  gain  the  main-land,  upon  which  it  might 
not  perhaps  be  difficult  to  travel  to  the  Strait  itself,  and  thus  to  end  every 
doubt,  as  well  as  every  conjecture,  respecting  it. 

While  we  were  on  shore,  which  was  from  a  quarter  past  one  till  twenty 
minutes  past  six,  P.M.,  the  tide  ebbed  three  feet  and  a  half,  and  appeared  to 
be  still  falling.     The  beach  is  extremely  flat  and  shelving,  so  that  the  boats 


y&CWJk&&XW^X\3S&&fj>'*X*&r>6^^^3i.        >«    ' 


"  I 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


307 


touched  the  ground  at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile  from  the  shore,  the  bottom   ,1822- 
being  composed  of  stones  of  all  sizes.  n^y<L/ 

A  breeze  had  sprung  up  from  the  south-east  while  we  were  on  shore ;  but 
the  weather  being  fine  we  kept  the  ships  fast,  it  being  my  intention  to  pre- 
pare immediately  for  my  proposed  journey  over  the  ice,  for  which  our 
present  station  was  particularly  convenient.  At  four  A.M.  on  the  12th,  Mon.12. 
however,  it  freshened  so  much  as  to  cause  the  ships  to  strike  very  heavily  on 
the  ice,  which  was  here  of  the  "hummocky  "  kind.  The  swell  having  soon 
after  broken  up  the  edge,  a  press  of  head-sail  enabled  us  to  force  the  ships 
a  short  distance  within  the  margin,  and  a  few  other  loose  masses  drifting 
down  from  the  eastward,  we  were  at  length  secure  from  any  disturbance. 
The  rudders  were  however  unshipped,  in  case  of  accidents,  and  in  the  after- 
noon the  wind  moderated,  though  the  weather  continued  extremely  incle- 
ment, with  snow,  which  was  afterwards  succeeded  by  rain.  On  the  13th,  Tues.  13. 
the  weather  remained  too  thick  and  unsettled  for  leaving  the  ships,  though 
the  wind  was  quite  moderate,  and  in  the  evening  shifted  to  the  westward. 
The  loose  ice  was  drifting  away  from  the  floe,  against  the  wind,  during  the 
whole  of  the  day,  affording  another  certain  proof  of  a  set  to  the  south-east, 
independently  of  tide.  Several  black  whales  came  up  close  to  the  ships, 
and  three  Sabine  gulls,  some  ducks,  dovekies,  and  silvery  gulls,  were  also 
seen. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  14th,  the  breeze  having  freshened  from  the  Wed.  14. 
north-west,  another  floe  broke  away  from  the  fixed  ice,  allowing  us  to  gain 
about  half  a  mile  more  to  the  westward  ;  such  was  the  vexatious  slowness 
with  which  we  were  permitted  to  advance  towards  the  object  of  our  most 
anxious  wishes !  As,  however,  this  disruption  brought  us  so  much  nearer 
the  islands  towards  which  I  was  about  to  travel,  we  cast  off  and  beat  up  into 
the  bight  left  by  the  floe. 

My  party  consisted  of  Mr.  Richards,  and  two  men  from  each  ship,  and  we 
were  furnished  with  ten  days'  provision.  Mr.  Crozier,  with  three  additional 
men,  was  appointed  to  assist  in  carrying  our  baggage  to  the  first  islands, 
and  then  to  return  on  board.  Having  given  Captain  Lyon  the  necessary  in- 
structions for  proceeding  during  my  absence,  and  appointed  the  narrow  part 
of  the  Strait  as  a  rendezvous  in  case  of  any  sudden  disruption  of  the  ice 
allowing  him  to  follow  us,  I  left  the  ships  at  half-past  one  P.M.,  but  had 
scarcely  proceeded  two  hundred  yards,  when  we  found  that  a  plank  would 
form  an  indispensable  part  of  our  equipment,  for  the  purpose  of  crossing  the 

2  R  2 


it,!  \mU 


■ 


ui  i 


, 

!     1 

' 

^^^^^^^^■S 


308 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.    numerous  pools  and  holes  in  the  ice.     Two  planks  of  fir  nailed  together 
J5J  being-  speedily  furnished  from  the  ships,  at  two  P.M.  we  finally  took  our 
departure. 

Having  soon  gained  the  more  solid  floe  before  observed  from  the  island, 
we  found  its  edge  distinctly  defined  by  a  strait  line  of  "  hummocky  "  ice, 
where  it  was  joined  to  the  thinner  floe  occupying  the  stream  of  the  Strait; 
giving  us  the  impression  of  its  having  been  much  longer  formed  than  the 
other  in  consequence  of  being  out  of  the  tide-way,  and  affording,  by  its 
comparative  solidity,  very  superior  travelling.  Being  thus  favoured,  we 
made  quick  progress  to  the  westward  for  seven  or  eight  miles,  when  the 
holes  and  cracks  began  to  increase  in  frequency  and  depth,  and  we  were 
three  hours  in  accomplishing  the  last  mile  and  a  half ;  the  warmth  reflected 
from  the  land,  and  the  action  of  the  tides  in  raising  and  depressing  the  ice, 
having  here  cracked  and  partially  detached  it  in  many  places.  We  landed  at 
a  quarter  past  nine  P.M.,  after  seven  hours'  walking,  the  direct  distance  from 
the  ships  not  exceeding  ten  or  eleven  miles,  and  found  it  low  water  by  the 
shore  about  ten  o'clock. 

The  difficulty  experienced  in  landing  made  me  apprehensive  lest  Mr.  Crozier 
and  his  party  should  not  be  able  to  get  from  the  island  without  the  as- 
sistance of  our  bridge.  I  despatched  him,  however,  at  four  A.M.  on  the 
Thur.  15. 15th,  and  had  the  satisfaction  to  find  that  being  now  unencumbered  with 
loads,  he  and  his  men  were  able,  by  a  circuitous  route  observed  from  the 
hills,  to  leap  from  one  mass  of  ice  to  another  and  thus  to  gain  the  more  solid 
floe.  Having  seen  him  thus  far  safely  on  his  way,  we  crossed  the  island  one- 
third  of  a  mile  to  the  westward,  carrying  the  plank  with  slings  from  our 
shoulders,  to  prevent  injuring  it  on  the  rocks.  After  passing  over  broken 
and  detached  ice  for  a  mile  and  a  quarter  to  the  next  island,  which  is  a 
small  one,  we  found  it  separated  by  a  narrow  channel  of  a  hundred  yards  in 
width  from  a  third  and  larger.  After  dining  and  resting  an  hour  or  two 
about  noon,  near  the  middle  of  this  island,  we  arrived  on  its  western  shore 
at  six  in  the  evening,  when  the  weather  becoming  misty  we  pitched  the 
tent  for  the  night.  Between  this  and  the  next  island  was  a  large  space  en- 
tirely clear  of  ice,  and  here  we  observed  a  black  whale  sporting  about :  we 
also  met  with  two  large  deer  and  a  fawn,  but  could  not  get  near  them.  A 
long-tailed  duck  with  three  very  young  ones,  and  a  pair  or  two  of  red- 
throated  divers,  were  swimming  about  in  the  ponds.  The  former  served  us 
as  a  supper,  the  andromeda  tetragona  and  ground- willow  furnishing  fuel  for 


a swxo^'«}«v^iif*^. '    -.  >>*Aj£      ■  *r* 


s 


^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


309 


1822. 
August. 


cooking  them.     A  pair  of  ravens,  one  or  two  silvery  gulls,  and  a  few  snow 
buntings,  were  all  we  saw  besides. 

Heavy  snow  continued  to  fall  dufing'the  night,  rendering  the  atmosphere  Frid.  16 
too  thick  to  allow  us  to  see  our  way  till  half-past  nine  A.M.  on  the  16th, 
when  we  struck  the  tent,  and  set  out  upon  the  ice,  which  we  now  found 
better  for  travelling  than  before,  consisting  of  a  level  floe,  intersected  only 
by  numberless  pools  not  more  than  knee-deep,  and  with  their  bottom  gene- 
rally strong  enough  to  allow  us  to  wade  through  them.  Proceeding  along 
the  southern  side  of  the  land  on  which  the  remarkable  hill  before-mentioned 
is  situated,  and  which  I  now  named  Mount  Sabine,  out  of  respect  to  Mr. 
Joseph  Sabine,  we  halted  at  noon  a  mile  and  a  half  due  south  of  it,  and 
observed  the  lat.  69°  37'  40"  ;  and  then  continuing  our  journey  landed  at 
two  P.M.  to  dine  and  rest.  Serjeant  Wise  here  shot  a  hare  of  a  remark- 
ably dark  colour  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  and  particularly  about 
the  ears,  but  quite  white  underneath.  Two  or  three  ring-plovers  were  also 
seen. 

We  moved  again  at  half-past  four  ;  and  at  a  mile  and  a  half  in  a  W.b.N.^N. 
direction,  arrived  at  the  extreme  point  of  the  island,  and  crossed  the 
ice  about  a  hundred  yards  to  the  next.  Traversing  this  also,  we  then 
walked  a  mile  and  a  half  with  the  assistance  of  the  plank,  which  it  fre- 
quently required  extreme  caution  not  to  break,  over  loose  and  even  drifting 
ice  to  the  next,  on  which  we  halted  for  the  night  at  eight  P.M.,  after  a 
day's  journey  of  no  great  length,  but  attended  with  much  wet  and  fatigue. 
The  snow,  which  fell  at  intervals  during  the  day,  was  succeeded  in  the 
evening  by  rain  and  fog,  which  continued  very  thick  till  six  A.M.  on  the 
17th,  when  we  resumed  our  journey  across  the  island;  and  after  deeper  Sat.  17. 
wading  than  usual  in  reaching  the  ice,  at  length  set  forward  upon  it,  and 
at  nine  o'clock  landed  on  a  small  island  in  a  S.W.b.W.  direction.  The  sun 
now  making  its  appearance,  and  the  whole  of  our  clothes  and  baggage  bein^ 
wet,  I  determined  to  remain  here  a  few  hours  to  dry  them,  which  we  were 
soon  enabled  to  do,"  the  wind  shifting  to  the  N.W.,  and  quickly  dissipating 
the  fog  and  clouds.  The  warmth  of  the  sun  seemed  not  more  agreeable  and 
invigorating  to  us  than  to  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  island.  These  con- 
sisted only  of  numerous  large  mosquitoes,  which,  though  in  a  torpid  state 
before,  now  commenced  their  attacks,  and  continued  to  annoy  us  during  the 
rest  of  our  stay.  Their  sting  however  certainly  produced  in  this  climate 
much  less  inflammation  than  is  usual  in  a  warmer  one,  though  I  do  not  know 


h,\ 


i 


,;  .■  , 


TW5 


•  m? 


310 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


in 


1822.    j10W  muc]1  0f  this  difference  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  man,  and  how  much  to 

August. 

^-y-«^  the  mosquito. 

The  islands  over  which  we  had  lately  passed,  and  which,  at  the  request  of 
Mr.  Richards,  I  named  the  Bouverie  Islands,  rise  from  two  to  six  hundred 
feet  above  the  sea,  with  deep  water  quite  close  to  their  shores.  They  con- 
sist principally  of  dark-coloured  gneiss-rock,  the  strata  of  which,  in  all  the 
instances  where  I  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  them,  dipped  to  the 
northward  or  north-west.  There  are  also  on  some  of  the  islands  consider- 
able tracts  where  the  rocks  exhibited  a  schistose  structure,  the  loose  slaty 
fragments,  which  I  took  to  be  mica-slate,  varying  from  near  a  perpendicular 
to  an  almost  horizontal  direction,  and  indifferently  as  to  the  direction  of 
their  dip.  On  one  island  only,  being  that  on  which  the  three  deer  were 
seen,  the  outer  ends  of  these  slaty  fragments  were  covered  with  a  thin  super- 
ficial coating  of  a  verdigris-green  substance,  extending  a  foot  or  two  along 
the  surface  in  different  places,  and  giving  the  rock  the  singular  appearance 
of  having  been  painted  that  colour.  None  of  the  fragments  were  thus 
tinged  in  any  part  but  their  outer  ends,  nor  could  I  find  any  other  substance 
in  the  same  neighbourhood  exhibiting  a  similar  appearance. 

After  obtaining  the  meridian  altitude,  which  gave  the  lat.  69°  37'  55",  we 
left  the  island,  and  directed  our  course  across  the  ice  to  the  N.W.,  towards 
a  low  part  of  the  land.  On  reaching  this  spot,  which  proved  to  be  an  isthmus 
scarcely  fifty  yards  in  breadth,  and  ascending  the  first  eminence,  we  had 
every  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  our  route,  being  now  enabled  to  perceive 
that  we  had  in  all  probability  reached  the  main-land ;  the  ice  lately  crossed 
being  that  of  a  spacious  bay  to  the  south,  which  I  named  after  my  fellow- 
traveller  Mr.  Richards,  and  the  sea  to  the  northward,  between  us  and  the 
high  land  of  Keiyuk-tarruoke,  bearing  evident  marks  of  our  approach  to  the 
supposed  strait.  The  ice  was  here  entirely  broken  up  and  in  motion  to  the 
eastward,  and  in  many  places  about  the  northern  shore  there  was  abundance 
of  open  water.  Being  satisfied  that  we  could  now  perform  the  remainder  of 
our  journey  by  land,  I  determined  to  leave  the  plank  and  a  portion  of  our 
provisions  at  this  spot,  and  to  make  a  forced  march  for  the  Strait  as  lightly 
equipped  as  possible.  We  here  for  the  first  time  found  the  rocks  to  be 
composed  of  red  granite,  a  circumstance  we  hailed  with  satisfaction  at  the 
time,  as  Captain  Lyon  had  met  with  a  similar  formation  at  the  extent  of  his 
journey  to  the  westward.  It  was  high  water  by  the  shore  at  about  seven  in 
the  evening. 


f 


*.  «JJ^MX»^1  v *3 « E £S * :*':»> vi vc.^ *y<*^ , t  '•  i  *r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


311 


At  two  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  18th,  the  weather  being  extremely  1822- 
fine  and  clear,  we  rose  with  the  sun  ;  and  after  depositing  our  spare  stores  J^LT 
within  a  heap  of  stones,  left  the  isthmus,  and  directed  our  course  over  the  *  18* 
hills  to  the  westward,  which  consist  partly  of  greyish  gneiss  and  partly  of  red 
granite,  some  of  them  rising  at  least  a  thousand  or  twelve  hundred  feet 
above  the  level  of  the  sea.  These  being  in  some  places  extremely  steep, 
with  numberless  loose  fragments  lying  about,  which  only  required  the  foot 
to  be  set  upon  them  to  give  them  motion  down  the  precipice,  we  were  for 
some  time  obliged  to  proceed  with  much  caution.  At  half-past  five,  how- 
ever, we  had  arrived  at  a  peninsula  which  promised  to  prove  of  high 
interest,  for  it  appeared  to  lead  to  the  very  spot  where,  from  the  set  of  the 
tide  and  the  trending  of  the  coast,  the  strait  was  most  likely  to  be  found  ; 
and  it  presented  at  the  same  time  a  geological  character  differing  from  any 
we  had  before  met  with.  The  appearance  of  the  southern  or  inner  part  of 
this  peninsula  is  singular,  being  that  of  three  or  more  nearly  horizontal  and 
equidistant  ranges  or  strata,  resembling  at  a  distance  so  many  tiers  or  galle- 
ries of  a  high  and  commanding  fortification,  which  seemed  to  defy  approach. 
On  reaching  this  place,  where  two  long  and  deep  ponds  of  fresh  water  serve 
to  contract  still  more  the  narrow  isthmus  by  which  it  is  divided  from  the 
other  land ;  we  found  the  rocks  composed  of  a  brownish-red  sandstone  in 
numerous  alternate  strata  of  darker  and  lighter  shades,  though  three  or  four 
only  of  these  were  conspicuous  at  a  distance. 

We  now  turned  nearly  due  north,  the  character  of  the  rocks  continuing 
much  the  same,  except  that  some  narrow  veins  of  a  compact  white  sandstone 
appeared  here  and  there  traversing  the  other.  Some  of  this,  as  well  as  of  the 
red  kind,  occurred  now  and  then  in  a  pulverized  state  ;  the  former  on  first 
taking  it  up,  exactly  resembled  white  sugar  when  moistened  by  water,  but 
being  subsequently  dried  proved  remarkably  minute  and  fine.  After  cross- 
ing a  deep  hollow,  nearly  intersecting  the  peninsula  from  east  to  west,  Ave 
observed  the  rocks  to  consist  of  a  beautiful  variety  of  the  reddish  sand- 
stone, variegated  with  serpentine  and  nearly  concentric  delineations  of  a 
darker  red,  and  having  numerous  oval  knoU  of  various  sizes,  like  those  of 
wood,  giving  the  smoothly  rounded  surface  of  the  bare  rock  in  many 
places  more  the  appearance  of  handsomely  polished  beef-wood  than  of 
stone.  After  passing  over  a  mile  and  a  half  of  this,  we  arrived  at  about 
seven  A.M.  at  the  ultimate  object  of  our  journey,  the  extreme  northern 
point  of  the  peninsula  overlooking  the  narrowest  part  of  the  desired  strait 


rl'm 


<i\,  i 


ts 


•     ll! 


m 


§W 


■"«• 


»<M 


312 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


AuSt  wn*cn  iay  immediately  below  us  in  about  an  east  and  west  direction, 
^-"v^>  being  two  miles  in  width,  apparently  very  deep,  and  with  a  tide  or  current  of 
at  least  two  knots  setting  the  loose  ice  through  to  the  eastward.  Beyond  us 
to  the  west,  the  shores  again  separated  to  the  distance  of  several  leagues; 
and  for  more  than  three  points  of  the  compass  in  that  direction  no  land 
could  be  seen  to  the  utmost  limits  of  a  clear  horizon,  except  one  island  six 
or  seven  miles  distant.  Over  this  we  could  not  entertain  a  doubt  of  having 
discovered  the  Polar  Sea  ;  and  loaded  as  it  was  with  ice,  we  already  felt  as 
if  we  were  on  the  point  of  forcing  our  way  through  it  along  the  northern 
shores  of  America. 

After  despatching  one  of  our  party  to  the  foot  of  the  point  for  some  of 
the  sea-water,  which  was  found  extremely  salt  to  the  taste,  we  hailed  the 
interesting  event  of  the  morning  by  three  hearty  cheers  and  by  a  small  extra 
allowance  of  grog  to  our  people,  to  drink  a  safe  and  speedy  passage  through 
the  channel  just  discovered,  which  I  ventured  to  name  by  anticipation,  the 
Strait  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla.  Having  built  a  pile  of  stones  upon  the  pro- 
montory which,  from  its  situation  with  respect  to  the  Continent  of  America, 
I  called  Cape  North-East,  we  walked  back  to  our  tent  and  baggage,  these 
having,  for  the  sake  of  greater  expedition,  been  left  two  miles  behind  ;  and 
after  resting  a  few  hours  set  out  at  three  P.M.  on  our  return.  To  save  our- 
selves the  fatigue  of  re-ascending  the  craggy  and  precipitous  mountain  land 
passed  over  in  the  morning,  we  struck  through  some  ravines  and  valleys 
more  to  the  southward,  which  however  led  us  so  far  out  of  our  way,  with- 
out much  improving  the  road,  that  we  did  not  reach  our  dep6t  till  a  quarter 
past  seven  in  the  evening,  after  a  circuitous  journey  of  fourteen  or  fifteen 
miles.  This  walk  however  subsequently  proved  of  service  in  pointing  out 
the  route  by  which  another  object  might  be  attained. 

The  whole  of  the  tract  over  which  we  passed  this  day  was  inconceivably 
barren  and  desolate,  with  scarcely  a  tuft  of  moss  or  grass,  or  even  a  snow 
bunting's  note  to  give  occasional  animation  to  the  scene.  I  cannot  help 
adding  however,  that  where,  in  some  moist  and  sheltered  situation,  a  little 
patch  of  green  did  occur,  the  sorrel,  (rumex  digynus,)  was  sure  to  have  put 
forth  its  leaves.  Nor  is  this  the  only  instance  in  which  we  have  remarked 
that  this  hardy  and  valuable  antiscorbutic  plant  seems,  as  it  were,  to  glory 
in  springing  up  and  nourishing  in  situations  where  scarcely  any  other  can 
find  soil  or  moisture  for  its  sustenance.  A  number  of  small  lakes  occur  in 
every  part  of  this  country,   as  well  as  on  all  the  islands  that  we  visited. 


mma#L\SBmFsz 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

Those  on  tlie  main  land  were  mostly  remarkable,  as  having  still  a  patch  of  .1822, 
level  solid  ice,  about  ten  inches  thick,  occupying  the  whole  extent  of  them, 
except  for  a  space  of  fifteen  or  twenty  feet  all  round  the  shores,  where    the 
ice  had  been  dissolved  by  the  warmth  of  the  land.     To  us  the  fact  was  new 
at  this  season,  and  is  still  somewhat  unaccountable.     Whether  so  strange 
a  circumstance  is  to  be  attributed  to  locality  or  to  an  unfavourable  season, 
the  experience  of  a  single  year  or  two  is  not  sufficient  to  determine.     Three 
long-tailed  ducks  were  killed  out  of  a  flock  swimming  in  a  lake  ;  these  bird 
being  in  moult  could  not  rise  from  the  water,  but  their  quickness  in  diving 
makes  it  extremely  difficult  to  shoot  them.     A  hare  of  a  very  dark  colour 
was  seen   near  the  tent,  though  one  of  these  animals  perfectly  white  had 
been  noticed  on  the  same  spot  only  the  day  before.     It  was  high  water 
the  shore  in  Richards's  Bay  at  a  quarter  before  eight  this  evening. 

At  thirty  minutes  past  five  A.M.  on  the  19th,  the  ice  was  observed  to  be  Mon.  19 
setting  fast  to  the  eastward  in  the  Strait,  as  indeed  it  had  always  been 
whenever  we  had  obtained  a  distinct  view  of  it,  which  circumstance  tended 
very  strongly  to  confirm  the  impression  we  had  before  received  of  a  per- 
manent easterly  current.  Having  employed  a  couple  of  hours  in  re-packing 
our  baggage  for  travelling,  we  set  out  on  the  ice  at  six  o'clock  and  reached 
the  small  island  at  nine  ;  where  Ave  were  saluted  as  before  by  swarms  of 
troublesome  mosquitoes.  The  tide  having  fallen  a  little  by  the  marks  on  the 
rocks  we  judged  it  to  have  been  high  water  at  about  half-past  eight.  Proceed, 
ing  again  at  half  an  hour  past  noon,  and  being  now  aware  that  our  easiest 
travelling  was  on  the  level  ice,  through  the  pools  on  which  we  had  learned 
to. pass  with  less  delay  than  at  first,  we  were  enabled  to  reach  Deer  Island 
at  a  single  journey,  by  taking  care  to  avoid  all  the  broken  ice  near  the  land. 
This  latter  precaution  was  indeed  so  necessary,  that,  when  at  length  we 
wished  to  go  on  shore,  it  took  us  above  an  hour  to  effect  the  last  two  hundred 
yards,  and  that  with  more  wet,  cold,  and  fatigue  than  we  had  experienced 
in  walking  the  whole  preceding  journey.  We  landed  however  at  five  P.M., 
and  obtaining  from  the  hills  a  distant  view  of  the  ships,  observed  that  they 
were  employed  in  warping  among  the  ice.  There  was  now  a  great  deal  of 
open  water  in  the  Strait,  and  the  easternmost  of  the  Bouverie  Islands  were 
entirely  cleared  of  the  ice  on  which  we  had  travelled  upon  our  outward 
journey.  We  here  found  some  more  of  the  verdigris-green  substance,  though 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  same  island  as  before,  occurring  precisely  under 
similar  circumstances.     A  little  animal  ran  up  the  rocks  near  our  tent,  which 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

at  the  time  we  took  to  be  an  ermine  ;  but  which  on  subsequent  recollection 
of  its  colour,  furry  coat,  and  brushy  tail,  I  believe  to  have  been  a  squirrel 
of  some  kind,  though  we  have  not  on  any  other  occasion  met  with  this 
animal. 

It  rained  hard  on  the  morning  of  the  20th  till  seven  A.M.,  when  we  re- 
ascended  the  hill  to  determine  our  best  route  to  the  ships  according  to  the 
position  of  the  ice,  and  also  with  the  intention  of  lighting  a  large  smoky  fire 
to  give  intimation  of  our  return,  which  signal  I  had  agreed  on  with  Captain 
Lyon.  In  the  latter  attempt  we  failed,  the  andromeda  being  too  wet  even  to 
produce  smoke  enough  for  our  purpose.  We  therefore  set  out  upon  the  ice 
at  half-past  nine  with  the  intention  of  making  a  hard  push  to  get  on  board 
without  halting.  With  this  view- we  kept  well  into  the  bay,  in  order  to  avoid 
the  detached  ice  near  the  islands,  but  were  once  obliged  to  go  on  shore  on 
account  of  a  broad  crack  that  had  lately  been  made  in  the  floe.  We  could 
at  this  time  scarcely  discover  the  ships  from  the  ice  ;  but  having  the  island 
of  Neerlo-natko  as  a  guide,  we  continued  to  push  on,  hoping  to  reach  them  in 
two  or  three  hours.  At  thirty  minutes  after  three  P.M.  however,  being  sur- 
prised to  find  them  still  six  or  seven  miles  distant,  we  halted  to  dine,  and  to 
let  one  of  our  party,  who  was  seized  with  a  shivering  in  consequence  of  twice 
falling  into  the  water,  shift  his  clothes  ;  after  which  we  again  set  forward. 
At  half-past  five  we  came  to  a  quantity  of  "  hummocky"  ice  that  lay  off  the 
island,  and  finding  here  a  broad  lane  of  water  obstructing  our  progress,  the 
idea  first  occurred  to  us  that  the  ships  must  be  adrift,  the  whole  of  the  ice 
outside  of  us  having  been  lately  broken  up  and  detached  from  the  floe  on 
which  Ave  stood.  By  means  of  ferrying  upon  one  piece  as  a  boat  to  the 
other,  Ave  at  length  got  across  the  lane  of  water  and  found  the  ice  in  sepa- 
rate masses,  but  more  closely  packed  on  the  other  side.  The  plank  being 
now  no  longer  serviceable,  Avhile  it  occasioned  us  much  detention  in  carrying, 
we  fixed  it  in  an  upright  position  on  a  large  floe-piece,  and  in  a  few  minutes 
after  a  gun  from  the  Hecla,  accompanied  by  the  appointed  signal  that  a  boat 
Avas  coming,  assured  us  of  our  being  discovered  by  the  ships.  At  nine  P.M. 
Avhen  some  of  our  party  Avere  nearly  exhausted  Avith  incessant  jumping  and 
Avading,  Lieutenant  Hoppner  met  us  in  one  of  the  boats,  and  we  arrived  on 
board  at  ten  o'clock,  after  tAvelve  hours'  laborious  journey. 

On  almost  all  the  shores  both  of  the  main-land  and  islands  that  we  visited, 
some  traces  of  the  Esquimaux  Avere  found ;  but  they  were  less  numerous 
than  in  any  other  places  on  Avhich  we  had  hitherto  landed.     This  circum- 


HuawrsEMK 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


stance  rather  seemed  to  intimate,  as  we  afterwards  found  to  be  the  case,  that    1822- 

o  •  •  •  August. 

the  shores  of  the  Strait  and  its  immediate  neighbourhood  are  not  a  frequent  v-*-y-%^ 
resort  of  the  natives  during  the  summer  months. 

I  learned  from  Captain  Lyon  that  Mr.  Crozier  and  his  party  had  scarcely 
got  on  board  the  ships  when  the  weather  became  extremely  thick  and 
continued  so  all  night,  so  that  his  return  was  very  opportune,  and  the 
more  so,  as  on  the  following  morning  the  whole  body  of  western  ice,  in- 
cluding that  to  which  the  ships  were  attached,  was  observed  to  have  broken 
up.  Fortunately  however  the  latter,  by  pressing  against  the  island  of  Neerlo- 
Nakto,  enabled  the  ships  for  some  time  to  retain  their  station  and  assisted  in 
keeping  them  off  the  shore  ;  but  they  were  afterwards  drifted  about  in  the 
shoal  water  near  the  island,  and  continued  in  a  very  unpleasant  and  hazard- 
ous situation  till  the  time  of  my  return.  Being  immoveably  beset  by  the 
other  ice  that  had  been  detached,  on  the  night  of  the  17th  the  Fury  sus- 
tained one  or  two  heavy  "  nips"  by  the  pressure,  which  lifted  her  abaft,  but 
without  any  injury  whatever.  Great  quantities  of  ice  were  observed  to 
drift  past  from  the  westward,  from  which  direction,  whenever  the  wind  was 
light,  there  appeared  to  be  a  constant  current. 

If  Mr.  Crozier's  return  was  opportune,  mine  was  certainly  no  less  so,  for  Wed.  21, 
at  the  very  time  of  our  crossing  the  lane  of  water  as  mentioned  above,  the 
ice  was  in  the  act  of  opening  out,  and  continued  to  do  so  for  the  rest  of  the 
night ;  so  that  on  the  morning  of  the  21st,  the  ships  were  nearly  in  clear 
water,  while  the  weather  became  so  thick  in  an  hour  after  our  arrival,  that 
we  could  scarcely  see  a  quarter  of  a  mile  for  two  days  afterwards.  At 
eight  A.M.  we  got  under  way,  with  a  view  of  endeavouring  to  find  the 
margin  of  the  fixed  floe,  by  which  alone  we  could  hope  to  hold  our  ground 
against  the  ice  which  we  knew  to  be  drifting  down  from  the  westward.  In 
this  attempt  we  succeeded,  and  ran  along  it  for  a  short  distance,  when  the 
fog  coming  on  more  thick  than  ever,  we  made  fast  in  thirty-two  fathoms, 
being  about  four  miles  to  the  northward  and  westward  of  Neerlo-Natko. 

On  the  22d  we  twice  made  a  mile  or  two  along  the  edge  of  the  floe,  when-  Thur.22. 
ever  the  weather  permitted  us  to  see  a  short  distance  a-head  ;  but  the  sound- 
ings being  now  too  deep  to  give  us  warning  of  our  approach  to  the  Bouverie 
Islands,  we  made  fast  in  the  evening  in  fifty-seven  fathoms,  the  more  de- 
cayed state  of  the  ice  appearing  to  indicate  our  being  near  enough  to  the 
land.  The  wind  was  very  light  from  the  eastward,  and  the  state  of  the 
weather  rendered  the  ship  so  moist  and  unwholesome  below  that  it  was 

2  S  2 


iiwv: 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


necessary  to  light  a  fire  in  the  warming  stove,  by  which  an  inconceivable 
degree  of  dryness,  warmth,  and  healthy  ventilation  was  produced  in  the 
course  of  two  or  three  hours.  Several  white  whales  were  playing  about  the 
ships,  and  a  number  of  sillocks  from  four  to  eight  inches  in  length,  observed 
near  the  small  pieces  of  drift-ice.  It  appeared  to  us  a  remarkable  coinci- 
dence that  the  last  time  we  had  met  with  sillocks,  which  was  in  the  entrance 
to  the  Duke  of  York's  Bay,  white  whales  seemed  to  be  hemming  them  in 
upon  the  shores  in  shallow  water. 

The  ice  coming  in  upon  us  soon  closed  the  open  space  through  which  we 
had  been  sailing  ;  and  at  half-past  two  A.M.  on  the  23d,  a  partial  clearing  of 
the  weather  discovered  to  us  the  islands  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  and  a 
half  to  the  N.W.b.W.  The  wind  veering  to  the  N.N.E.  in  the  course  of  the 
afternoon,  the  weather  became  more  clear;  but  the  breeze  freshening  at 
night  brought  the  whole  body  of  external  drift-ice  upon  us  with  considerable 
pressure. 

On  the  25th  the  wind  having  at  length  backed  to  the  W.N. W.,  the  prospect 
began  to  brighten ;  the  ice  in  the  fair-way  of  the  Strait  soon  acquiring  motion 
to  the  eastward,  and  that  near  the  ships  shortly  after  beginning  to  drive, 
though  more  slowly,  in  the  same  direction.  Half  an  hour  afternoon,  as  soon 
as  there  appeared  the  least  chance  of  making  any  progress  Ave  made  sail  and 
prepared  for  moving  the  Fury.  On  heaving  upon  the  hawsers,  however,  in 
order  to  cast  the  ship's  head  towards  a  lane  of  water  not  two  hundred  yards 
distant,  we  found  her  so  compactly  "soldered,"  as  the  sailors  aptly  call  it, 
between  the  masses  of  ice  by  the  late  pressure  from  without,  that  all  our 
power  was  insufficient  to  move  her  head  a  single  degree  of  the  compass. 
Captain  Lyon  having  suggested  the  mode  of  pulling  us  out  by  making  sail  on 
the  Hecla,  which  the  ice  had  entirely  left,  it  was  tried  without  effect,  the 
masses  having  so  effectually  overlaid  each  other  by  the  pressure  as,  with  the 
assistance  of  a  slight  degree  of  frost,  to  form  one  body  almost  as  compact  as 
a  solid  floe.  No  better  success  attended  an  attempt  to  detach  one  piece 
after  another,  beginning  from  the  outside,  by  the  Hecla's  dragging  upon  them 
under  all  sail,  for  the  ship  was  brought  up  without  the  masses  separating. 
One  only  method  and  that  a  slow  and  laborious  one  remained,  which  was  to 
employ  all  hands  from  both  ships  with  handspikes,  axes,  and  saws,  to  detach 
and  force  off  one  or  two  masses  at  a  time.  This  plan  at  length  effected  our 
release  ;  and  at  nine  P.M.,  after  eight  hours'  incessant  labour  bestowed  upon 
an  obstacle  apparently  so  trifling,  we  got  into  clear  water  and  stretched  to 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

the  northward,  the  main  ice  having  in  the  meantime  disappeared  so  effectually    1822- 

.    .  ,.  August, 

that  nothing  was  eventually  lost  by  our  late  detention.      After  standing  on 

for  an  hour  or  two  we  had  scarcely  any  ice  about  us,  and  by  midnight  were 

entirely  clear  of  it. 

The  wind  gradually  falling  was  succeeded  by  a  light  north-easterly  Mon.  26. 
breeze,  with  which  at  daylight  on  the  26th  we  steered  under  all  possible 
sail  up  the  Strait.  The  course  being  shaped  and  no  ice  in  our  way,  I 
then  went  to  bed;  but  was  immediately  after  informed  by  Mr.  Crozier  that 
the  compasses  had  shifted  from  N.|E.,  which  was  the  course  I  left  them 
indicating,  to  E.|N.,  being  a  change  of  seven  points,  in  less  than  ten  mi- 
nutes. After  running  half  a  mile  in  a  true  W.b.N.  direction,  the  needles 
began  to  return  to  their  true  position;  in  half  a  mile  farther  they  had  resumed 
their  proper  direction  and  agreed  exactly  at  North.  Having  sent  a  boat  to 
the  Hecla  immediately  on  our  noticing  the  first  alteration,  I  found  from 
Captain  Lyon  that  a  similar  phenomenon  was  observed  to  take  place  on 
board  that  ship,  which  was  following  in  our  wake.  The  breeze  slowly  in- 
creasing from  the  eastward,  and  the  weather  happily  remaining  unusually 
clear  for  that  direction  of  the  wind,  we  soon  arrived  off  the  narrow  part  of 
the  Strait,  immediately  on  opening  which,  we  met  a  tide  or  current  running 
above  two  knots  to  the  eastward  with  numerous  eddies  and  ripplings.  By 
keeping  on  the  south  or  continental  shore,  and  passing  along  by  Cape  North- 
East,  within  two  or  three  hundred  yards  of  the  rocks,  we  succeeded  with 
the  assistance  of  the  boats  a-head  in  getting  through  the  channel  soon  after 
eleven  o'clock. 

The  length  of  this  narrowest  part  of  the  Strait  is  three  miles,  in  an  E.b.S, 
and  W.b.N.  direction  ;  it  is  two  miles  across  and  nearly  uniform  in  its  width 
the  whole  way  through.  The  rocks  of  red  sandstone  on  the  south  side  shelve 
gradually  down  from  a  height  of  three  or  four  hundred  feet,  so  that  in  sail- 
ing through  we  had  generally  two  fathoms  more  depth  of  water  on  the  outer 
than  on  the  inner  side  of  the  ship,  the  soundings  continuing  deep  however 
almost  close  to  the  shore.  The  opposite  or  northern  land  of  the  narrows, 
where  on  closer  examination  Ave  found  several  islands,  is  also  high,  but  less 
shelving  than  the  other,  and  presenting  when  clear  of  snow  a  much  darker 
appearance.  The  eastern  point  of  the  entrance  on  this  shore,  which  I  named 
Cape  Ossory,  has  a  small  rocky  islet  lying  close  off  it,  upon  which  there  was 
much  heavy  ice  aground.  In  several  other  places  also  on  both  sides,  but 
particularly  on  the  south  shore,  large  heaps  of  ice  lay  piled  up  upon  the  rocks 


kw.. 


318 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


' 


j 


1822.    jn  one  or  two  spots  to  the  height  of  forty  or  fifty  feet.     The  current  in  mid- 

v^L'  channel   was  running  three  or  four  knots  to  the  eastward  when  we  came 

through,  and  nothing  hut  the  boldness  of  the  shore  would  have  enabled 

us  to  effect  a  passage,  as  the  wind  was  too  light  to  stem  the  stream  in  the 

middle. 

Steering  to  the  southward  of  the  island  before  seen  from  Cape  North-East, 
in  order  still  to  keep  along  the  continental  shore,  we  passed  between  two 
dangerous  shoals,  one  of  which  runs  off  from  the  island  and  the  other  lies 
quite  by  itself,  about  midway  between  this  and  the  main-land.  The  latter 
was  at  this  time  pointed  out  by  a  great  quantity  of  heavy  ice  lying  aground 
upon  it,  as  well  as  by  a  yellow  sandstone  rock  that  made  its  appearance  in 
one  or  two  places  just  above  the  surface  of  the  water.  After  clearing  these, 
and  again  deepening  our  soundings,  we  had  begun  to  indulge  the  most  flatter- 
ing hopes  of  now  making  such  a  rapid  progress  as  would  in  some  degree  com- 
pensate for  all  our  delays  and  disappointments,  when,  at  once  to  crush  every 
expectation  of  this  sort,  it  was  suddenly  announced  from  the  crow's-nest 
that  another  barrier  of  fixed  ice  stretched  completely  across  the  Strait,  a  little 
beyond  us,  in  one  continuous  and  impenetrable  field,  still  occupying  its 
winter-station.  In  less  than  an  hour  we  had  reached  its  margin  when,  find- 
ing this  report  but  too  correct,  and  that  therefore  all  further  progress  was  at 
present  as  impracticable  as  if  no  Strait  existed,  we  ran  the  ships  under  all 
sail  for  the  floe,  which  proved  so  "  rotten"  and  decayed  that  the  ships  forced 
themselves  three  or  four  hundred  yards  through  it  before  they  stopped. 
Keeping  all  our  canvass  spread  we  then  tried  to  break  the  thin  edges  about 
the  numerous  holes,  by  dropping  weights  over  the  bows,  as  well  as  by  vari- 
ous other  equally  ineffectual  expedients  ;  but  the  ice  was  "  tough"  enough 
to  resist  every  effort  of  this  kind,  though  its  watery  state  was  such  as  to 
increase  if  possible  our  annoyance  at  being  stopped  by  it.  The  passage  to 
the  northward  of  the  island  was  not  even  so  clear  as  this  by  above  two  miles 
of  ice,  so  that  in  every  respect  our  present  route  was  to  be  preferred  to  the 
other  ;  and  thus  after  a  vexatious  delay  of  six  weeks  at  the  eastern  entrance 
of  the  Strait,  and  at  a  time  when  we  had  every  reason  to  hope  that  nature, 
though  hitherto  tardy  in  her  annual  disruption  of  the  ice,  had  at  length  made 
an  effort  to  complete  it,  did  we  find  our  progress  once  more  opposed  by  a 
barrier  of  the  same  continuous,  impenetrable,  and  hopeless  nature  as  at 
first ! 

We  lay  here  in  thirty-six  fathoms  on  a  soft  bottom,  being  about  a  mile  and  a 


ttiA&^xtl^^iraiKX^ :y.-w^YcLA  ,  s  >>*«>        «.;v 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


319 


half  from  the  high  ruffled  land  of  the  continent  to  the  south,  and  a  mile  and   A1822* 

0  °°    _  _  August. 

three-quarters  from  the  island,  which  is  comparatively  low.     Some  sea-water   ^v-*-> 
taken  up  from  the  surface  in  passing  through  the  narrows,  was  found  by  Mr. 
Fisher  to  be  of  the  specific  gravity  1.0263,  at  the  temperature  of  52°. 

The  wind  being  light  and  variable  on  the  27th,  two  boats  were  sent  to  the  Tues.  27. 
island  and  two  to  the  main-land  by  way  of  examining  the  natural  productions, 
of  which  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  more  fully  hereafter.  Specimens  of 
every  thing  noticed  were  brought  on  board  by  our  gentlemen,  and  the  fol- 
lowing remarkable  observations  made  on  the  tides,  the  first  being  Lieutenant 
Reid's  report  on  the  main-land,  and  the  second  that  of  Mr.  Henderson's  on 
the  island :  "  The  tide  was  found  to  ebb  by  the  shore  from  thirty  minutes 
past  nine  till  thirty  minutes  after  eleven  A.M.,  the  fall  being  four  inches. 
FronVthirty  minutes  past  eleven  to  fifteen  minutes  after  noon  it  rose  one  inch, 
and  then  fell  four  inches  till  two  P.M.,  when  the  boat  left  the  shore." 
"  Landing  on  the  island  at  twenty  minutes  past  nine  A.M.  the  tide  was  ob- 
served to  fall  six  inches  till  thirty  minutes  past  eleven,  from  which  time  till 
noon  it  rose  an  inch  and  a  half,  then  ebbed  eight  inches  till  thirty  minutes 
after  two  P.M."  The  tide,  being  tried  in  the  offing  by  the  small  boat  moored 
to  the  bottom,  Avas  found  to  set  as  follows  : 


It.  m. 

per  hour. 

At  9.10  A.M. 

E.S.E. 

^  mile 

„  11.15     „ 

w.s  w. 

i 

To      >» 

„     2.0  P.M. 

Westward 

1 

T       " 

„     4.0        „ 

Do. 

1 

Between  seven  and  eight  P.M.  the  loose  ice  began  to  leave  the  floe  edge, 
and  to  drift  against  a  light  wind  to  the  eastward.  By  these  and  our  subse- 
quent observations  on  the  tides  in  this  part  of  the  Strait,  it  seems  apparent 
that  the  phenomena,  both  of  the  stream  and  of  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  water, 
are  the  joint  effects  of  a  tide  and  a  current,  the  latter  in  general  setting  to  the 
eastward  at  this  season. 

The  weather  being  warm,  a  sensible  alteration  was  produced  in  the  ap- 
pearance of  the  ice  in  the  course  of  the  day,  and  we  could  not  now  commu- 
nicate between  the  two  ships  by  walking  over  the  floe,  Avithout  the  assist- 
ance of  planks.  This  circumstance  encouraged  me  once  more  to  attempt 
getting  the  ships  through  it  to  the  westward,  by  employing  the  method  of 
sawing  and  sinking,  though  where  this  labour  was  to  end  it  was  not  easy  to 
guess,  as  our  parties  on  shore  had  not  been  able  to  discover  from  the  hills 
any  indication  of  open  water  in  that  direction.     The  saws  and  other  geer 


& 


1 


320 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


|... 


1822. 
August. 


were,   however,   prepared   for  this   attempt   at  four  o'clock  the  following 


tri:  I 


Wed.  28.  The  weather  became  so  thick  with  rain  and  snow  in  the  course  of  the 
night,  that  we  could  not  see  half  a  mile  in  any  direction  ;  but  about  one 
A.M.  on  the  28th,  we  began  to  perceive,  by  a  gradual  alteration  in  the 
soundings,  that  the  ice  to  which  the  ships  were  attached  was  adrift.  No 
time  was  therefore  to  be  lost  in  getting  the  ships  underway,  to  be  at  liberty 
to  act  as  circumstances  might  require,  for  we  did  not  know  in  what  direction 
we  were  driving.  The  weather  now  became  so  much  thicker,  with  snow  in 
large  flakes,  that  we  could  with  difficulty  see  three  hundred  yards  a-head. 
We  stood  to  the  eastward,  however,  and  after  getting  sight  of  the  grounded 
ice  on  the  shoals,  tacked  off  and  on  till  we  should  see  how  the  floe  we  had 
left  was  driving.  It  was  not  long  before  we  perceived  it  to  be  setting  directly 
on  the  shoals,  so  that  it  was  necessary  for  us  to  find  our  way  between  them,  at 
•all  risks,  to  avoid  the  certain  danger  of  being  forced  upon  the  rocks.  In 
making  a  tack  near  the  shoals,  the  Fury's  helm  was  put  down  in  eight 
fathoms,  but  before  the  sails  filled,  the  ship  was  carried  by  the  current  into 
three,  and  the  yellow  rocks  were  plainly  visible  under  her.  She  gathered 
way,  however,  just  in  time  to  avoid  grounding,  and  the  Hecla,  presently 
after,  escaping  a  similar  accident  near  the  same  spot,  we  cleared  the  shoals 
in  another  tack  or  two,  and  then  stood  to  the  eastward. 

Proceeding  with  all  the  caution  which  the  state  of  the  weather,  and  the 
extremely  confined  nature  of  the  navigation,  rendered  requisite,  we  soon 
made  the  northern  land  of  the  narrows,  within  a  mile  of.  which  we  remained 
for  several  hours,  endeavouring  to  find  some  sheltered  anchorage,  the  wind 
being  fresh  from  the  N.N.W.  and  the  weather  becoming  still  more  inclement 
than  before.  So  steep,  however,  was  this  shore,  that  we  could  obtain  no 
soundings  with  eighty-eight  fathoms  of  line  at  half  a  mile  distance,  and 
generally  found  from  thirty  to  twenty-six  within  a  cable's  length  of  the 
rocks,  in  every  little  nook  the  boats  entered.  In  the  evening,  finding  the 
weather  not  likely  to  improve,  and  that  the  situation  of  the  ships,  if  kept 
under  way  during  the  night  in  this  narrow  and  unknown  channel,  must  be  a 
very  dangerous  one,  we  btfre  up  to  make  the  island,  in  the  hope  of  finding- 
shelter  under  one  of  its  numerous  low  points.  In  this  last  resource  we  were 
not  disappointed  ;  for  in  an  hour's  run  we  made  the  island,  which  was  now  so 
covered  with  snow  as  to  be  easily  mistaken  for  a  floe  of  ice  without  great 
attention  to  the  leads  ;  and  with  a  degree  of  good  fortune  which  has  never 


KJ&  £*&';*WXi$^lA\*S&2X£SV  }  »^\& '        >*«  vt         v&r*: 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


321 


to* 


yet  deserted  us  in  such  cases,  we  succeeded  in  picking  out  an  excellent  an- 
chorage in  eleven  fathoms,  where  we  passed  a  thick,  snowy,  and  dark  night, 
without  any  disturbance  from  wind  or  ice. 

As  soon  as  the  anchors  were  dropped,  my  attention  was  once  more  turned 
to  the  main  object  of  the  Expedition,  from  which  it  had  for  a  moment  been 
diverted  by  the  necessity  of  exerting  every  effort  for  the  immediate  safety  of 
the  ships.  This  being  now  provided  for,  I  had  leisure  to  consider  in  what  man- 
ner, hampered  as  the  ships  were  by  the  present  state  of  the  ice,  our  means 
and  exertions  might  during  this  unavoidable  detention  be  employed  to  the 
greatest  advantage,  or  at  least  with  the  best  prospect  of  ultimate  utility. 

Whatever  doubts  might  at  a  distance  have  been  entertained  respecting 
the  identity,  or  the  contrary,  of  the  place  visited  by  Captain  Lyon  with  that 
subsequently  discovered  by  myself,  there  could  be  none  on  a  nearer  view ; 
as,  independently  of  the  observed  latitude,  Captain  Lyon  could  not,  on  ap- 
proaching the  narrows,  recognise  a  single  feature  of  the  land  ;  our  present 
channel  being  evidently  a  much  wider  and  more  extensive  one  than  that 
pointed  out  by  Toolemak  on  the  journey.  It  became,  therefore,  a  matter  of 
interest,  now  that  this  point  was  settled,  and  our  progress  again  stopped  by 
an  insuperable  obstacle,  to  ascertain  the  extent  and  communication  of  the 
southern  inlet;  and,  should  it  prove  a  second  strait,  to  watch  the  breaking  up 
of  the  ice  about  its  eastern  entrance,  that  no  favourable  opportunity  might 
be  missed  of  pushing  through  it  to  the  westward.  Hitherto,  as  1  have 
before  remarked,  the  question  respecting  the  existence  of  a  second  passage, 
had  been  wholly  unimportant  as  concerned  the  movements  of  the  Expedi- 
tion, because  we  could  see,  at  the  time  of  our  entering  the  present  strait, 
that  the  only  possible  track  to  the  other  was  blocked  by  solid  and  continuous 
ice.  The  mortifying  prospect  however  of  a  second  detention  in  this  strait, 
added  to  the  consideration  of  the  sudden  changes  that  often  take  place  in 
the  state  of  the  ice,  rendered  it  again  necessary  to  revert  to  the  southern 
inlet,  to  which,  but  a  few  days  before,  we  had  ceasedto  attach  any  importance. 
I  therefore  determined  to  despatch  three  separate  parties,  to  satisfy  all  doubts 
in  that  quarter,  as  well  as  to  gain  every  possible  information  as  to  the  length 
of  the  Strait,  and  the  extent  of  the  fixed  ice,  now  more  immediately  before  us. 

With  this  view,  I  requested  Captain  Lyon  to  take  with  him  Mr.  Griffiths 
and  four  men,  and  proceed  over  land  in  a  S.b.E.  direction,  till  he  should  de- 
termine by  the  difference  of  latitude,  which  amounted  only  to  sixteen  miles, 
whether  there  was  or  was  not  a  strait  leading  to  the  westward,  about  the 

2  T 


1822. 
August. 


322 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.  parallel  of  69°  26',  being  nearly  that  in  which  the  place  called  by  the  Esqui- 
maux Khemig  had  been  found  by  observation  to  lie.  This  appeared  a  simple 
and  effectual  method  of  deciding  a  question,  on  which  the  operations  of  the 
Expedition  might  ultimately  depend.  In  the  mean  time,  Lieutenant  Palmer, 
was  directed  to  proceed  in  a  boat  to  Igloolik,  or  Neerlo-nakto,  as  might 
be  necessary,  to  ascertain  whether  the  passage  leading  towards  Khemig  was 
yet  clear  of  ice  ;  and,  should  he  find  any  one  of  the  Esquimaux  willing  to 
accompany  him  to  the  ships  with  his  canoe,  to  bring  him  on  board  as  a  pilot. 
The  third  party  consisted  of  Mr.  Bushnan,  with  three  men,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Reid,  who  was  instructed  to  proceed  along  the  conti- 
nental coast  to  the  westward,  to  gain  as  much  information  as  possible  re- 
specting the  termination  of  our  present  strait,  the  time  of  his  return  to  the 
ships  being  limited  to  four  days,  at  the  expiration  of  which  the  other  two 
parties  might  also  be  expected  to  reach  us. 

By  this  arrangement,  in  which  the  connexion  of  each  expedition  with  the 
others,  and  that  of  the  whole  with  our  main  object,  will  easily  be  perceived, 
I  hoped  to  gain  such  information  as  would  either  confirm  my  determination 
to  continue  our  efforts  in  the  present  station  of  the  ships,  or  point  out, 
beyond  any  doubt,  the  expediency  of  transferring  them  to  some  other 
quarter.  Having  gone  on  board  the  Hecla  to  communicate  my  views  and 
intentions  to  Captain  Lyon,  I  directed  every  thing  to  be  in  readiness  for 
despatching  the  parties  at  noon  on  the  following  day. 

On  the  morning  of  the  29th,  the  wind  being  light  from  the  eastward  but 
the  weather  much  more  clear  than  before,  we  weighed  and  stood  over  to  the 
main-land  with  the  intention  of  putting  our  travellers  on  shore,  but  found 
that  coast  now  so  lined  with  the  ice  which  had  lately  broken  adrift,  that  it 
was  not  possible  for  a  boat  to  approach  it.  We  could  not  help  at  this  time 
congratulating  ourselves  on  the  fortunate  escape  we  had  experienced,  in  not 
having  already  cut  any  distance  into  the  floe  before  it  separated  ;  for  in  such 
a  case  it  would  hardly  have  been  possible  to  escape  driving  on  shore  with  it. 
Standing  off  to  the  westward,  to  see  what  service  the  late  disruption  had 
done  us,  we  found  that  a  considerable  floe  had  separated,  exactly  in  a  line 
between  the  island  off  which  we  lay  and  a  second  to  the  westward  of  it, 
subsequently  named,  at  Lieutenant  Hoppner's  request,  in  honour  of  Lord 
Amherst*.  Tacking  at  the  newly-formed  margin  of  the  fixed  ice,  we  observed, 

These  two  islands  are  probably  those  delineated  by  Iligliuk  in  this  situation,  in  her  chart, 
(No.  2.) 


Thur.  29. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

not  only  that  it  was  still  firmly  attached  to  the  shores,  but  that  it  was  now    1822- 
almost  entirely  "  hummocky,"  and  heavier  than  any  we  had  seen  since  JJ?!?* 
making  Igloolik  ;  some  of  the  hummocks,  as  we  afterwards  found,  measuring 
from  eight  to  ten  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  sea. 

The  different  character  now  assumed  by  the  ice,  while  it  certainly  damped 
our  hopes  of  the  passage  being  cleared  this  season  by  the  gradual  effect  of 
dissolution,  confirmed  however,  in  a  very  satisfactory   manner,  the  belief 
of  our  being  in  a  broad  channel  communicating  with  a  western  sea.     As 
the  conclusions  we  immediately  drew  from  this  circumstance  may  not  be  so 
obvious  to  others,  I  shall  here  briefly  explain  that,  from  the  manner  in  which 
the  hummocky  floes  are  formed,  it  is  next  to  impossible  that  any  of  these  of 
considerable  extent  can  ever  be  produced  in  a  mere  inlet  having  a  narrow 
communication  with  the  sea.     There  is  in  fact  no  ice  to  which  the  denomi- 
nation of  "sea-ice"  may  be  more  strictly  and  exclusively  applied  than  this ; 
and  we  therefore  felt  confident  that  the  immense  floes  which  now  opposed 
our  progress,  must  have  come  from  the  sea  on  one  side  or  the  other ;  while 
the  current,  which  we  had  observed  to  run  in  an  easterly  direction  in  the 
narrows  of  this  strait,  precluded  the  possibility  of  such  ice  having  found  its 
Way  in  from  that  quarter.     The  only  remaining  conclusion  was,  that  it  must 
have  been  set  into  the  Strait  from  the  westward  towards  the  close  of  a  sum- 
mer, and  cemented  in  its  present  situation  by  the  frost  of  the  succeeding  winter. 
Standing  back  towards  the  Eastern  Island,  which  I  named  after  my  friend 
and  late  companion  in   these  regions,  Captain  Matthew  Liddon  of    the 
Royal  Navy,  and  finding  the  shore  quite  clear  of  ice,  wxe  dropped  our 
anchors  under  its  lee  in  twelve  fathoms,  on  a  muddy   bottom,  at  the  dis- 
tance of  half  a  mile  from  the  beach.     We  had  scarcely  secured  the  ships, 
however,  when  some  large  masses  of  heavy  drift-ice  began  to  set  toward  us, 
and  several  of  these  successively  coming  in  contact  with  the  Fury's  bows 
and  cable,  I  directed  the  anchors  to  be  immediately  weighed  again,  rather 
than  run  any  risk  of  damage  to  them ;  and  sailing  over  to  the  fixed  ice,  made 
our  hawsers  fast  to  it  and  lay  securely  for  the  night. 

A  great  deal  of  snow  having  fallen  in  the  last  two  days,  scarcely  a  dark  Frid.  30. 
patch  was  now  to  be  seen  on  any  part  of  the  land,  so  that  the  prospect  at 
daylight  on  the  30th,  was  as  comfortless  as  can  well  be  imagined  for  the 
parties  who  were  just  about  to  find  their  way  among  the  rocks  and  precipices. 
Soon  after  four  A.M.,  however,  when  we  had  ascertained  that  the  drift-ice 
was  no  longer  lying  in  their  way,  they  were  all  despatched  in  their  different 

2  T   2 


M*s* 


324 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822-    directions.     For  each  of  the  land-parties  a  depot  of  several  days'  provision 
JivS'-  and  fuel  was,  in  case  of  accidents,  established  on  the  beach ;  and  Lieutenant 
Palmer  took  in  his  boat  a  supply  for  nine  days. 

The  fact  of  our  never  having  seen  a  stream  of  tide  or  current  setting 
through  the  narrows  of  the  Strait  in  any  direction  but  to  the  eastward,  made 
it  an  object  of  curiosity  to  ascertain  by  observation  on  the  spot  during  at  least 
two  consecutive  tides,  whether  or  not  a  permanent  current  existed  there. 
I  determined  therefore  on  despatching  Mr.  Crozier  on  this  service  ;  and  the 
absence   of  so   many  of   our  people   necessarily  limiting   our  means,  his 
establishment  only  consisted  of  the  small  nine-feet  boat  and  two  marines, 
with  which  he  left  us  under  sail  at  one  P.M.,  being  provisioned  for  four  days. 
I  directed  Mr.  Crozier  to  land  and  pitch  his  tent  somewhere  about  Cape 
North-East,  and  after  carefully  observing  the  tides,  both  on  shore  and  in  the 
offing,  for  the  whole  of  one  day,  immediately  to  return  to  the  ships.     The 
weather  improving  as  the  day  advanced,  a  good  deal  of  snow  disappeared 
from  the  islands,  but  little  or  none  on  the  rugged  high  land  of  the  continent. 
Sat.  31.       On  the  31st,  the  wind  blew  fresh  and  cold  from  the  north-west,  which 
caused  a  quantity  of  ice  to  separate  from  the  fixed  floe  in  small  pieces  during 
the  day,  and  drift  past  the  ships.     Early  in  the  morning,  a  she-bear  and  her 
two  cubs  were  observed  floating  down  on  one  of  these  masses,  and  coming 
close  to  the  Hecla  were  all  killed.      The  female  proved  remarkably  small, 
two  or  three  men  being  able  to  lift  her  into  a  boat.     A  large  party  of  us  from 
each  ship  passed  several  hours  on  shore  at  Liddon  Island,  in  examining  its 
natural  productions.     The  basis  of  this  island,  which  rises  perhaps  in  some 
parts  two  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  is  a  brownish  sandstone, 
though  the  same  substance  is  abundantly  found  of  different  colours,  such  as 
red  of  various  shades,  dark  brown,  white,  and  striped  with  curved  lines  in 
the  manner  described  near  Cape  North-East.     On  the  higher  parts  of  the 
land,  nodules  of  white  quartz,  from  an  inch  and  a  half  in  diameter  to  the 
size  of  a  grain  of  sand,  are  found  in  large  quantities  imbedded  in  the  sand- 
stone rock,  and  a  great  variety  of  other  substances  are  lying  in  loose  pieces 
on  the  beach.      Of  these  one  of  the  most  abundant  was  a  species  of  iron- 
stone which,  from  its  weight,  appeared  to  be  a  rich  ore ;  and  a  large  rock  on 
the  beach  contained  a  good  deal  of  asbestos.      A  great  variety  of  other 
specimens   were    procured    from  this    island,  which   was  however  almost 
entirely  barren  of  the  productions  of  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms. 
Of  the  former  we  saw   only  a  single  herd  of  deer,   and  the  little  vegeta- 


.  **::» /\3^xw^'vj^^i>i^:»r>^.^  a  s  ■*<*.**        &r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


325 


tion  which  might  have  afforded  them  subsistence,  was  now  permanently 
covered  with  a  coating  of  snow,  from  three  to  six  inches  in  depth,  and  so 
hard  as  to  allow  us  to  walk  on  it  without  sinking.  The  view  from  the  high 
part  of  the  is1  and,  which  was  a  favourable  situation  for  opening  the  western 
entrance  of  the  Strait,  was  extremely  satisfactory  as  regarded  land,  but  not  a 
single  break  could  be  seen  in  the  ice,  to  the  utmost  limits  of  the  horizon. 

At  half-past  nine  on  the  morning  of  the  1st  of  September,  one  of  our 
parties  was  descried  at  the  appointed  rendezvous  on  shore,  which  on  our 
sending  a  boat  to  bring  them  on  board,  proved  to  be  Captain  Lyon  and 
his  people.  From  their  early  arrival  we  were  in  hopes  that  some  decisive  in- 
formation had  at  length  been  obtained  ;  and  our  disappointment  may  there- 
fore be  imagined,  in  finding  that,  owing  to  insuperable  obstacles  on  the  road, 
of  which  Captain  Lyon's  annexed  account  will  give  the  best  idea,  he  had 
not  been  able  to  advance  above  five  or  six  miles  to  the  southward,  and  that 
with  excessive  danger  and  fatigue,  owing  to  the  depth  of  the  snow,  and  the 
numerous  lakes  and  precipices. 

"  On  striking  inland  we  found  the  mountains  deeply  covered  with  snow, 
yet  made  about  three  miles  uninterrupted,  but  by  the  precipices.  At  this 
distance  we  found  the  mountains  to  increase  considerably  in  height,  and 
they  were  so  completely  intersected  by  deep  lakes,  as  frequently  to  oblige 
us  to  retrace  our  steps  and  toil  up  the  same  cliffs  which  we  had  but  a  short 
time  before  descended  with  considerable  difficulty  and  danger.  The  depth 
of  the  recently  fallen  snow  was  from  one  to  three  feet,  and  where  chasms 
occurred  amongst  the  crags  it  was  of  course  in  a  greater  body.  We  here 
found  it  requisite  to  feel  our  way  with  poles,  for  had  any  of  our  party 
fallen  into  a  cleft  of  the  rocks  it  would  have  been  out  of  our  power  to 
extricate  him.  The  general  acclivity  of  the  mountains  was  so  great  that  it 
became  necessary  to  disperse  in  climbing  or  descending,  least  the  loose 
fragments  of  a  rock,  or  a  false  step,  should  have  precipitated  those  beneath 
several  hundred  feet  to  the  bottom.  We  were  employed  above  eight  hours 
to-day  at  this  laborious  work,  and  found  in  the  evening  that  we  had  not 
made  more  than  five  miles  direct  from  our  first  landing-place,  for  we  could 
plainly  see  the  open  water  in  which  the  ships  were  lying,  and  with  naked 
eye  discern  the  grounded  ice  off  Liddon  Island.  We  pitched  our  tents 
under  a  crag  on  the  mountain  top  where  we  passed  a  very  cold  night. 

;  We  set  out  at  six  in  the  morning  of  the  31st,  apparently  with  a  better 


1822. 
August. 


I 


Sept. 
Sun.  1. 


!*' 


ABSTRACT 

of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board 

His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Sea,  d 

uring  the  Month  of  August,  1822. 

j 

1 

Fahrenheit's  Ther- 
mometer. 

Sea  Water  at 
the  surface. 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 
Weather. 

Day 

Place. 

Maxi- 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Mean 
Temp. 

Specific 
Gravity 

Temp. 

when 

weighed 

Maxi- 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Di  recti  on. 

Velocity. 

1    - 

0 

34 

O 

30 

O 

32.  75 

o 
31.33 

1 .0265 

O 
55 

inchcs 

.29.58 

inches 

29.39 

inches 

29.483 

ESE 

modt. 

bhazy  and  rain 

I    2 

39 

32 

36.04 

32.42 

29.62 

29.59 

29.603 

NE 

modt. 

cloudy 

3 

50 

33 

39.37 

31.83 

29.62 

29.48 

29.578 

fAM.  NE 

£pm.  SW 

light 

fine 

4 

39 

29| 

34.54 

31.50 

1.0243 

50 

29.61 

29.43 

29.530 

SW  to  N W 

modt. 

cloudy,  rain  at 
times 

5 

c$ 

40 

28 

34.33 

31.00 

29.61 

29.56 

29.582 

South 

modt. 

cloudy,  rain  at 
times 

6 

44 

30 

37.42 

31.42 

29.57 

29.52 

29.542 

NW 

light,  calm 
at  times 

fine 

S 7 

s 

44 

31 

35.25 

32.11 

1.0201 

51| 

29.52 

29.49 

29.508 

WNW 

modt. 

fine 

8 

>> 
3 

37 

31 

33.42 

32.67 

29.57 

29.44 

29.503 

WNW 

light 

hazy  and  rain 

1    ° 

CD 

35 

30 

32.92 

31.54 

29.53 

29.37 

29.460 

S  to  WNW 

light 

hazy,  rain  at 
times 

10 

o 

48 

32 

36.37 

31.92 

29.54 

29.45 

29.495 

SW 

modt. 

cloudy 

11 

'5 

38 

30 

33.96 

31.67 

29.71 

29.60 

29.663 

WbN 

modt. 

fine 

12 

09 
0} 

32 

30 

31.04 

31.42 

29.48 

29.20 

29.312 

SSE 

strong  to 
light 

hazy,  snow  and 
sleet 

13 

►  3 

o 

41 

301 

34.04 

31.75 

29.38 

29.23 

29.297 

Westerly 

light 

foggy,  rain  at 
times 

14 

CD 
CD 

a 

3G 

30 

33.04 

31.42 

29.51 

29.38 

29.412 

WNW 

modt 

cloudy 

15 

W 

3S 

32 

34.42 

31.12 

29.40 

29.38 

29.395 

NWbW 

modt. 

cloudy 

10 

36 

31 

33.17 

31.21 

29.43 

29.40 

29.413 

NNW 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

17 

H 

CD 

30 

30 

32.  C2 

31.37 

29.60 

29.48 

29.553 

NWbW 

light 

cloudy 

18 

40 

30 

34.08 

31.83 

29.64 

29.60 

29.615 

North 

modt. 

fine 

19 

£ 

39 

33 

35.75 

32.54 

29.70 

29.65 

29.680 

C  round  the 
l  compass 

light  and 
variable 

cloudy 

20 

38 

33 

34.58 

32.00 

29.80 

29.70 

29.743 

WNW 

modt.. 

cloudy 

21 

34 

31 

32.67 

31.50 

29.64 

29.54 

29.602 

NE 

modt. 

foggy  and  rain 

22 

36 

30 

32.71 

29.96 

29.51 

29.33 

29.438 

East 

light 

foggy 

23 

40 

29 

33.08 

29.67 

29.33 

29.21 

29.257 

NE 

modt. 

hazy  and  rain 

24 

_ 

36 

32 

33.92 

30.50 

29.46 

29.38 

29.430 

NWbW 

modt. 

cloudy 

25 

>> 

37 

30i 

33.62 

30.25 

29.61 

29.48 

29.563 

NW 

modt. 

fine 

2G 

38 

30 

32.67 

29.42 

I .0263 

52 

29.70 

29.60 

29.650 

East 

light 

cloudy 

27 

CD 

5* 

40 

29 

32.75 

28.79 

1 .0256 

52 

29.68 

29.41 

29.572 

ESE 

light 

cloudy 

28 

o  <u 

("•"ft 

31 

30 

30.71 

28.2'J 

29.37 

29.09 

29.1S6 

NNW 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

29 

33 

29 

30.42 

28.54 

29.36 

29.02  29.173 

NWbN 

light 

hazy,  snow  at 
times 

30 

CD 
J3 

35 

29 

32.42 

28.58 

29.62 

29.4129.534 

(AM.  North 
(PM.  West 

light 

cloudy 

31 

J  *"* 

31 

27 

29.92 

28. 2S 

29.82 

29.  C2  29. 728 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy 

1 

50 

27 

33.68 

30.89 

29.82 

29  0229.500 

1 

«^i^^AlJ^l^1 XXVSS+X&$\Xt* <  -.  ^  *  A*  A,^: 


toi 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


327 


sept 


prospect  before  us,  but  after  scrambling  about  a  mile  found  ourselves  again    J822- 

,  Sept. 

obliged  to  retrace  our  steps  in  order  to  avoid  a  chain  of  lakes,  and  when 
after  three  hours'  exertion  we  had,  as  we  supposed,  got  nearly  round  these, 
another  cluster  of  greater  magnitude  was  discovered,  and  we  found  our- 
selves not  five  hundred  yards  from  the  spot  on  which  we  had  slept.  In 
descending  a  precipice  one  of  the  men  lost  his  hold,  but  was  fortunately 
arrested  by  a  rock  which  lay  beneath  the  snow,  and  escaped  with  only  a  se- 
vere contusion  on  the  nose.  We  had  been  obliged  to  throw  our  knapsacks 
down  this  cliff  and  use  the  greatest  caution  in  sliding  down  it,  but  had  no 
sooner  reached  its  foot  than  the  discovery  of  the  lake  obliged  us  again  to 
gain  the  height.  Finding  it  impossible  to  accomplish  the  service  at  this 
rate  of  travelling,  and  having  only  five  hours  to  complete  the  out-going  time 
I  determined  on  turning  back,  and  arrived  at  the  ships  before  noon  on  the 
1st  of  September. 

"  The  mountains  wTe  passed  were  all  of  gneiss  and  granite,  and  I  should 
suppose  many  of  them  a  thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  One  chain 
of  lakes  extended  east  and  west  about  six  or  eight  miles,  and  they  were 
apparently  of  great  depth,  although  their  width  did  not  exceed  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  at  any  part.  In  these  were  several  small  falls  or  bars,  over  two  of 
which  we  waded.  The  steepness  of  the  ridge  of  mountains  bounding  the 
longest  extent  of  lakes  may  be  better  understood  by  the  outline  I  took  on 
the  spot. 


328 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"  The  upper  or  craggy  part  was  of  solid  granite,  and  the  slope  of  its 
debris,  which  however  was  in  most  cases  deeply  covered  by  snow.  In  all 
the  lakes  was  a  sheet  of  solid  ice,  detached  from  the  banks  and  floating 
in  the  centre.  Its  thickness  above  water  was  from  six  to  twelve  inches. 
The  little  vegetation  we  saw  was  shrivelled  and  dry,  which  may  account 
for  the  absence  of  deer.  We  saw  numerous  tracks  of  them  near  the  lakes, 
but  they  were  not  recent,  and  may  have  been  made  while  the  animals  were 
herding  for  their  final  departure  ;  a  few  small  flocks  of  buntings  were  seen 
as  if  also  assembled  to  migrate  to  the  southward." 


Sun.  1.  Being  thus  by  a  combination  of  untoward  circumstances  baffled  in  an 
endeavour  which  had  appeared  almost  certain  of  success,  we  had  only  to 
await  with  patience  the  arrival  of  our  other  parties  ;  scarcely  however  ven- 
turing to  hope  that  their  information  alone  could  prove  of  any  great  interest 
or  importance  in  furthering  our  main  object.  The  north-west  wind  freshen- 
ing almost  to  a  gale,  which  made  me  somewhat  apprehensive  for  Mr.  Crozier 
and  his  little  establishment  at  the  Narrows,  I  despatched  Mr.  Ross,  at 
seven  this  evening,  to  carry  him  a  fresh  supply  of  provisions  and  to  assist 
him  on  his  return  to  the  ship.  At  the  same  time  I  directed  Mr.  Ross  to 
occupy  the  following  day  in  examining  the  portion  of  land  forming  the 
northern  shore  of  the  Narrows,  which  we  had  some  reason  to  suppose 
insular. 

Mon.  2.  At  nine  A.M.  on  the  2d,  Lieutenant  Reid  and  his  party  were  descried  at 
their  landing-place,  and  a  boat  being  sent  for  them  arrived  on  board  at  half- 
past  eleven.  An  account  of  this  journey,  which  was  accompanied  by  a 
sketch  of  the  coast,  is  here  subjoined. 


August. 
30. 


"  Landing  at  six  A.M.  on  the  30th,  we  commenced  our  march  about  due 
west  along  the  coast,  though  not  in  a  direct  line,  the  hills  being  in  many 
parts  perpendicular  down  to  the  water,  and  we  had  to  cross  one  inlet  in 
which  the  ice  was  broken  up.  At  noon  we  arrived  at  an  inlet,  from  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  to  a  mile  and  a  quarter  in  width,  with  a  rapid  run  of  water, 
having  in  it  two  small  islands,  and  in  part  covered  with  ice.  FolloAving  the 
stream  down  to  the  sea,  without  finding  a  fording-placc,  we  ascended  the 
banks,  and  at  length  crossed  upon  the  ice  with  much  difficulty.     Dining  on 


*..  it0jk^^^i^^^'iif3^xvf^^:^T»^r>^A  a  s «^u^        «    \ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


329 


the  west  side  we  continued  our  journey,  and  at  half-past  six  pitched  our    1822- 
tents  for  the  night.      This  day's  journey  was  from  hill   to    hill,  over    ex-   \JEi 
Iremely   rugged  land,    frequently  interrupted    by    lakes,    which    made  the 
course  so  circuitous  that,  though  in  a  direct  line  we    could  not  have  ad- 
vanced  more   than    fifteen    miles,  we    had   probably  traversed   twice    that 
distance. 

"  Setting  out  at  four  A.M.  on  the  31st,  we  now  kept  more  inland  than  31. 
before,  and  descended  into  a  deep  valley,  having  at  the  bottom  a  rapid 
stream,  which  we  were  obliged  to  follow  nearly  to  the  sea  before  we 
could  cross  it,  after  which  we  got  upon  tolerably  good  ground  leading 
gradually  up  to  the  hills.  We  then  again  began  to  ascend,  hill  after 
hill  rising  in  succession,  and  the  rugged  ground  being  covered  with  large 
loose  stones,  having  the  space  between  them  filled  with  snow,  which  made 
the  walking  heavy  and  dangerous.  At  noon  we  had  gained  a  hill  of  con- 
siderable height,  having  Avalked  sixteen  miles,  and  now  found  ourselves 
due  west  of  the  ships,  distant  about  six  leagues.  From  this  station,  which 
was  in  some  respects  a  commanding  one,  the  bearings  and  an  eye-sketch 
were  taken  by  Mr.  Bushnan,  but  the  land  still  interrupted  our  view  to  the 
westward,  so  that  in  that  direction  very  little  more  could  be  ascertained 
with  respect  to  the  extent  of  the  Strait  than  might  be  seen  from  the  ships. 
Notwithstanding  this  circumstance  however,  as  our  provisions  were  half  ex- 
pended, I  deemed  it  prudent  to  proceed  no  farther,  especially  as  the  road 
was  now  so  rugged,  that  little  or  nothing  more  could  be  effected  in  a  few 
hours'  travelling.  At  three  P.M.  therefore  we  set  out  on  our  return  to  the 
eastward  and  reached  the  Fury  before  noon  on  the  2d. 

:i  In  the  course  of  our  journey  only  six  rein-deer  were  seen  ;  but  the 
tracks  of  these  animals,  as  well  as  of  bears  and  foxes,  were  numerous.  From 
our  farthest  station  on  the  western  hills,  which  rise  perhaps  from  eight  to 
nine  hundred  feet  above  the  sea,  we  observed  another  head-land  beyond 
the  extreme  point  seen  from  the  ships,  and  distant  from  it  about  three  or 
four  leagues  ;  but  the  intervention  of  other  land  prevented  our  discovering 
the  trending  of  the  coast  further  to  the  westward.  The  northern  land  is 
extremely  high,  and  its  western  point  appeared  about  ten  leagues  distant, 
leaving  an  extensive  opening  in  that  direction.  The  ice  seemed  to  extend 
from  Amherst  Island  as  far  as  we  could  see  to  the  westward,  presenting  one 
unbroken  surface  from  the  north  to  the  south  shore  of  the  Strait." 

2  U 


1! 


' 


ii 


_ 


/ 


330 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Notwithstanding  every  exertion  on  the  part  of  our  travellers,  their  labours 
had  not  thrown  much  light  on  the  geography  of  this  part  of  the  coast,  nor 
added  any  information  that  could  be  of  practical  use  in  directing  the  opera- 
tions of  the  ships.     The  important  question  respecting  a  second  passage 
leadin°-   to    the  westward   still  remained    as  much  a  matter   of  mere  con- 
jecture   as    at   first ;   while    the   advanced    period  of  the   season,   and    the 
unpromising  appearance  of  the  ice  now  opposing  our  progress,  rendered  it 
more  essential  than  ever  that  this  point  should,  if  possible,  be  fully  decided. 
Under  this  impression,  it  occurred  to  me  that  the  desired  object  might  pos- 
sibly be   accomplished,   by  pursuing  the   route   along  the  head  or  western 
shore  of  Richards'  Bay,  part  of  which  I  had  already  traversed  on  my  former 
journey,  and  found  it  much  less  laborious  walking  than  that  experienced  by 
Captain  Lyon  on  the  higher  and  more  rugged  mountains  inland.     I  deter- 
mined therefore  to  make  this  attempt,  taking  with  me  Mr.  Richards  and  most 
of  my  former  companions,  and  proceeding  in   a  boat  as  far  as  the  isthmus 
mentioned  on  the  17th  of  August,  from  whence  our  journey  might  at  once 
be  advantageously  commenced. 
Tues.  3.       This  night  proved  the  coldest  we  had  experienced  during  the  present  sea- 
son, and  the  thermometer  stood  at.  24°  when  I  left  the  ships  at  four  A.M.  on 
the  3d,  having  previously  directed   Captain  Lyon  to  remain   as  near  their 
present  station  as  might  be  consistent  with  safety,  and  carefully  to  watch 
for  any  alteration  that  might  occur  in  the  western  ice.     I  also  requested 
Captain  Lyon  to  render  Mr.  Fisher  every  assistance  in  his  power  in  the  tri- 
gonometrical measurement  of  some  high  snow-capped  hills  to  the  north-west, 
which  at  my  desire  he  had  undertaken.     To  the  land  on  which  these  moun- 
tains stand,  and  which  the  Esquimaux  call  Keii/uk-tarrnoke,  I  gave  the  name 
of  Cockburn  Island,  in  honour  of  Vice- Admiral  Sir  George  Cockburn,  one 
of  the  Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty,  whose  warm  personal  interest 
in  every  thing  relating  to  Northern  Discovery  can  only  be  surpassed  by  the 
public  zeal  with  which  he  has  ahvays  promoted  it. 

Being  favoured  by  a  strong  north-westerly  breeze,  we  reached  the  nar- 
rows at  half-past  six  A.M.,  and  immediately  encountered  a  race  or  ripple  so 
heavy  and  dangerous,  that  it  was  only  by  carrying  a  press  of  canvass  on  the 
boat  that  we  succeeded  in  keeping  the  seas  from  constantly  breaking  into 
her.  This  rippling  appeared  to  be  occasioned  by  the  sudden  obstruction 
which  the  current  meets   at  the  western  mouth  of  the  narrows,   aided  in 


"  'i; 


■ittL 


•^v!»^f<' 


\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


331 


the  present  instance,  by  the  strong  breeze  that  blew  directly  upon  the  coiner    1822. 
forming  the  entrance  on  the  south  side.     On  clearing  this,  which  we  did  JSKL/ 
after  running  about  one-third  of  a  mile  and  then  getting  into  smooth  water, 
though  the  current  was  running  at  least  three  knots  to  the  eastward,  the 
thoughts   of   all  our   party  were,  by   one   common   impulse,    directed  to- 
wards Mr.  Crozier  and  his  little  boat,  which  could  not  possibly  have  lived 
in  the  sea  Ave  had  just  encountered.     It  was  not,  therefore,  without  the 
most  serious  apprehension  on  his  account  that  I  landed  at  Cape  North-East, 
where  I  had  directed  the  observations  to  be  made  on  the  tides ;  and  send- 
ing Mr.  Richards  one  way  along  the  shore,  proceeded  myself  along  the  other 
to  look  for  him.     On  firing  a  musket,  after  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  walk,  I  had 
the  indescribable  satisfaction  of  seeing  Mr.  Crozier  make  his   appearance 
from  behind  a  rock,  Avhere  he  was  engaged  in  watching  the  tide-mark.     I 
found  him  and  his  party  quite  safe  and  well,  though  they  had  encountered 
no  small  danger,  while  attempting  to  try  the  velocity  of  the  stream  in  the 
narrows,  being  beset  by  a  quantity  of  drift-ice  from  which  they  with  dif- 
ficulty escaped  to  the  shore.     I  found  also  that  Mr.  Ross,  after  towing  them 
in  when  adrift,  and  leaving  Mr.  Crozier  his  provisions,  had  proceeded  to 
accomplish  his  other  object,   appointing  a  place  to  meet  them  on  his  return 
to  the  ships.     In  half  an  hour  after  we  saw  the  gig  crossing  to  us  under 
sail,  and  were  soon  joined  by  Mr.  Ross,  who  informed  me  that  he  had  de- 
termined the  insularity  of  the  northern  land,  which  I  therefore  distinguished 
by  the  name  of  Ormond  Island,  out  of  respect  to  the  Earl  of  Ormond  and 

OSSORY. 

Having  furnished  our  gentlemen  with  an  additional  supply  of  provisions, 
in  case  of  their  being  unavoidably  detained  by  the  continuance  of  the  wind, 
I  made  sail  for  the  isthmus  at  ten  A.M.,  where  we  arrived  after  an  hour's 
run,  and  hauling  the  boat  up  on  the  rocks  and  depositing  the  greater  part 
of  our  stores  near  her,  set  off  at  one  P.M.  along  the  shore  of  Richards' 
Bay,  being  equipped  with  only  three  days'  provision  and  as  small  a  weight 
of  clothing  as  possible.  The  coast,  though  not  bad  for  travelling,  led 
us  so  much  more  to  the  westward  than  I  expected,  in  consequence  of  its 
numerous  indentations  that,  after  above  five  hours'  hard  walking,  we  had 
only  made  good  a  W.S.W.  course,  direct  distance  six  miles.  One  of  our 
men  then  complaining  of  giddiness  and  other  unpleasant  symptoms,  we 
halted  and  pitched  the  tent  amidst  rugged  and  barren  rocks  of  red  granite, 
dreary  and  desolate  beyond  description.    A  single  snow-bunting  was  literally 

2   U  2 


" 

.  i.l 

!| 

^--•-Mmjj^tti 


V.  <-^  >VJ  .^Jtrv  -r*>^  ;jS^/>, 


rm&Ct 


rf  (4   U\*4VA< 


■ 


i  i  i 


332 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Wed.  4. 


all  we  saw  of  animal  life  during  this  afternoon's  walk  ;  but  the  tracks  of  deer, 
all  going  to  the  southward,  were  everywhere  seen  upon  the  snow.  We  ob- 
tained on  every  eminence  a  distinct  view  of  the  ice  the  whole  way  down  to 
Neerlo-nakto,  in  which  space  not  a  drop  of  clear  water  was  discernible  ;  the 
whole  of  Richards'  Bay  was  filled  with  ice  as  before. 

We  moved  at  six  P.M.  on  the  4th,  and  soon  came  to  a  number  of  lakes 
from  half  a  mile  to  two  miles  in  length,  occurring  in  chains  of  three  or  four 
together,  round  which  we  had  to  walk  at  the  expense  of  much  time  and 
labour.     All  these   terminated   towards   the   sea   in    inlets,    one    of  which 
that  we    came  to  at  nine   A.M.,  and  which   I  named   after  Mr.  Halse   of 
the  Fury,  was  three  or  four  miles  in  length,  and  detained  us  two  hours  in 
walking  round  the  head  of  it.     These  inlets  were  still  filled  with  ice  of  the 
last  winter's  formation,  except  close  round  the  shores,  where  a  narrow  space 
of  open  water  had  been  formed  by  the  warmth  of  the  land.     We  halted  at  a 
quarter  past  eleven,  having  made  good  four  miles  and  a  half  in  a  S.b.W.  di- 
rection, and  found  ourselves  by  observation  at  noon  in  latitude  69°  32'  58". 
Continuing  our  journey  at  three  P.M.  we  soon  arrived  at  the  shores  of  ano- 
ther inlet  like  the  former,  two  or  three  miles  in  length,  up  which  we  had  to 
walk  above  two  before  we  could  make  any  southing.     We  were  then  for  the 
first  time   enabled  to  proceed  almost  directly  to  the  southward,   our  only  in- 
terruption being  occasioned  by  the  numerous  steep  and  craggy  hills  which 
every  where  presented  themselves.     At  half-past  five  we  suddenly  came  in 
sight  of  a  high  and  remarkably  level  piece  of  table-land,  immediately  to  the 
southward  of  us,  and  extending  for  several  miles  in  an  east  and  west  direc- 
tion.    Along  the  upper  part  ran  a  narrow  perpendicular  ridge  having  a  dark 
appearance,  and  the  rest  formed  a  yellow  shelving  slope,  as  if  composed  of 
the  debris  falling  uniformly  from  above.     At  half-past  six,  on  gaining  a  sight 
of  the  sea  from  the  top  of  a  hill,  we  immediately  recognised  to  the  eastward 
the  numerous  islands  of  red  granite  described  by  Captain  Lyon ;  and  now 
perceived  what  had  before  been  surmised,  that  the  south  shore  of  Richards' 
Bay  formed  the  northern  coast  of  the  inlet,  up  which  his  journey  with  the 
Esquimaux  had  been  pursued.     Our  latitude  by  account  from  noon  being 
now  69°  28',  we  felt  confident  that  a  short  walk  directly  to  the  south  must 
bring  us   to  any  strait  communicating  with   that  inlet,   and  we  therefore 
pushed  on  in  confident  expectation  of  being  near  our  journey's  end.     At 
seven  P.M.,  leaving  the  men  to  pitch  the  tent  in  a  sheltered  valley,  Mr. 
Richards  and  myself  ascended  the  hill  that  rose  beyond  it,  and  on  reaching 


c  ^::&;tf  >*xw^nirar^  .    i 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


333 


its  summit  found  ourselves  overlooking  a  long  and  narrow  arm  of  the  sea  1822*- 
communicating  with  the  inlet  before  seen  to  the  eastward,  and  appearing  to  ^J^O• 
extend  several  miles  nearly  in  an  east  and  west  direction,  or  parallel  to  the 
table-land  before  described,  from  which  it  is  distant  three  or  four  miles.  The 
space  between  the  creek'and  the  table-land  is  quite  low,  forming  a  striking  con- 
trast with  the  rugged  shore  on  which  we  stood,  and  being  covered  with  abun- 
dant vegetation,  as  well  as  intersected  by  numerous  ponds  of  water.  The 
breadth  of  the  little  creek  at  the  place  at  which  we  had  arrived,  being  half  a 
mile  above  its  junction  with  the  wider  inlet  in  which  the  Coxe  Islands  lie,  is 
about  half  a  mile,  and  continues  nearly  the  same  for  three  or  four  miles  that 
we  could  trace  it  in  a  westerly  direction.  Beyond  this  it  seemed  to  turn 
more  northerly,  and  our  view  being  obstructed  by  the  high  and  rugged  hills 
of  which,  on  the  north  side  of  the  creek,  the  whole  tract  of  country  is  com- 
posed, 1  determined  to  pursue  our  journey  along  its  banks  in  the  morning, 
to  ascertain  its  further  extent,  or  at  least  to  trace  it  till  it  was  no  longer 
navigable  for  ships.  That  the  creek  we  now  overlooked  was  a  part  of  the 
same  arm  of  the  sea  which  Captain  Lyon  had  visited,  the  latitude,  the  bear- 
ings of  Igloolik  which  was  now  plainly  visible,  and  the  number  and  appear- 
ance of  the  Coxe  Islands,  which  were  too  remarkable  to  be  mistaken,  all  con- 
curred in  assuring  us  ;  and  it  only  therefore  remained  for  us  to  determine 
whether  it  would  furnish  a  passage  for  the  ships.  Having  made  all  the  re- 
marks which  the  lateness  of  the  evening  would  permit,  we  descended  to  the 
tent  at  dusk,  being  directed  by  a  cheerful  blazing  fire  of  the  andromeda  tetra- 
gona,  which  in  its  present  dry  state  served  as  excellent  fuel  for  warming  our 
provisions. 

Setting  forward  at  five  A.M.  on  the  5th,  along  some  pleasant  valleys  covered  Thur.  5. 
with  grass  and  other  vegetation,  and  the  resort  of  numerous  rein-deer,  we 
walked  six  or  seven  miles  in  a  direction  parallel  to  that  of  the  creek ;  when,  find- 
ing the  latter  considerably  narrowed,  and  the  numerous  low  points  of  its  south 
shore  rendering  the  water  too  shoal,  to  all  appearance,  even  for  the  navigation 
ofoi  sloop  of  ten  tons,  I  determined  to  waste  no  more  time  in  the  further  exami- 
nation of  so  insignificant  a  place.  There  was  not  in  this  creek  the  least  per- 
ceptible stream  of  tide  or  current,  which  circumstance  alone,  considering  the 
strength  of  that  which  rushes  through  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla,  would 
have  been  sufficient  perhaps  to  demonstrate  thaf  it  had  no  outlet  to  the  west- 
ward. Its  whole  appearance  indeed  indicated  it  to  be  what  it  has  since 
proved,  a  mere  inlet  of  the  sea,  similar  to  those  we  had  before  passed,  com- 


l4i 


*  i   i 


-■^m 

K 

HI 

1822. 
Sept. 


Ilii 


334 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


municating  with  lakes  and  streams  which  annually  pour  their  waters  into  it, 
affording  excellent  kayak  navigation  to  the  Esquimaux,  and  supplying  them 
with  the  salmon  with  which  they  had  lately  provided  us.  The  farther  we 
went  to  the  westward  the  higher  the  hills  became  ;  and  the  commanding  pros- 
pect thus  afforded  enabled  us  distinctly  to  perceive  with  a  glass  that,  though 
the  ice  had  been  entirely  dissolved  in  the  creek,  and  for  half  a  mile  below  it, 
the  whole  sea  beyond  this  to  the  eastward,  even  as  far  as  Igloolik,  was  co- 
vered with  one  continuous  and  unbroken  floe. 

Having  now  completely  satisfied  myself  that,  as  respected  both  ice  and  land, 
there  was  no  navigable  passage  for  ships  about  this  latitude,  no  time  was 
lost  in  setting  out  on  our  return.  To  avoid  the  numerous  indentations  of 
Richards'  Bay,  we  kept  rather  more  inland  ;  by  which  means,  though  we  at 
first  encountered  some  of  the  steep  precipices  and  deeper  snow  described  by 
our  other  travellers,  we  eventually  saved  ourselves  much  walking.  On  this 
high  ridge  the  hills,  which  are  generally  steep  on  both  sides,  and  with  a 
quantity  of  the  loose  debris  lying  up  and  down  them,  occur  very  close  toge- 
ther ;  so  that  no  sooner  has  the  summit  of  one  been  gained,  than  another  of 
equally  forbidding  aspect  presents  itself,  the  valleys  between  them  being 
chiefly  occupied  by  lakes  of  various  sizes,  all  except  the  mere  shallow  ponds 
having  a  floe  of  solid  ice  covering  their  surface.  Some  of  the  smaller  streams 
that  supply  the  lakes  had  now  been  arrested  by  the  autumnal  frost,  and  the 
smallest  pools  on  the  rocks  were  frozen  to  the  bottom  ;  but  the  larger 
streams  were  still  runniDg  in  full  force,  and  no  "  young  "  ice  had  as  yet 
formed  upon  the  lakes.  The  rocks  are  here  entirely  of  red  granite  ;  and  we 
frequently  noticed  rounded  and  insulated  hills  of  this  shape, 


situated  at  the  end  of  a  valley,  and  appearing  as  it  were  to  flank  it. 
Frid.5.       Nothing  of  interest  occurred  during  the  rest  of  our  journey  to  the  boat, 
which  we  reached  before  dark  on  the  evening  of  the  6th,  having  suffered 
only  a  few  trifling  bruises  in  the  course  of  our  scrambling  over  the  rocks. 
The  thermometer  fell  to  19°  at  night,  but  our  depdt  at  the  boat  furnishing 


**^^;*>tfXi*^^'v^^  *     < 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


335 


1822. 
Sept. 


abundance  of  additional  clothing,  we  found  the  tent  as  warm  as  could  be 
desired  ;  which  was  by  no  means  the  case  at  this  season  when  we  were  lightly 
equipped  for  travelling.  The  night  was  beautifully  clear,  with  a  bright  moon- 
light ;  but  a  cloud  of  dense  vapour  hung  over  the  land  in  most  parts,  which 
was  not  entirely  dissipated  until  late  on  the  following  day. 

We  launched  the  boat  at  day -break  on  the  7th,  and  on  arriving  at  the  nar-  Sat.  7, 
rows,  were  glad  to  find  that  our  other  boats  had  left  the  place.  The  current 
was  as  usual  setting  to  the  eastward,  and  in  one  place  about  the  middle  of 
the  narrows,  where  a  large  collection  of  squeezed-up  ice  formed  a  small 
projecting  point,  it  ran  full  four  knots.  Rowing  over  to  the  north  shore, 
we  landed  there  to  dine  at  a  quarter  past  eleven,  which  was  just  the 
time  of  high  water,  on  an  islet  at  the  entrance  of  a  bay.  While  rest- 
ing here  we  observed  the  small  pieces  of  ice  setting  fast  to  the  westward, 
and  proceeding  at  two  P.M.,  found  the  boat  favoured  by  a  considerable  tide 
in  the  same  direction.  This  we  kept  till  about  five  P.M.,  when  we  had 
reached  Liddon  Island,  and  were  there  met  by  a  tide  from  the  westward,  it 
being  then  about  low  water  by  the  shore  ;  from  which  it  seemed  reasonable 
to  conclude  that  the  flood-tide  came  from  the  westward.  At  half-past  eight 
we  arrived  on  board,  where  I  was  happy  to  find  that  all  our  parties  had  re- 
turned without  accident,  except  that  Lieutenant  Palmer  had  been  wounded 
in  his  hand,  and  temporarily  blinded  by  a  gun  accidentally  going  off,  from 
which  however  he  fortunately  suffered  no  eventual  injury.  Lieutenant  Pal- 
mer reported  his  having  ascertained  that  the  ice  still  remained  attached  to 
the  land  from  the  western  part  of  Igloolik  across  to  the  continent,  precluding 
all  possibility  of  a  passage  to  the  westward  in  that  direction.  Lieutenant 
Palmer's  report  contained  numerous  observations  for  the  geographical  posi- 
tion of  the  parts  of  the  land  which  he  visited,  and  some  notices  respecting 
the  Esquimaux  mode  of  burial,  which  will  be  given  in  another  place. 

No  alteration  had  taken  place  in  the  state  of  the  ice  during  my  absence,, 
except  what  was  occasioned  by  a  few  small  pieces  now  and  then  breaking  off 
from  the  margin,  which  however  scarcely  effected  a  change  that  was  sensible 
in  the  course  of  several  days.  The  ships  had  therefore  remained  undis- 
turbed at  the  station  where  I  left  them  ;  and  in  order  to  occupy  the  time  as 
usefully  as  possible,  Captain  Lyon  had  despatched  a  party  under  the  com- 
mand of  Lieutenant  Hoppner  to  travel  along  some  low  land  next  the  .sea,  to 
the  westward ;  with  the  hope  of  his  thus  being  enabled,  by  escaping  the 
rugged  ground  encountered  by  Lieutenant  Reid,  to  add  something  more  to 


-   *  '«  \4 


•  '.    .?  ■  C    •-  A   I. 


i 

I 


336 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


our  knowledge  of  the  continental  shore  of  the  Strait.  Lieutenant  Hoppner 
had  just  returned  from  this  excursion,  an  account  of  which,  together  with 
those  of  Messrs.  Crozier  and  Ross,  will  bring  up  the  narrative  of  our  pro- 


ceedings to  this  time. 


MR.  CROZIER'S  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  TIDES. 

"  During  the  time  of  our  stay  at  the  narrows  of  the  Strait  no  opportunity 
was  lost  of  continuing  our  observations  on  the  tides,  an  abstract  of  which  is 
contained  in  the  following  Table.  By  these  it  will  be  perceived  that  in  mid- 
channel  the  stream  constantly  set  to  the  eastward  from  daylight  till  dark,  and 
that  when  on  the  south  shore  a  westerly  set  was  observable,  the  tide  was 
generally  falling.  In  rowing  along  the  north  shore  of  the  narrows,  on  our 
return  we  had  a  strong  westerly  set  of  at  least  two  miles  an  hour,  from 
thirty  minutes  after  eleven  A.M.  till  thirty  minutes  after  two  P.M.  on  the  3d, 
during  most  of  which  time  the  tide  was  ebbing  by  the  shore,  and  having 
landed  the  same  evening  upon  the  east  end  of  Liddon  Island,  we  found  it 
high  water  at  seven  P.M.,  being  about  an  hour  earlier  than  the  last  observed 
tide  in  the  narrows. 


Tide  Table  in  the  Narrows  of  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla. 


Day. 

1822. 


Aug.  31. 


High  Water. 


H.M. 


A.M. 

or 
P.M. 


Low  Water. 


6.20 


6.15 


A.M. 
P.M 


H.M. 


A.M. 
P.M. 


Rise 

of 
Tide. 


Fall 

of 

Tide. 


REMARKS,  &c. 


Sept.  I*.1 


6.40 


7.30 


A.M. 


0.40 


0.50 


P.M. 


P.M 


ft.  in.  I  ft.  in. 
5.10 
5.2 


The  stream  in  mid-channel  was  setting  to  the  eastward  during  the 
whole  day.  From  4.30  A.M.,  till  1 1,  an  eddy  set  along  the  south 
shore  to  the  westward.  About  1  P.M.  it  began  to  run  to  the  east- 
ward, and  continued  to  do  so  the  rest  of  the  day.  From  6.15  P.M. 
till  7.10,  the  water  neither  rose  nor  fell  by  the  shore. 


7.0 


P.M. 


about 
8 


A.M. 


P.M. 


8.9 


The  stream  constantly  running  to  the  eastward  in  mid-channel. 
An  eddv  setting  to  the  westward  close  to  the  south  shore  till  near 
noon.  At  1  P.M.  it  again  set  to  the  eastward  and  continued  to  do 
so  till  dark. 

*  It  was  full  moon  at  6.5 4  A.M.  this  day. 


No  eddy  nor  slack  was  observed  this  day,  the  wind  being  strong 
from  the  westward.  The  current  constantly  setting  fast  to  the  east- 
ward ;  at  about  8  A.M.  not  less  than  four  miles  per  hour. 


This  tide,  by  the  mark  on  the  rocks,  rose  two  inches  above  that 
of  the  preceding  evening,  being  also  the  highest  of  any  we  observed. 


o^wxo^'w*^^^*^*^^.**  a  s  «**aa* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


337 


"  From  these  observations  it  would  appear  that  the  regular  stream  of  flood- 
tide  sets  to  the  eastward,  and  that  of  the  ebb  to  the  westward,  in  this  Strait; 
though,  at  this  season,  the  latter  is  not  always  perceptible,  on  account  of  the 
rapid  current  permanently  running  against  it  in  an  easterly  direction." 


After  towing  Mr.  Crozier  to  the  shore,  under  circumstances  of  consi- 
derable danger  to  that  gentleman's  party  in  their  little  boat,  Mr.  Ross  imme- 
diately proceeded  in  execution  of  the  service  with  which  he  was  charged, 
and  landing  a  little  to  the  northward  of  Cape  Ossory,  observed  the  latitude 
to  be  69°  43'  30".  He  then  rowed  along  the  shore  to  the  northward,  passing 
one  or  two  bays  and  several  small  islands,  and  landed  in  the  evening  upon  a 
rugged  islet,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  long;  from  whence  he  had  the  passage 
directly  open  between  Ormond  Island  and  the  northern  shore,  and  after- 
wards perceived  an  island  lying  towards  its  western  opening,  which  had 
before  been  noticed  from  the  opposite  side.  The  rocks  along  this  coast 
were  found  to  be  composed  of  greyish  gneiss,  and  on  some  of  the  islands 
numerous  masses  of  reddish  granite  also  occurred,  lying  detached  upon  the 
surface.  On  the  small  islet  adjoining  Cape  Ossory,  Mr.  Ross  noticed  a 
broad  vein  of  dark-coloured  hornblende,  imbedded  in  the  gneiss  ;  and  a 
similar  structure  presented  itself  near  a  small  bay  just  to  the  northward  of 
it,  the  vein  being  here  about  thirty  yards  wide,  forty  or  fifty  feet  high,  and 
reaching  as  far  under  water  as  could  be  distinguished.  The  appearance  of 
this,  at  a  short  distance,  was  not  unlike  that  of  a  high  pile  of  coal,  and  from 
the  direction  it  took,  it  seemed  to  be  a  continuation  of  the  vein  before 
noticed. 

Mr.  Ross's  report,  of  which  I  have  here  given  a  brief  abstract,  contained 
also  a  variety  of  useful  angles,  observations,  and  other  hydrographical  ma- 
terials, by  which  the  whole  of  this  part  of  the  coast  has  been  laid  down  on 
the  chart. 

LIEUTENANT  HOPPNER'S  REPORT. 

"  Landing  on  Amherst  Island  at  five  A.M.  on  the  6th,  we  hauled  the  boat 
on  shore,  and  proceeded  with  three  days'  provisions  towards  the  western  end 
of  the  passage  dividing  the  island  from  the  main-land.  The  tide  being  out, 
we  experienced  some  difficulty  in  reaching  the  firm  ice  in  the  centre  of  the 

2    X 


1822. 
Sept. 


■  II 


m\ 


.^  i 


. 


f 

•  'i    ■  j 

I*1  III*  n  '  ; 

•  1    . 

IT!  1 

'    1 

338 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
Sept. 


7th. 


passage ;  but  having  at  length,  by  the  assistance  of  a  plank,  crossed  the 
loose  pieces  near  the  shore,  we  found  the  "  young  ice  "  connecting  the  rest 
sufficiently  strong  to  enable  us  to  pass  over  it  with  ease,  and  we  arrived  on 
the  main-land  about  one  P.M.  At  two  we  recommenced  our  walk  along- 
shore to  the  westward  ;  and  as  the  extreme  point  of  land  seen  from  the  ships 
did  not  seem  to  be  more  than  eight  miles  distant,  and  the  ground  was  good 
for  travelling,  I  determined  to  leave  our  knapsacks  and  other  baggage  be- 
hind, and  was  in  hopes  of  being  thus  enabled  to  obtain  a  clear  view  round 
the  point  before  sun-set,  and  of  returning  to  our  tent  at  night.  In  this  ex- 
pectation, however,  I  was  altogether  disappointed  ;  for  after  three  hours' 
hard  walking,  Ave  found  the  point  was  still  at  least  five  or  six  miles  from  us, 
which  obliged  me  to  give  up  the  attempt,  and  to  return  to  the  tent  for  the 
night. 

"  The  distance  to  the  western  extreme  being  greater  than  I  could  now 
hope  to  travel  in  the  time  to  which  I  was  limited  by  my  instructions,  I 
ascended  a  high  hill  at  five  A.M.  on  the  7th  to  obtain  a  view  of  the  Strait. 
The  horizon,  however,  was  so  obscured  by  fog  that  we  could  only  at  inter- 
vals see  the  tops  of  the  northern  hills.  Our  prospect  to  the  westward  was 
also  very  limited,  but  as  far  as  could  be  discerned,  the  ice  appeared  per- 
fectly close  and  composed  of  high  hummocks  with  a  few  heavy  floe-pieces. 
Proceeding  on  our  return  at  eight  o'clock,  we  reached  Amherst  Island  by 
noon,  the  young  ice  having  every  where  become  so  firm  that  Ave  might  easily 
have  returned  to  the  ships  upon  it,  without  the  assistance  of  a  plank.  The 
fog  having  noAV  cleared  aAvay,  gave  us  a  good  vieAV  from  the  west  end  of  the 
island,  where  we  could  perceive  that  no  land  Avas  visible  for  three  or  four 
points  of  the  compass  between  the  north  and  south  shores  of  the  Strait.  In 
this  space  nothing  was  to  be  seen  but  compact  heavy  ice,  with  a  Avhite  haze 
hanging  over  the  horizon  to  the  westAvard.  Being  anxious  to  examine  also 
the  state  of  the  ice  on  the  north  side  of  the  island,  I  left  the  party,  Avhen  tAvo 
miles  short  of  the  boat,  and  walked  to  a  high  ridge  on  that  side,  from  Avhich 
I  perceived  a  remarkable  bluff*  on  the  north  shore  of  the  Strait,  appearing 
to  be  detached  from  the  other  land,  but  this  my  position  did  not  enable  me 
to  determine. 

"  I  found  the  ice  on  the  north  side  of  the  island  perfectly  close  and  much 
heavier  than  on  the  opposite  shore,  being  generally  composed  of  large  floe- 

*  Afterwards  called  by  Lieutenant  Reld,  Cape  Halloweli. 


*»;«^^x  w^^'vii^.«  v/^v^rW^^M^  *M...k       &r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


339 


pieces.  This  land,  from  abreast  the  west  end  of4  Amherst  Island,  changes  1822- 
its  aspect  very  much,  the  hills  becoming  less  rugged  to  the  westward,  and  vJv£/ 
having  at  their  foot  a  sloping  plain  covered  with  fine  pasturage,  extending 
in  one  place  four  or  five  miles  towards  the  sea.  On  this  plain  we  passed 
several  circles  of  stones,  placed  by  the  Esquimaux,  and  others  set  up  in  a 
similar  manner  to  those  before  observed  in  different  parts  of  the  coast. 
These  did  not  bear  the  marks  of  having  been  recently  visited  ;  but  the  tracks 
of  deer  were  so  numerous,  and  the  aspect  of  the  country  so  favourable  for 
a  summer  residence,  that  it  appeared  a  likely  place  for  the  Esquimaux  to 
resort  to  occasionally  during  that  season." 


The  result  of  our  late  endeavours,  necessarily  cramped  as  they  had  been, 
was  to  confirm,  in  the  most  satisfactory  manner,  the  conviction  that  we  were 
now  in  the  only  passage  leading  to  the  westward  that  existed  in  this  neigh- 
bourhood. There  was,  and  indeed  still  is,  reason  to  believe,  from  the 
information  of  the  Esquimaux,  that  Cockburn  Island  extends  two  degrees  to 
thejnorthward  and  very  considerably  to  the  eastward  of  this  Strait.  To 
have  abandoned  without  further  trial  the  most  promising  place,  as  respects 
the  North-West  Passage,  that  the  most  sanguine  mind  could  hope  to  dis- 
cover, upon  the  chance  of  saving  time  by  pursuing  a  circuitous  route  of 
perhaps  three  or  four  hundred  miles  of  unknown  coast,  and  of  finding  a 
more  navigable  passage  two  degrees  farther  north,  I  should  have  considered 
an  unjustifiable  departure  from  the  plain  tenor  of  my  instructions,  if  not  a 
direct  abandonment  of  the  cause  in  which  we  were  engaged.  Notwithstand- 
ing, therefore,  the  present  unpromising  appearance  of  the  ice,  I  had  no 
alternative  left  me  but  patiently  to  await  its  disruption,  and  instantly  to  avail 
myself  of  any  alteration  that  nature  might  yet  effect  in  our  favour. 


'1.1 


;t 


2X2 


340 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Sun.  8. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

A   JOURNEY    PERFORMED    ALONG    THE    SOUTH   SHORE    OP    COCKBURN  ISLAND CONFIR- 
MATION   OF    AN    OUTLET     TO    THE    POLAR    SEA PARTIAL    DISRUPTION    OF    THE    OLD 

ICE,    AND    FORMATION    OF    NEW RETURN    THROUGH    THE    NARROWS    TO    THE    EAST- 
WARD  PROCEED    TO    EXAMINE     THE    COAST     TO     THE     NORTH-EASTWARD FURY'S 

ANCHOR    BROKEN STAND    OVER    TO    IGLOOLIK    TO    LOOK    FOR   WINTER-QUARTERS 

EXCURSION    TO    THE    HEAD    OF    QU1LLIAM  CREEK SHIPS   FORCED   TO    THE  WESTWARD 

BY  GALES  OF  WIND A  CANAL    SAWED    THROUGH    THE    ICE,  AND    THE  SHIPS  SECURED 

IN    THEIR    WINTER    STATION CONTINUED  VISITS  OF  THE  ESQUIMAUX,  AND  ARRIVAL 

OF  SOME  OF  THE  WINTER-ISLAND  TRIBE PROPOSED    PLAN    OF    OPERATIONS    IN    THE 

ENSUING    SPRING. 

A  light  air  springing  up  from  the  eastward  on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  we 
took  advantage  of  it  to  run  up  to  the  margin  of  the  fixed  ice,  which  was  now 
perhaps  half  a  mile  farther  to  the  westward,  in  consequence  of  small  pieces 
being  occasionally  detached  from  it,  than  it  had  been  when  we  tacked  off  it 
ten  days  before.  We  here  made  fast  nearly  in  a  line  between  Amherst  and 
Liddon  Islands,  though  much  nearer  to  the  former,  and  in  fifty-eight  fathoms, 
on  a  soft  muddy  bottom.  Though  the  easterly  wind  continued,  the  weather, 
which  had  been  foggy  in  the  morning,  cleared  up  after  noon  and  a  beautiful 
day  succeeded.  At  seven  P.M.,  some  water  brought  up  from  thirty  fathoms' 
depth  was  at  the  temperature  of  27|°,  and  some  from  fifty-five  fathoms  at  27|°; 
that  at  the  surface  being  27§°,  and  of  the  air  251°,  the  whole  being  taken  by 
the  same  thermometer.  We  noticed,  however,  a  remarkable  difference  in  the 
temperature  of  the  surface-water  on  the  two  sides  of  the  ship,  that  drawn  on 
the  starboard  side  being,  as  above  stated,  at  27|°,  and  on  the  larboard  30° 
and  30|°  the  whole  afternoon.  The  difference  was  perhaps  on  this  occasion 
to  be  attributed  to  the  sun  being  more  on  the  larboard  side  than  on  the  other; 


*&a&^X&Z^'&ttlVfS*X&&T>&..*<  i  s  >**4..V*  +?*\ 


OF  A  NORTH  WEST  PASSAGE. 


341 


182?. 
Sept. 


but  nearly  the  same  thing  occurred  on  the  11th,  when  the  reverse  was  the 
case  with  respect  to  the  sun.  In  every  instance  the  water  was  drawn  in  the 
same  bucket,  and  from  within  a  foot  of  the  ship's  bends ;  and  to  whatever 
cause  it  was  to  be  attributed,  it  shews  in  how  great  a  degree  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  surface-water  may  be  affected  by  some  local  and  perhaps  trivial 
circumstance.  A  great  number  of  seals  were  lying  on  the  ice  during  the 
day,  and  three  swans  were  observed  flying  to  the  south-eastward. 

At  daylight  on  the  9th,  I  sent  Mr.  Ross  on  shore  to  Amherst  Island  with  Mon.9 
two  men,  and  furnished  with  a  tent  and  provisions,  for  the  purpose  of  regis- 
tering the  rise  and  fall  of  the  tides,  while  observations  were  at  the  same  time 
made  upon  the  stream  or  current  in  the  offing.     At  eight  A.M.  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  sea-water  at  the  surface  was 27° 

At  thirty  fathoms'  depth  .  ■         ......         .         27-i 

At  fifty-five     „        „         .         .         .         .         .        27j 

Air  in  the  shade 28 

Another  clear  and  uncommonly  beautiful  day,  such  as  we  had  scarcely  expe- 
rienced during  the  whole  summer,  gave  us  hopes  of  the  season  being  some- 
what lengthened  by  a  mild  autumn.  In  the  evening  we  thought  we  could 
perceive  the  sun  glittering  on  a  lane  of  water  towards  the  western  end  of 
the  Strait,  which  might  perhaps  have  been  opened  by  the  eastern  breeze 
now  blowing.  Every  thing  however  remained  unmoved  on  our  side,  and  a 
great  quantity  of  young  ice  formed  on  the  sea  outside  of  us,  so  that  it  was 
scarcely  practicable  to  get  a  boat  out  for  trying  the  current.  The  pools  on 
the  floes  were  now  also  so  hardly  frozen,  that  skating  and  sliding  were  going 
on  upon  them  the  whole  day,  though  but  a  week  before  it  had  been  dan- 
gerous to  venture  upon  them. 

This  latter  circumstance,  together  with  the  fineness  of  the  weather  and 
the  tempting  appearance  of  the  shore  of  Cockburn  Island,  which  seemed 
better  calculated  for  travelling  than  any  that  we  had  seen,  combined  to 
induce  me  to  despatch  another  party  to  the  westward,  with  the  hope  of 
increasing,  by  the  only  means  within  our  reach,  our  knowledge  of  the  lands 
and  sea  in  that  direction.  Lieutenant  Reid  and  Mr.  Bushnan  were  once 
more  selected  for  that  service  to  be  accompanied  by  eight  men,  a  large 
number  being  preferred,  because  by  this  means  only  is  it  practicable  to 
accomplish  a  tolerably  long  journey,  especially  on  account  of  the  additional 
weight  of  warm  clothing  which  the  present  advanced  state  of  the  season 


if 


\i,m 


342 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


'. 


1822.  rendered  indispensable.  Lieutenant  Reid  was  furnished  with  six  days' 
yJ^ij  provisions,  and  directed  to  land  where  most  practicable  on  the  northern 
shore,  and  thence  to  pursue  his  journey  to  the  westward  as  far  as  his  re- 
sources would  admit,  gaining  all  possible  information  that  might  be  useful  or 
interesting.  Every  arrangement  being  made,  the  party  was  held  in  readiness 
to  leave  the  ships  at  daylight  the  following  morning. 
Tues.  10.  Our  travellers  were  favoured  by  another  summer's  day  on  the  10th,  not  a 
breath  of  wind  stirring,  and  the  atmosphere  being  extremely  clear  and  free 
from  clouds.  Mr.  Henderson  being  sent  to  Amherst  Island  to  examine  the  ice 
along  its  northern  shore,  where  we  first  hoped  to  see  some  alteration,  reported 
on  his  return,  that  he  had  observed  a  crack  extending  from  the  western  end 
of  the  island  across  towards  the  northern  shore  of  the  Strait,  which  we 
hoped  might  form  a  new  line  of  separation  just  about  to  take  place.  In  the 
evening  two  of  Lieutenant  Reid's  party  returned  on  board  with  a  note, 
informing  me  that  one  of  the  men  being  taken  ill,  that  officer  had  judged 
it  prudent  immediately  to  send  him  back  with  one  of  his  shipmates  to  take 
care  of  him. 

At  four  P.M.  the  temperature  of  the  sea- water  at  the  surface  was     .     29° 

28| 
28 
28 
Air  in  the  shade 

the  whole  being  taken  by  the  same  mercurial  thermometer.  The  young  ice 
increased  very  considerably  in  consequence  of  the  calm  weather  and  the 
unruffled  smoothness  of  the  sea,  and  several  sheets  of  it  drifting  in  towards 
the  floe  completely  froze  the  ships  in  for  the  time,  our  rudders  being  im- 
moveably  set  fast.  This  night  was  one  of  the  clearest  I  ever  saw,  the  hea- 
Wed.  11.  venly  bodies  shining  with  uncommon  brilliancy,  and  was  succeeded  on  the 
11th  by  another  lovely  day,  similar  to  the  three  preceding  ones.  The  tem- 
perature of  the  sea-water  at  the  surface  was 


11 

30 

n 

11 

. 

)5 

40 

>) 

11                  • 

9 

11 

55 

5) 

11                  ■ 

• 

at  10  A.M. 

at  7.30  P.M 

o 
281 

o 
.      .      2S| 

At  20  fathoms' 

depth 

28| 

.      .     281 

„  30       „ 

ii 

28 

.     .     21 

„  40 

n 

28 

.     .     28 

ii  55        ,, 

)> 

21 

.     .      28 

Air  in  the  shade    . 

28|     . 

.      .      26| 

I     C *'JkteMX&^^'&T&*f^*XJ*&T\&A  1  -  •***;.-.. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


343 


In  the  morning  experiments,  however,  the  temperature  of  the  surface,  as    \822- 
given  above,  was  taken  on  the  starboard  side,  on  which  a  bright  sun    had  w^J 
been  shining  for  several  hours  ;  whereas,  on  the  larboard  or  shady  side  the 
water  was  at  the  temperature  of  30°,  or  a  degree  and  a  quarter  warmer.     A 
party  of  the  Hecla's  people,  sent  by  Captain  Lyon  to  Amherst  Island,  were 
fortunate  in  killing  a  deer. 

An  easterly  breeze,  though  a  very  light  one,  served  considerably  to  Thur.  12. 
widen  the  crack  iri  the  ice  before  seen  to  the  westward ;  and,  as  the  floe 
had  certainly  not  moved  in  our  neighbourhood,  a  hope  was  excited  that 
there  must  be  some  room  to  the  westward  to  have  allowed  a  separation  to 
take  place.  We  therefore  anxiously  looked  for  a  strong  easterly  wind,  as  the 
most  probable  means  of  at  length  clearing  a  passage  through  the  Strait. 
The  weather  continued  remarkably  mild  and  pleasant,  and  some  thawing 
was  going  on  during  the  day.  Our  hunting  parties  were  again  sent  on  shore 
to  the  island,  but  without  success. 

Just  before  daylight  on  the  13th  the  floe  suddenly  broke  between  the  two  Frid.  13. 
ships,  and  we  were  for  some  time  in  hopes  that  a  general  change  was 
about  to  take  place  in  our  favour,  as  we  could  soon  after  perceive  a  good 
deal  of  open  water  immediately  to  the  westward  of  the  ice  to  which  the 
ships  were  attached.  We  found,  however,  as  the  day  broke,  that  no 
alteration  had  taken  place  near  us  but  the  separation  of  a  considerable 
mass  near  the  island,  leaving  no  passage  whatever  into  the  open  water 
seen  beyond.  The  Hecla,  happening  to  be  fast  to  the  broken  mass,  was 
obliged  to  make  all  sail,  to  stem  a  current  that  carried  her  with  it  some  dis- 
tance to  the  eastward.  So  far  however  was  this  current  from  being  percep- 
tible on  or  near  the  surface  that,  on  making  several  trials,  a  superficial 
set,  occasioned  by  an  easterly  breeze,  was  uniformly  found  in  an  opposite 
direction. 

The  latitude  of  our  present  station  was  69°  48'  10" ;  the  longitude,  by  chro- 
nometers, 83°  29'  27";  the  variation  of  the  magnetic  needle  89°  18'  19";  and 
the  dip,  as  obtained  by  Mr.  Fisher,  88°  21'  21".  -The  view  of  the  Strait  from 
this  position  was  calculated  to  impress  us  with  the  idea  of  its  being  a  mag- 
nificent passage  into  the  Polar  Sea,  especially  on  one  of  the  clear  and  cloud- 
less days  which  we  had  lately  enjoyed.  One  of  the  most  striking  features 
of  this  truly  polar  landscape  is  that  which  is  presented  by  the  snow-capped 
mountains  of  Cockburn  Island,  to  the  north-west  of  the  ships,  the  highest 
of  which  Mr.  Fisher  determined,  by  accurate  trigonometrical  measurement, 


l»l 


,,        H-. 


344 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


to  be  one  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty-seven  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
sea.  The  tops  of  these  mountains  have  a  smoothly-rounded  outline  ;  and  as 
they  were  covered  with  snow  for  about  one-fourth  downwards  from  their 
summits  as  early  as  the  13th  of  August,  when  we  first  discovered  them  from 
the  narrows,  it  is  probable  that  they  had  been  so  during  the  whole  summer. 
To  the  eastward  of  these  the  land  becomes  much  more  rugged  though  con- 
siderably lower ;  and  in  every  part  there  appeared  to  be  a  space  of  shelving 
ground  next  the  sea,  like  that  over  which  Lieutenant  Reid  was  now  pur- 
suing his  journey. 

The  appearance  of  Amherst  Island  also  is  remarkable  on  account  of  the 
materials  of  which  it  is  composed,  which,  unless  covered  with  snow,  pre- 
sent an  aspect  singularly  dark,  and  affording  a  striking  contrast  with  the 
surrounding  lands.  It  was  curious  indeed  to  observe  that,  as  if  determined 
to  preserve  this  singularity,  the  snow  was  always  first  dissolved  upon  this 
island,  which,  even  on  some  very  cold  days,  contrived  to  throw  off  its  fleecy 
mantle  when  no  other  shore  was  uncovered,  which  circumstance  may  per- 
haps be  in  part  attributed  to  the  colour  as  well  as  to  the  other  qualities  of 
the  rocks.  The  geological  character  of  Amherst  Island,  which  I  had  not 
myself  an  opportunity  of  visiting,  differs  from  any  we  have  hitherto  met 
with.  I  am  happy  therefore  in  availing  myself  of  the  following  extracts 
from  the  journals  of  Captain  Lyon  and  Mr.  Edwards,  who  walked  over 
various  parts  of  the  island,  and  have  been  kind  enough  to  furnish  me  with 
these  notices. 

"  The  beach  on  which  we  landed,"  says  Captain  Lyon,  "  was  flat,  and 
entirely  covered  with  minute  scales  of  black  slate,  and  the  whole  of  the 
northern  side  of  the  island  that  I  visited  consists  of  the  same  substance, 
lying  in  laminae  which  are  loose  and  easily  detached,  those  near  the  surface 
being  for  the  most  part  curiously  fluted,  or  having  small  rounded  ridges  of  a 
finger's  breadth  running  in  parallel  lines  across  them.  From  the  appearance 
of  the  ground  where  some  broad  chasms  lay  open,  one  of  the  seamen  who 
accompanied  me,  and  had  been  brought  up  in  a  coal  country,  was  led  to 
observe  that  he  had  no  doubt  of  that  mineral  existing  here,  a  short  distance 
below  the  surface  ;  but,  after  a  narrow  search,  no  pieces  could  be  discovered. 
Towards  the  centre  of  the  island  we  found  it  assume  a  different  aspect,  be- 
yond a  line  that  may  be  supposed  to  intersect  it  from  east  to  west.  The  south- 
ern half  was  covered  in  many  places  with  small  amorphous  masses  of  clay  and 


I 


i  O^wxo^w^w^/y*:^^.  ■      yJAfe-. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


345 


limestone,  and  some  low  swampy  places  were  thinly  clothed  with  shrivelled 
grass  and  moss  ;  while  on  the  northern  or  slaty  side  we  could  perceive  no 
signs  of  vegetation.  On  coasting  the  beach  to  return  to  the  boat,  we  passed 
the  remains  of  two  Esquimaux  circles  of  stones  apparently  long  forsaken,  as 
no  bones  were  found  near  them,  and  they  were  partly  buried  in  the  slaty 
beach. 

"  Near  the  place  at  which  Mr.  Ross  was  stationed  to  observe  the  tides,  I 
found  a  most  fairy-like  grotto  in  a  small  cliff  of  black  and  rugged  slate, 
through  which  the  water  as  it  oozed  had  formed  most  brilliant  icy  stalactites, 
five  or  six  feet  in  length.  These  hung  across  the  front  of  the  cave  in  a 
variety  of  fanciful  forms  over  a  small  basin,  which  was  frozen  as  smooth  as 
the  most  polished  mirror.  The  sun  shone  full  but  powerless  on  the  silvery 
icicles,  which  formed  a  brilliant  contrast  to  the  deep  ebon  shade  of  the 
cave  behind  them.  The  whole  appearance  of  this  little  spot  was  of  the 
most  delicate  and  novel  description,  and  I  felt  that  neither  by  pen  nor  pencil 
could  I  do  it  justice. 

'  The  base  of  Amherst  Island,"  Mr.  Edwards  observes,   "  is   an  argilla- 
ceous schist  of  various   qualities,  from  a  very  fine  and  soft  to   a  compact 
coarse    variety,    which  answers   to    the    greywacke    schist    of  geologists. 
The  kinds  alternate  with  each    other,    and  those  of  intermediate  quality 
are    remarkable    for  having  the    surfaces    of   the  lamina   divided    into   pa- 
rallel longitudinal  beds,  by  narrow  but  deeply  impressed  lines,  such  as  may 
be  seen  in  very  coarse  pastry.     In   some   specimens  these   lines  are  inter- 
sected by  others  at  right  angles,  forming  small  quadrilateral  and  elliptic  ele- 
vations.    One  side  only  of  the  laminae,  in  some  varieties,  is  so  impressed, 
while  in  others  both  sides  are  similar;  in  this  latter  case  the  lines  on  one 
side  coincide  with  those  on  the  other.     Flat  circular  depressions  are  also 
seen  occasionally  upon  the  surface,  but  I  did  not  notice  any  organic  remains. 
The  more  elevated  ridges  of  the  island  are  formed  of  the  disintegrating 
remains  of  a  super-incumbent  stratum  of  compact  limestone.     It  is  hard  and 
sonorous,  internally  of  a  dark  greyish  blue  colour ;  externally,  where  ex- 
posed to  air  or  moisture,  deeply  ferruginous.     It  does  not  burn  into  quick 
lime,  but  contains  minute  veins  of  calc-spar,  and  corresponds  with  the  calc 
of  Kirwan.     Worn  blocks  of  sandstone,  granite,  gneiss,  and  other  quartzose 
rocks,  are  scattered  over  the  surface  of  the  island." 

The  observations  made  by  Mr.  Ross  upon  the  tides,  together  with  those 
upon  the  set  of  the  stream  in  the  offing,  are  comprised  in  the  following 
Table :—  2  y 


1822. 
Sept. 


ii 


":, 


i  H 'i 


Tide-Table  at  Amherst  Island. 


Time. 


Tide   by    the 
Shore. 


Set  of  the  Stream  in  the  Offing. 


Fury's  Ob-     Rate  per!    Hccla's  Ob-    Rate  per 
servations.        Hour.  II    servations.    |  Hour. 


Wind 
very 
light 
from 


North. 


-.    -A 


l^iSWAl)^\*M^^lj/^fcirrs  ^ « ^t,  %  \ttL,  < 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


347 


On  the  14th,  while  an  easterly  breeze  continued,  the  water  increased  1822- 
very  much  in  breadth  to  the  westward  of  the  fixed  floe  to  which  we  were  ^J^J 
attached ;  several  lanes  opening  out,  and  leaving  in  some  places  a  channel  Sat'  14, 
not  less  than  three  miles  in  width.  At  two  P.M.  the  wind,  suddenly  shifting 
to  the  westward,  closed  up  every  open  space  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours, 
leaving  not  a  drop  of  water  in  sight  from  the  masthead  in  that  direction. 
To  this  however  we  had  no  objection ;  for  being  now  certain  that  the  ice  was  at 
liberty  to  move  in  the  western  part  of  the  Strait,  we  felt  confident  that  if  once 
our  present  narrow  barrier  were  also  detached,  the  ordinary  changes  of  wind 
and  tide  would  inevitably  afford  us  opportunities  of  making  progress.  When 
a  body  of  ice  has  once  broken  from  the  land  and  found  some  room  to  move 
about,  the  case  is  seldom  a  hopeless  one  ;  but  the  kind  of  hermetical-s eating 
which  we  had  lately  witnessed  leaves,  while  it  lasts,  no  resource  but  pa- 
tience, and  watchfulness.  The  westerly  wind  was  accompanied  by  fine 
snow  which  continued  during  the  night,  rendering  the  weather  extremely 
thick,  and  our  situation  consequently  very  precarious  should  the  ice  give 
way  during  the  hours  of  darkness. 

The  recent  separation  of  the  ice  to  the  westward,  while  it  kept  alive  our  Sun.  15. 
hopes  of  soon  proceeding  on  our  way,  made  us  also  at  this  moment  some- 
what apprehensive  lest  Lieutenant  Reid  and  his  party  might,  in  their  return 
to  the  ships,  be  caught  upon  it  while  it  was  adrift,  and  escape  our  observa- 
tion during  the  thick  weather  or  in  the  night.  It  was  therefore  with  great 
satisfaction  that,  at  four  P.M.  on  the  15th,  we  discovered  our  travellers  upon 
the  ice.  A  fresh  party  being  despatched  to  meet  and  to  relieve  them  of  their 
knapsacks,  Lieutenant  Reid  arrived  safely  on  board  at  seven  P.M.,  having 
by  a  quick  and  most  satisfactory  journey,  ascertained  the  immediate  junction 
of  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla  with  the  Polar  Sea.  Lieutenant  Reid's 
account,  which  is  here  subjoined,  was  accompanied  by  an  accurate  plan  of 
the  Strait,  drawn  by  Mr.  Bushnan,  and  constructed  by  a  series  of  triangles 
extending  considerably  to  the  eastward  of  the  Narrows,  and  thence  carried 
on  to  Igloolik. 


LIEUTENANT  REID'S  ACCOUNT. 


>! 


M\ 


■I 


iiaJOl 


Nstii 


"  At  daylight  on  the  10th,  the  weather  being  remarkably  fine,  I  left  the 
Fury  with  my  party,  and  on  our  journey  towards  the  land  found  the  walking 

2  Y  2 


10. 


•  inry^*^ 


348 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
Sept. 


11. 


extremely  good,  the  late  frost  having  filled  up  all  the  holes  and  pools  upon 
the  ice.  After  the  first  four  miles  the  character  of  the  ice  changed  from  the 
rough  and  '  hummocky  '  kind  to  a  smooth  level  floe,  and  this  continued  the 
whole  way  to  the  land,  except  that  in  its  immediate  neighbourhood  it  was 
much  broken  up  and  detached  ;  which  occasioned  us  much  difficulty  and 
some  wetting  in  getting  to  the  beach.  One  of  the  Hecla's  men  having  been 
taken  ill  about  this  time  I  determined  to  send  him  back  to  the  ships  without 
delay,  and  directed  one  of  his  shipmates  to  accompany  and  take  care  of 
him.  This  reduction  of  our  number  considerably  increasing  the  loads  of  the 
rest  of  the  party,  one  day's  provision  was  deposited  at  the  landing-place, 
and  with  the  remainder  we  set  out  to  the  westward. 

"  From  one  till  four  P.M.  we  walked  nine  miles  over  excellent  groundYor 
travelling,  and  then  obtained  sights  for  the  chronometer,  giving  the  longitude 
83°  58'  30";  after  which  we  again  moved  forward,  and  having  advanced  six 
miles  in  a  direction  a  little  to  the  northward  of  west,  halted  and  pitched  the 
tent  for  the  night.  The  land  over  which  Ave  had  this  day  travelled  is  prin- 
cipally composed  of  sandstone,  with  here  and  there  a  piece  of  granite.  In 
the  course  of  the  day  we  passed  the  stones  of  an  Esquimaux  summer 
habitation,  arranged  as  usual  in  a  circular  form,  but  it  did  not  appear  of 
recent  date.  The  ice  in  the  Strait  still  presented  the  same  unbroken  sur- 
face as  that  seen  from  the  ships,  except  quite  close  in-shore,  where  it  was 
detached  by  the  action  of  the  tides.  We  also  observed  a  few  narrow  lanes  of 
water  here  and  there  running  into  the  floe,  but  they  extended  only  a  short 
distance  from  the  land. 

"  At  five  A.M.  on  the  11th,  we  re-commenced  our  walk  to  the  westward, 
and  at  seven  came  to  a  ravine  with  a  rapid  run  of  water,  which  we  crossed 
after  a  little  detention,  and  stopped  to  breakfast  one  mile  to  the  westward  of 
it.  Again  proceeding  at  nine  o'clock,  we  continued  our  walk  till  noon, 
when  we  halted  to  obtain  the  meridian  altitude,  which  gave  the  latitude 
70°  00'  05",  and  soon  after  setting  forward  again,  pitched  our  tent  for  the 
night  at  half-past  six  P.M.  our  day's  journey  being  estimated  at  thirteen  miles 
in  a  W.|N.  direction.  We  could  here  perceive  that  the  opposite  or  main- 
land gradually  trended  to  the  southward,  leaving  a  broad  entrance  into  the 
Western  Sea,  though  covered  with  even  and  apparently  unbroken  ice.  The 
weather  being  clear  afforded  us  an  extensive  prospect  to  the  westward,  and 
we  could  now  perceive  that  a  bluff  near  the  north  shore,  which  had  before 
appeared  insular,  formed  in  reality  the  northern  point  of  the  entrance,  and 


**^;v3atfx«^yr  v,^^  *mv*       *r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


349 


I  named  it  Cape  Hallowell,  out  of  respect  to  Vice- Admiral  Sir  Benjamin    1822. 

Hallowell.     This  head-land  was  joined  to  Cockburn  Island  by  a  piece  of  . ^ 

low  land  not  visible  at  any  great  distance,  and  receding  considerably  so  as 
to  form  a  fine  bay,  which  I  named  after  Captain  William  Autridge,  of  the 
Royal  Navy.  To  the  southward  of  Cape  Hallowell  are  several  small  rocky 
islets,  and  near  these,  as  well  as  in  every  other  part  of  the  entrance  of  the 
Strait,  the  ice  presented  the  same  unbroken  appearance  as  before. 

"  At  half-past  five  A.M.  on  the  12th,  we  again  set  forward,  and  continuing  12. 
our  walk  till  nine  o'clock,  pitched  the  tent  upon  a  rising  ground,  from 
whence  we  commanded  a  good  view  around  us,  and  being  near  the  entrance 
of  an  inlet  running  up  to  the  north-eastward.  The  opening  of  the  Strait 
into  the  Polar  Sea  was  now  so  decided,  that  I  considered  the  principal 
object  of  my  journey  accomplished  ;  but  being  desirous  of  obtaining  obser- 
vations at  this  spot,  and  the  weather  being  cloudy,  I  determined  on  remain- 
ing a  few  hours  for  that  purpose.  In  the  mean  time  Mr.  Bushnan  and 
myself  walked  up  the  banks  of  the  inlet,  which  I  named  after  my  friend 
Mr.  Thomas  Whyte,  and  found  it  to  extend  five  or  six  miles  in  a  north-east 
direction,  its  general  breadth  being  from  a  mile  to  a  mile  and  a  half.  At 
the  head  of  the  inlet  we  found  two  ravines  running  into  it,  and  the  vegeta- 
tion was  here  more  abundant  than  any  I  had  seen  during  the  voyage.  We 
saw  also  the  remains  of  two  Esquimaux  huts,  which  were  old  and  appeared 
to  have  been  winter  habitations. 

"  The  sky  being  still  clouded  on  the  morning  of  the  13th,  we  set  out  on 
our  return  to  the  eastward,  from  which  quarter  the  wind  soon  after  freshened 
up  with  constant  snow  and  sleet.  At  one  P.M.  on  the  14th,  we  reached  our 
landing-place,  when  we  found  that  a  great  alteration  had  taken  place  in  the 
state  of  the  ice,  there  being  now  a  considerable  lane  of  water  running  off  in 
the  direction  of  the  ships,  while  near  the  shore  some  pressure  appeared  to 
have  taken  place.  On  the  following  day,  when  the  snow  ceased  falling  for  15_ 
a  short  time,  a  still  greater  change  was  perceptible,  there  being  in-shore  a 
space  of  clear  water  extending  three  miles  from  east  to  west,  and  more  nu- 
merous marks  than  before  of  recent  pressure.  Upon  the  whole,  the  change 
in  the  state  of  the  ice  since  our  outward  journey  was  very  striking,  and 
seemed  to  afford  a  hope  that  the  passage  of  the  ships  might  still  be  favoured 
by  some  more  extensive  movement. 

:'  At  half-past  eleven  A.M.,  the  tide  being  out  so  as  to  favour  our  getting 


13, 


14. 


*»l 


350 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.  Upon  the  ice,  we  set  out  for  the  ships,  steering  by  a  pocket-compass,  as  the 
J?t  weather  was  too  thick  to  allow  us  to  see  them.  Passing  several  '  lanes  '  of 
water,  one  of  them  of  considerable  breadth,  and  observing  several  places  in 
which  the  ice  had  been  thrown  up  by  pressure,  we  came,  at  half-past  one 
P.M.  to  a  broad  lane,  with  the  ice  in  motion  on  the  opposite  side.  As 
the  direction  of  the  ships  was  still  uncertain,  we  halted  here  to  dine,  and 
obtaining  a  sight  of  them  soon  after,  in  a  clearer  interval,  again  set  out.  At 
four,  the  Fury  made  the  signal  of  having  discovered  us,  and  at  seven 
o'clock,  being  met  by  a  fresh  party,  we  arrived  on  board." 

Mr.  Bushnan  remarked,  in  the  course  of  this  journey,  that  though  in 
some  places,  and  particularly  at  the  head  of  Whyte  Inlet,  the  vegetation  was 
remarkably  abundant,  yet  the  plants  were  singularly  backward  and  dwarfish, 
and  flowers  rare  ;  which  remark  was  also  made  by  most  of  our  other  tra- 
vellers. The  Esquimaux  huts  at  the  head  of  Whyte  Inlet,  Mr.  Bushnan 
describes  as  being  one  round,  and  the  other  rectangular ;  the  latter,  which 
was  the  largest,  being  seven  feet  in  length,  and  five  in  breadth.  They  were 
made  with  large  slabs  of  sandstone,  and  had  every  appearance  of  having 
been  winter  residences. 


i*lilll  >••"*« 


Sun.  15.  The  weather  continuing  very  thick  with  small  snow,  and  there  being  now 
every  reason  to  suppose  a  final  disruption  of  the  fixed  ice  at  hand,  I  deter- 
mined to  provide  against  the  danger  to  which,  at  night,  this  long-wished-for 
event  would  expose  the  ships,  by  adopting  a  plan  that  had  often  before  oc- 
curred to  me,  as  likely  to  prove  beneficial  in  unknown  and  critical  navigation 
such  as  this.  This  was  nothing  more  than  the  establishment  of  a  temporary 
light-house  on  shore  during  the  night,  which,  in  case  of  our  getting  adrift, 
would,  together  with  the  soundings,  afford  us  that  security  which  the  slug- 
gish traversing  of  the  compasses  otherwise  rendered  extremely  doubtful. 
For  this  purpose,  two  steady  men,  provided  with  a  tent  and  blankets,  were 
landed  on  the  east  point  of  Amherst  Island  at  sunset,  to  keep  up  some 
bright  lights  during  the  eight  hours  of  darkness,  and  to  be  sent  for  at  daylight 

Mon,  16.  in  the  morning.  On  the  16th  the  north-west  wind  continued,  but  no  alteration 
whatever  took  place  in  the  ice.  Small  snow  was  almost  constantly  falling 
during  the  day,  which  once  more,  and  permanently  for  the  winter,  as  it 
afterwards  proved,  covered  those  parts  of  the  land  that  the  late  fine  weather 


i 


<    1 

0 

m 

% 

■■:'. 

4 

1 

ft 

S3) 

N 

"1 

H 

^ 

.N 

H 

*s 

irl 

1 

k 

'; 

1 


s 


! 


•*.  *::»;\3^xa^yrw^^^^  ,    i 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


351 


1822, 
Sept. 


had  partially  cleared.  A  number  of  seals  were  seen  upon  the  ice,  and  these 
were  all  the  animals  we  noticed  about  this  time.  Our  light-house  was  again 
established  at  sunset. 

On  the  17th,  the  wind  freshened  almost  to  a  gale  from  the  north-west,  with  Tues.  V, 
thicker  and  more  constant  snow  than  before.  The  thermometer  fell  to  lQl° 
at  six  A.M.,  rose  no  higher  than  20°  in  the  course  of  the  day,  and  got  down 
to  12°  at  night,  so  that  the  young  ice  began  now  to  form  about  us  in  great 
quantities.  The  danger  of  our  being  seriously  hampered,  should  the  ice 
come  adrift  in  the  night,  being  much  increased  by  this  new  annoyance, 
which  we  well  knew  to  be  the  certain  symptom  of  approaching  winter,  it 
became  absolutely  necessary  to  move  somewhere  out  of  the  way.  We  there- 
fore cast  off  and  stood  a  little  within  the  east  point  of  Amherst  Island,  where 
a  good  birth  was  found  along-side  another  floe  of  land-ice,  and  sheltered  by 
the  island  from  any  thing  coming  up  the  Strait  from  the  westward.  The 
Fury  was  set  fast  by  the  young  ice  in  the  course  of  the  night,  which  proved 
clearer  than  was  expected,  with  a  faint  appearance  of  the  Aurora  Borealis  in 
the  N.N.W.  quarter. 

Appearances  had  now  become  so  much  against  our  making  any  further 
progress  this  season,  as  to  render  it  a  matter  of  very  serious  consideration 
whether  we  ought  to  risk  being  shut  up  during  the  winter,  in  the  middle  of 
the  Strait,  where,  from  whatever  cause  it  might  proceed,  the  last  year's  ice  was 
not  yet  wholly  detached  from  the  shores  ;  and  where  a  fresh  formation  had 
already  commenced,  which  there  was  but  too  much  reason  to  believe  would 
prove  a  permanent  one.  It  has  been  seen  by  what  gradual  steps  our  informa- 
tion was  obtained  respecting  the  Strait  now  before  us,  how  frequent  were  the 
delays,  and  how  insurmountable  the  obstacles  we  had  to  encounter ;  and, 
though  no  account,  however  detailed,  can  convey  an  adequate  idea  of  the 
anxiety  with  which  each  scrap  of  information  was  sought  after  and  received^ 
or  the  daily  and  hourly  mortification  attendant  on  each  fresh  delay,  the  fore- 
going narrative  is,  perhaps,  sufficient  to  shew  that  it  was  not  without  consider- 
able mental  solicitude,  as  well  as  physical  exertion,  that  we  had  effected  even 
thus  far  our  passage  to  the  westward.  In  proportion  to  the  labour  and  disap- 
pointments which  the  attainment  of  this  object  had  cost  us,  was  the  reluc- 
tance I  felt  in  admitting  even  a  thought  of  its  abandonment ;  and  as  long  as 
the  weather  continued  open,  I  always  ventured  to  cherish  a  belief  that  some 
favourable  alteration  might  yet  occur.  Now,  however,  that  the  frost  was 
hourly  at  work  in  re-connecting,  by  numberless  links,  the  "  older"  masses, 


:■.■:-■  I 


■I 


\n\ 


!l     : 


"'"''Vim., 


352 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.  whose  partial  separation  had  lately  excited  our  hopes,  it  seemed  scarcely 
reasonable  any  longer  to  entertain  an  expectation  of  such  a  change  as  could 
essentially  promote  our  ultimate  object.  Had  we,  indeed,  succeeded  in 
getting  fairly  through  the  Strait,  and  then  found  no  more  than  the  ordinary 
obstacles  of  these  seas  to  contend  with,  I  could  not  have  had  a  moment's 
hesitation  in  continuing  to  push  on  to  the  last  hour  of  the  navigable  season  ; 
taking  our  chance,  as  usual,  of  then  rinding  a  place  of  security  for  our  win- 
ter-quarters. But  the  prospect  now  before  us  offering  no  such  encourage- 
ment, it  appeared  more  prudent  to  regulate  our  proceedings  according  to 
existing  circumstances,  and  rather  to  moderate  our  views  for  the  present, 
than  by  an  ill-timed  perseverance  to  interfere  with  our  hopes  for  the  future. 

It  would  undoubtedly  have  been  interesting  at  this  period  of  the  voyage,  to 
have  known  whether  the  unfavourable  state  of  the  ice  during  the  late  sum- 
mer was  merely  the  result  of  an  unusually  bad  season,  or  the  effect  of  some 
more  permanent  and  local  cause,  rendering  the  navigation  of  this  passage 
equally  impracticable  in  the  general  average  of  years.  Without  however  at 
present  entering  into  that  question,  which  it  would  require  the  experience  of 
several  seasons  to  determine,  and  to  which  I  shall  have  some  future  occasion 
to  revert,  it  is  now  only  necessary  to  remark  that  in  whatsoever  state  the  ice 
might  here  be  found  in  the  ensuing  summer,  there  appeared  no  reason  for 
supposing  our  object  would  be  furthered  by  wintering  in  the  middle  of  the 
Strait ;  because  its  eastern  entrance  being  certainly  the  first  to  be  cleared,  it 
would  be  an  easy  matter  to  regain  our  present  advanced  position  in  a  few 
hours  after  that  clearance  should  take  place.  On  the  other  hand,  supposing 
the  ice  to  remain  unbroken  till  the  same  period  next  season,  (and  it  was  not 
easy  to  get  over  the  impression  that  what  had  happened  one  year  would  in  all 
probability  happen  the  next,)  our  wintering  in  the  Strait  involved  the  cer- 
tainty of  being  frozen  up  for  eleven  months, — a  sickening  prospect  under 
any  circumstances,  but  in  the  present  instance  probably  fatal  to  our  best  hopes 
and  expectations. 

With  the  conviction  of  these  unpleasant  truths  reluctantly  forced  upon  my 
mind,  I  considered  it  my  duty  to  assist  my  own  judgment  at  this  crisis  by 
calling  for  the  opinions  of  the  senior  officers  of  the  Expedition.  With  this 
view  therefore  I  addressed  a  letter  to  Captain  Lyon  and  Lieutenants  Hoppner 
and  Nias  respectively,  directing  their  attention  to  the  principal  circumstances 
of  our  present  situation,  and  requesting  their  advice  as  to  the  measures  most 
proper  to  be  pursued  for  the  successful  prosecution  of  our  enterprise. 


r\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


353 


The  officers  agreeing  with  me  in  opinion  as  to  the  expediency  of  our  not  182*- 
risking  a  detention  in  the  Strait  during  the  winter,  I  determined,  on  the  sSt 
grounds  before  detailed,  no  longer  to  postpone  our  departure,  if  indeed,  as  Thur- 19 
there  was  some  reason  to  think,  it  had  not  already  been  delayed  too  long.'  I 
therefore  directed  a  memorandum  to  be  read  on  board  each  ship,  acquainting 
the  officers  and  men  with  my  views  as  above  stated,  and  also  expressing  my 
intention  to  employ  Avhatever  time  might  yet  remain  of  the  present  season,  in 
the  examination  of  the  coast  of  Cockburn  Island  to  the  northward  and  eastward. 
In  the  event  of  making  little  progress  in  that  direction,  I  proposed  looking 
out  for  some  situation  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Igloolik  that  might  afford  se- 
curity to  the  ships  during  the  winter,  and  by  ensuring  an  early  release  in  the 
spring,  allow  us  at  least  the  liberty  of  choosing  to  what  part  of  the  coast  our 
efforts  should  then  be  directed.  I  gladly  availed  myself  of  this  opportunity 
to  offer  my  best  thanks  so  justly  due  to  the  officers  and  men  under  my  com- 
mand, for  their  zealous  and  unremitted  exertions  during  the  two  seasons  that 
had  passed  ;  and  it  was  scarcely  necessary  to  remind  the  ships'  companies  of 
the  necessity  of  continuing  to  the  last  those  praiseworthy  efforts,  on  which 
the  ultimate  accomplishment  of  our  enterprise  might  still  depend. 

The  young  ice  had  now  formed  so  thick  about  the  Fury,  that  it  became 
rather  doubtful  whether  we  should  get  her  out  without  an  increase  of  wind  to 
assist  in  extricating  her,  or  a  decrease  of  cold.     At  ten  A.M.  however  we  be- 
gan to  attempt  it,  but  by  noon  had  not  moved  the  ship  more  than  half  her  own 
length.     As  soon  as  we  had  reached  the  outer  point  of  the  floe,  in  a  bay  of 
which  we  had  been  lying,  we  had  no  longer  the  means  of  applying  a  force 
from  without  and,  if  alone,  should  therefore  have  been  helpless  at  least  for  a 
time.    The  Hecla  however  being  fortunately  unencumbered,  in  consequence 
of  having  lain  in  a  less  sheltered  place,  sent  her  boats  with  a  hawser  to  the 
margin  of  the  young  ice  ;  and  ours  being  carried  to  meet  it  by  men  walking 
upon  planks  at  considerable  risk  of  going  through,  she  at  length  succeeded 
in  pulling  us  out ;  and  getting  into  clear  water  or  rather  into  less  tough  ice,  at 
three  P.M.  we  shaped  a  course  to  the  eastward.  At  seven  o'clock,  it  being  too 
late  to  run  through  the  narrows,  we  anchored  for  the  night  in  ten  fathoms, 
near  the  east  end  of  Liddon  Island,  where  we  lay  without  disturbance. 

Although  the  thermometer  remained  at  11°  most  of  the  night,  little  or  no  Tues/20. 
young  ice  had  formed  about  the  ships  by  daylight  on  the  following  morning. 
This  circumstance,  which  it  may  be  practically  useful  to  explain,  arose  from 
the  newly-formed  sheets  immediately  drifting  away  from  the  land,  on  which 

2  z 


J 

wjJa 

;; 

in 

but 


i  .'i  >  •  -i .  •  ■ 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

account,  though  the  freezing  process  is  constantly  going  on,  a  weather  shore 
is  frequently  the  clearest,  when  no  other  part  of  the  sea  is  free  from  young 
ice.  The  latter  part  of  this  fact  became  evident  soon  after  our  getting  under 
way,  the  whole  of  the  night's  formation  of  ice  having  been  drifted  down  and 
stopped  at  the  narrows  ;  producing  so  impenetrable  a  barrier  that,  at  seven 
A.M.,  the  Fury  was  altogether  stopped  by  it,  and  the  Hecla  coming  up  astern, 
in  half  an  hour  afterwards.  Boats  were  immediately  got  under  the  bows, 
and  every  other  means  resorted  to  that  we  could  devise,  to  break  the  young 
ice  ahead  of  the  ships,  but  sometimes  to  no  purpose  for  two  hours  together. 
The  ice  was  just  in  that  state  in  which  there  is  no  such  thing  as  operating 
upon  it ;  too  thick  to  allow  a  ship  to  be  forced  through  it,  too  tough  for  regu- 
lar sawing,  and  yet  dangerous  for  men  to  walk  upon.  To  get  a  boat  her  own 
length  through  it  would  occupy  a  dozen  men  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  that 
by  standing  in  the  water  the  whole  time,  and  after  all  without  being  able  to 
make  a  channel  for  the  ship.  When  a  vessel  is  thus  stopped,  provided  the  ob- 
stacle does  not  exceed  a  certain  strength,  and  the  wind  is  favourable  at  the 
time,  there  is  nothing  so  effectual  in  forcing  her  ahead  as  what  is  technically 
called  "  sallying,"  which  consists  in  the  men  suddenly  running  from  side  to 
side  of  the  deck,  thus  causing  the  ship  to  roll  and  relieve  herself  from  the 
friction  and  adhesion  of  the  young  ice  against  her  bends.  It  is  astonishing 
indeed  to  see  how  immediately  a  progressive  motion  is  sometimes  thus  im- 
parted to  a  ship,  when  all  other  and  more  laborious  means  have  failed  in  ad- 
vancing her  a  single  inch. 

While  thus  employed  during  the  forenoon,  we  began  to  perceive  about 
half-past  ten  that  the  ships  were  driving  back  with  a  tide  setting  from  the 
eastward,  which  gradually  increased  in  strength,  and  occasioned  us  to  lose 
one  or  two  miles  of  ground  while  struggling  to  extricate  the  ships  from  the 
ice.  At  three  P.M.  we  at  length  got  clear,  and  in  passing  Cape  Ossory  at 
five  found  the  tide  slack,  it  being  now  low  water  by  the  shore.  From  this 
concluding  observation  on  the  tides  in  this  part  of  the  Strait  of  the  Fury 
and  Hecla,  as  well  as  from  all  our  preceding  remarks,  and  especially  the 
more  regular  ones  of  Mr.  Crozier  already  given,  I  believe  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  the  flood-tide  here  comes  from  the  westward.  That  there 
is  besides  this,  during  a  great  part  of  the  summer,  a  permanent  current 
setting  from  the  same  direction  is  also  sufficiently  apparent ;  and  the  joint 
effects  of  these  two  causes  appear  to  account  satisfactorily  for  the  various 
irregularities  observed,  as  well  in  the  set  of  the  stream  as  in  the  rise  and 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


355 


fall  of  the  water  by  the  shore.  The  natural  inference  with  respect  to  the  1822 
current  seemed  at  the  time  to  be,  that  it  is  occasioned  by  the  annual  melt-  ^H, 
ing  of  the  snows  upon  the  shores  of  the  Polar  Sea,  for  which  this  Strait 
affords  the  only  outlet  leading  to  the  southward,  within  perhaps  some  hun- 
dreds of  miles  ;  and  this  supposition  appeared  the  more  reasonable  from  the 
circumstance  of  the  current  having  just  now  ceased,  when  the  streams  from 
the  land  were  once  more  arrested  by  the  frost  of  approaching  winter.  It 
must  however  be  confessed,  that  this  conjecture  will  not  hold  good  with 
respect  to  the  current  at  Winter  Island,  where  it  was  generally  found  to  be 
setting  to  the  southward  throughout  the  whole  of  the  winter. 

After  clearing  the  narrows  we  ran  down  a  few  miles  and  then  hove  to  for 
the  night,  which  proved  dark  and  squally,  the  wind  having  increased  and 
veered  more  to  the  southward.     The  hours  of  darkness,  in  a  confined  and 
little-known  navigation,  are  always  anxious  ones;   but  our  situation  was 
to-night  rendered  still  more  critical,  by  the  compasses  being  affected  some- 
what in  the  same  manner  as  described  on  the  morning  of  the  26th  of  August, 
and  in  a  situation  from  three  to  five  miles  to  the  southward  of  the  same  spot. 
What  the  amount  of  the  change  was,  the  darkness  prevented  our  deter- 
mining ;  but  it  could  not  have  been  less  than  six  or  seven  points,  as  was 
ascertained  about  the  time  of  our  heaving  to,  by  the  bearing  of  the  Hecla 
astern  of  us,  without  which  guide  we  should  have  imputed  it  to  an  alteration 
in  the  wind.      We  kept  however  in  deep  water  during  the  night,  and  at 
daylight  on  the  2Lst  made  all  sail  along  Cockburn  Island  on  which  the  wind  Sat.  2! 
now  directly  blew.     No  ice  was  here  seen  to  oppose  our  progress  except 
some  broad  streams  of  "  pancake-ice  ;"  but  it  being  impossible  to  run  down 
on  a  dead  lee-shore  to  carry  on  the  proposed  examination,  I  made  a  tack  to 
fetch  Tern  Island    and  anchored  under  its  lee  for  the  night  in  thirteen 
fathoms,  at  the  distance  of  a  mile  from  the  shore.       The  island  was  now 
so  covered  with  snow  that  it  might  easily  be  mistaken  for  a  floe  of  heavy 
ice  till  closely  approached.     A  number  of  sea-horses  were  seen  here,  and 
Captain  Lyon  struck  some  of  them,  but  was  prevented  securing  them  by 
their  taking  to  the  young  ice,  through  which  the  boats  could  not  make  their 
way. 

At  break  of  day  on  the  22d  we  weighed  and  stood  to  the  north-eastward,  Sun  22 
with  the  intention  of  proceeding  in  the  further  examination  of  the  shores  of 
Cockburn  Island.     The  wind,  however,  freshened  up  so  suddenly  from  the 
S.E.b.S.,  that  it  was  impossible  to  make  any  progress  ;  and  at  half-past  eight 


"'v.^i 


frlfcl 


2  Z    2 


356 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822.     A.M.,  finding  the  weather  still  becoming  worse,  I  determined  to  run  back  to 

Sept. 


Tern  Island,  where  alone  we  knew  of  any  shelter  during  the  approaching  bad 
weather.     A  fresh  gale  almost  immediately  coming  on,  with  a  considerable 
sea  and   very  thick  snow,  it  was  for  some  time  doubtful  whether  we  should 
be  able  to  find  the  little  spot  we  were  in  search  of.     Discovering  it  at  length 
under  our  lee  appearing  like  a  long  white  cloud  upon  the  horizon,  we  bore 
up  to  run  round  the  reefs  by  which  it  is  encompassed,  and  which  may  be 
perceived  at  a  considerable  distance  by  the  whiteness  of  the  water.     Every 
seaman  will  be  aware  of  the  difficulty  of  choosing  an  anchorage  in  a  gale  of 
wind,  and  upon  a  coast  so  little  known  as  to  render  extreme  caution  neces- 
sary in  approaching  it.     To  these  difficulties  however  must  be  added,  in  the 
present  instance,  the  extreme  smallness  of  the  island ,  which  afforded  so  little 
lee  that,  to  use  an  expression  of  the  seamen,  it  was  like  "  anchoring  under 
the  point  of  a  needle."     On  the  other  hand  it  was  requisite  for  the  leading 
ship  to  keep  sufficient  sail  set  to  the  last  moment,  to  ensure  gaining  anchor- 
age, which  once  lost  would  have  placed  us  in  a  situation  of  extreme  danger 
during  the  ensuing  dark  and  tempestuous  night.     The  consequence  was  that 
though  the  Fury's  sails  were  clewed  up  and  furled  with  the  utmost  alacrity, 
the  strain  proved  too  heavy  for  the  anchor,  wThich  after  bringing  the  ship 
nearly  head  to  wind,  began  again  to  drag  along  the  ground.      The  chain 
cable  being  then  veered  to  seventy  fathoms,  she  was  at  length  brought  up, 
being  in  five  fathoms  and  a  half  and  close  to  some  grounded  masses  of  ice 
lying  upon  the  reefs  ;  but  we  had  every  reason,  notAvithstanding  this,  to  sup- 
pose that  all  was  not  right  with  the  anchor.     The  Hecla  having  the  Fury  as 
a  guide  came  to  in  a  good  birth  a  little  outside  of  us. 
Mon.  23.      The  gale  now  continued  to  increase,  and  a  good  deal  of  swell  setting  into 
our  roadstead  incommoded  us  less  by  the  additional  strain  thus  put  upon 
the  anchors,  than  by  the  numerous  heavy  masses  of  ice  that  it  served  to  lift 
off  the   ground,  and  which  driving  past  the  ships  occasioned  them  some 
heavy  shocks  during  this  inclement  night.     We  rode  the  gale  out  however 
quite   securely,  and  on  the  morning  of  the  23d  had  once  more  a  moderate 
breeze,  though  with  continued  snow.     Advantage  was  taken  of  this  change 
to  shift  our  births  a  little  further  out,  in  case  of  the  wind  coming  upon  the 
shore,  when  our  conjectures  respecting  the  Fury's  anchor  were  disagreeably 
verified  by  its  coming  to  the  bows  with  only  one  fluke.     Having  now  but  a 
single  serviceable  anchor  on  deck,  the  launch  was  hoisted  out  and  one  re- 
ceived from  the  Hecla.     The  Mind  shifted  to  the  westward  soon  after  we  had 


*^;tf^xu^:Av*«ffty/^  *r* 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


357 


1822. 
Sept. 


y-VJ> 


moved  ;  and  the  island  now  affording  us  no  shelter  and  the  night  being  toler- 
ably clear  and  fine,  we  weighed  after  dark,  to  avoid  incurring  further  damage 
to  our  ground  tackle,  in  which  our  losses  had  already  been  serious  ones. 

The  time  had  now  arrived  when  I  could  no  longer  consider  it  prudent  to  Tue's.  24 
venture  the  ships  at  sea;  for  with  ten  hours  of  darkness  in  the  four-and- 
twenty,  a  low  temperature,  and  at  times  a  considerable  sea,  it  may  readily 
be  supposed  that  our  situation  was  one  of  almost  constant  and  unavoidable 
danger.  Besides,  on  an  unknown  coast  such  as  that  I  had  purposed  to  ex- 
amine, it  occupies  nearly  one-half  of  a  short  day  in  looking  out  for  ancho- 
rage for  the  ensuing  night,  and  that  perhaps  after  all  affording  no  security 
to  the  ships,  with  much  risk  to  the  ground-tackle.  These  considerations 
appeared  to  me  so  important,  and  the  probability  so  small  of  effecting  any 
thing  that  could  eventually  promote  our  main  object,  that  I  determined  on 
running  the  ships  over  to  Igloolik,  before  the  strong  autumnal  equinoctial 
gales  usual  in  these  regions  should  come  on.  Making  sail  therefore  for 
the  island,  we  discovered  it  at  half-past  ten  A.M.,  though  such  was  the  dif- 
ficulty of  distinguishing  this  from  Neerlo-nakto,  or  either  from  the  main-land, 
on  account  of  the  snow  that  covered  them  that,  had  it  not  been  for  the  Es- 
quimaux huts,  we  should  not  easily  have  recognised  the  place.  At  noon  we 
arrived  off  the  point  where  the  tents  had  first  been  pitched,  and  were  imme- 
diately greeted  by  a  number  of  the  Esquimaux,  who  came  running  down  to 
the  beach,  shouting  and  jumping  with  all  their  might.  The  soundings, 
though  regularly  decreasing,  are  shoal  off  this  point ;  and  the  Fury  in  standing 
in  shoaled  the  water  to  four  fathoms  and  a  half,  at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile  ; 
but  by  keeping  out  a  little,  and  proceeding  with  caution  along  the  south 
shore  of  the  island,  we  deepened  to  twenty,  and  being  then  led  more  off 
the  land,  found  no  bottom  with  the  hand-leads.  Making  a  tack  towards  the 
island  we  again  came  into  regular  soundings  ;  and  at  half-past  two  P.M.  an- 
chored in  ten  fathoms  on  a  muddy  bottom  at  the  distance  of  two-thirds  of  a 
mile  from  the  shore. 

As  soon  as  we  had  anchored  I  went  on  shore,  accompanied  by  several  of 
the  officers,  to  pay  the  Esquimaux  a  visit,  a  crowd  of  them  meeting  us  as 
usual  on  the  beach  and  greeting  us  with  every  demonstration  of  joy.  They 
seemed  disappointed  that  we  had  not  reached  Akkoolee,  for  they  always  re- 
ceive with  eagerness  any  intelligence  of  their  distant  country-people.  Many 
of  them,  and  Toolemak  among  the  number,  frequently  repeated  the  expres- 
sions, "  Owyak  Na-o  !  "  (no  summer,)  "  Toolc-too  Na-o !  "  (no  rein-deer,)  which 


raw 


in,  ''i 


■      :i 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


we  considered  at  the  time  as  some  confirmation  of  our  own  surmises  respecting 
the  badness  of  the  past  summer.  When  we  told  them  we  were  come  to  win- 
ter among  them,  they  expressed  very  great  and  doubtless  very  sincere  de- 
light, and  even  a  few  coyennas  (thanks)  escaped  them  on  the  first  communica- 
tion of  this  piece  of  intelligence. 

We  found  these  people  already  established  in  their  winter  residences, 
which  consisted  principally  of  the  huts  before  described,  but  modified  in 
various  ways  both  as  to  form  and  materials.  The  roofs,  which  were  wholly 
wanting  in  the  summer,  were  now  formed  by  skins  stretched  tight  across  from 
side  to  side.  This,  however,  as  we  soon  afterwards  found,  was  only  a  prepara- 
tion for  the  final  winter  covering  of  snow,  and  indeed  many  of  the  huts  were 
subsequently  lined  in  the  same  way  within,  the  skins  being  attached  to  the 
sides  and  roof  by  slender  threads  of  whalebone,  disposed  in  large  and  re- 
gular stitches.  Before  the  passages  already  described,  others  were  now 
added  from  ten  to  fifteen  feet  in  length,  and  from  four  to  five  feet  high, 
neatly  constructed  of  large  flat  slabs  of  ice  cemented  together  by  snow  and 
water.  Some  huts  also  were  entirely  built  of  this  material,  of  a  rude  circular 
or  octangular  form,  and  roofed  with  skins  like  the  others.  The  light  and 
transparent  effect  Avithin  these  singular  habitations  gave  one  the  idea  of  be- 
ing in  a  house  of  ground-glass,  and  their  newness  made  them  look  clean, 
comfortable,  and  wholesome.  Not  so  the  more  substantial  bone  huts,  which, 
from  their  extreme  closeness  and  accumulated  filth,  emitted  an  almost  insup- 
portable stench,  to  which  an  abundant  supply  of  raw  and  half-putrid  walrus 
flesh  in  no  small  degree  contributed.  The  passages  to  these  are  so  low  as  to 
make  it  necessary  to  crawl  on  the  hands  and  knees  to  enter  them  ;  and  the 
floors  of  the  apartments  were  in  some  so  steep  and  slippery,  that  we  could 
with  difficulty  pass  and  repass,  without  the  risk  of  continually  falling  among 
the  filth  with  which  they  were  covered.  These  were  the  dirtiest  because  the 
most  durable  of  any  Esquimaux  habitations  we  had  yet  seen,  and  it  may  be 
supposed  they  did  not  much  improve  during  the  winter.  Some  bitches  with 
young  were  very  carefully  and  conveniently  lodged  in  small  square  kennels, 
made  of  four  upright  slabs  of  ice  covered  with  a  fifth,  and  having  a  small 
hole  as  a  door  in  one  of  the  sides.  The  canoes  were  also  laid  upon  two 
slabs  of  this  kind,  like  tall  tomb-stones  standing  erect;  and  a  quantity  of 
spare  slabs  lying  in  different  places  gave  the  ground  an  appearance  somewhat 
resembling  that  of  a  statuary's  yard.  Large  stores  of  walrus'  and  seals' 
flesh,  principally  the  former,  were  deposited  under  heaps  of  stones  all  about 


Ml  1  iii 


,1      '■ 


111 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

the  beach  and,  as  we  afterwards  found,  in  various  other  parts  of  the  island, 
which  shewed  that  they  had  made  some  provision  for  the  winter  though, 
with  their  enormous  consumption  of  food,  it  proved  a  very  inadequate 
one. 

The  breeze  continuing  fresh  from  the  westward,  with  clear  weather,  the  Wed.  25 
thermometer  fell  to  12°  on  the  morning  of  the  25th.  Being  desirous  of  ascer- 
taining, as  soon  as  possible,  in  what  situation  it  would  be  expedient  to  place 
the  ships  for  the  winter,  several  boats  were  despatched  to  sound  along  the 
shore  ;  when  I  found  that  the  only  spot  likely  to  afford  shelter,  or  even  any 
near  approach  to  the  land,  was  within  a  point  called  Oong-alooyat,  at  the  en- 
trance of  a  fine  bay  about  two  miles  to  the  westward  of  our  present  anchor- 
age. The  young  ice  now  covered  the  whole  surface  of  the  sea  like  floating 
honey,  the  breeze  not  allowing  it  to  become  solid  ;  and,  towards  night,  the 
wind  shifting  to  the  eastward,  soon  raised  the  temperature  too  high  for  any 
fresh  formation  of  that  kind.  I  determined,  therefore,  without  loss  of  time, 
to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  afforded  by  this  change,  to  run  to  the 
westward  in  a  boat  as  far  as  the  fixed  ice  would  permit ;  and,  if  soon 
stopped  by  that  obstacle,  to  cross  upon  it  to  the  main-land,  and  endeavour  to 
clear  up  the  mystery  respecting  Khemig,  which  had  cost  us  so  many  spe- 
culations and  conjectures. 

Leaving  the  Fury  at  seven  A.M.  on  the  26th,  and  being  favoured  by  a  Thur,  26. 
fresh  easterly  breeze,  we  soon  cleared  the  south-west  point  of  Igloolik  ;  and 
having  passed  the  little  island  of  Ooglidghioo,  immediately  perceived  to  the 
W.N.W.  of  us  a  group  of  islands,  so  exactly  answering  the  description  of 
Coxe's  Group,  both  in  character  and  situation,  as  to  leave  no  doubt  of  our 
being  exactly  in  Captain  Lyon's  former  track.  Being  still  favoured  by  the 
wind,  and  by  the  total  absence  of  fixed  ice,  we  reached  the  islands  at  eleven 
A.M.,  and  after  sailing  a  mile  or  two  among  them,  came  at  once  in  sight  of 
the  two  bluffs  forming  the  passage  pointed  out  by  Toolemak  and  then  sup- 
posed to  be  called  Khemig.  The  land  to  the  north  called  by  the  Esquimaux 
Khiadlaghioo  we  now  found  to  be,  as  we  had  before  conjectured,  the  southern 
shore  of  Richards'  Bay  ;  and  its  extreme  point  to  the  eastward  I  subse- 
quently named,  by  Lieutenant  Nias's  request,  Cape  Matthew  Smith,  after 
Captain  Matthew  Smith,  of  the  Royal  Navy.  The  land  on  our  left,  or 
to  the  southward,  proved  an  island,  five  miles  and  a  quarter  in  length,  of 
the  same  bold  and  rugged  character  as  the  rest  of  this  numerous  group, 
and  by  far  the  largest  of  them  all.     To  prevent  the  necessity   of  reverting 


[ 

» 

m 

Hi. 

] 

tiiiiii 

*i 

|J,"l"iiiif 

- 

v 

3 

*■«*■>«" 


H^iil 


360 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


to  this  subject.  I  may  at  once  add,  that  two  or  three  months  after  this, 
on  laying  before  Ewerat  our  own  chart  of  the  whole  coast,  in  order  to 
obtain  the  Esquimaux  names,  we  discovered  that  the  island  just  mentioned 
was  called  Khemig,  by  which  name  Ormond  Island  was  also  distinguished  ;  the 
word  expressing  in  the  Esquimaux  language  any  thing  stopping  up  the 
mouth  of  a  place  or  narrowing  its  entrance,  and  applied  also  more  familiarly 
to  the  cork  of  a  bottle  or  a  plug  of  any  kind.  And  thus  were  reconciled  all 
the  apparent  inconsistencies  respecting  this  hitherto  mysterious  and  incom- 
prehensible word,  which  had  occasioned  us  so  much  perplexity. 

After  landing  to  dine  upon  one  of  the  islands  of  which,  from  first  to  last, 
we  counted  nearly  one  hundred,  we  again  made  sail  and,  running  between 
the  bluffs,  which  are  half  a  mile  apart,  continued  our  course  in  rather  a 
wider  channel  than  before  though  still  among  islands.  At  half-past  three 
we  were  stopped  by  a  floe  of  fixed  ice  stretching  entirely  across  the 
passage,  and  the  weather  now  becoming  thick  wrth  small  snow,  we  landed  and 
pitched  the  tent  for  the  night ;  not,  however,  till  I  had  recognised  on  the  left 
hand  or  main-land  the  remarkable  cliff  described  in  my  former  journey, 
by  which  circumstance  we  were  assured  of  being  near  the  little  inlet  then 
discovered. 
Frid.  27.  At  daylight  on  the  27th,  we  crossed  to  a  small  island  at  the  margin  of  the 
ice  ;  and  leaving  the  boat  there  in  charge  of  the  coxswain  and  two  of  the 
crew,  Mr.  Ross  and  myself,  accompanied  by  the  other  two,  set  out  across  the 
ice  at  seven  A.M.  to  gain  the  main-land,  with  the  intention  of  determining 
the  extent  of  the  inlet  by  walking  up  its  southern  bank.  After  an  hour's 
good  travelling  we  landed  at  eight  A.M.,  and  had  scarcely  done  so  when  we 
found  ourselves  at  the  very  entrance,  being  exactly  opposite  the  place  from 
which  Mr.  Richards  and  myself  had  obtained  the  first  view  of  the  inlet. 
The  patch  of  ice  on  which  we  had  been  walking,  and  which  was  about  three 
miles  long,  proved  the  only  remains  of  last  year's  formation ;  so  forcibly  had 
nature  struggled  to  get  rid  of  this  before  the  commencement  of  a  fresh 
winter. 

We  found  this  land  similar  to  Igloolik  in  its  geological  character,  being 
composed  of  limestone  in  schistose  fragments  ;  but  in  some  parts,  even  for  a 
mile  or  two  together,  covered  with  herbage  the  most  extensive  and  luxuriant 
I  have  ever  seen  near  this  latitude.  Here  and  there  occurred  a  little  pile  as 
it  were  of  the  fragments  of  limestone,  lying  horizontally  as  if  arranged  by 
art,  and  projecting  a  few  feet  above  the  surface  of  the  ground.     The  sides  of 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


361 


several  small  rising  banks  presented  a  similar  disposition,  but  I  did  not  notice  J^822- 
any  boulders  of  harder  substances  resting  upon  any  of  them,  nor  indeed  could  ^v^, 
we  find  a  single  specimen  of  any  other  mineral  than  limestone.  Walking 
quickly  to  the  westward  along  this  shore,  which  afforded  excellent  tra- 
velling, Ave  soon  perceived  that  our  business  was  almost  at  an  end,  the 
inlet  terminating  a  very  short  distance  beyond  where  I  had  first  traced  it, 
the  apparent  turn  to  the  northward  being  only  that  of  a  shallow  bay. 
To  make  quite  sure,  however,  I  sent  Mr.  Ross  on  with  one  of  the  men, 
to  walk  to  the  head  of  it,  while  I  with  the  other  turned  off  to  examine  the 
cliff-land  to  the  southward.  We  found  the  slope  of  this  to  be  composed  as 
was  conjectured,  of  the  debris  falling  from  the  perpendicular  ridge  above, 
the  whole  being  limestone  without  a  single  exception  that  we  could  discover. 
The  slope  making  an  angle  of  about  60°  with  a  horizontal  line,  and  being  in 
some  parts  covered  with  snow,  we  with  difficulty  ascended  it ;  but  found  the 
upper  ridge  wholly  impracticable  on  account  of  the  snow  overhanging  the 
summit.  The  height  of  the  perpendicular  rock,  which  lies  in  broad  hori- 
zontal strata,  is  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet,  the  whole  cliff  being  about  one 
hundred  and  eighty  above  the  level  of  the  other  ground.  At  the  bottom  of 
the  slope  lay  numerous  heavy  square  blocks  of  the  limestone  ;  and  upon 
these,  as  well  as  on  some  of  the  smaller  fragments,  I  observed  impressions  of 
fossil-shells. 

Having  finished  my  examination  of  this  remarkable  piece  of  land,  which 
extends  between  four  and  five  miles  in  an  east  and  west  direction,  I  went  to 
meet  Mr.  Ross  ;  who  reported  that,  having  Avalked  three  or  four  miles  to  the 
westward,  he  found  the  inlet  terminate  about  two  miles  further  in  that  direc- 
tion. Having  thus  completed  our  object,  we  set  out  on  our  return,  and 
reached  the  boat  at  three  P.M.  after  a  walk  of  twenty  miles.  The  weather 
fortunately  remaining  extremely  mild,  no  young  ice  was  formed  to  obstruct 
our  way,  and  we  arrived  on  board  at  noon  the  following  day,  after  an  Sat.  28. 
examination  peculiarly  satisfactory,  inasmuch  as  it  proved  the  non-exist- 
ence of  any  water  communication  with  the  Polar  Sea,  however  small  and 
unfit  for  the  navigation  of  ships,  to  the  southward  of  the  Strait  of  the  Fury 
and  Hecla.  The  creek  whose  extent  to  the  westward  we  had  lately  deter- 
mined, I  named  after  Captain  John  Quilliam  of  the  Royal  Navy  ;  and  the 
Inlet,  of  which  this  is  a  continuation,  was  distinguished  by  the  name  of 
Hooper  Inlet,  after  my  friend  Mr.  Hooper,  purser  of  the  Fury. 

I  found  from  Captain  Lyon  on  my  return  that,  in  consequence  of  some  ice 

3  A 


;: 

^^HLgii  W-4M 

il 

fin 

ini 


'    V  \ 


3® 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
Sept. 


W 

'•'11 
3 

m 

■v:  ;i 


coming  in  near  the  ships,  (most  probably  that  which  had  lately  been  dis- 
lodged from  Richards'  Bay,)  he  had  shifted  them  round  the  point  into  the 
births  where  it  was  my  intention  to  place  them  during  the  winter ;  where 
they  now  lay  in  from  eleven  to  fourteen  fathoms  at  the  distance  of  three 
cables'  lengths  from  the  shore. 

The  point  of  Oonga-looyat  is  rendered  conspicuous  at  some  distance  by 
fifteen  walls  of  loose  stones,  disposed  in  a  tolerably  regular  oval  form, 
about  live  feet  high,  from  forty-one  to  twenty-seven  feet  in  length,  and 
from  thirty-three  to  eighteen  in  breadth,  the  longest  diameter  being  from 
north  to  south.  The  greater  part  of  these  had  at  their  south  ends  a 
kind  of  recess,  and  some  of  them  two,  as  in  the  annexed  figures- 1  and 
2,   the   entrance   being  through  a  gap  in  the  wall,   at  e.     A  smaller  oval 


North. 


of  stones  was  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  principal  one,  and  had  been 
used  simply  for  confining  the  tent-skins  of  the  Esquimaux,  who  had  left 
behind  them  the  usual  traces  of  recent  habitation,  such  as  oil,  bones  and 
putrid  flesh  in  abundance.  The  small  central  space  at  s  was  sunk  about 
a  foot  below  the  level  of  the  ground,  and  the  parts  marked  b  had  served  as 
beds,  being  raised  with  flat  stones  about  a  foot,  and  covered  with  shingle. 
The  use  of  the  principal  or  outer  circles,  which  differed  from  any  thing^e 
had  observed  elsewhere,  was  not  at  first  very  obvious  to  us,  but  Ewerat^ancl 
Togolat  one  day  explained  that  they  were  only  used  at  the  killing  of  a 
whale,  on  which  rare  and  grand  occasion  they  indulge,  it  seems,  in  more 
than  ordinary  festivity  and  merriment.  As  far  as  we  could  understand  their 
description  of  this  fete,  it  appears  that  the  whole  animal  or  a  principal  part 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASS  AGE. 


363 


of  it  is  dragged  into  the  enclosure,  where  some  of  the  men  are  employed  in  1822. 
cutting  it  up  and  throwing  the  pieces  over  the  wall  to  the  rest,  who  stand  ScPL 
ready  to  receive  them  outside  ;  while  the  women  range  themselves  in  a 
circle  around  the  whale  within,  and  continue  singing  during  the  operation. 
One  of  these  walls,  which  was  built  with  more  neatness  and  regularity  than 
the  others,  had  the  inner  oval  larger  in  proportion  than  usual,  and  consisting 
of  heavy  stones  evidently  laid  as  seats.  Each  of  these  structures,  (which 
were  placed  at  the  distance  of  thirty  or  forty  yards  apart,)  was  the  distinct 
property  of  a  particular  individual ;  and  had  probably,  in  its  turn,  been  the 
seat  of  feasting  and  merriment  either  to  the  present  owner,  or  those  from 
whom  he  had  inherited  it.  The  inner  circles,  however,  appeared  to  be 
made  use  of  as  common  summer  habitations,  either  from  the  convenience 
and  superior  shelter  they  afford,  or  possibly  from  some  superstitious  rever- 
ence entertained  for  this  particular  site.  On  a  rising  ground  above,  were 
several  large  stones  set  upright  in  aline  three  or  four  hundred  yards  in 
length  ;  with  what  intention  we  did  not  learn.  Most  of  these  people  had  now 
returned  to  their  winter  station  at  the  south-east  end  of  the  island.  A  sick 
man  with  his  family  took  up  his  quarters  in  our  neighbourhood,  for  the 
benefit  of  medical  assistance  ;  and  building  a  snow-hut  near  the  ships,  con- 
tinued Mr.  Skeoch's  patient  for  a  short  time,  and  then  joined  the  rest  of  the 
natives  at  the  village. 

The  snow  continued  to  fall  during  most  of  the  29th,  on  the  evening  of  Sun.  29. 
which  day  the  weather  cleared  up  and  the  thermometer  fell  to  15°  at  mid- 
night. Some  young  ice  now  formed  near  us,  but  for  this  and  the  two  fol- 
lowing days,  when  the  temperature  oscillated  between  16°  and  19°,  it  was 
only  of  the  "  pancake  "  kind,  being  the  softest  of  any  that  assumes  an  ap- 
pearance of  continuity.  From  the  2d  to  the  4th  of  October,  however,  when  October. 
the  thermometer  fell  to  10°  during  the  nights,  the  ice  formed  into  a  more  Frid-  4- 
solid  sheet ;  but  being  kept  too  constantly  in  motion  by  the  wind  to  attach 
itself  to  the  land,  still  drove  rapidly  past  the  ships,  which  easily  cut  for 
themselves  a  passage,  as  it  were,  through  it,  to  the  discomfiture  only  of  the 
buoys  on  the  anchors,  which  were  frequently  pressed  under  the  ice,  but 
would  occasionally,  by  their  buoyancy,  force  themselves  up  through  some 
thin  part.  The  rapidity  with  which  ice  will  form  upon  the  surface  of  the 
sea,  even  at  no  very  low  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  was  rendered 
particularly  apparent  by  what  occurred  for  several  days  about  this  period, 
when  a  continuous  sheet,  from  three  quarters  of  an  inch  to  an  inch  and 

3  A  2 


nil!,   ,„ 


;!:;  hif'' 


f^VSSJPTWraZI 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 
Fury,  at  Sea,  during  the  Month  of  September,   1822. 


Day 


Place. 


i 


Fahrenheit's 
Thermometer. 


33 
34 
3G 
30 

28 
28 
2S 
30 
31 
33 
31 
37 
34 
33 
28 
30f 
20 
16 
18 
20 
29 
29 
2S 
28 
25 
23 
29 
27 
19 
19 


+  37 


27 
25 
24 
25 
20 
19 
19 
20 
19 
19 
20 
23 
27 
24 
211 
22 
12 
11 
11 
14 
20 
2G 
26 
11 
12 
27 
27 
19 
15 
10 


+11 


3U.00 

31.83 

27.58 

27.58 

27.17 

24.71 

22.92 

25.58 

25.08 

25.37 

20.33 

30.29 

30.42 

27.83 

24.2 

25.83 

17.33 

13.21 

11.29 

18.00 

25 .83 

27.00 

2G.92 

22.25 

18.90 

28.42 

27.90 

21.75 

17.29 

17.7 


j-  24.45 


goo 

,°  a  ctf 

E-l    >-  ti- 

rJ  ct  ni 
cj  M  OJ 
*h       CO 


2».04 

2S.42 

27.08 

27.17 

27.21 

27.25 

27.00 

28.10 

27.88 

2S.33 

28.09 

29.83 

29.58 

28.40 

28.05 

28.  OS 

27.12 

27.50 

27.22 

27.01 

28.21 

28.  IS 

28.17 

27.75 

27.45 

2S.25 

2S.79 

2S.0S 

27.79 

27.95 


27. 57 


Barometer. 


inches 

29.91 

29.82 

29.82 

29.91 

30.03 

29.98 

29.80 

29.82 

29.85 

29.S7 

29.70 

29,58 

29.51 

29.50 

29.53 

29.G0 

29.73 

29.78 

29.63 

29.88 

30.02 

30.02 

29.72 

29.80 

29.81 

29.04 

29.G2 

29.73 

29.72 

29.G0 


:i0.02 


inches 

29.80 

29.60 

29.78 

29.83 

29.95 

29.S4 

29.72 

29.70 

29.83 

29.75 

29  .GO 

29.51 

29.50 

29.4S 

29.45 

29.52 

29.00 

29.7G 

29.70 

29.83 

29.55 

29.72 

29.63 

29.72 

29.01 

29.02 

29.00 

29.00 

29.05 

29.57 


inches 

29.898 
29.722 
29.810 
29.S83 
29.986 
29.92} 
29.765 
29.773 
29.840 
29.820 
29.650 
29. 547 j 
29.502J 
29.495 
29.4S7 
29.502 
29.042 
29.770 
29.765 
29.850 
29.930 
29.863 
29.670 
29.818 
29.730 
29.627 
29.013 
29.G55 
29.69S 
29.500 


29.45 


Prevailing 
AVinds. 


Velocity. 


29.730 


NW 

NW 

West 

WbN 

NW 

West 

WNW 

ESE 

ENE 

NWbW 

SE 

ESE 

SE 

ENE 

NNW 

NW 

WNW 

West 

NW 

NW 

SEbE 

SSE 

SSE 

NW 

WNW 

ENE 

ENE 

Northerly 

NW 

NW 


fresh 

strong  &  ) 
squally  > 

modt. 
modi. 

modt. 

modt. 

modt. 

light 

light 

light 

It.&calm] 
at  times  ) 

light 
fresh 
modt. 
light 
modt. 
fresh 
light 
light 
light 
modt. 
strong 
modt. 
modt. 
modt. 
modt. 
modt. 
modt. 
modt. 
modt. 


Prevailing 
Weather. 


J 


cloudy 

cloudy 

cloudy 

cloudy 

cloudy 

cloudy — snow  at  times 

clear 

fine 

fine 

fine 

fine 

hazy 

hazy 

hazy  and  small  snow 

hazy — snow  at  times 

cloudy 

cloudy — snow  at  times 

snow  at  times 

cloudy 

cloudy 

cloudy 

hazy — snow  at  times 

hazy — snow  at  times 

cloudy 

cloudy 

hazy 

hazy  and  snow 

hazy  and  snow 

cloudy — snow  at  times 

cloudy 


"Hi 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


365 


a  half  in  thickness,  incessantly  drove  past  the  ships.  The  distance  of  01S  ,"' 
the  land  a-head,  under  which  this  formation  must  have  commenced,  and  <-*-r-^> 
which  appeared  as  though  it  were  itself  furnishing  an  inexhaustible  store, 
was  not  more  than  two  miles  and  a  quarter,  and  the  rate  at  which  the  ice 
came  past  us  varied  from  a  mile  to  a  mile  and  a  half  an  hour  ;  so  that  the 
sheet  must  have  been  formed  of  this  thickness  in  the  course  of  two  hours 
and  a  half  at  farthest. 

This  continued  without  intermission  for  two  days,  the  only  annoyance 
it  occasioned  being  that  of  preventing  our  communication  with  the  shore, 
where  some  parties  had  previously  been  occupied  in  cutting  turf  for  the  sides 
of  the  house  intended  to  be  built  as  an  observatory.  On  the  night  of  the 
4th,  however,  it  began  to  shew  its  strength  by  causing  the  Hecla  to  drive 
directly  in  our  hawse,  but  she  fortunately  brought  up  just  in  time  to  secure 
both  ships  from  damage.  It  therefore  became  absolutely  necessary  to  move 
farther  into  the  bay  ;  that  we  might  have  to  encounter  "  younger  "  ice,  and 
thus  avoid  the  risk,  which  now  threatened  us,  of  being  driven  out  to  sea  for 
the  winter. 

On  the  5th,  therefore,  we  commenced  this  attempt,  it  being  my  intention  Sat.  5. 
whenever  the  ice  became  attached  to  the  land,  to  cut  our  way  back  to  the 
present  station.  By  dint  of  great  exertion  in  all  the  boats,  our  people  suc- 
ceeded in  rowing  out  a  stream  anchor,  and  laying  it  down  a-head  of  the 
Hecla,  which  was  the  weathermost  ship ;  and  by  this  she  was  enabled  before 
dark  to  warp  about  one-third  of  a  mile  farther  into  the  bay.  On  the  follow-  Sun.  & 
ing  day  she  advanced  a  little  farther  by  the  same  means,  and  then  by  hawsers 
run  down  from  her  the  Fury  was  moved  up  to  the  same  station.  The  ice 
had  now  become  much  stronger,  and  the  wind  falling  in  the  evening,  it 
was  broken  off  near  us  and  arrested  in  its  drift,  partly  perhaps  by  the 
ships  themselves  which  now  lay  at  the  edge  of  the  newly-formed  floe. 
Near  the  time  of  sunset  this  afternoon  a  splendid  parhelion  appeared  on 
each  side  at  the  distance  of  22°  IT  from  the  sun,  displaying  very  rich  pris- 
matic colours  and  quite  dazzling  the  eye  to  look  steadfastly  at  them.  A  pa- 
raselena  was  also  seen,  at  night,  on  each  side  the  moon,  their  angular 
distance  from  that  object  measuring  23°.  The  thermometer  fell  to  zero  at 
midnight  and  the  temperature  still  farther  decreased  to  —2°  on  the  morning 
of  the  7th,  which  kept  every  thing  quiet  during  the  day,  and  gave  us  hopes  Mon.  7. 
that  no  disruption  would  again  disturb  us.  The  fall  of  the  thermometer  to 
zero  occasioned  as  usual  a  considerable  condensation  of  vapour  into  water, 


"li  'M 


' 


1 


366 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
October. 


Tues.  8, 


"Wed.  9. 


upon  the  beams  of  the  lower  deck  ;  but  directions  being  given  for  com- 
mencing our  winter  system  of  ventilation,  dryness  was  restored  in  less  than 
three  hours  after  the  lighting  of  the  main-hatchway  stove. 

The  wind  changing  to  the  south-east  on  the  8th,  and  soon  increasing  to  a 
fresh  breeze  which  shortly  raised  the  thermometer  to  +25°  the  ice  was  once 
more  set  in  motion,  breaking  in  all  directions,  and  one  sheet  doubling  under 
another  wherever  a  separation  had  been  effected.  The  wind  increasing 
and  with  it  the  pressure  also,  the  ships  were  turned  round  with  their  sterns 
towards  the  north-west  shore  of  the  bay,  upon  which,  but  for  the  anchors, 
we  must  have  been  immediately  driven.  Even  these  however  could  not 
long  sustain  the  ships  against  the  ice,  which  from  being  at  first  only  an  inch 
or  two  in  thickness  became  in  a  few  hours  more  than  as  many  feet,  by  the 
long-continued  process  of  one  sheet  overlaying  the  other.  The  Fury  soon 
drove  past  the  Hecla,  the  latter  happening  to  rest  against  a  stouter  part  of 
the  ice,  which  for  some  time  held  her  to  windward.  The  breeze  still  in- 
creasing, the  lower  yards  and  top-gallant-masts  were  struck,  and  the  rudders 
kept  ready  for  unshipping,  if  it  should  be  found  necessary :  we  lay  however 
tolerably  quiet,  driving  but  a  little  in  the  course  of  the  night.  Notwithstand- 
ing the  constant  motion  and  dangerous  state  of  the  ice  during  the  clay,  several 
of  the  Esquimaux  walked  fearlessly,  though  cautiously,  off  to  the  ships.  Their 
method  is  to  go  in  a  line  a-head,  or  by  single  files,  the  leader  and  perhaps  one 
or  two  of  the  others  carrying  a  spear,  with  which  they'  constantly  try  the  ice 
before  them,  keeping  their  legs  as  far  asunder  as  possible  so  as  to  bear  upon 
a  large  surface,  and  carefully  avoiding  the  parts  that  look  black.  In  this 
manner,  during  this  and  the  succeeding  day,  when  I  would  not  on  any  con- 
sideration have  ventured  a  man  of  ours  in  a  similar  situation,  did  these 
people  continue  to  visit  us,  some  women  and  even  children  being  among  the 
number. 

On  the  morning  of  the  9th,  the  wind  began  to  freshen  to  a  gale,  by  which 
the  ice  was  again  set  in  motion,  and  the  squeezing  and  doubling  re-com- 
menced with  fresh  violence.  In  the  afternoon  the  Fury  drove  rapidly  to 
the  westward  but,  occasionally  holding  on,  allowed  a  great  deal  of  ice 
to  go  past  her  and  interpose  itself  between  the  ship  and  the  land.  As 
soon  as  this  had  taken  place,  and  the  ships  were  thus  secured  from  the 
danger  of  driving  on  the  beach,  we  should  have  been  glad  to  purchase  our 
anchors,  which  then  became  the  objects  of  our  greatest  solicitude.  The 
Fury  was  so  closely  and  constantly  hemmed  in  that,  with  her,  this  was 


^a^tt^^i«y^^^^^^^H^.,y:  •  *  *ev. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


367 


1822. 
October* 


impracticable  ;  but  an  opportunity  unexpectedly  offering  for  the  Hecla  to  do 
so,  Captain  Lyon  instantly  took  advantage  of  it ;  when,  to  our  inexpressible 
mortification,  her  anchor  was  found  to  have  lost  both  the  flukes.  There  was 
scarcely  any  loss  which  we  could  not  better  have  afforded  ;  and  I  had  every 
reason  to  apprehend  that  the  Fury  would  incur  a  similar  one  ;  for  the  gale 
still  increasing,  her  anchor  was  dragged  over  the  ground  nearly  a  mile  with- 
out stopping,  and  at  times  continued  to  be  so  during  the  night,  which  proved 
a  most  tempestuous  and  inclement  one. 

In  the  course  of  the  evening,  while  the  ice  was  driving  past  the  Fury 
and  fresh  separations  were  almost  every  moment  taking  place  in  it,  a  little 
Esquimaux  boy,  named  Aglooka,  about  ten  years  of  age,  a  son  of  our 
patient  at  the  point,  found  his  way  along-side,  and  was  very  quietly  stepping 
from  one  piece  of  ice  to  another  in  order  to  keep  his  ground  abreast  our 
gangway.  Observing  him  in  this  situation,  we  threw  him  the  bight  of  a 
rope  into  which  he  put  himself,  and  was  hauled  on  board.  With  this  indul- 
gence he  Avas  pleased,  not  from  the  idea  of  having  escaped  any  danger,  for 
he  had  certainly  never  felt  apprehension,  but  because  he  might  see  the 
ship  and  pick  up  something  from  the  Kabloonas. 

Towards  daylight  on  the  10th,  the  ice  ceased  moving,  a  great  quantity  Thur.  10. 
being  now  packed  between  the  ships  and  the  land.     The  Hecla  had  been 
driven  to  the  westward  of  the  Fury,  but  both  were  secure  from  going  on 
shore,  and  our  anchor  was  now  once  more  the  sole  cause  of  apprehension 
On  its  moderating  and  clearing  up  in  the  course   of  the  forenoon,  Ave  found 
that  we  had  drifted  more  than  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  point  of  Oon«-a- 
looyat,  the  station  originally  selected  for  the  winter-quarters  of  the  ships, 
being  uoav  nearer  to  the  western  point  of  the  bay.     We  could,  however,  do 
nothing  but  wait  in  patience  to  see  if  any  further  change  Would  take  place 
in  the  state  of  the  ice  and,  whenever  it  appeared  to  be  permanently  fixed, 
commence  the  operation,  which  Avould  now  be  no  easy  one,  of  cutting  back 
to  the  point.     In  the  mean  time  the  ice  not  being  likely  to  move  without 
some  alteration  in  the  wind,  Ave  took  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  Esqui- 
maux sledges,   of  Avhich  several  came  down  to  the  ships,  to  obtain  some 
water  from  the  shore,  our  stock  being  nearly  expended  and  the  snow  not 
yet  sufficiently  deep  for  collecting  it  to  thaAv.     Mr.  Crawford  and  one  of  our 
men,  therefore,  accompanied  the  Esquimaux  with  a  sledge  loaded  -with  small 
casks,  which  they  soon  filled  Avith  water,  though  at  the  expense  of  falling 


:ul 


H 


•  •*    •:  -.  . %  urt  .    ml    \ 


368 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
October. 

Frid.  11. 


Sun.  13. 


Mon.  14, 


through  the  ice  more  than  once,  in  consequence  of  its  irregular  and  deceit- 
ful surface. 

On  the  11th,  the  wind  backed  a  little  to  the  north-east,  and  the  ice  re- 
mained quiet ;  but  the  small  snow  that  almost  constantly  fell  keeping  the 
thermometer  nearly  up  to  the  freezing  point,  we  felt  assured  that  a  westerly 
breeze  would  again  set  it  in  motion,  and  subject  us  to  the  risk  of  losing 
more  anchors,  or  of  being  driven  out  to  winter  at  sea.  The  Esquimaux, 
finding  their  sledges  might  be  turned  to  some  account  in  our  service, 
brought  six  or  seven  of  them  down  to  us  on  the  12th,  when  each  ship  em- 
ployed two  in  procuring  water.  Being  unwilling  also  to  subject  our  own 
people  to  the  risk  of  falling  in,  to  which  they  were  much  more  liable  than 
the  natives,  we  did  not  hesitate  to  intrust  the  latter  with  the  sole  charge 
of  our  casks  and  tools  for  breaking  the  ice  in  the  ponds.  They  performed 
all  that  Ave  desired  with  great  faithfulness  and  punctuality,  bringing  several 
turns  of  water  in  the  course  of  the  day,  and  receiving  some  small  though 
useful  reward  for  their  pains. 

The  wind  remaining  easterly  during  the  greater  part  of  the  13th,  the  ice 
gave  us  no  disturbance  ;  till  a  very  moderate  breeze  springing  up  at  nine 
P.M.  from  the  opposite  quarter  at  once  set  the  whole  in  motion  near  the 
ships,  and  we  soon  began  to  drive  with  it  to  the  eastward.  The  Hecla's  an- 
chor was  immediately  and  of  necessity  let  go  ;  in  less  than  an  hour  after- 
wards however  th«  wind  very  opportunely  backed  to  the  southward,  and  no 
further  alteration  took  place  than  the  opening  of  a  few  small  "  holes"  of 
water.  This  motion  of  the  ice  was  so  far  favourable  to  us  that,  on  the  fol- 
lowing day,  we  had  an  opportunity  of  purchasing  our  anchor  on  board  the 
Fury,  though  not  without  heaving  it  by  main  force  from  under  a  floe.  This 
labour  however  was  amply  repaid  by  our  finding  it  perfectly  uninjured, 
though  polished  quite  bright  on  the  lower  side  by  dragging  along  the  ground. 
It  is  perhaps  proper  for  me  here  to  notice,  that  the  Fury  had  on  this  occasion 
a  hempen  cable  bent,  and  the  Hecla  an  iron  one,  and  that  while  the  anchor  of 
the  former  was  dragged  a  full  mile  and  a  half  without  any  injury,  that  of  the 
Hecla  was  broken  in  driving  about  one-tenth  of  the  same  distance.  I  may 
add  moreover,  that  our  former  losses  in  anchors  had  also  occurred  with  iron 
cables,  which  were  preferred  for  general  use  on  this  service,  to  obviate  the 
danger  of  their  being  damaged  either  upon  foul  ground  or  by  the  chafing  of 
ice.     From  the  circumstances  just  noticed,  however,  it  is  by  no  means  my 


■■iim 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


369 


intention  hastily  to  infer  that  our  losses  in  this  way  were  to  be  attributed  to  1822- 
the  unyielding  nature,  or  any  other  supposed  bad  quality  of  the  chain-cables,  ^41' 
(though  this  >vas  the  opinion  expressed  by  our  most  experienced  seamen  at 
the  time,)  for  a  few  insulated  facts  are  of  themselves  of  very  little  import- 
ance. But  it  is  only  by  the  collection  of  such  facts  under  the  various  circum- 
stances of  trial  which  may  occur  to  seamen,  that  the  comparative  merits  of 
the  two  kinds  of  cables  can  ultimately  be  determined. 

The  wind  was  easterly  with  a  mild  atmosphere  till  the  night  of  the  15th,  Tues.  15. 
when  the  thermometer  began  to  fall  immediately  on  the  springing  up  of  a 
north-west  breeze.     Some  remarkable  alterations  took  place  however  this 
evening,  according  to  the  clearness  of  the  atmosphere  or  the  contrary.      Be- 
tween four  and  five  o'clock  the  weather  becoming  clear  overhead,  the  tempera- 
ture fell  to  12|°;  at  thirty  minutes  after  five  a  partial  haze  came  on,  when 
the  thermometer  immediately  rose  to  15|°  ;  and  this  soon  after  disappearing, 
the  thermometer  again  fell  to  13°,  the  wind  continuing  at  N.W.  the  whole 
time.     The  breeze  gradually  increased  in  the  course  of  the  night,  and  on 
the  following  day  blew  a  gale  for  some  hours,  with  considerable  snow-drift.  Wed.  16. 
As  soon  as  it  moderated  we  felt  assured  that  the  ice  was  now  permanently 
fixed  for  the  winter,  and  arrangements  were  therefore  made  for  commencing 
our  sawing  operations  the  next  morning.     Such  however  was  the  laborious 
nature  of  this  task,  in  consequence  of  the  repeated  doubling  and  squeezing 
of  the  ice,  that  after  nine  hours'  hard  work  for  both  crews  on  the  17th,  we  Thur.  17. 
could  only  succeed  in  getting  in  five  and  twenty  fathoms  of  the  Hecla's  chain- 
cable  before  dark.     It  is  scarcely  possible  indeed  to  describe  the  teasing  na- 
ture of  ice  in  this  state,  and  the  impossibility  of  cutting  a  passage  through  it 
in  any  reasonable  time.     So  many  strata  had  overlaid  each  other  that   the 
whole  thickness  in  some  places  exceeded  seven  feet,  which  in  others  was  in- 
creased still  further  by  masses  squeezed  up  and  lying  over-end.     Ice  even  of 
this  thickness,  if  it  were  only  solid,  would   afford  by  its  continuity  some 
means  of  pulling  it  out ;  but  in  the  present  instance,  after  the  saws  had  de- 
tached it,  each  separate  layer  was  to  be  fished  out  by  hooks  and  ropes,  and 
as  soon  as  one  was  removed  another  rose  to  the  surface,  leaving  after  all  so 
much  "  sludge"  or  small  powdered  ice,  as  immediately  to  produce  a  fresh 
formation  on  the  surface.     On  the  18th  however  the  Hecla's  anchor  was  got  Frid.  18. 
to  the  bows,  and  happily  without  injury  to  it ;   our  next  object  was  to  get 
that  ship  close  to  the  Fury,  and  then  to  commence  a  canal  for  both  to  warp  in 
to  the  eastward. 

3  B 


ili 


kill- 


;i^r#r 


370 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
October. 


* 

,  •  * 

* 

1 

1 

* 

1 

t 

1  '  ! 

It  happened  that  immediately  beyond  the  Fury  in  that  direction,  there  was 
a  level  undisturbed  floe  of  some  extent,  which  it  would  be  comparatively 
easy  to  saw  and  sink  ;  while  the  whole  of  the  ice  between  the  two  ships  was 
of  the  impracticable  nature  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe  above.  As  it  was 
indispensible  for  Mr.  Fisher's  observations  and  experiments  that  the  Fury 
should  be  near  the  shore,  I  determined  on  this  account  as  well  as  another 
that  suggested  itself  about  this  time,  and  of  which  I  shall  speak  in  another 
place,  not  to  incur  the  risk  of  both  ships  wintering  at  a  distance  from  the 
land,  by  persevering  too  long  in  our  attempts  upon  the  Hecla,  especially 
as  the  frost  was  now  hourly  increasing  the  difficulty  we  should  have  in  moving 
the  Fury  into  a  convenient  birth.  The  result  of  two  whole  days'  wet  and 
Sun.  20.  fatiguing  labour  on  the  19th  and  20th,  being  only  to  advance  the  Hecla  about 
two-thirds  of  her  own  length  each  day,  I  directed  that  object  to  be  aban- 
doned without  further  delay,  and  the  canal  to  be  commenced  ahead  of  the 
Fury. 
Mon.  21.  On  the  21st  a  large  basin  was  cut  in  a  level  piece  of  ice  for  the  reception 
of  a  quantity  of  squeezed-up  masses  that  lay  between  us  and  the  regular  floe, 
and  which  it  was  much  easier  to  float  away  into  any  space  that  would  be 
found  for  them,  than  to  haul  out  of  the  water  by  piece-meal.  This  being 
accomplished,  the  work  went  on  more  quickly  ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  after- 
Wed.  30.  noon  of  the  30th  that  the  whole  was  completed,  and  the  Fury  placed  in  the 
best  birth  for  the  winter  that  circumstances  would  permit.  This  was  how- 
ever by  no  means  so  far  out  towards  Oongalooyat  as  was  originally  intended; 
but  the  ice  had  in  this  neighbourhood  been  thrown  up  into  such  high  and 
numerous  hummocks,  that  to  get  the  ship  any  further  that  way  was  entirely 
beyond  our  means  ;  and  we  were  therefore  obliged  to  rest  contented  with  the 
facilities  our  present  situation  afforded  for  Mr.  Fisher's  observations  during 
the  winter.  An  early  release  in  the  spring  could  here  be  scarcely  expected, 
nor  indeed  did  the  nature  of  the  ice  about  us  independently  of  situation 
allow  us  to  hope  for  it ;  but  both  these  unfavourable  circumstances  had  been 
brought  about  by  a  contingency  which  no  human  power  or  judgment  could 
have  obviated,  and  at  which  therefore  it  would  have  been  unreasonable  as 
well  as  useless  to  repine.  We  lay  here  in  rather  less  than  five  fathoms',  on  a 
muddy  bottom  at  the  distance  of  one  cable's  length  from  the  eastern  shore 
of  the  bay. 

The  whole  length  of  the  canal  was  four  thousand  three  hundred  and  forty- 
three  feet ;  the  thickness  of  the  ice  in  the  level  and  regular  parts  being  from 


t  ^aaa^X^^^^.^^  '.  rj&pt 


\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


371 


twelve  to  fourteen  inches,  but  in  many  places,  where  a  separation  had  oc-  J822. 
curred,  amounting  to  several  feet.  I  cannot  sufficiently  do  justice  to  the  °^Z' 
cheerful  alacrity  with  which  the  men  continued  this  laborious  work  during 
thirteen  days,  the  thermometer  being  frequently  at  zero,  and  once  as  low  as 
—  9°  in  that  interval.  It  was  satisfactory,  moreover,  to  find  that,  in  the 
performance  of  this,  not  a  single  addition  had  been  made  to  the  sick-list  of 
either  ship,  except  by  the  accident  of  one  man's  falling  into  the  canal,  and 
who  returned  to  his  duty  a  day  or  two  afterwards. 

While  our  people  were  thus  employed,  the  Esquimaux  had  continued  to  Thur.  31, 
make  daily  visits  to  the  ships,  driving  down  on  sledges  with  their  wives  and 
children,  and  thronging  on  board  in  great  numbers,  as  well  to  gratify  their 
curiosity,  of  which  they  do  not  in  general  possess  much,  as  to  pick  up  what- 
ever trifles  we  could  afford  to  bestow  upon  them.  These  people  were  at  all 
times  ready  to  assist  in  any  work  that  was  going  on,  pulling  on  the  ropes, 
heaving  at  the  windlass,  and  sawing  the  ice,  sometimes  for  an  hour  together. 
They  always  accompanied  their  exertions  by  imitating  the  sailors  in  their 
peculiar  manner  of  "  singing  out"  when  hauling,  thus  at  least  affording  the 
latter  constant  amusement,  if  not  any  very  material  assistance,  during  their 
labour.  Among  the  numerous  young  people  at  Igloolik,  there  were  some 
whose  activity,  on  this  and  other  occasions,  particularly  struck  us.  Of  these 
I  shall  at  present  only  mention  two  ;-^Nobgloo,  an  adopted  son  of  Toolemak, 
and  Kongolek,  a  brother  of  "  John  Bull,"  These  two  young  men,  who  were 
from  eighteen  to  twenty  years  of  age,  and  stood  five  feet  seven  inches  in 
height,  displayed  peculiar  tact  in  acquiring  our  method  of  heaving  at  the 
windlass,  an  exercise  at  which  Kongolek  became  expert  after  an  hour  or  two's 
practice.  The  countenances  of  both  were  handsome  and  prepossessing, 
and  their  limbs  well-formed  and  muscular ;  qualities  which,  combined 
with  their  activity  and  manliness,  rendered  them,  (to  speak  like  a  naturalist,) 
perhaps  as  fine  specimens  of  the  human  race  as  almost  any  country  can 
produce. 

Some  of  our  Winter  Island  friends  had  now  arrived  also,  being  the  party 
who  left  us  there  towards  the  end  of  the  preceding  May,  and  whom  we  had 
afterwards  overtaken  on  their  journey  to  the  northward.  They  were  cer- 
tainly all  very  glad  to  see  us  again  and,  throwing  off  the  Esquimaux  for  a 
time,  shook  us  heartily  by  the  hand  with  every  demonstration  of  sincere 
delight,  Ewerat  in  his  quiet  sensible  way,  which  was  always  respectable, 
gave  us  a  circumstantial  account  of  every  event  of  his  journey.     On  his 

3  b  2 


m 


ill 


I 


1822. 

October. 


[ 

1 

i 

i 

1 

■Hi 

1    ' 

■ 

J      '"''■! 

erl              llM 

372 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


arrival  at  Owlitteeweek,  near  which  island  we  overtook  him,  he  had  buried 
the  greater  part  of  his  baggage  under  heaps  of  stones,  the  ice  no  longer 
being  fit  for  dragging  the  sledge  upon.  Here  also  he  was  happily  eased  of 
a  still  greater  burthen  by  the  death  of  his  idiot  boy,  who  thus  escaped  the 
miseries  to  which  a  longer  life  must,  among  these  people,  have  inevitably 
exposed  him.  As  for  that  noisy  little  fellow  "  John  Bull,"  (Kooillitiuk,)  he 
employed  almost  the  whole  of  his  first  visit  in  asking  every  one,  by  name, 
"  How  d'ye  do,  Mr.  so  and  so?"  a  question  which  had  obtained  him  great 
credit  among  our  people  at  Winter  Island.  Being  a  very  important  little  per- 
sonage, he  also  took  great  pride  in  pointing  out  various  contrivances  on 
board  the  ships,  and  explaining  to  the  other  Esquimaux  their  different  uses, 
to  which  the  latter  did  not  fail  to  listen  with  all  the  attention  due  to  so 
knowing  an  oracle. 

We  had  for  several  days  past  seen  no  birds  near  the  ships  except  one  or 
two  ravens  ;  but  those  who  had  visited  the  huts  had  met  with  a  covey  or  two 
of  grouse  in  that  neighbourhood,  of  which  a  few  were  killed  by  the  Esqui- 
maux with  arrows.  Mr.  Edwards  found,  on  examination,  that  these  birds, 
and  also  one  or  two  obtained  in  the  summer  on  the  south  shore  of  the  Strait, 
were  not  of  the  same  species  as  those  we  had  procured  farther  to  the  south- 
ward, the  latter  being  the  tetrao  rupestris,  and  these  the  tetrao  albus,  (Pen- 
nant's Arct.  Zool.)  or  the  willow-partridge  of  Hearne.  Two  wolves  had 
lately  paid  us  some  nocturnal  visits,  and  the  Esquimaux  had  killed  several 
bears  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  open  water. 

Having  now  brought  up  the  account  of  our  proceedings  to  the  time  of  the 
ships  being  once  more  established  in  their  winter-quarters,  it  may  not  be  im- 
proper to  take  a  brief  review  of  the  result  of  our  late  efforts,  and  then  to 
close  this  part  of  the  narrative  by  stating  the  determination  which  I  now 
formed  with  respect  to  the  future  movements  of  the  Expedition. 

Flattering  as  our  prospects  appeared  at  the  commencement  of  the  past 
summer,  our  efforts  had  certainly  not  been  attended  with  a  proportionate  de- 
cree of  success  :  and  little  satisfaction  remained  to  us  at  the  close  of  the  sea- 
son,  but  the  consciousness  of  having  left  no  means  within  our  reach  untried, 
that  could  in  any  way  promote  our  object.  It  required  indeed  but  a  single 
glance  at  the  chart  to  perceive,  that  whatever  the  last  summer's  navigation 
had  added  to  our  geographical  knowledge  of  the  eastern  coast  of  America, 
and  its  adjacent  lands,  very  little  had  in  reality  been  effected  in  furtherance 
of  the  North-West  Passage.     Even  the  actual  discovery  of  the  desired  outlet 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


373 


into  the  Polar  Sea,  had  been  of  no  practical  benefit  in  the  prosecution  of  our    1822- 
enterprise  ;  for  we  had  only  discovered  this  channel  to  find  it  impassable,  and  srv-C' 
to  see  the  barriers  of  nature  impenetrably  closed  against  us,  to  the  utmost 
limit  of  the  navigable  season. 

Without  reverting,  however,  to  the  past,  or  being  at  the  pains  to  re-con- 
sider what  we  had  or  had  not  been  able  to  effect,  it  was  sufficient  only  to 
know  our  present  geographical  position  to  be  aware,  that  the  remaining  re- 
sources of  the  Expedition  were  no  longer  adequate  to  the  accomplishment 
of  our  principal  object.  Not  to  know  this  would  have  implied  ignorance  of 
the  real  nature  of  the  attempt,  and  therefore  not  to  admit  it  would  have  been 
little  better  than  absurdity.  Instead  of  disguising  the  difficulties  where 
any  existed,  it  seemed  more  prudent  to  search  out  and  endeavour  to  obviate 
them  ;  and  after  fairly  considering  every  circumstance  of  our  situation,  to  de- 
cide on  the  adoption  of  such  measures  as,  with  our  present  resources,  appeared 
still  to  hold  out  some  reasonable  hope  of  ultimate  and  complete  success. 

Viewing  the  matter  in  this  light,  it  appeared  to  resolve  itself  into  the 
single  question,  by  what  means  the  resources  of  the  Expedition  could  pos- 
sibly be  extended  beyond  the  period  to  which  they  were  at  present  calculated 
to  last,  namely,  the  close  of  the  year  1824.     Only  one  expedient  suggested 
itself  by  which  that  object  could  be  attained  ;  and  this  I  determined  to  adopt 
should  no  unforeseen   occurrence  arise  to  prevent  it. — It  was  to  send  the 
Hecla  to  England  in  the  following  season,   taking  from  her  a  twelvemonths' 
provisions  and  fuel  to  complete  the  Fury's  resources  to  the  end  of  the  year 
1825,  and  then  continuing  our  efforts  in  that  ship  singly  as  long  as  a  reason- 
able hope  remained  of  our  ultimate  success.      One  or  two  collateral  advan- 
tages occurred  to  me  as  likely  to   be  derived  from  this   plan  ;   the  first  of 
which  was  the  opportunity  thus  afforded  of  transmitting  to  the  Lords  Com- 
missioners of  the  Admiralty  a  full  account  of  our  past  proceedings  and  pre- 
sent situation  and  intentions,  whereby  perhaps  much  needless  anxiety  on  our 
account  might  be  prevented.    It  would  also,  as  I  hoped,  allow  their  Lordships 
the  option  of  making  any  alteration  which  they  might  now  deem  requisite  in 
the  arrangements  pointed  out  in  my  Instructions,  respecting  the  ship  to  be 
sent  to  meet  us  near  Behring's  Strait,  for  which  the  orders  might  not  perhaps 
leave  England  before  the  arrival  of  the  Hecla  there,  in  the  autumn  of  1823. 
These  were,  however,  minor  and  less  important  considerations  ;  my  principal 
object  and  determination  being  to  persevere,  to  the  utmost  extent  of  our  re- 
sources, in  the  prosecution  of  the  enterprise  with  which  I  had  the  honour  to 


'if!    'I 


ity  i 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


be  charged.  Having  suggested  this  expedient  to  Captain  Lyon,  I  had  much 
satisfaction  in  finding  his  opinion  entirely  coincide  with  my  own  ;  and  with- 
out at  present  mentioning  it  to  the  other  individuals  belonging  to  the  Expe- 
dition, we  continued  to  consult  together  from  time  to  time  during  the  winter, 
concerning  the  arrangements  it  would  be  requisite  to  make  for  commencing 
the  execution  of  our  plan  in  the  course  of  the  following  spring. 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Igloolik,  during  the  Month  of  October,  1822. 

Day 

Fahrenheit's  Ther- 
mometer. 

CD 

ttf  as  £ 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity 

Prevailing  Weather. 

1 

o 
+19 

+16 

+17.58 

o 

indies 

29.57 

inches 
29.52 

inches 

,29.543 

NW 

fresh 

cloudy 

2 

16 

10 

13.83 

29.70 

29.50 

29.615 

NW 

fresh 

fine 

3 

18 

10 

14.67 

29.70 

29.60 

29.666 

NE 

light 

,  cloudy— snow  at  times 

4 

15 

10 

12.42 

29.59 

29.52 

29.545 

NWesterly 

light 

cloudy 

5 

13 

10 

10.92 

29.80 

29.65 

29.732 

NW 

fresh 

cloudy 

0 

12 

0 

7  67 

29.93 

29.80 

29.888 

NW 

fresh 

clear 

7 

16 

-  2 

.  7.42 

30.04 

29.98 

30.012 

NNVV  hy  W  to  I 
SE              f 

SE 

light 

clear 

8 

25 

+18 

22.12 

53.0 

29.96 

29.80 

29.887 

modt. 

cloudy  and  snow 

9 

21 

17 

19.83 

65.0 

29.73 

29.39 

29.577 

East 

fresh 

cloudy 

10 
11 

23 
25 

21 
21 

24.17 
23.33 

67.0 
61.7 

29.26 
29.25 

29.19 
29.20 

29.225 
29.222 

ESE 

NE 

)  am.  fr. 
i  pin,  It. 

modt. 

snow 
cloudy 

hazy  and  snow 

12 

23 

19 

21.08 

62.2 

29  26 

29.10 

29.212 

NE 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

13 

29 

17§ 

23.64 

64.0 

29  07 

28.68 

28.855 

NEbyN 

light 

cloudy  and  snow 

14 

19§ 

11 

16.79 

62.2 

29.76 

29.18 

29.448 

SSE 

modt. 

hazy 

15 

22 

HI 

17.33 

62.2 

29.84 

29.67 

29.777 

ESE 

modt. 

cloudy 

16 

25 

Ml 

17.38 

62.7 

29.63 

29.51 

29.553 

AM.  NW) 
PM.  SE  | 

modt. 

cloudy,  snow  at  times 

17 

17 

4 

12.25 

62.2 

30.06 

29.66 

29.915 

SE 

modt. 

cloudy 

18 

13 

3 

8.33 

61.7 

30.22 

30.13 

30.170 

NE 

light 

fine  and  clear 

19 

21 

4 

14.25 

62.2 

30.15 

30.07 

30.115 

ENE 

modt. 

cloudy,  snow  at  times 

20 

20 

4 

8.83 

62.0 

30.28 

30.16 

30.207 

North    $ 

liftht 
and  va- 
riable 

fine  and  clear 

21 

10 

0 

4.67 

60.2 

30.30 

30.28 

30.290 

NNW 

light 

fine 

22 

2 

-  5 

-1.71 

61.0 

30.26 

30.06 

30.172 

NW 

modt. 

fine  and  clear 

23 

-  1 

9 

5.54 

58.0 

30.02 

29.98 

30.002 

NNW 

modt. 

fine  and  clear 

24 

+13 

+  2 

-+8.33 

55.0 

30.11 

30.00 

30.047 

ENE 

light 

hazy  and  snow 

25 

11 

4 

7.25 

59.7 

30.31 

30.11 

30.223 

North 

light 

cloudy 

26 

8 

5 

5.88 

61.2 

30.49 

30.33 

30.402 

East  round  by  f 
South  toNH.5 

light 

hazy,  snow  at  times 

27 

11 

5 

9.67 

61.0 

30.40 

30.26 

30.310 

South 

nodt. 

hazy,  snow  at  times 

28 

15 

10 

12.37 

61.0 

30.20 

30.10 

30.157 

South 

Tiodt. 

cloudy,  snow  at  times 

29 

15 

11 

13.67 

61.7 

30.10 

30.00 

30.082 

East 

light 

cloudy 

30 

16 

10 

13.50 

61.0 

30.10 

29.95 

30.030 

EbN 

light 

hazy 

31 

20 

10 

14.62 

64.7 

29.90 

29.61 

29.753 

N  Easterly 

light 

hazy,  snow  at  times 

+29 

-  9 

+12.79 

61.5 

30.49 

28.68 

29.827 

ill 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

PREPARATIONS   FOR  THE   WINTER VARIOUS   METEOROLOGICAL   PHENOMENA     TO     THE 

CLOSE  OF  THE  YEAR   182*2 — SICKNESS  AMONG  THE  ESQUIMAUX A  HOSPITAL   BUILT 

NEAR  THE  SHIPS   FOR   THEIR   ACCOMMODATION — METEOROLOGICAL   PHENOMENA    TO 

THE  END  OF  MARCH ABSTRACT  OF  THE  COMPARATIVE  MEAN  WINTER  TEMPERATURE 

AT  MELVILLE  ISLAND,  WINTER  ISLAND,  AND  IGLOOLIK. 

1822.  The  measures  now  adopted  for  the  security  of  the  ships  and  their  stores,  for 
*!iv2?' tne  maintenance  of  economy,  cleanliness,  and  health,  and  for  the  prosecu- 
tion of  the  various  observations  and  experiments,  being  principally  the  same 
as  those  already  detailed  in  the  preceding  winter's  narrative,  it  will  only  be 
necessary  to  mention  those  particulars  in  which,  either  from  some  slight 
difference  of  situation,  or  from  our  additional  experience,  any  deviation  from 
the  former  plans  was  now  considered  necessary. 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  each  succeeding  winter  passed  in  these  regions 
had  suggested  to  us  the  expediency  of  leaving  our  masts,  yards,  sails,  and 
rigging  more  and  more  in  their  proper  places  than  before  :  and  all  that  we 
now  did  was  to  strike  the  top-gallant  yards  and  masts,  unreeve  the  running- 
rigging  to  prevent  chafing  by  the  wind,  lay  the  small  sails  across  the  tops, 
and  hang  the  spare  spars  over  the  side.  It  may,  indeed,  be  safely  affirmed 
that,  in  a  high  latitude,  the  less  the  masts  and  yards  are  dismantled  the  better, 
for  the  frost  does  no  injury  to  the  geer  while  it  remains  unmoved  ;  and  none 
can  possibly  occur  from  thawing  till  the  proper  season  for  refitting  arrives. 
The  boats  were  placed  on  the  ice,  about  fifty  yards  from  the  ships,  and  with 
their  geer  stowed  in  them  closely  covered  with  snow. 

In  banking  the  snow  against  the  ships'  sides,  pains  were  taken  to  make 
this  a  more  effectual  protection  than  before.  For  this  purpose  a  wall  of  suf- 
ficient height,  composed  of  cut  slabs  of  snow,  was  first  constructed  at  the  dis- 
tance of  four  or  five  feet  from  the  bends,  and  loose  snow  afterwards  thrown 


\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


377 


in  between,  till  it  reached  considerably  above  the  chains,  so  as  to  cover  Js^b 
nearly  the  whole  of  the  upper-works.  We  also  laid  over  the  upper-deck  fore  s**^ 
and  aft,  as  well  as  upon  the  hatchways  and  companions,  about  eight  inches 
depth  of  snow,  and  above  that  a  coating  of  sand  cemented  by  water,  so  as  to 
form  a  firm  and  level  covering  of  these  materials.  Though  there  can  be 
little  doubt  of  the  efficacy  of  this  plan  in  preventing  the  escape  of  a  portion  of 
the  warmth  from  below,  it  is  also  to  be  recommended  as  of  essential  service 
in  preventing  the  planks  from  rending,  and  the  pitch  in  the  seams  from  being 
cracked,  effects  which  the  frost  is  otherwise  sure  to  produce. 

The  facility  which  our  people  had  acquired  by  our  intercourse  with  the 
Esquimaux  in  the  application  of  snow  to  the  use  of  building,  induced  me 
also  to  surround  the  Fury  with  a  wall  of  that  plentiful  material ;  it  was  twelve 
feet  high,  and  placed  at  the  distance  of  twenty  or  twenty-five  yards  from  the 
ship,  forming  a  large  square  like  that  of  a  farm-yard.  It  is  probable  that 
such  a  wall  may  be  favourable,  during  high  winds,  for  preventing  in  some 
degree  the  rapid  abstraction  of  heat  from  a  ship,  while  it  also  serves  the 
purpose  of  keeping  out  snow  drift,  and  of  affording  a  comfortable  shelter 
for  walking  with  almost  every  wind  that  can  blow. 

In  housing-in  the  ships,  the  "  pitch  "  of  the  roof  was  made  somewhat  less 
than  before,  the  height  of  the  centre  spar  being  now  thirteen  feet  above  the 
deck;  and  as  the  day -light  began  to  return,  two  or  three  of  the  glazed 
garden  frames  were  fitted  into  the  cloth  as  skylights,  which  proved  a  great 
convenience.  I  may  here  mention  that  scarcely  any  snow  rested  on  the 
housing  during  the  winter,  a  fresh  breeze  invariably  carrying  away  that 
which  any  preceding  light  weather  had  allowed  to  lodge  there.  The  same 
remark  applies  to  our  tops,  masts,  yards,  and  rigging,  which  were  perhaps 
more  clear  of  snow  in  April  than  in  October. 

The  observatory  house  on  shore  was  now  built  rather  smaller  than  before, 
being  thirteen  feet  by  eight,  of  which  the  observatory  part  occupied  five 
feet  of  one  end,  leaving  a  room  eight  feet  square  for  the  instruments  and 
other  apparatus.  It  was  also  built  with  a  flat  instead  of  a  "  pitched"  roof; 
and  this,  as  well  as  the  sides,  were  of  single  planks,  lined  on  the  inside 
with  canvass,  and  closely  covered  without,  first  by  turf  and  then  by  slabs 
of  snow.  It  is  only  necessary  to  add  that,  in  all  these  alterations,  the  ad- 
vantage was  no  less  felt  in  the  additional  warmth,  than  in  the  reduction  of 
labour  and  materials  requisite  in  the  construction. 

The  distance  between  the  two  ships,  though  not  such  as  to  prevent  con- 

3  c 


■ 


'\\     .       i 


"I'^Pjiiii 


,1 

1' 

r 

...«r  II 


■I 


378 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
Novemb 


stant  intercourse,  was  nevertheless  too  great  to  allow  of  our  continuing  the 
theatrical  entertainments,  by  which  our  former  winters  had  been  consider- 
ably enlivened.  This  was  however  the  less  requisite,  and  indeed  entirely 
unnecessary,  on  account  of  our  neighbourhood  to  the  Esquimaux,  whose 
daily  visits  to  the  ships  throughout  the  winter  afforded,  both  to  officers  and 
men,  a  fund  of  constant  variety  and  never-failing  amusement,  which  no  re- 
sources of  our  own  could  possibly  have  furnished.  Our  people  were,  how- 
ever, too  well  aware  of  the  advantage  they  derived  from  the  schools,  not  to 
be  desirous  of  their  re-establishment,  which  accordingly  took  place  soon 
after  our  arrival  at  Igloolik ;  and  they  were  glad  to  continue  this  as  their 
evening  occupation  during  the  six  succeeding  months. 

The  ordinary  occupations  and  occurrences  of  the  winter  having  now  lost 
the  novelty  which  could  alone  have  imparted  to  them  at  first  any  interest 
or  amusement  in  the  relation,  I  shall  perhaps  be  readily  excused  for  passing 
them  over  in  silence  ;  and  for  confining  myself  principally  to  an  account  of 
the  natural  phenomena  observed  during  the  winter,  and  to  a  few  occasional 
remarks  on  the  means  of  preserving  health  in  these  regions. 
Frid.  l.  During  the  first  week  in  the  month  of  November,  the  weather  for  this 
climate  continued  tolerably  mild,  and  the  temperature  then  fell  to  30°  below 
zero,  which  change  we  felt  very  sensibly.  Open  water  was  still  observed 
at  the  distance  of  two  or  three  miles  in  the  offing,  with  columns  of  frost- 
smoke  over  it  and  a  bluish  "  water-sky  "  about  that  part  of  the  horizon. 
A  grouse  (tetrao  albusj  was  killed  at  the  huts  on  the  16th,  having,  besides 
the  black  near  the  tip  of  the  tail-feathers,  two  speckled  feathers  not  far  from 
the  end  of  the  tail. 

About  this  time,  a  number  of  the  Esquimaux  sent  sledges  and  dogs  for 
several  of  their  relatives  coming  from  Amitioke,  among  whom  were  many  of 
our  old  acquaintance  and  some  also  who  were  strangers  to  us.  Among 
others  was  our  young  friend  Toolooak,  who  arrived  in  company  with  another 
remarkably  fine  young  man  named  Oo-too-gu-ak.  The  former,  as  we  now 
found,  had  come  for  the  very  important  purpose  of  entering  on  the  cares  of 
the  marriage-state,  though  his  own  age  was  only  from  seventeen  to  eighteen, 
and  that  of  his  wife,  a  very  pretty  girl  named  Eerktua,  not  more  than  sixteen. 
These  youthful  marriages  are  quite  common  among  the  Esquimaux  of  Igloo- 
lik, and  in  some  instances  take  place  even  at  a  still  earlier  age  than  that  just 
mentioned ;  for  a  girl  named  Ang-oot,  who  had  been  the  wife  of  Kongolek 
for  several  months,  could  not  possibly  have  passed  the  age  of  thirteen  at  this 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


379 


time.  The  marriage  ceremony  appears  to  be  very  simple,  consisting  only  in  1822- 
the  husband  coming,  when  desired,  to  the  hut  or  tent  of  the  bride's  father,  v-#-r%/ 
and  taking  her  to  his  own  by  force.  As  the  time  of  the  marriage  seems  to 
depend  wholly  on  the  caprice  or  interest  of  the  parents,  the  reluctance  ex- 
pressed by  the  female,  and  which  the  women  humourously  enough  described 
to  us  as  forming  an  indispensable  part  of  their  conduct  on  this  occasion,  is 
probably  not  always  a  matter  of  mere  form  or  pretended  coyness.  This 
event  constitutes  a  most  important  era  in  the  life  of  the  young  couple,  who 
immediately  set  up  a  separate  establishment,  similar  to  that  of  the  oldest 
married  people,  and  the  husband  is  thenceforth  bound  to  labour  for  the  support 
of  his  wife.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  advantage  of  these  early  mar- 
riages to  both  parties  ;  nor  is  there  any  time  of  life  at  which  an  Esquimaux 
of  either  sex  may  be  considered  as  better  furnished  both  with  food  and 
clothing,  than  during  the  first  five  or  six  years  after  this  event  has  taken 
place. 

Toolooak  had  scarcely  arrived  a  couple  of  hours,  when  some  of  our  gen- 
tlemen going  out  to  the  village  found  him  seated  beside  his  wife  with  all  the 
gravity  and  sedateness  of  an  old  married  man  ;  and  on  the  following  day  they 
both  came  tp  the  ships.  Toolooak  having  grown  considerably,  had  a  much 
more  manly  appearance  than  before  ;  but  neither  he  nor  his  wife  had  much 
to  say  for  themselves  at  this  their  first  visit.  "  The  bride"  was  dressed  out, 
while  she  remained  on  board,  in  all  the  finery  we  could  muster,  and  both 
received  numerous  useful  presents  to  assist  in  setting  them  up  in  the  world. 
Toolooak's  travelling  companion  Ootooguak  particularly  attracted  our  notice 
on  account  of  his  height,  which  was  five  feet  nine  inches  and  three  quarters, 
or  within  a  quarter  of  an  inch  of  the  tallest  we  had  yet  seen  in  the  tribe.  It 
is  no  less  remarkable  also  that  his  father  Nannow,  and  his  brother  Ooyarra- 
seoo,  who  arrived  shortly  after,  were  both  uncommonly  fine  and  tall  men  for 
Esquimaux,  the  first,  notwithstanding  a  slight  degree  of  decrepitude,  standing 
five  feet  eight  and  a  half  and  the  latter  five  feet  nine  inches  in  height. 

I  must  here  notice  an  occurrence  which  had  lately  taken  place,  and  which 

created  no  inconsiderable  sensation  among  the  Esquimaux.      Though  the 

authority  of  the  husbands  is  in  most  respects  strictly  maintained  among  these 

people,  yet  their  conduct  towards  their  wives  is  far  from  being  unkind,  and 

they  seldom  if  ever  proceed  to  the  extremities  too  common  with  some  savages. 

A  few  days  ago,  however,  an  elderly  man  named  Sherddeoo,  in  consequence 

3  c  2 


,,,  lit 


!■!■':  !if| 


.:■:::;:; 


1 


380 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1822. 
Novemb. 


ft 


of  some  altercation  between  his  two  wives,  undertook  to  settle  their  dispute 
by  means  of  his  knife,  with  which  he  inflicted  some  very  severe  cuts  on  the 
forehead  of  one,  and  on  the  hand  of  the  other.  Some  of  our  gentlemen 
found  them  sitting  very  contentedly  in  their  hut,  with  one  of  the  wounds 
sewn  up,  and  both  covered  over  with  the  hair  of  deer  adhering  by  the  coagu- 
lated blood.  They  were  evidently  very  shy  of  shewing  them,  and  Sheradeoo 
exhibited  a  good  deal  of  uneasiness  at  having  his  domestic  affairs  thus 
inquired  into;  so  that,  upon  the  whole,  our  gentlemen  on  their  return  con- 
fessed that  here,  as  elsewhere,  it  seemed  most  prudent  not  to  interfere  in  the 
quarrels  betwixt  man  and  wife.  The  Esquimaux  uniformly  spoke  of  this 
occurrence  as  a  matter  of  real  reproach  ;  which  circumstance,  together  with 
the  fact  of  its  being  the  only  instance  that  has  come  to  our  knowledge 
during  a  long  intercourse  with  these  people,  is  a  sufficient  proof  that  it  forms 
an  exception  to  their  ordinary  conduct,  and  cannot  therefore  fairly  be  con- 
sidered an  impeachment  of  their  general  character. 

The  Esquimaux  having  occasionally  at  this  season  a  quantity  of  venison  at 
their  huts  which,  as  well  as  large  loads  of  walrus-flesh,  they  continued  for 
some  time  after  the  setting-in  of  the  winter  to  bring  from  various  distant 
stores,  a  general  permission  was  given  to  purchase  meat,  to  be  paid  for  out 
of  the  presents.     The  article  most  in  request,  however,  was  wood,  and  for  a 
piece  of  rough  spar  about  seven  feet  long  and  from  two  to  three  inches 
thick,  I  purchased  for  the  use  of  the  ship  more  than  seventy  pounds  of  the 
finest  venison  we  had  ever  seen,  while  smaller  portions  were  occasionally 
obtained  for  less  valuable  articles.      Captain  Lyon  and  myself  also  bought 
some  dogs  and  set  up  our  own  sledges,  which  proved  of  infinite  convenience 
in  various  ways  during  the  winter,  there  being  an  excellent  hard  and  beaten 
road  constantly  kept  between  the  ships  and  the  huts,  by  the  frequent  walk- 
ing and  driving  of  ourselves  and  the  natives.     These  people  parted  with 
their  dogs  without  much  reluctance,  and  at  first  at  a  moderate  price ;  and  the 
dogs  in  a  short  time  became  so  domesticated  among  us,  that  they  would  never 
leave  the  ships.     It  seems  a  curious  piece  of  inconsistency  in  the  disposition 
of  these  people  that,  harshly  as  in  many  respects  they  certainly  treat  their 
dogs,  they  were  not  satisfied  to  sell  them  to  us  till  assured  we  did  not  mean 
to  kill  them  ;  and  they  thanked  us  more  heartily,  I  believe,  when  they  saw  us 
building  a  house  for  their  reception,  than  they  would  have  done  for  a  similar 
attention  paid  to  themselves.     The  dogs  on  their  part  shewed  that  this 


!  ^3ia^xo^^^«^^^v^^.^ *  >^;^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


381 


regard  was  reciprocal,  for  even  after  they  became  perfectly  familiarized  to  N1822'. 
the  ships,  they  always  fawned  upon  their  old  masters,  and  expressed  great  ^n*~> 
delight  at  seeing  them. 

Some  wolves  continued  still  to  prowl  about  us,  and  three  of  these  hungry 
animals  were  nearly  on  the  point  of  attacking  a  Newfoundland  dog  of  Mr. 
Richards's,  which  went  playing  about  them,  when  he  was  called  off  in  time 
to  save  him.  On  the  23d,  the  thermometer,  for  the  first  time,  got  down  to  Sat.  23. 
— 38°,  when  our  mercury  in  the  artificial  horizons,  being  probably  adulte- 
rated by  lead  from  the  troughs,  froze  into  the  form  of  branches  of  trees, 
extremely  beautiful,  and  retaining  all  its  brilliancy  of  surface.  For  several 
days  about  this  period  the  cold  continued  uniformly  intense,  but  with  every 
westerly  wind  there  was  open  water  at  no  great  distance  to  the  south-east- 
ward of  the  island,  where  the  Esquimaux  almost  daily  resorted  for  the  pur- 
pose of  killing  walruses.  On  the  30th  in  the  morning  we  remarked  a  simul-  Sat.  30. 
taneous  increase  of  wind  and  in  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  the 
thermometer  rising  from  —  26|°  to  —20°  as  the  breeze  freshened,  without 
any  other  apparent  cause  affecting  it.  The  mean  temperature  of  the  month 
of  November,  which  was  — 19°  37'  we  considered  a  low  one,  being  only 
1|°  above  that  of  Melville  Island  in  1819, 

The  appearances  of  the  Aurora  Borealis  were  neither  frequent  nor  brilliant 
during  this  month.  On  the  7th  near  midnight  this  phenomenon  appeared 
from  E.S.E.  to  S.W.,  forming  an  irregular  arch  of  white  light,  not  Continuous 
in  every  part,  and  about  eight  degrees  high  in  the  centre.  From  the  upper 
margin  of  this  arch,  coruscations  now  and  then  shotupwards  towards  the  zenith. 
On  the  morning  of  the  21  st,  Mr.  Ross  remarked  a  bright  arch  of  the  Aurora 
passing  through  the  zenith  from  east  to  west,  and  meeting  the  horizon  at 
each  end  :  besides  this,  two  smaller  and  apparently  concentric  arches  were 
visible  to  the  southward,  the  higher  arch  being  in  the  centre  about  twenty 
degrees  above  the  horizon  and  the  other  about  ten  degrees.  An  arch  of  the 
same  kind  appeared  at  night  in  the  south-west  quarter  of  the  heavens.  On  the 
3d  a  column  of  light  tinged  with  prismatic  colours  appeared  on  each  side  of 
the  sun,  at  the  angular  distance  of  22°  05',  and  a  parhelion  at  the  same  dis- 
tance above  it.  The  columns  indeed  were,  properly  speaking,  parts  of  an 
imperfect  circle  or  halo  ;  beyond  these,  however,  at  the  same  height  above 
the  horizon,  and  distant  from  the  sun  forty-six  degrees,  was  a  second  par- 
helion on  each  side,  slightly  coloured  like  the  others  ;  so  that  five  of  these 
were  visible  at  the  same  time,  though  none  but  the  two  first  mentioned  were 


li,   N 


mm\ 


ifll 


iu\ 


■>;,  linn 


'A 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at 

Igloolik,  during  the  Month  of  November, 

1822. 

Day 

Fahrenheit's 
Thermometer. 

Mean 

Temp. 

of  lower 

deck. 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

.Velocity 

Weather. 

1 

o 
+8 

o 
-6 

+0.08 

61?7 

inches. 

29.66 

inches. 
29.57 

inches. 

29.622 

WNW 

light 

cloudy -snow  at  times 

2 

-6 

24 

-14.50 

61.0 

29.82 

29.67 

29.725 

West 

light 

fine 

3 

8 

24 

17.67 

58.7 

29.92 

29.78 

29.855 

NW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

4 

10 

26 

16.79 

59.2 

29.94 

29.83 

29.902 

West 

light 

hazy 

5 

+1 

20 

9.92 

56.7 

29.82 

29.72 

29.772 

Round  the ) 
Compass  J 

light& 
varia. 

cloudy 

6 

-7 

25 

12.08 

56.0 

29.75 

29.72 

29.732 

South 

light 

hazy 

7 

15 

29| 

21.75 

56.0 

30.10 

29.83 

29.980 

NW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

8 

3 

30 

18.50 

51.0 

30.17 

29.62 

30.007 

SE 

light 

hazy 

9 

+8 

4 

+1.46 

56.0 

29.60 

29.20 

29.378 

ESE 

fresh 

hazy,  snow  at  times 

10 

-2 

19 

-8.17 

55.7 

29.74 

29.61 

29.707 

NNW 

fresh 

cloudy 

11 

20 

31 

26.04 

54.2 

29.70 

29.53 

29.608 

NW 

fresh 

clear 

12 

25 

28§ 

27.25 

52.7 

29.48 

29.39 

29.432 

West 

modt. 

clear 

13 

26 

31 

28.37 

52.0 

30.10 

29.59 

29.867 

Northerly 

light 

fine  and  clear 

14 

21 

29 

24.00 

51.2 

30.13 

30.00 

30.064 

NNW 

modt. 

fine  and  clear 

15 

18| 

24 

20.21 

50.2 

29.99 

29.68 

29.818 

NW 

fresh 

fine  and  clear 

16 

15 

20 

18.08 

52.0 

29.60 

29.50 

29.522 

NW 

light 

fine 

17 

11 

18 

15.25 

53.7 

29.80 

29.50 

29.633 

WNW 

fresh 

clear 

18 

8 

19 

14.17 

53.0 

29.91 

29.89 

29.900 

sw 

light 

fine  and  clear 

19 

+1 

8 

3.50 

57.0 

29.88 

29.83 

29.852 

sw 

light 

hazy 

20 

-10 

20 

16.88 

57.0 

29.90 

29.80 

29.872 

NW 

modt. 

fine 

21 

19 

25 

21.67 

57.7 

29.77 

29.60 

29.672 

NW 

modt. 

fine 

22 

26 

30 

27.67 

57.7 

29.70 

29.57 

29.623 

WNW 

light 

clear 

23 

30 

32 

30.83 

54.7 

29.84 

29.78 

29.810 

NW 

light 

fine  and  clear 

24 

30 

32 

31.25 

55.7 

29.84 

29.80 

29.826 

West 

light 

fine  and  clear 

25 

30 

32 

31.58 

53.7 

29.76 

29.44 

29.595 

West 

light 

fine  and  clear 

26 

24 

30 

25.33 

54.0 

29.36 

29.28 

29.313 

NNW 

light 

cloudy 

27 

23 

26 

24.71 

52.0 

29.40 

29.36 

29.378 

NW 

light 

fine 

28 

25 

30 

26.96 

53.0 

29.63 

29.42 

29.537 

NNW 

modt. 

fine 

29 

24 

31 

28.67 

55.2 

29.73 

29.66 

29.708 

NNW 

light 

fine 

30 

17 

26| 

20.83 

56.7 

29.76 

29.74 

29.743 

West 

fresh 

cloudy 

+8 

-32 

-19.37 

55.2 

30.17 

29.20 

29.715 

\\  Ml  M 


■ 


!   Oa^X»^'^^^^<.mv^\£^t;^>,x ''  j-^ry*l 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


383 


very  distinct.  On  the  16th  Mr.  Ross  and  myself  observed  near  the  northern  1822- 
horizon,  and  exactly  opposite  to  the  sun,  a  circular  patch  of  faint  white  light ;  *.«*-r<w' 
its  size  was  many  times  larger  than  that  of  the  sun,  though  it  was  not  at  all 
defined  about  the  edges,  being  indeed  rather  softened  off  into  the  purple 
sky  on  which  it  rested.  On  the  22d  the  sun  rose  with  a  bright  spot  of  white 
light  at  the  distance  of  twenty  to  thirty  degrees  on  each  side  of  it,  and  a  ver- 
tical column  of  a  red  colour  extended  from  the  sun  to  about  two  degrees  above 
it.  This  last  phenomenon  is  very  common  in  cold  weather  and  when  the 
sun's  altitude  is  very  small.  A  cross  was  observed  about  the  moon  on  the 
27th,  consisting  of  vertical  and  horizontal  rays  of  whitish  light  appearing  to 
pass  through  that  object. 

At  apparent  noon,  on  the  2d  of  December,  six  days  after  the  sun  had  in-  Decemb. 
dependency  of  the  effects  of  refraction  set  to  us  for  a  period  of  more  than  x 
seven  weeks,  we  caught  a  glimpse  of  its  upper  limb  from  the  deck  of 
the  Fury,  about  one-sixteenth  of  its  whole  disk  being  visible  above  the  low 
land  to  the  southward.  It  is  impossible  not  to  acknowledge  the  benevolence 
as  well  as  to  admire  the  wisdom  of  the  law  which,  among  all  its  varied  and 
wonderful  effects  displayed  throughout  the  works  of  nature,  contrives  to 
shorten,  by  nearly  a  whole  fortnight,  the  annual  absence  of  this  cheering 
luminary  from  the  frozen  regions  of  the  earth,  and  thus  contributes  so  essen- 
tially to  the  welfare  and  enjoyment  of  their  numerous  inhabitants. 

On  the  4th  I  drove  out  to  the  huts,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Hooper,  princi-  Wed.  4. 
pally  with  the  intention  of  bringing  back  one  of  my  dogs  that  had  strayed  to 
the  village,  and  which  Toolemak,  his  former  master,  had  been  employing  in 
his  fishery  for  several  days  past,  instead  of  bringing  him  honestly  back ;  a  trick 
which  evidently  shewed  a  disposition  to  try  how  far  they  could  safely  go  in 
this  way,  and  of  which  therefore  it  was  as  well  to  take  some  notice  in  good  time. 
Including  the  late  addition  of  our  Winter  Island  acquaintance,  the  number  of 
separate  huts  now  amounted  to  fifteen  or  sixteen,  which,  together  with  the 
usual  appurtenances,    such  as  canoes,  sledges,  and  several  smaller  store- 
houses, occupying  perhaps  a  quarter  of  an  acre  of  ground,  constituted  a  vil- 
lage of  no  mean  nor  uninteresting  appearance.   .We  found  very  few  men  at 
the  huts,  the  greater  part  being  absent  in  quest  of  walruses  ;  and  after  passing 
an  hour  or  two  in  several  of  the  apartments,  and  making  a  number  of  presents 
to  the  women,  we  were  under  the  necessity  of  coming  away  without  perform- 
ing our  principal  errand,  as  neither  Toolemak  nor  my  dog  made  their  ap- 
pearance.    I  took  care,  however,  publicly  to  proclaim  Toolemak  as  atigliktoke 


i 


zrrssr^ 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

(thief,)  which  declaration,  as  I  expected,  produced  the  greater  effect  from  the 
notice  we  had  hitherto  taken  of  him,  and  the  respect  in  which  he  was  held 
by  the  Esquimaux  in  his  capacity  of  Angetkook.  As  a  more  effectual  pre- 
ventive, however,  against  a  repetition  of  this  kind  of  roguery  in  future,  1 
took  away  from  his  hut  a  large  piece  of  wood  that  I  had  given  him  for  two 
dogs,  till  he  should  return  the  one  in  question,  explaining  to  his  wife  my  rea- 
son for  doing  so  ;  and  then  returned  to  the  ships.  A  day  or  two  afterwards 
the  dog  was  returned  in  due  form,  and  with  every  expression  of  sorrow  and 
contrition  that  Toolemak  could  muster  on  such  an  occasion.  It  deserves  to 
be  noticed  as  a  fact  extremely  creditable  to  these  people,  that  though  for  above 
two  hours  we  had  left  our  sledge  unguarded,  and  with  numerous  valuable 
presents  upon  it,  we  did  not  find  a  single  article  missing  when  we  came  away, 
and  this  was  by  no  means  the  only  instance  of  the  same  thing  occurring. 

I  found  on  my  return  to  the  ships  that  two  of  our  English  dogs,  having  in- 
cautiously set  off  in  chase  of  a  wolf  near  the  Hecla,  one  of  them,  a  Scotch 
terrier  belonging  to  Lieutenant  Reid  and  a  great  favourite  with  us,  had  been 
caught  and  devoured  by  the  hungry  and  ferocious  animal.  The  other 
had  escaped  by  being  a  quicker  runner ;  though  the  resemblance  of  the  wolf 
to  the  Esquimaux  dogs  was  such  as  to  have  probably  deceived  them  till  they 
approached  him  very  close. 

On  the  8th,  for  several  hours  before  and  after  noon,  a  vertical  column  of 
pale  red  light  appeared  immediately  over  the  sun's  place,  extending  a  degree 
or  two  above  the  horizon,  and  shifting  its  position  only  as  the  sun  swept 
round  to  the  westward.  From  the  9th  to  the  12th  the  thermometer  frequently 
fell  to  —  43°,  being  a  greater  degree  of  cold  than  had  at  all  been  experienced 
during  the  preceding  winter ;  and  the  temperature  now  kept  down  with  a 
degree  of  constancy  that  had  not  been  experienced  even  at  Melville  Island 
at  this  season. 

On  the  14th  and  15th  the  wind  blew  hard  from  the  west  and  N.W.  for  seve- 
ral hours,  with  considerable  snow-drift,  notwithstanding  which  the  mercury 
in  the  barometer  kept  up  as  high  as  29.80  inches  for  more  than  four  and 
twenty  hours  successively,  and  clear  and  moderate  weather  succeeded  for 
Tues.  17.  two  or  three  days.  On  the  17th  Mr.  Ross  killed  another  grouse  of  the  same 
species  as  before,  and  weighing  one  pound  fourteen  ounces  ;  it  had  in  its 
maw  the  buds  of  the  ground  willow,  some  seed  vessels  of  the  saxifraga  op- 
positifolia,  and  a  small  quantity  of  moss.  The  smoke  issuing  from  the  stove- 
Thur.  19.  pipes  kept  remarkably  low  during  the  whole  of  the  19th,  the  thermometer 


Sun.  15. 


*.  ••■  /A^^Xii^^\^t}tX^f^^^^^ry^J^^^k *J&£ *  r&*\ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


385 


being  from  -  30°  to  33°,  and  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  at  30.07  inches    As    1822. 
the  reverse  of  this  was  frequently  the  case  when  these  instruments  afforded  IJ^S5' 
an  indication  nearly  similar,  it  appeared  to  us  to  depend  on  some  other  con- 
dition, perhaps  the  moisture,  of  the  atmosphere.     On  the  21st  there  being-  a  Sat  2] 
fresh  wind,  with  the  sky  clear  overhead,  Arcturus  was  discernible  to  the  naked 
eye  till  forty-seven  minutes  after  eleven,  A.M.,  apparent  time  •  at  half  an 
hour  past  noon  it  was  again  visible,  and  stars  of  the  second  magnitude  could 
be  distinguished  at  three-quarters  past  one  o'clock. 

On  Christmas-day  I  directed  a  small  addition  to  be  made  to  the  allowance  Wed  25 
of  provisions,  including  a  dinner  of  fresh  beef  that  had  been  killed  on  board 
the  Nautilus  in  the  month  of  June,  1821,  and  preserved  with  a  very  small 
quantity  of  salt  rubbed  over  it,  on  deck,  since  that  period.     Though  I  never 
saw  a  Christmas  spent  in  so  orderly  a  manner  at  sea,  it  did  not  pass  without 
producing  some  injurious  effects  upon  the  health  of  the  men,  several  serious 
cases  of  disordered  bowels  occurring  immediately  afterwards,  in  spite   of 
every  precaution.      As  more  than  usual  care  had  been  taken  to  avoid  excess 
or  exposure   among  them,  Mr.    Edwards   considered   this   circumstance  as 
tending  to  evince  a  greater  susceptibility  in  this  way  than  had  been  exhibited 
during  our  first  winter.     On  the  26th  Mr.  Ross  shot  another  grouse  (teiraojhin  26 
albus,)   weighing  one  pound  eight  ounces,  and  having  in  its  maw  the  same 
vegetable  substances  as  the  last.     On  the  28th  the  smoke  from  the  funnels  Sat  28 
was  again   observed  to  keep  unusually  low,  skimming  along  the  top  of  the 
housing  as  it  escaped,  and  then  descending  to  the  ice.     The  thermometer  ' 
was  at  this  time  at  -35°,  and  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  at  29  65  inches  the 
wind  being  light  at  N.N.W. 

The  year  closed  with  the  temperature  of -42°,  the  mean  of  the  month  of  Tues  31 
December  having  been  27°  8,  which,  taken  in  connexion  with  that  of  Novem 
ber,  led  us  to  expect  a  severe  winter.     Observing  a  considerable  difference 
in  the  indication  of  some  of  our  spirit-thermometers,  ten   of  these  instru 
ments  were  exposed  to  the  atmosphere  under  exactly  similar  circumstances*- 
when  they  were  found  to  range  from  -35°  to  -  48°,  the  two  hitherto  registered 
on  board  and  on  the  ice,  indicating  from  2°  to  3°  higher  than  the  mean  of  the 
whole  number.     The  latter  of  these  two  was  in  future  used  for  registering 

•  Of  this  number  five  were  of  uncoloured  spirits,  with  the  scales  graduated  as  low  as  -  200°  • 
the  rest  were  of  aJcohol  coloured  in  the  usual  manner.    By  subsequent  comparisons  it  appeared 
that  at  higher  temperatures,  especially  above  zero,  the  disagreement  was  much  less  between  the 
same  instruments. 

3    D 


386 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


L  ~v       j* 

■         ■ 

r 

[>ii 

ft 

jfi 

^r< 

I 

1822.  the  temperature,  and  that  on  board  altogether  dispensed  with ;  so  that  the 
DJ^5'  degree  of  cold  found  in  the  Meteorological  Abstracts  during  this  winter,  will 
be  from  2°  to  3°  less  than  the  mean  above  alluded  to.  In  estimating  the  mean 
temperature  of  the  year,  the  same  deduction  may  fairly  be  made  during  the 
other  months,  as  a  correction  for  the  difference  between  the  thermometer  on 
board,  and  that  freely  exposed  at  a  distance  from  the  ship. 

In  the  meteorological  phenomena  observed  during  the  month  of  Decem- 
ber, there  was  little  that  deserves  particular  notice.     On  the  morning  of  the 
lst'of  December  a  luminous  spot  of  white  light  or  paraselena  was  seen  on 
each  side  of  the  moon,  at  the  angular  distance  of  23°.     Between  one  and  two 
A.M.  on  the  13th,  while  Messrs.  Ross  and  Bushnan  were  employed  in  taking 
some  observations  alongside  the  Fury,  they  saw  a  vivid  flash  of  light,  which 
it  afterwards  occurred  to  them  must  have  come  down  the  electric  chain  at- 
tached to  the  masthead,  directly  under  which  they  happened  to  be  standing  at 
the  time.     As  soon  as  Mr.  Fisher  was  acquainted  with  this  circumstance  he 
applied  the  electrometer  to  the  chain,  but  as  usual  without  any  perceptible 
effect  on  the  gold-leaf.      The  Aurora  Borealis  had  been  visible  to  the  south- 
ward for  some  hours  during  the  night,  but  had  disappeared  for  half  an  hour 
before  the  flash  was  seen.     About  nine  A.M.   on  the  19th,  Mr.  Hooper  ob 
served  a  meteor  in  the  W.b.S.,  about  50°  above  the  horizon,  whence  it  de- 
scended in  a  curved  line,  having  its  convex  side  towards  the  horizon,  and 
disappeared  in  the  W.b.N.     In  size  and  brilliancy  it  resembled  the  planet 
Jupiter,  and  the  time  of  its  continuance  was  about  three  or  four  seconds. 

About  the  middle  of  the  month  of  December  several  of  the  Esquimaux 
had  moved  from  the  huts  at  Igloolik,  some  taking  up  their  quarters  on  the  ice 
at  a  considerable  distance  to  the  north-west,  and  the  rest  about  a  mile  outside 
the  summer-station  of  the  tents.  At  the  close  of  the  year  from  fifty  to  sixty 
individuals  had  thus  decamped,  their  object  being,  like  that  of  other  savages 
on  terra  firma,  to  increase  their  means  of  subsistence  by  covering  more 
ground  ;  their  movements  were  arranged  so  quietly  that  we  seldom  heard  of 
their  intentions  till  they  were  gone.  At  the  new  stations  they  lived  entirely 
in  huts  of  snow ;  and  the  northerly  and  easterly  winds  were  considered  by 
them  as  most  favourable  for  their  fishing,  as  these  served  to  bring  in  the  loose 
ice  on  which  they  principally  kill  the  walruses.  At  the  distant  station,  how- 
ever, which  was  farther  removed  from  clear  water,  their  principal  dependence 
was  on  the  neitiek,  which  is  taken  by  watching  at  the  holes  made  by  that  ani- 
mal in  the  ice.     Abreast  of  Igloolik  the  clear  water  was  not,  with  a  westerly 


t-:;A^^>:^:t^ 


1 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


387 


1822. 


wind,  more  than  three  miles  distant  from  the  land,  and  a  dark  water-sky  con- 
tinued  accurately  to  define  its  position  and  extent.  DJ^i' 

From  the  time  of  our  first  arrival  here  in  the  autumn,  the  Esquimaux  had 
been  in  tiie  habit  of  catching  foxes  upon  the  west  point  of  the  bay,  called  by 
them  Arngnarko-ek-seat.      The  traps  used  for  this  purpose  were  extremely 
simple  and  ingenious,  and  to  us  quite  new.     They  consisted  of  a  small  cir- 
cular arched  hut  of  stones,  having  a  square  aperture  at  the  top,  but  quite 
close  and  secure  in  every  other  part.     This  aperture  is  closed  by  some  blades 
of  whalebone  which,  though  in  reality  only  fixed  to  the  stones  at  one  end, 
appear  to  form  a  secure  footing,  especially  when  the  deception  is  assisted  by 
a  little  snow  laid  on  them.     The  bait  is  so  placed  that  the  animal  must  come 
upon  this  platform  to  get  at  it,  when  the  latter  (unable  to  bear  the  weight) 
bends  downwards,  and  after  precipitating  the  fox  into  the  trap,  which  is  made 
too  deep  to  allow  of  his  escape,  returns  by  its  elasticity  to  the  former  posi- 
tion, so  that  several  may  thus  be  caught  successively.     The  Hecla  being  near 
the  point,  Mr.  Mogg  was  much  in  the  habit  of  accompanying  the  Esquimaux 
to  their  traps,  and  remarked  that  the  foxes  were  very  numerous  till  about 
the  end  of  November,  when  they  began  to  fall  off  in  number,  and  the  traps 
were  less  regularly  visited  than  before.      A  few  were  however  taken  in  the 
month  of  December,  towards  the  end  of  which  many  of  the  traps  were  neg- 
lected, and  allowed  to  fill  up  with  drift.     In  the  early  part  of  January  the  rest 
were  dismantled,  but  Mr.  Mogg  caught  two  after  this  ;  one  on  the  23d  of 
January,  being  a  male  of  a  bluish  cast,  with  the  tips  of  its  ears  and  tail 
black  ;  the  other  a  female  larger  than  the  former  and  beautifully  white,  taken 
on  the   13th  of  February.      Their  weight  was  eight  and  eight  and  a  half 
pounds,  and  the  temperatures  of  their  bodies  when  just  killed  100|°  and 
100°.     The  foregoing  account  of  the  time  when  these  animals  were  most 
abundant,  agrees  with  what  we  had  before  observed  at  Winter-Island,  and 
Mr.  Mogg  considered  their  number  to  have  been  here  fully  as  great.     Some 
of  the  Esquimaux  were  thus  furnished  with  outer  jackets  of  fox-skins  with 
the  fur  outside,  forming  a  remarkably  clean,  comfortable,  and  handsome-look- 
ing costume,  though  the  material  is  by  no  means  a  durable  one. 

The  first  week  of  the  new  year  brought  a  continuance  of  cold  weather;    i823 
after  which,  for  the  succeeding  fortnight,  the  temperature  was  remarkably  January- 
high,  the  thermometer  frequently  rising  above  zero,  and  once  to  +  22°,  which 
occurred  with  a  fresh  easterly  breeze  and  some  snow  falling.     An  inspection 
of  our  Meteorological  Abstracts  will  shew  that  in  this  as  in  every  other  part 

3  D  2 


:„»| 


|||    ll.lt!  | 


!  'J 


m 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 
Fury,  at  Igloolik,  during  the  Month  of  December,  1822. 


Fahrenheit's  Ther- 
mometer. 


Day 

1 

2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 


9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

21 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

SO 

31 


15 

23 

12 

11 

14 

16 

20 

26 

36 

39 

39 

37 

35 

24 

21 

29 

30 

30 

29 

17 

14 

13 

11 

10 

11 

25| 

27 

31 

32 

36 

33 


—20 
31 
29 
20 
23 
23 
29 
35 
40 
42 
42 
41 
38 
33 
30 
35 
36 
37 
33 
27 
19 
16 
22 
19 
29 
32 
37 
35 
40 
40 
43 


C   CD 
a  v 


-16.42, 

27.92 

19.17 

16.33 

19.17 

18.50 

23.92 

30.62 

38.35 

40.42 

40.42 

39.29 

36.58 

28.42 

26.67 

32.50 

32.83 

33.33 

31.00 

21.42 

17.04 

14.17 

14.29 

13.25 

21.00 

28.96 

32.96 

33.25 

36.50 

38.83 

38.37 


Barometer. 


53.0 

55.2 

57.0 

55.2 

57.2 

56.0 

61.7 

59.0 

56.0 

56.0 

57.2 

57.7 

57.7 

54.0 

52.0 

53.7 

50.7 

49.2 

53.0 

54.0 

54.0 

54.0 

56.0 

58.2 

63.0 

61.0 

61.7 

60.2 

CO.O 

58.0 

61.0 


inches 

29.83 

29.78 

29.43 

29.30 

29.32 

29.57 

29.67 

29.65 

29.65 

29.63 

29.  72 

29.82 

29.90 

29.90 

29.80 

29.83 

29.70 

30.02 

30.07 

30.00 

29.89 

29.50 

29.18 

29.24 

29.18 

29.22 

29.55 

29.70 

29.75 

29.72 

29.83 


inches 

29.79 


inches 

29.813 


—10     —43     -27.80 


29.48 

29.19 

29.20 

29.30 

29.32 

29.58 

29.57 

29.60 

29.62 

29.63 

29.70 

29.85 

29.80 

29.80 

29.65 

29.60 

29.72 

30.02 

29.96 

29.58 

29.18 

29.07 

29.18 

29.10 


Mean. 


29.637 

29.277 

29.247 

29.303; 

29.447 

29.615, 

29.598' 

29.625 

29.624 

29.687 

29.737 

29.876 

29.852 

29.800 

29.737 

29.630 

29.900 

30.057 

29.978 

29. 742 

29.318 

29.140 

29.212 

29.118 


Prevailing 
Winds. 


Velucity. 


56.5 


30.07 


29.09,29.148 
29.24:29.405 
29.5929.653 
29.7029.717 
29.5829.64!; 
29.62  29.712 


29  07  29.58! 


ssw 

West 
West 

NNW 
NbW 
ENE 
ENE 
North 
NW 
NW 
West 
West 
NW 
West 
NW 
West 
NNW 
N. Easterly 
NNE 
North 
NW 
NW 
NW 
WSW 
Westerly 
NW 
West 
NNW 
Westerly 
West 
West 


light 

light 

light 

light 

modt. 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 

fresh 

modt. 

light 

light 

light 

modt. 

fresh 

fresh 

fresh 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 

light 


Prevailing  Weather. 


hazy 

fine 

cloudy 

hazy,  snow  at  times 

hazy 

fine 

fine 

fine 

fine 
fine  and  clear 
fine  and  clear 

clear 

fine 

fine 

hazy 

fine 

fine 

fine 

fine 
clear,  with  drift 

clear 

clear 
fine  and  clear 
hazy,  and  snow 

clear 

hazy 
fine  and  clear 

fine 
fine  and  clear 

fine 
fine 


j  iijiajtfxo^Vvi^y/^v^^^fe^^ *55j&^  -  SF5g^ 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


389 


of  the  polar  regions  we  have  yet  visited,  a  southerly  or  easterly  wind  occa-    ls2i;f- 

i  •        •        i        i  i  .t        i  ii  i  January. 

sioned  a  rise  in  the  thermometer,  while  the  greatest  cold  was  always  expe-  v^-^ 
rienced  with  the  wind  in  the  opposite  quarters. 

On  the  1st  of  January  the  star  Capella  could  be  kept  sight  of  with  the  Wed.  l. 
naked  eye  till  half  an  hour  before  noon,  the  weather  being  remarkably  clear  and 
fine.  On  the  5th,  the  sky  looked  so  red  towards  noon  that  we  were  induced  Sun.  5. 
to  look  out  for  the  sun  from  the  masthead,  but  without  success,  though  we 
could  not  help  fancying  every  moment  that  it  was  about  to  burst  above  the 
horizon.  After  this  the  sky  was  so  constantly  overcast  for  a  fortnight,  that 
we  did  not  obtain  a  sight  of  it.  In  the  first  week  of  January,  the  proportion 
of  coals  for  the  main-hatchway  stoves  was  increased  to  five  pecks  per  day,  or 
the  quantity  for  which  they  were  expressly  constructed.  This  proportion  of 
fuel,  which  was  now  expended  for  the  first  time  since  leaving  England, 
was  continued  for  eleven  weeks,  or  till  towards  the  end  of  March  ;  after  which 
the  expenditure  of  coals  for  this  apparatus  was  gradually  diminished,  and  it 
was  permanently  discontinued  for  the  season  on  the  10th  of  June.  About  Mon.  6. 
this  time  some  more  of  the  Esquimaux  shifted  their  quarters  from  Igloolik  to 
the  ice,  leaving  the  permanent  huts  upon  the  island  now  deserted  by  about 
one-half  their  inhabitants. 

On  the  19th,  the  weather  having  at  length  cleared  up,  we  were  once  more  Sun.  19. 
gratified  with  a  sight  of  the  sun,  and  numerous  parties  of  walkers  were  seen 
in  various  parts  of  the  bay,  enjoying  the  novelty  and  splendour  of  this  cheer- 
ing and  glorious  sight.  A  parhelion  also  appeared  on  each  side  of  the  sun  ; 
and  exactly  opposite  to  it  near  the  northern  horizon  was  a  large  circular 
patch  of  white  light,  precisely  similar  to  that  described  on  the  16th  of  No- 
vember. The  Esquimaux  who  were  at  the  ships  to-day  before  the  sun  rose, 
particularly  said  that  we  should  see  it,  and  apparently  with  great  confi- 
dence. It  is  certain  however  that  on  this  occasion  no  sun-dance  took  place, 
nor  any  other  festivity  of  the  kind  described  by  Crantz  *;  their  only  expres- 
sion of  satisfaction  at  this  event  being  of  the  same  general  nature  as  our  own. 

About  this  time  the  accounts  from  the  huts,  as  well  from  the  Esquimaux  as 
from  our  own  people,  concurred  in  stating  that  the  number  of  the  sick,  as 
well  as  the  seriousness  of  their  complaints,  was  rapidly  increasing  there.  We 
had  indeed  scarcely  heard  of  the  illness  of  a  woman  named  Kei-moo-seuk, 
who  it  seemed  had  lately  miscarried,  when  an  account  arrived  of  her  death. 


Tues.  21, 


II 


»Ti*»i*j 


*  Crantz,  I,  76 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


She  was  one  of  the  two  wives  of  Ooyarra,  one  of  Captain  Lyon's  fellow- 
travellers  in  the  summer,  who  buried  her  in  the  snow  about  two  hundred 
yards  from  the  huts,  placing  slabs  of  the  same  perishable  substance  over  the 
body,  and  cementing  them  by  pouring  a  little  water  in  the  interstices.  Such 
an  interment  was  not  likely  to  be  a  very  secure  one,  and  accordingly  a  few 
days  after,  the  hungry  dogs  removed  the  snow,  and  devoured  the  body. 

We  had  also  heard  of  the  indisposition  of  a  woman  named  Pootoo-a-look, 
the  wife  of  Takkee-likkee-td,  and  the  accounts  of  her  being  now  more  un- 
favourable than  before,  Captain  Lyon  drove  out  to  the  huts  on  the  22d,  ac- 
companied by  Mr.  Mac  Laren,  to  see  and  endeavour  to  relieve  her.  They 
found  her  in  an  extremely  debilitated  state,  and  her  child,  which  was  about 
three  years  of  age,  lying  under  the  same  skin,  apparently  almost  starved  in 
consequence  of  its  mother's  inability  to  suckle  it.  After  feeding  them  both 
with  a  little  arrow-root,  Captain  Lyon  desired  the  man  to  come  to  the  ships 
the  next  day  for  some  medicines,  as  well  as  for  some  blankets  to  add  to 
their  warmth  and  dryness.  On  entering  one  of  the  bone  huts,  Captain 
Lyon  discovered  a  log  of  wood  forming  a  transverse  beam  above  the 
entrance :  on  examination  it  proved  to  be  of  fir,  without  bark,  from  four 
to  five  feet  in  length,  about  eight  inches  in  diameter,  and  having  no  appear- 
ance of  being  eaten  by  worms.  The  Esquimaux  informed  him  that  it  had 
been  picked  up  on  the  island  of  Neerlo-nakto,  but  did  not  trouble  them- 
selves to  form  any  conjecture  from  whence  it  came.  This  circumstance  is 
principally  worth  mentioning  for  the  sake  of  introducing  a  much  more  sin- 
gular one,  that,  during  five  summers'  navigation  on  or  about  the  north- 
eastern coast  of  the  American  continent,  we  have  never  met  with  one  piece 
of  drift-wood  floating  in  the  sea. 

While  speaking -on  this  subject,  I  may  not  improperly  add  what  has  been 
the  result  of  numerous  inquiries  respecting  the  wood  which,  as  we  under- 
stood the  Esquimaux,  was  said  to  grow  at  or  near  Akkoolee.  It  appeared  from 
some  conversations  with  these  people  after  our  arrival  at  Igloolik,  that, 
upon  the  north-west  point  of  an  island  on  that  coast,  called  Seat-toke,  a 
considerable  quantity  of  wood  of  large  dimensions  is  found ;  but  so  dif- 
ficult is  this  place  of  access  that,  of  all  the  Esquimaux  of  whom  we  have  a 
personal  knowledge,  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  a  single  individual 
has  ever  been  there,  and  the  information  is,  therefore,  entirely  from  hear- 
say. Ewerat,  who  was  the  clearest  in  his  account  of  it,  and  who  derived 
all  his  information  on  this  subject  from  a  very  old  man  now  living,  but  not 


ad      S 


-J       : 


1=1      k 


h 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


391 


:!  !l   :  "HHM 


personally  known  to  us,  assured  me,  as  many  others  had  done,  that  wood  1823- 
was  abundant  at  the  place  above  alluded  to.  He  explained,  however,  pretty  v-«v*w 
intelligibly,  that  it  did  not  grow  there,  as  we  had  at  first  been  given  to 
understand  ;  and  upon  the  whole  it  seems  most  probable  that  the  wood  of 
which  the  Esquimaux  speak  is  drift-wood.  That  wood  should  occur  in  one  spot 
only  out  of  a  large  extent  of  coast,  suggested  to  us  at  the  time  the  idea  that 
it  might  have  been  brought  there  by  the  current  of  some  river  setting  it 
down  from  the  interior  of  the  continent,  as  on  the  northern  shores  of  Asia 
and  Europe.  The  researches  of  Captain  Franklin,  however,  with  which  we 
were  then  unacquainted,  have  furnished  a  more  satisfactory  mode  of  account- 
ing for  this  fact ;  the  wood  being  probably  deposited  at  Seat-toke  by  the 
current  observed  to  set  from  the  westward  along  the  northern  coast  of 
America,  and  bringing  with  it  quantities  of  drift-wood  seen  by  Captain 
Franklin  on  those  shores  along  which  his  late  extraordinary  canoe-navigation 
was  performed. 

On  the  23d  Takkee-likkee-ta  came  to  the  Hecla  according  to  his  promise,  Thur.  23. 
and  was  supplied  with  various  comforts  for  his  wife  and  child.  As  how- 
ever their  principal  want  of  comfort  arose  from  the  coldness  and  moisture  of 
their  present  quarters,  Captain  Lyon  proposed  to  him  to  bring  them  to  the 
Hecla.  To  this  the  man  joyfully  assented  and,  being  furnished  with 
a  sledge  and  dogs,  soon  brought  the  invalids  on  board,  where  they  were 
comfortably  lodged  in  Captain  Lyon's  cabin,  and  attended  with  all  the 
care  that  their  situation  required,  and  that  humanity  could  suggest.  Besides 
the  child  that  was  ill,  another  also  accompanied  them  named  Shiga,  a 
pleasing  and  uncommonly  intelligent  girl  about  eleven  years  of  age,  whom 
we  now  found  to  have  been  one  of  the  individuals  I  saw  in  Lyon  Inlet 
during  the  summer  of  1821.  In  the  evening  I  sent  my  servant  to  the  vil- 
lage, for  the  purpose  of  going  into  all  the  huts  (which  from  the  lowness  and 
indescribable  filth  of  the  passages  was  no  easy  or  pleasant  task)  to  see  what 
other  sick  there  might  be.  He  reported,  on  his  return,  that  a  young  man 
named  Piccooyak,  a  great  favourite  with  our  officers  and  ship's  company,  was 
in  a  very  weak  condition,  and  that  his  wife  and  another  female  were  lying 
beside  him  to  keep  him  warm,  at  the  same  time  crying  most  piteously. 
Early  on  the  following  morning,  therefore,  I  despatched  Mr.  Crawford  on  Frid.  24. 
the  sledge  to  bring  Piccooyak  to  the  ship  ;  but  alas  !  his  miseries  here  were 
at  an  end,  for  he  had  breathed  his  last  on  the  preceding  evening  within  an 
hour  after  Ave  had  first  been  informed  of  his  illness !     His  wife  Kaga,  a 


,J); -J         | 


-     .t      «      A 


392 


"  "111:1 

- 

< 

5 

" 

I 

■■ 

.« 

j 

.. 

i 

v 

'I 


ihii 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823. 
January. 


young  woman  lately  brought  to  bed,  was  lying  about  in  the  snow  beside  the 
road,  and  making  lamentations  that  bespoke  much  more  sincere  grief  than 
the  cutting  off  of  hair,  which  the  widows  here  did  not  always  practise*. 
We  did  not,  however,  at  this  time  know  what  bitter  cause  of  lamentation 
this  event  was  to  prove  to  poor  Kaga. 

Mr.  Crawford  thought  he  could  not  now  better  execute  his  instructions 
than  in  bringing  to  the  ship  a  young  man  of  the  name  of  Kooeetseek,  who 
was  very  much  debilitated  by  the  long  continuance  of  a  rheumatic  com- 
plaint ;  he  was  accordingly  lodged  in  our  sick  bay  together  with  his  sister, 
an  intelligent  child  about  nine  years  of  age,  named  Kirko-warioo,  who  accom- 
panied him  as  his  nurse.  The  latter  soon  became  domesticated  among  us 
and,  being  well  cleaned  and  dressed  in  European  clothes,  amused  us  greatly 
by  her  vivacity  and  intelligence.  Indeed  it  required  no  long  acquaintance 
with  this  poor  child,  to  convince  us  that  art  and  education  might  easily  have 
made  her  equal  or  superior  to  ourselves,  or,  as  some  of  our  gentlemen  at 
the  time  remarked,  that  there  were  in  reality  more  shades  of  dirt  than  of  any 
other  difference  subsisting  between  us. 

Scarcely  had  these  arrangements  been  made  on  board  the  Fury,  when  we 
heard  of  the  death  of  Captain  Lyon's  patient,  her  extremely  debilitated 
state  rendering  it  impossible  to  rally  her  by  any  means  that  could  be  devised. 
The  circumstances  attending  the  death  and  burial  of  this  poor  woman  and 
her  child,  affording  an  insight  into  some  of  the  customs  of  the  Esquimaux 
on  these  occasions,  are  thus  related  by  Captain  Lyon,  to  whom  I  am  in- 
debted for  the  account. 


"  The  mother  Poo-too-alook  was  about  thirty-five  years  of  age,  the  child 
about  three  years — yet  not  weaned,  and  a  female  ;  there  was  also  another 
daughter  Shega,  about  twelve  or  thirteen  years  of  age,  who  as  well  as 
her  father  was  a  most  attentive  nurse.  My  hopes  were  but  small  as  far  as 
concerned  the  mother,  but  the  child  was  so  patient  that  I  hoped  from  its 
docility  soon  to  accustom  it  to  soups  and  nourishing  food,  as  its  only  com- 
plaint was  actual  starvation.  I  screened  off  a  portion  of  my  cabin,  and 
arranged  some  bedding  for  them,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Esquimaux 
do  their  own.     Warm  broth,    dry  bedding,  and   a   comfortable   cabin    did 

*  Crantz,  I.  138. 


\  a 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


393 


24. 


wonders  before  evening,  and  our  medical  men  gave  me  great  hopes.  As  an  ls23- 
introduction  to  a  system  of  cleanliness,  and  preparatory  to  washing  the  sick  J^XL' 
who  were  in  a  most  filthy  state,  I  scrubbed  Shega  and  her  father  from  head 
to  foot  and  dressed  them  in  new  clothes.  During  the  night  I  persuaded 
both  mother  and  child,  who  were  very  restless  and  constantly  moaning,  to 
take  a  few  spoonfuls  of  soup.  On  the  morning  of  the  24th  the  woman  ap- 
peared considerably  improved,  and  she  both  spoke  and  ate  a  little.  As  she 
was  covered  with  so  thick  a  coating  of  dirt  that  it  could  be  taken  off  in 
scales,  I  obtained  her  assent  to  wash  her  face  and  hands  a  little  before  noon. 
The  man  and  his  daughter  now  came  to  my  table  to  look  at  some  things  I 
had  laid  out  to  amuse  them;  and  after  a  few  minutes  Shega  lifted  the  curtain 
to  look  at  her  mother,  when  she  again  let  it  fall  and  tremblingly  told  us  she 
was  dead. 

"  The  husband  sighed  heavily,  the  daughter  burst  into  tears,  and  the  poor 
little  infant  made  the  moment  more  distressing  by  calling  in  a  plaintive  tone 
on  its  mother,  by  whose  side  it  was  lying.  I  determined  on  burying  the 
woman  on  shore,  and  the  husband  was  much  pleased  at  my  promising  that 
the  body  should  be  drawn  on  a  sledge  by  men  instead  of  dogs  ;  for  to  our 
horror  Takkelikkeeta  had  told  me  that  dogs  had  eaten  part  of  Keimooseuk, 
and  that  when  he  left  the  huts  with  his  wife  one  was  devouring  the  body  as 
he  passed  it. 

'  Takkeelikkeeta  now  prepared  to  dress  the  dead  body,  and  in  the  first 
place  stopped  his  nose  with  deer's  hair  and  put  on  his  gloves,  seeming 
unwilling  that  his  naked  hand  should  come  in  contact  with  the  corpse.     I 
observed  in  this  occupation  his  care  that  every  article  of  dress  should  be 
as  carefully  placed  as  when  his  wife  was  living,  and  having  drawn  the  boots 
on  the  wrong  legs,  he  pulled  them  off  again  and  put  them  properly  ;  this  cere- 
mony finished,  the  deceased  was  sewed  up  in  a  hammock,  and  at  the  hus- 
band's urgent  request  her  face  was  left  uncovered.     An  officer  who  was 
present  at  the  time  agreed  with  me  in  fancying  that  the  man,  from  his  words 
and  actions,  intimated  a  wish  that  the  living  child  might  be  enclosed  with 
its  mother.     We  may  have  been  mistaken,  but  there  is  an  equal  probability 
that  we  were  right  in  our  conjecture  ;  for  according  to   Crantz  and  Egede 
the  Greenlanders  were  in  the  habit  of  burying  their  motherless  infants  from 
a  persuasion  that  they  must  otherwise  starve  to  death,  and  also  from  being 
unable  to  bear  the  cries  of  the  little  ones  while  lingering  for  several  days 
without  sustenance  ;  for  no  woman  will  give  them  any  share  of  their  milk 


,i:-     !■    "  I 


"I'lii 


,.;, 


394 


1823. 
January, 


,'it 


i 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


which  they  consider  as  the  exclusive  property  of  their  own  offspring. 
My  dogs  being  carefully  tied  up  at  the  man's  request,  a  party  of  our 
people  accompanied  by  me  drew  the  body  to  the  shore,  where  we  made  a 
grave  about  a  foot  deep,  being  unable  to  get  lower  on  account  of  the  frozen 
earth.  The  body  was  placed  on  its  back  at  the  husband's  request,  and  he 
then  stepped  into  the  grave  and  cut  all  the  stitches  of  the  hammock,  although 
without  throwing  it  open,  seeming  to  imply  that  the  dead  should  be  left 
unconfined.  I  laid  a  woman's  knife  by  the  side  of  the  body  and  we  filled  up 
the  grave,  over  which  we  also  piled  a  quantity  of  heavy  stones  which  no  animal 
could  remove.  When  all  was  done  and  we  returned  to  the  ship,  the  man 
lingered  a  few  minutes  behind  us  and  repeated  two  or  three  sentences,  as  if 
addressing  himself  to  his  departed  wife  ;  he  then  silently  followed.  We 
found  Shega  quite  composed  and  attending  her  little  sister,  between  whose 
eye-brows  she  had  made  a  spot  with  soot,  which  I  learned  was  because 
being  unweaned  it  must  certainly  die.  During  the  night  my  little  charge 
called  on  its  mother  without  intermission,  yet  the  father  slept  as  soundly 
until  morning  as  if  nothing  had  happened. 

"  All  who  saw  my  patient  on  the  morning  of  the  25th  gave  me  great 
hopes  ;  she  could  swallow  easily  and  was  even  strong  enough  to  turn  or  sit 
upright  without   assistance,   and  in  the  forenoon  slept  very  soundly.     At 
noon  the  sister  of  the  deceased,  Ootooguak,  with  her  husband  and  son, 
came  to  visit  me.     She  had  first  gone  to  the  Fury  and  was  laughing  on 
deck  and  at  her  own  request  was  taken  below,  not  caring  to  hurry  herself 
to  come  to  the  house  of  mourning.     Even  when  she  came  to  the  Hecla,  she 
was  in  high  spirits,  laughing  and  capering  on  deck  as  if  nothing  had  hap- 
pened, but  on  being  shewn  to  my  cabin,  where  Shega  having  heard  of  her 
arrival  was  sitting  crying  in  readiness,  she  began  with  her  niece  to  howl 
most  wofully.     I  however  put  a  stop  to  this  ceremony,  for  such  it  certainly 
was,  under  the  plea  of  its  disturbing  the  child.     The  arrival  of  a  pot  of 
smoking  walrus-flesh  soon  brought  smiles  on  all  faces  but  that  of  Takkeelik- 
keeta,  who  refused  food  and  sat  sighing  deeply  ;  the  others  ate,  chatted,  and 
laughed,  as  if  nothing  but  eating  was  worth  thinking   of.     Dinner  being 
over,  I  received  thanks  for  burying  the  woman  in  such  a  way  that  "  neither 
wolves,  dogs,  nor  foxes  could  dig  her  up  and  eat  her,"  for  all  were  full  of 
the  story  of  Keimooseuk,  and  even  begged  some  of  our  officers  to  go  to 
Igloolik  and  shoot  the   offending  dogs.      A  young  woman   named  Ablik, 
sister  to  Ooyarra,  was  induced  after  much  entreaty  and  a  very  large  present 


*_*3*rfsto«x  &^A  \&rf* 2X ^^^rn^r\^Jn^^AM.r^  '<  7&F&. 


Ii,l! 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE.  395 

of  beads,  to  offer  her  breast  to  the  sick  child,  but  the  poor  little  creature    1823. 
pushed  it  angrily  away.     Another  woman  was  asked  to  do  the  same,  but  J£J!£Z' 
although  her  child  was  half  weaned  she  flatly  refused. 

:  The  aunt  of  my  little  one  seeming  anxious  to  remain,  and  Shega  being 
now  alone,  I  invited  her  to  stop  the  night.  In  the  evening  the  child  took  meat 
and  jelly  and  sat  up  to  help  itself,  but  it  soon  after  resumed  its  melancholy 
cry  for  its  mother.  At  night  my  party  had  retired  to  sleep,  yet  I  heard 
loud  sighing  occasionally,  and  on  lifting  the  curtain  I  saw  Takkeelikkeeta 
standing  and  looking  mournfully  at  his  child.  I  endeavoured  to  compose 
him  and  he  promised  to  go  to  bed,  but  hearing  him  again  sighing  in  a  few 
minutes,  I  went  and  found  the  poor  infant  was  dead,  and  that  its  father  had 
been  some  time  aware  of  it.  He  now  told  me  it  had  seen  its  mother  the  last 
time  it  called  on  her,  and  that  she  had  beckoned  it  to  Khil-la,  (Heaven)  on 
which  it  instantly  died.  He  said  it  was  "  good  "  that  the  child  was  gone, 
that  no  children  out-lived  their  mothers,  and  that  the  black  spot  which 
Shega  had  frequently  renewed  was  quite  sufficient  to  ensure  the  death  of 
the  infant. 

'  My  party  made  a  hearty  breakfast  on  the  26th,  and  I  observed  they  did     26. 
not  scruple  to  lay  the  vessel  containing  the  meat  on  the  dead  child,  which  I 
had  wrapped  in  a  blanket ;  and  this  unnatural  table  excited  neither  disgust 
nor  any  other  feeling  amongst  them  more  than  a  block  of  wood  could  have 
done.     We  now  tied  up  all  the  dogs  as  Takkeelikkeeta  desired,  and  took  the 
child  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  astern  of  the  ships  to  bury  it  in  the  snow ; 
for  the  father  assured  me  that  her  mother  would  cry  in  her  grave  if  any 
weight  of  stones  or  earth  pressed  on  her  infant.     She  herself,  he  feared, 
had  already  felt  pain  from  the  monument  of  stones  which  we  had  laid  upon 
her.     The  snow  in  which  we  dug  the  child's  grave  was  not  above  a  foot 
deep,  yet  we  were  not  allowed  to  cut  into  the  ice  or  even  use  any  slabs  of  it 
in  constructing  the  little  tomb.     The  body  wrapped  in  a  blanket,  and  having 
the  face  uncovered,  being  placed,  the  father  put  the  slings  by  which  its  de- 
ceased mother  had  carried  it,  on  the  right  side,  and  in  compliance  Avith  the 
Esquimaux  custom  of  burying  toys  and  presents  with  their  dead,  I  threw  in 
some  beads.     A  few  loose  slabs  of  snow  were  now  placed  so  as  to  cover 
without  touching  the  body,   and  with  this  very  slight  sepulchre  the  father 
was  contented,  although  a  fox  could  have  dug  through  it  in  half  a  minute. 
We  however  added  more  snow,  and  cemented  all  by  pouring  about  twenty 
buckets  of  water,  which  were  brought  from  the  ship,  on  every  part  of  the 

3  E  S 


ln»l . 


"■Hi, 


396 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


tan 


1823. 
J  anuary. 


^»-y" 


Ml! 


29. 


mound.     I  remarked  that  before  our  task  was  completed  the  man  turned 
and  walked  quietly  to  the  ships. 

"  During  the  two  last  days,  I  obtained  some  information  with  respect 
to  mourning  ceremonies,  or  at  all  events  such  as  related  to  the  loss  of  a 
mother  of  a  family  ;  three  days  were  to  be  passed  by  the  survivors  with- 
out their  walking  out  on  the  ice,  performing  any  kind  of  work,  or  even 
having  any  thing  made  for  them.     Washing  is  out  of  the   question  with 
Esquimaux  at  most  times,    but  now   I  was   not  allowed  to  perform  the 
necessary  ablutions  of  their  hands  and  faces,  however  greasy  or  dirty  they 
might  be  made  by  their  food  ;  the  girl's  hair  was  not  to  be  put  in  pig-tails, 
and  every   thing  was   neglected;    Takkeelikkeeta  was   not  to  go  sealing 
until  the  summer.     With   the    exception   of  an  occasional  sigh  from  the 
man,  there  were  no  more  signs  of  grief;    our  mourners   ate,  drank,  and 
were  merry,  and  no  one  would  have  supposed  they  ever  had  wife,  mother, 
or  sister.     When  the  three  days,  and  it  is  singular  that  such  should  be  the 
time,  were  expired,  the  man  was  to  visit  the  grave;  and  having  talked 
with  his  wife,  all  duties  were  to  be  considered  as  over.     The  28th  was  our 
third  day,  but  a  heavy  northerly  gale  and  thick  drift  prevented  our  visiting 
the  grave.     The  29th,  although  not  fine,  was  more  moderate  and  I  accom- 
panied him  at  an  early  hour.     Arriving  at  the  grave,  he  anxiously  walked  up 
to  it  and  carefully  'sought  for  foot-tracks  on  the   snow,  but  finding  none 
repeated  to  himself,  "  No  wolves,  no  dogs,  no  foxes,  thank  ye,  thank  ye." 
He  now  began  a  conversation  which  he  directed  entirely  to  the  grave,  as  if 
addressing  his  wife.     He  called  her  twice  by  name,  and  twice  told  her  how 
the  wind  was  blowing,  looking  at  the  same   time   in  the  direction  from 
whence  the  drift  was  coming.     He  next  broke  forth  into  a  low  monotonous 
chaunt  and,  keeping  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  grave,  walked  slowly  round  it  in 
the  direction  of  the  sun  four  or  five  times,  and  at  each  circuit  he  stopped 
a  few  moments  at  the  head.     His  song  was,  however,  uninterrupted.    At  the 
expiration  of  about  eight  minutes,  he  stopped,  and  turning  suddenly  round 
to  me,  exclaimed  "  Tugwa,"  (that's  enough)  and  began  walking  back  to  the 
ship.     In  the  song  he  chaunted  I  could  frequently  distinguish  the  word  Koy- 
emm,  (thank  you)  and  it  was  occasionally  coupled  with  the  Kabloonas.    Two 
other  expressions,  both  the  names  of  the  spirits  or  familiars  of  the  Annatko, 
Toolemak,  were  used  a  few  times  ;  but  the  whole  of  the  other  words  were 
perfectly  unintelligible  to  me. 

"  I  now  sent  Shega  and  her  father  home,  well  clothed  and  in  good  case. 


Hf.,1 


m 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


397 


The  week  they  had  passed  on  board  was  sufficient  time  to  have  gained  them  1823- 
the  esteem  of  every  one,  for  they  were  the  most  quiet  inoffensive  beings  I  ever  ^^Z' 
met  with,  and  to  their  great  credit  they  never  once  begged.  The  man  was 
remarkable  for  his  extraordinary  fondness  for  treacle,  sugar,  salt,  acids,  and 
spruce-beer,  which  the  others  of  the  tribe  could  not  even  smell  without 
disgust ;  and  he  walked  about  to  the  different  messes  in  hopes  of  being 
treated  with  these  delicacies.  Shega  was  a  timid  well-behaved  girl,  and 
generally  remained  eating  in  my  cabin,  for  I  am  confident  of  speaking  far 
within  bounds  when  I  say  she  got  through  eight  pounds  of  solids  per  diem. 
As  far  as  gratitude  could  be  shewn  by  Esquimaux,  which  is  saying  '  koyenna' 
on  receiving  a  present,  my  friends  were  sensible  of  the  attentions  I  had 
shewn  them." 


.IHlllli'll 


We  were  to-day  informed  that  the  corpse  of  Picooyak  had  fared  even 
worse  than  that  of  Keimooseuk.  The  same  snow-covering  being  put  over  the 
body,  a  second  disinterment  Avas  as  easily  effected  a  day  or  two  afterwards, 
and  another  meal  made  by  the  hungry  dogs.  In  relating  this  story,  at 
which  every  feeling  of  common  humanity  revolts,  the  Esquimaux  pretended 
to  be  very  much  enraged  at  the  dogs,  and  to  let  some  of  our  gentlemen 
know  that  they  wished  the  Kabloonas  would  shoot  them.  As  however  it 
was  not  the  owners  of  the  dogs  who  expressed  this  wish,  and  as  we  con- 
sidered a  knife  quite  as  effectual  in  killing  a  dog  as  a  gun  would  be,  if 
applied  with  equal  good  will,  we  did  not  think  proper  to  inflict  such  a 
punishment,  which,  if  due  at  all,  would  more  properly  have  fallen  on  those 
who  made  the  complaint.  It  is  most  certain  indeed,  that  none  but  the 
immediate  relatives  of  the  deceased  cared  a  jot  about  the  matter ;  nor 
did  the  other  individuals  among  them  hesitate  to  laugh  as  they  heard  or 
told  the  story.  On  some  of  our  people  going  out  to  the  village  they  found 
that  Piccoyak's  child  had  died,  owing  probably  to  the  misery  and  consequent 
inattention  of  its  mother  Kaga,  who  now  lived  as  before  with  the  infirm  and 
aged  parents  of  her  late  husband. 

From  the  morning  of  the  24th  till  midnight  on  the  26th,  the  mercury  in 
the  barometer  was  never  beloAV  30.32  inches,  and  at  noon  on  the  latter  day 
had  reached  30.52  inches,  which  was  the  highest  we  had  yet  observed  it 
in  the  course  of  this  voyage.  This  unusual  indication  of  the  barometer  was 
followed  by  hard  gales  on  the  27th  and  28th,  first  from  the  S.W.  and  after-  27  &  28. 


Hi 


(ii  ii.ii' i 


ilium 


|.||i||«!l! 


EVD 


EAIfcifaJEH 


398 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


1823. 
January. 


'  HI 


February 

Sun.  2.  * 


Mon.  3. 


wards  from  the  N.W.,  the  mercury  falling  from  30.51  inches  at  eight  P.M. 
on  the  26th,  to  30.25  about  five  A.M.  on  the  27th,  or  about  0.26  of  an  inch 
in  nine  hours,  before  the  breeze  came  on.  At  midnight  on  the  27th  it  had 
reached  29.30,  and  on  the  following  night  29.05,  which  was  its  minimum 
indication  during  the  gale.  These  high  winds  were  accompanied  by  a  rise 
in  the  thermometer  very  unusual  at  this  season  of  the  year,  the  temperature 
continuing  above  zero  for  several  hours,  and  very  near  this  point  of  the  scale 
for  the  whole  two  days. 

The  mean  temperature  of  January  proved  indeed  as  remarkable  for  being 
a  high  one,  as  that  of  the  preceding  month  had  been  in  a  contrary  way, 
being  only  —  17°. 07,  or  more  than  ten  degrees  warmer  than  December.  The 
first  fortnight  in  February  bid  fair  to  present  a  similar  anomaly  ;  the  mild 
weather  Ave  now  experienced  giving  us  hopes  of  a  winter  rather  favourable 
than  otherwise,  notwithstanding  the  severity  with  which  it  had  set  in. 

We  were  about  this  time  much  shocked  to  hear,  by  an  arrival  from  the 
distant  huts,  of  the  death  of  Noogloo,  the  young  man  whom  I  before  men- 
tioned as  the  flower  of  the  whole  tribe.  His  complaint,  as  far  we  could 
learn,  had  been  of  an  inflammatory  nature,  and  was  also  of  some  con- 
tinuance ;  as  Toolemak,  who  considered  him  as  his  adopted  son,  had  been 
out  to  visit  him  two  or  three  times,  and  was  much  afflicted  by  his  loss. 
There  was  something  peculiarly  shocking  in  the  havoc  which  death  appeared 
now  to  be  making  among  the  younger  and  more  vigorous  individuals  of 
this  tribe  ;  and  never  does  he  seem  to  inflict  a  more  severe  blow  than  when 
he  selects  such  as  Noogloo  for  his  victim. 

Having  heard  also  that  Innooksioo  was  ill  at  the  distant  huts,  I  requested 
Mr.  Crozier  to  call  at  the  village,  to  endeavour  to  hire  a  sledge  and  a 
conductor  to  go  out  to  that  station  to  see  him,  and,  if  he  wished  it,  to  brine: 
him  on  board.  In  this  however  he  did  not  succeed,  the  sledges  being  prin- 
cipally engaged  in  the  fishing,  and  their  owners  absent  from  the  huts. 
Mr.  Crozier  reporting  however  that  there  were  still  some  sick  at  Igloolik, 
I  went  there  on  the  following  day,  and  arrived  at  the  huts  in  time  to 
prevent  a  fine  little  boy,  named  Attangut,  who  was  apparently  in  a  dying 
state,  from  being  packed  up  with  the  rest  of  his  father's  goods  and  chattels, 
previous  to  his  departure  for  the  next  station.  Having  suggested  to  his 
parents  that  it  would  be  better  to  place  the  boy  on  my  sledge,  and  to  send 
him  to  the  ship,  than  to  take  him  in  his  present  debilitated  state  still  farther 
from  our  assistance,  they  joyfully  accepted  the  proposal ;  and  I  accompanied 


.    |iHf 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 
Fury,  at  Igloolik,  during  the  Month  of  January,  1823. 


Day 


Fahrenheit's 
Thermometer. 


Maxi- 
mum. 


17 


+22 


-45 


-17.07 


1)       ^4 

£*•«  ° 

a  o  « 

aS  £ 
«  s  s 

OHO 


Barometer. 


inches 

29.93 


Mini- 
mum. 


inches 

29.88 


inches 

29.917 


62.3 


30.52 


29.05 


29.750 


Prevailing 
Winds. 


Velocity. 


light  and 
variable 


Prevailing 
Weather. 


fine 

clear 

clear 

clear 

clear 

clear 

cloudy 

hazy 

clear  and  drift 

cloudy 

cloudy 

hazy 

cloudy  and  drift 

hazy  and  snow 

hazy  and  snow 

hazy 
hazy  and  snow 
hazy  and  snow 
fine 
fine 
clear 
fine 
fine 
fine 
fine 
fine 
cloudy  and  drift 

drift 

cloudy  and  drift 

hazy 

clear 


1  I'ii  li-  I 


[Hi)* 


|jii  liH 


Hiiii! 


'     [ 


ii  nitf 


400 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"tlMai 

liltl. 


1823.  t^ie  travelling  party  to  the  ice.  The  road  to  this  new  village,  to  which  be- 
fore  the  middle  of  February  all  the  people  from  the  bone  huts  had  removed, 
was  now  worn  as  smooth  as  that  between  Igloolik  and  the  ships,  except 
where  it  passed  over  the  heavy  hummocks  and  large  cracks  in  the  ice  near 
the  shore.  The  habitations  here  were  exact  counterparts  of  those  at  Winter 
Island ;  and  it  was  quite  a  relief  to  enter  them,  new  and  clean  as  they 
were,  after  the  filth  of  the  more  durable  ones  at  Igloolik.  The  ice  on 
which  the  huts  stood  was  near  the  edge  of  the  squeezed-up  or  hummocky 
kind,  and,  from  the  cracks  close  to  them,  was  in  all  probability  touching  the 
ground  in  most  parts  ;  while  outside  of  the  village  there  was  a  smooth  level 
floe  of  considerable  extent,  over  which  they  travelled  to  their  fishery  at  its 
margin,  where  open  water  still  remained  at  the  distance  of  three  miles 
from  the  shore.  It  seemed  that  they  would  for  the  sake  of  convenience 
have  carried  their  abodes  further  out  to  sea,  but  that  it  was  not  considered  safe 
to  venture  their  whole  establishment  where  the  ice  was  liable  to  be  broken  off, 
and  drifted  away  by  the  tide.  There  are  few  people  however  who  care  less 
for  a  walk  of  considerable  length,  if  they  have  any  object  in  view  in  ac- 
complishing it,  than  the  Esquimaux  ;  in  proof  of  which,  in  addition  to  the 
instances  already  adduced  at  Winter  Island,  it  may  be  stated  that,  on  some 
of  the  most  inclement  days  in  this  winter,  many  of  the  women,  and  several 
of  the  children  from  eight  to  eleven  years  of  age  were  in  the  habit  of 
walking  to  the  ships  and  back  again,  a  distance  not  less  than  fourteen  miles, 
and  sometimes  when  the  road  was  so  covered  by  snow-drift  that  it  required 
constant  attention  to  keep  in  the  right  track. 

On  repassing  the  huts  at  Igloolik  I  went  to  see  the  parents  and  widow  of 
Piccooyak,  who  lived  together  in  a  hut  of  snow  in  a  state  of  very  great 
wretchedness.  The  parents,  both  of  them  old  and  infirm,  were  sitting  in 
one  corner  with  scarcely  any  clothes  upon  them,  while  Kaga  lay  in  another, 
moaning  most  lamentably,  and  almost  entirely  covered  with  some  skins,  of 
which  neither  the  kind  nor  original  colour  could  be  distinguished  for  the  dirt 
and  grease  with  which  they  were  besmeared.  On  my  questioning  her,  she 
after  some  time  looked  up  and  gave  me  to  understand  what  indeed  appeared 
to  be  the  case,  that  she  was  not  ill  but  simply  wretched  ;  and  I  could 
plainly  perceive  that  her  misery  in  great  part  proceeded  from  the  robbery  of 
most  of  her  property,  as  described  by  Crantz  to  be  the  usual  fate  of  widows 
in  Greenland  *.     Indeed  of  numerous  presents  which  she  and  her  husband 

*  Crantz,  I.  192. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


401 


had  received  on  board  the  ships,  not  one  now  remained;  and  a  lamp  and     1823. 
cooking  pot  seemed  all  that  her  inhuman  countrymen  had  left  her,  at  least  F^^y 
of  those  things  which  could  have  been  of  any  service  to  themselves.     There 
was  at  this  time  no  food  in  the  hut ;  and  the  mild  weather  produced  so  con- 
stant a  dropping  from  the  roof,  that  had  I  stayed  much  longer  my  own  thick 
clothing  must  have   been  wet  through.      I  therefore  requested  the  old  man 
to  accompany  me  to  his  son's  grave  ;  and  when  there  proposed  to  him  to  put 
the  body  out  of  the  reach  of  dogs  for  the  future,  by  burying  it  in  the  ground, 
to  which  with  many  tears  and  thanks  he  willingly  consented  ;  and  I  promised 
to  send,  out  on  the  following  day  to  make  preparations  for  that  purpose. 
When  the  old  man  lifted  up  his  son's  spear  at  the  head  of  the  grave,  or 
rather  of  the  mound  of  snow  containing  his  mangled  remains,  he  burst  into 
a  fresh  flood  of  tears ;  and  frequently  complaining  of  what  the  dogs   had 
done,  repeated  quite  in  an  agony  of  grief  the  name  of  Piccooyak.     A  day 
or  two  afterwards  I  went  out  according  to  my  promise,  and  was  accompanied 
to  the  burial-place  by  the  old  man,  who  though  he  scrupulously  avoided 
touching  the  body,  which  was  in  a  more  mutilated  state  than  ever,  directed 
that  it  should  be  laid  on  the  back  and  with  the  head  to  the  northward.  Close 
to  the  grave  lay  his  spear,  some  buttons,  a  string  or  two  of  beads,  and  a  small 
drinking-cup,  all  which  the  old  man  begged  us  to  deposit  in  the  same  manner 
as  before,  but  would  by  no  means  handle  himself.     He  made  no  objection  to 
the  body  being  covered  with  the  soil,  which  was  light ;  but  a  day  or  two  after- 
wards, when  I  sent  one  of  our  gentlemen  out  to  perform  a  similar  office  for  the 
remains  of  Keimooseuk,  her  relations  objected  to  our  doing  so ;  explaining  that 
when  a  body  was  thus  buried,  the  stones  ought  to  be  arched  over,  so  as  not 
to  rest  upon  it,  a  method  they  intended,  as  they  said,  to  adopt  in  the  spring. 
We  had  reason  to  believe,  however,  from  the  numerous  human  skulls  found 
near  the  huts  in  the  summer,  that  at  least  in  many  instances  no  such  trouble 
is  taken  with  the  dead;  so  that  by  a  combination  of  superstition,  indolence, 
and  indifference,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  other  animals  besides  dogs  are 
permitted  not  unfrequently  to  feast  upon  them.      This  old  man  however  ex- 
pressed no  scruples  of  any  kind ;  was  thankful  and  composed  when  the  inter- 
ment was  completed  ;  and  being  afterwards  supplied  by  us  with  some  clothes 
for  himself  and  wife,  removed  to  the  ice  with  the  rest  and,  as  we  afterwards 
found,  existed  on  the  charity  of  some  of  the  other  Esquimaux. 

The  account  I  gave  of  poor  Kaga  on  my  return  to  the  ships,  induced  Captain  Tues.  4. 
Lyon  to  send  out  for  her,  with  the  hope  of  at  least  preserving  her  health,  and 

3  p 


ill 

'lit 

Jj  ! 
il,' 

*4| 

II];' 

" 

| 

jl 

k 

i  i 

r  \ 


I"- 


urn 


;i 


*, 
I 

?: 


HiMl'ff 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

1823.  administering  to  her  comfort  until  she  should  shew  some  symptoms  of  return- 
V^O  ing  energy,  the  want  of  which  seemed  at  present  to  be  her  principal  complaint. 
She  was  accordingly  lodged  in  Captain  Lyon's  cabin,  and  together  with  a  con- 
sumptive looking  boy  named  Allowseuk,  who  also  stood  much  in  need  of  a  warm 
and  dry  lodging,  received  every  possible  kindness  and  attention.  The  idea 
which  suggested  itself  respecting  Kaga  was  that  if,  as  we  began  to  fear,  the 
condition  of  widows  was  as  destitute  here  as  in  Greenland,  it  would  be  a 
charity  to  endeavour  to  bring  about  a  match  between  this  her  Takkee- 
likkee-ta  ;  the  first  step  towards  which  was  to  rouse  her  from  her  present 
apathy,  and  then  to  give  her  such  a  portion  as  might  add  to  her  value  and 
respectability  as  a  wife.  The  grief  however  which  Takkee-likkee-ta  continued 
for  some  time  to  express  for  his  late  loss,  prevented  our  hinting  this  scheme  to 
him  for  the  present,  and  in  the  meantime  the  other  unfeeling  Esquimaux 
were  permitted  to  entertain  any  notion  they  pleased  respecting  our  inten- 
tions in  bringing  Kaga  to  the  ships  ;  for  a  mere  act  of  charity  they  either 
did  not  or  would  not  understand  it  to  be. 

The  Esquimaux  who  had  occasional  communication  with  the  distant  village, 
having  given  us  reason  to  suppose  that  they  meant  to  bring  Innooksioo  in  to 
the  ships,  it  became  evident  that  some  more  systematic  as  well  as  extensive 
means  must  be  resorted  to  for  the  relief  of  their  sick,  than  we  had  hitherto 
thought  of  adopting.  Captain  Lyon's  charity  being  already  very  highly  taxed 
with  a  most  perverse  and  thankless  patient,  as  Kaga  soon  turned  out  to  be, 
while  the  Fury's  sick-bay  began  to  swarm  with  lice  to  such  a  degree  as  to  render 
it  necessary  to  turn  our  own  men  almost  entirely  out  of  it,  I  determined  on 
building  a  hospital  within  the  walls  of  our  square  expressly  for  the  reception 
of  the  natives  ;  and  having  proposed  it  to  the  officers  on  whom  all  the 
trouble  would  necessarily  devolve,  a  plan  for  the  building,  medical  attend- 
ance, and  victualling  was  immediately  settled,  with  a  degree  of  cordiality 
and  zeal  which  I  can  never  forget.  A  house  was  accordingly  constructed 
with  spars,  turf,  snow,  and  canvass,  twelve  feet  square,  having  a  passage  with 
two  doors,  and  containing  five  convenient  bed-places  for  the  sick,  and  a  small 
warming-stove  in  the  centre.  All  our  people  being  employed  about  it,  Lieu- 
tenant Nias  completed  the  building  in  a  couple  of  days,  at  no  expense  but 
that  of  labour  which  could  in  no  way  be  so  well  employed.  The  medical 
and  other  attendance  was  arranged  by  Messrs.  Edwards  and  Skeoch,  and  a 
stock  of  sea-horse  meat  laid  in  by  Mr.  Hooper,  to  furnish  any  patients  that 
might  be  brought  down  to  the  ships. 


U 


!••!< 


Hill 


hn'ii 


v 
0 


3 
» 


r  him1' 


1JS 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


403 


We  to-day  placed  a  Six's  self-registering  thermometer  in  the  ground  near  l823 
the  observatory,  four  feet  beneath  the  surface,  the  indices  being  set  at  +  8°.  y^r^S 
It  would  undoubtedly  have  been  interesting  to  have  ascertained  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  earth  during  the  winter,  at  a  much  greater  depth  than  this  ;  but 
to  give  an  idea  of  the  difficulty  of  doing  this,  it  will  only  be  necessary  to  state 
that  it  occupied  twenty-seven  days  to  effect  what  we  did,  and  that  at  the 
expense  of  ten  pick-axes  broken  by  digging.  After  the  first  twenty  inches, 
where  the  soil  was  quite  loose,  the  ground  was  literally  frozen  as  hard  as  a 
rock,  so  that  each  blow  of  the  pick-axe  brought  off  only  a  few  splinters  ac- 
companied by  some  white  dust.  As  only  one  man  could  have  room  to  work 
at  a  time,  another  foot  in  depth  would  probably  have  occupied  two  or  three 
weeks  more  in  completing,  and  it  was  therefore  considered  advisable  to  take 
advantage  of  the  present  high  temperature  of  the  atmosphere  to  deposit  the 
thermometer  and  close  up  the  hole.  The  mercury  in  the  barometer  once 
more  stood  as  high  as  30.52  inches  to-day,  a  light  wind  blowing  from  the 
N.N.E.,  and  we  had  fine  weather  for  two  or  three  succeeding  days. 

To  give  some  idea  of  the  number  of  deer  killed  by  the  Esquimaux  at  the 
proper  season,  I  may  here  state  that  1  to-day  counted  on  a  girdle  worn  round 
the  waist  by  Toolooak's  mother,  twenty-nine  ears  of  that  animal,  which  had 
all  been  procured  by  this  young  man's  own  exertions  in  the  course  of  the  last 
summer.  His  own  game  of  this  kind  must  therefore  have  amounted  to  at 
least  fifteen  deer,  and  his  mother  almost  constantly  wore  the  girdle  as  a  proud 
trophy  of  her  son's  exploits.  There  are  few  mothers  indeed  who  might  not 
be  proud  of  such  a  son  as  Toolooak,  who  on  longer  acquaintance  quite 
maintained  his  former  character,  of  possessing  many  excellent  qualities  both 
of  head  and  heart. 

On  the  6th  Kooeetseek  being  convalescent  was  discharged  from  our  sick-  Thur.  6. 
bay,  and  sent  on  a  sledge  to  the  huts,  where  he  soon  after  regained  the 
flesh  he  had  lost,  and  was  as  well  as  ever.  He  had  scarcely  left  us  when 
our  expected  patient,  Innooksioo,  arrived  with  his  wife,  two  young  children, 
and  all  the  worldly  property  they  possessed,  and  was  comfortably  established 
in  the  hospital.  This  man  who,  when  in  health,  was  one  of  the  most  lusty 
and  vigorous  in  the  tribe,  was  now  so  much  reduced  by  illness  that  his  face 
could  scarcely  be  recognised.  He  was  brought  to  the  ship  on  the  sledge  of 
old  Nannow,  who  also  accompanied  him,  and  continued  throughout  his 
illness  to  visit  him  occasionally. 

On  the  8th  a  trifling  circumstance  occurred  which,  however,  as  it  exhibits  Sat.  8. 

3   F  2 


!!H'iM    '  I 


I;';'.,: 


m 

i 

s 

m 

$  'it 

» 

SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823.  a  trait  of  Esquimaux  character,  I  may  perhaps  be  excused  for  relating.  A 
ttJ^J  queer  old  woman,  one  of  our  Winter  Island  acquaintance,  brought  back 
unasked  a  silver  thimble  which  Mr.  Skeoch  suspected  her  having  stolen  out 
of  his  cabin  a  day  or  two  before.  She  now  without  reserve  confessed  that 
she  had  taken  it,  but  laughingly  told  him  that,  finding  it  much  too  small  for 
her  finger,  she  had  honestly  returned  it,  and  concluded  with  an  earnest  re- 
quest to  be  allowed  some  beads  in  exchange  for  it.  Their  pilferings  had 
hitherto  been  so  rare  and  so  trifling,  that  we  could  easily  wink  at  this  piece 
of  petty  larceny,  which  seemed  to  carry  with  it  its  own  compensation,  by  the 
humours  of  the  old  lady's  conceit  in  confessing  it. 

Among  the  traits  in  these  people's  disposition,  and  the  peculiarities  in  the 
history  of  their  social  dealings  with  one  another,  which  our  present  inter- 
course served  to  discover  to  us,  was  the  circumstance  of  their  being  divided 
into  two  or  three  parties,  which,  though  never  absolutely  quarrelling,  were 
still  on  no  very  cordial  terms  of  intimacy.  This  party-feeling,  and  the  jea- 
lousies excited  by  it,  were  conspicuous  on  various  occasions,  and  once  dis- 
played themselves  on  a  subject  the  least  likely  of  any  to  have  given  uneasi- 
ness to  an  Esquimaux.  One  day  when  Mr.  Hooper  had  been  at  the  trouble 
of  going  to  the  huts  to  cater  for  our  Esquimaux  patients,  and  had  purchased 
a  considerable  quantity  of  meat,  he  happened  in  the  evening  to  tell  Innook- 
sioo,  who  was  just  then  regaining  an  enormous  appetite,  of  his  good  success 
in  this  way  ;  the  latter  anxiously  asked  of  whom  the  meat  had  been  pro- 
cured, and  being  told  that  it  was  Pootooalook,  declared  that  he  would  never 
eat  a  bit  of  it.  Vexatious  as  this  sort  of  prejudice  was  likely  to  prove  to  us, 
Mr.  Hooper  fortunately  pretended  to  assent  to  it ;  and  Innooksioo  having  thus 
satisfied  his  party-feeling,  wisely  permitted  it  to  have  no  farther  influence, 
and  avoiding  all  further  questions  on  the  subject,  had  in  a  few  days  demo- 
lished his  full  share  of  Pootooalook's  meat. 

Thus,  conscience  freed  from  every  clog, 
Mahometans  eat  up  the  hog 

Some  other  prejudices  exhibited  by  these  people  were  not  to  be  so  easily 
compromised,  and  therefore  occasioned  greater  trouble.  The  sick  must  on 
no  account  see  each  other,  nor,  except  in  particular  cases  as  before  men- 
tioned at  Winter  Island,  be  seen  by  any  other  person,  always,  however, 
excepting  Kablootms,  to  whom  the  prohibition  did  not  seem  to  extend.  The 
using  of  a  sick  person's  drinking- cup,  knife,  or  other  utensil  by  a  second 
individual  was  sure  to  be  vehemently  exclaimed  against,  the  invalid  being 


ii 


i  i 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


405 


always  the  first  to  make  the  objection. 


We  had  therefore  to   furnish  a    1823- 

February 
separate  set  of  things  for   each   person,  and  Innooksioo   was  so  unhappy  \^v^ 

while  the   boiler  of  the  stove,  which   held   several  gallons,  was   used  for 

thawing  snow  for  another  person's  consumption   as  well  as  his  own,  that 

we  were  under  the  necessity  of  allowing  his  wife  to  burn  her  own  lamp, 

and  thus  provide  him  with  water  at  the  expense  of  nearly  a  gallon  of  our  oil 

per  day.     One  day,  however,  this  'prejudice  received  a  very  necessary  and 

serviceable  check.     Mr.  Skeoch  while  pouring  out  some  medicine  into  a 

little  glass  measure  used  exclusively  for  that  purpose,  and  which  could  not 

be  changed  for  any  other,  observed  Innooksioo  beginning  to  acquaint  the 

other  patient,  for  whom  the  draught  was  intended,  that  he  had  been  drinking 

out  of  the  same  vessel.      Mr.   Skeoch  perceiving  the  absolute  necessity  of 

opposing  him  in   this  instance,  immediately,  and  with   great  seriousness, 

threatened  to  beat  him  if  he  dared  to  say  another  word.     The  other  man 

having  in  part  overheard  from  behind  his  screen  what  had  been  going  on, 

asked  Innooksioo  some  question  before  he  would  put  the  vessel  to  his  lips, 

but  Mr.  Skeoch 's  threat  having  entirely  closed  those  of  Innooksioo,  no  answer 

was  returned,  the  medicine  was  drank  without  further  hesitation,  and  this 

point  once  for  all  effectually  gained. 

These  and  several  other  fancies  of  the  Esquimaux  combined,  as  may  be 
supposed,  to  render  the  hospital  duties  no  sinecure  to  those  engaged  in  per- 
forming them  ;  and  in  thus  noticing  occurrences  in  themselves  perhaps  so 
trivial  and  unimportant,  I  have  had  in  view  the  double  object  of  illustrating 
the  character  and  disposition  of  these  people,  and  of  doing  all  the  justice  in 
my  poAver  to  those  gentlemen  who,  with  unabated  patience  and  assiduity, 
continued  to  combat  every  difficulty,  resolved  if  possible  to  cure  the  Esqui- 
maux even  in  spite  of  themselves. 

While  such  were  the  difficulties  attending  the  management  of  our  public  Mon.  10. 
infirmary,  Captain  Lyon  had  suffered  his  full  share  of  annoyance  from  the 
frowardness  of  Kaga,  who,  to  the  usual  unthankfulness  of  the  Esquimaux 
disposition,  unfortunately  added  a  degree  of  self-willed  perverseness  that 
rendered  her  wholly  intractable,  and  wore  out  the  patience  of  all  that  were 
concerned  in  attending  upon  her.  Her  strength  and  spirits  were  now  so  much 
restored  that  she  could  sing  when  not  too  sulky,  and  had  made  for  herself 
a  fear-nought  jacket,  of  which  she  stood  much  in  need,  so  that  it  was  de- 
termined to  send  her  back  to  the  village;  Nuyakka,  a  man  noted  for  his 
respectability,  and  who  said  that  his  wife  was  Kaga's  sister,  having  pro- 


i  mi  mi 


: 


w«am 


JMJbmg*  IfL1  «K  WJ, 


406 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Ml 


Februa'r  mised  to  lodge  and  feed  tne  widow  in  his  own  hut.     She  was  therefore  sent 
^-v>-  back  on  the  10th  upon  Captain  Lyon's  sledge,  having  first  expressed  her 
gratitude  by  stealing  a  knife,  which  was  found  concealed  under  her  jacket 
at  the  moment  of  her  departure. 

Toolemak,  who  came  to  the  ships  to-day,  was  extremely  low  and  dejected 
on  account  of  Noogloo's  death,  and  it  was  often  remarked  afterwards  that  the 
tears  stood  in  his  eyes  whenever  he  spoke  of  that  young  man.  He  went 
several  times  into  the  hospital,  asked  Innooksioo  a  number  of  questions  re- 
specting his  lodging  and  other  accommodations,  of  which  he  had  good  sense 
enough  to  see  the  full  value,  and  sufficient  candour  to  thank  us  very  heartily 
for  our  attentions.  This  man  furnished  the  only  instance  that  came  under 
our  notice,  of  any  thing  approaching  to  superiority  acknowledged  by  the  Es- 
quimaux. To  Toolemak's  opinion  and  wishes  many  of  the  others  unques- 
tionably paid  considerable  deference,  and  he  appeared  in  many  instances  to 
be  so  much  better  furnished  with  food  than  the  rest,  that  he  undoubtedly 
drew  occasional  supplies  from  several  of  the  tribe.  This  distinction,  which 
-  went  no  farther  than  I  have  related,  and  for  which  he  was  of  course  indebted 
to  his  professional  merits,  was  after  all  confined  to  a  certain  party ;  the  rest 
of  the  Esquimaux  always  listening  with  extreme  satisfaction  to  any  thing 
that  might  be  said  to  Toolemak's  disadvantage,  and  evidently  triumphing 
in  his  disgrace. 

The  Esquimaux  had  about  this  time  killed  several  sea-horses  and  meat 
was  abundant  at  the  village.     They  also  killed  several  bears  in  the  course 
of  the    winter,    amounting  in  all  to  eight  or  ten,  in  the  space  of  six  or 
seven  months  ;  but  none  of  those  animals  had  been  seen  near  the  ships  on 
account  of  our  distance  from  the  open  water. 
Tues.  11.      A  brother  of  Innooksioo's  called  Toolooak,  a  lad  about  the  same  age  as  our 
young  friend  of  that  name,  came  to  the  ships   to-day  with  a  severe  gash  in 
his  leg,  accidentally  inflicted  by  his  own  knife ;  and  the  wound  proving  a 
deep  one  and  much  inflamed,  Mr.  Edwards  recommended  his  being  received 
into  the  hospital.     Here,  however,  we  had  to  encounter  a  fresh  series  of 
perverseness  ;  for  even  his  own  brother  objected  to  his  coming  into  the  same 
apartment,  and  it  was  not  without  some  difficulty  that  we  contrived  to  get 
him   established  there.     Innooksioo,  upon  the  whole,   however,  proved  a 
good  and  tractable  patient   enough,      Some  of  his  tricks  were  laughable 
because  quite  inoffensive  ;  among  which  was  a  habit  of  endeavouring  to  ex- 
cite the  compassion  of  every  body  that  went  into  the  hospital,  by  complain- 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


407 


ing  of  his  stomach  being  empty,  his  cheeks  fallen  in,  and  in  short,  if  his  story  1823- 
could  be  told  in  plain  English,  that  he  was  in  a  fair  way  to  be  starved.  His  ^v>- 
daily  established  allowance  of  solid  meat  was  at  this  time  from  four  to  five 
pounds,  to  which  was  generally  added  from  one  to  tsvo  or  three  pounds  more 
as  presents  from  his  friends  ;  but  even  this  was  not  enough  to  satisfy  the 
cravings  of  his  appetite.  Finding,  however,  that  no  plea  of  his  could  induce 
Mr.  Hooper  to  depart  from  the  regular  system,  and  that  the  rest  of  the  Ka- 
bloonas  received  his  piteous  tale  with  a  laugh,  in  which  by-the-by  his  wife 
invariably  joined,  he  at  length  ceased  his  unjust  and  needless  solicitations. 

Some  of  our  people  going  out  to  the  huts  on  the  12th,  found  that  Nuyakka  Wed.  12. 
had  so  ill  performed  his  promise  respecting  Kaga,  that  he  had  already  dis- 
missed her  from  his  own  apartment  and,  either  from  decency's  or  conscience 
sake,  had  built  her  a  small  one  communicating  with  the  passage  of  his  own. 
Whether  the  perverse  humours  of  Kaga,  or  the  caprice  or  inhumanity  of 
Nuyakka  had  been  the  occasion  of  this  change,  we  could  not  discover ;  but 
perhaps  each  of  these  had  some  share  in  her  removal.  As,  however,  she 
was  well  clothed  with  the  things  she  had  received  from  the  Hecla,  and 
Nuyakka,  as  it  appeared,  still  continued  to  feed  her,  we  could  only  look  on 
and  see  how  she  was  to  be  disposed  of. 

On  the  15th,  some  remarkable  clouds  were  hanging  over  the  open  water  Sat.  15. 
to  the  eastward,  appearing  like  vast  volumes  of  smoke,  curling  into  rounded 
and  almost  circular  forms.  This  peculiarity  we  never  observed  at  any  other 
time,  though  there  was  constantly  a  "  water-sky  "  in  that  direction,  consist- 
ing of  a  general  and  diffused  darkness,  varied  occasionally  by  numerous 
vertical  columns  of  "frost-smoke." 

On  the  19th,  Mr.  Edwards,  on  paying  a  visit  to  the  huts,  found  a  young  Wed.  19. 
man  named  Kooeetseearioo  so  ill,  that  he  thought  it  better  to  risk  bringing 
him  in,  than  to  incur,  what  now  appeared  almost  certain,  his  dying  if  he 
remained  at  the  village.  Mr.  Edwards  afterwards  inquired  for  Kaga,  and 
was  shewn  into  her  hut,  in  which  however  there  was  so  little  light  and  so 
contaminated  an  atmosphere,  that  he  could  neither  see  any  person  nor 
breathe  the  air  of  the  apartment.  Having  at  length  succeeded  in  getting 
the  wretched  inmate  to  look  up,  though  without  being  able  to  draw  from  her 
any  answer  to  his  questions,  he  found  it  impossible  to  continue  longer  in  the 
hut,  and  could  not  therefore  ascertain  whether  she  laboured  under  any 
specific  complaint,  though  her  appearance  seemed  to  indicate  that  she  was 
now  ill,  if  not  utterly  abandoned.     On  the  following  day,  therefore,  when  I  Thur.  20. 


* 


I 

1  I 

1 


408 


:*■  HI . 

HI 

SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"Hi 


••■ 


1823.  went  out  to  bring  Kooeetseearioo  on  board,  I  made  another  effort  to  ascer- 
-*v^  tain  this  unfortunate  creature's  real  situation;  and  as  soon  as  I  had  arranged 
about  the  young  man's  removal,  went  into  Nuyakka's  hut,  to  make  inquiries 
respecting  her.  On  asking  his  wife  to  shew  me  Kaga's  apartment,  she 
laughed  rather  sneeringly,  but  did  not  comply  with  my  request ;  and  had  it 
not  been  for  little  Shega,  who  was  by  at  the  time  and  immediately  offered 
herself  as  my  guide,  I  should  not  easily  have  accomplished  my  object. 
Being  preceded,  however,  by  this  good-natured  child,  I  crept  on  hands  and 
knees  through  a  narrow  low  passage  about  ten  feet  long,  at  the  end  of  which 
she  pointed  still  onwards,  and  producing  a  knife,  brought  expressly  for  the 
purpose,  fell  to  work  in  removing  a  large  slab  of  snow  that  covered  the  door- 
way. Shega  then  retired,  and  I  with  much  difficulty  pushed  myself  forward 
through  the  low  and  narrow  entrance.  The  misery  which  now  presented 
itself  to  my  view  was  such  that,  though  it  will  not  easily  be  effaced  from 
my  memory,  I  am  at  a  loss  to  convey  by  description  any  adequate  idea  of  it. 
The  hut  was  constructed  of  snow,  in  the  usual  form,  but  without  a  window  ; 
and  the  light  of  a  miserable  single-wicked  lamp  was  just  sufficient  to  inter- 
cept the  daylight  by  blackening  the  roof,  to  fill  the  apartment  with  smoke, 
and  to  render  the  wretchedness  as  well  as  "the  darkness  visible."  The 
diameter  of  this  habitation  was  about  six  feet,  and  its  height  from  four 
to  five.  At  one  end  of  the  bed-place  lay  the  wretched  Kaga,  with  a 
stream  of  blood  that  seemed  to  have  come  from  her  mouth,  frozen, 
together  with  part  of  her  hair,  along  the  front  of  the  bank  of  snow 
that  formed  the  bed-place.  After  several  ineffectual  attempts  to  gain  her 
attention,  in  the  course  of  which  I  began  to  doubt  whether  she  still  lived, 
she  at  length,  with  much  apparent  difficulty,  turned  her  head  and  exhibited 
a  face  which  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  recognise.  Her  eyes  were  now 
much  closed,  and  even  the  half-smothered  flame  of  a  single  wick  in  the 
lamp  near  her  head  seemed  oppressive  to  her  sight.  In  hopes  of  obtaining 
some  information  respecting  her  bodily  complaints,  I  asked  her  several  ques- 
tions ;  but  her  answers,  when  she  made  any,  were  uttered  in  so  slow  and 
indistinct  a  tone  of  voice,  that  I  could  not  understand  a  syllable  of  them. 
Beginning  now  seriously  to  feel  the  effects  of  the  offensive  atmosphere  of 
the  hut,  which,  if  the  nature  of  it  could  be  described,  would  be  little  less 
disgusting  in  the  description  than  in  the  reality,  I  was  under  the  necessity 
of  quitting  this  scene  of  human  wretchedness,  which  exceeded  any  thing  my 
imagination  could  possibly  have  pictured.     On  my  returning  to  Neiseak,  the 


■ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


409 


1823. 


wife  of  Nuyakka,  and  reproaching  her  with  the  diabolical  inhumanity  of  F<!brua 
thus  leaving  her  sister  to  perish,  she  made  some  excuse  which  I  did  not  ^v^>" 
understand,  but  treated  the  whole  matter  with  a  degree  of  levity  and  indif- 
ference, of  which  it  is  painful  to  think  any  human  creature  capable  on  such 
an  occasion.     Placing  Kooeetseearioo  on  my  sledge,  I  now  set  off  for  the 
ships,  in  no  very  good  humour  with  the  humane  qualities  of  the  Esquimaux. 
On  my  return  on  board,  strongly  impressed  with  the  misery  I  had  just 
witnessed,  I  naturally  began  to  consider  what  could  be  done  to  relieve  it, 
and  I  well  knew  that  I  should  not  want  assistance  in  executing  any  plan 
that  might  with  this  view  be  adopted.     The  difficulties,  however,  were  not  a 
few ;  for  besides  the  indelicacy  of  a  sick,  helpless,  and  perverse  woman 
being  attended  solely  by  men,  it  would  be  absolutely  necessary  to  build  a 
separate  apartment  for  her  reception,  as  Innooksioo,  we  were  well  aware, 
would  not  have  remained  in  the  hospital  an  hour  after  her  admission  there. 
Indeed,  it  was  not  without  some  coaxing,  and  more  threatening,  that  he 
would  allow  Kooeetseearioo  to  be  lodged  under  the  same  roof  with  him. 
Determined,  however,  to  make  an  effort  to  save  this  unfortunate  wretch,  who 
was  evidently  doomed  by  her  own  country-people  to  a  lingering  but  certain 
death,  a  separate  hut  was  erected,  communicating  with  the  passage  of  the 
hospital,  and  a  volunteer  found  among  the  ship's  company  to  attend  exclu- 
sively to  her ;  while  every  other  necessary  arrangement  was  made  for  her 
reception  by  the  officers  I  have  before  mentioned  as  so  humanely  taking 
upon  themselves  this  trouble. 

On  the  following  day  Mr.  Crozier  went  out  to  bring  her  on  board,  and  on  Frid.  21. 
unroofing  the  hut  to  remove  her  to  the  sledge  found,  as  we  suspected,  that 
she   had  been  robbed  of  almost  every  thing.     When  lodged  in  her  new 
apartment,  where  there  was  light  and  room  to  examine  her  condition,  little 
hope  appeared  of  poor  Kaga's  recovery  ;  her  debilitated  state  being  such  as 
to  imply  the  almost  total  exhaustion  of  the  vital  powers,    and  her  body 
reduced  in  the  short  space  of  a  few  days  to  a  mere  skeleton.     To  shorten  a 
story  which  there  is  little  inducement  to  prolong,  Kaga  breathed  her  last 
on  the  following  day,  which  event  there  would  have  been  no   charity  in  Sat.  22. 
lamenting,  determined  as  her  country  people  were  to  let  her  ultimately 
perish.     Nor  was  her.removal  to  the  ships  at  all  to  be  regretted  ;  for  if  it 
were  only  to  give  the  body  a  decent  and  secure  burial,  something  might  be 
considered  as  thus  gained.     On  examination  after  death,  she  was  found  to 
have  lost  every  tooth  in  her  upper  jaw,  and  her  gums  and  the  roof  of  her 


'4'i  : 

i 

-4U 

''"ll  i                     WM 

illi, !       ^ 

1    1                               .mM.- 

...  hji, 
1 

jm 

IMt'. 


inn  <!•'•'      i 


: 


3    G 


. 


410 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


1823.  m0uth  were  quite  black  with  disease,  so  that  whatever  supplies  might  latterly 
U^J  have  been  afforded  her  she  could  not  eat,  and  her  stomach  being  quite 
empty,  starvation  was  probably  the  occasion  of  her  death.  Having  publicly 
made  known  her  death  to  the  Esquimaux,  and  allowed  the  body  to  remain 
unburied  the  whole  of  the  following  day,  to  give  them  an  opportunity  of 
doing  something  towards  her  burial,  we  placed  her  remains  in  a  grave  near 
the  observatory,  together  with  her  lamp,  the  only  residue  of  her  original 
property.  Not  an  inquiry  was  afterwards  made  about  her ;  and  Nuyakka 
now  disclaimed  any  relationship  to  her,  though  he  had  before  asserted  that 
she  was  his  wife's  sister,  and  had  at  least  tacitly  admitted  her  claim  upon 
them,  by  offering  to  take  her  into  his  hut.  Thus  perished  a  young  woman 
not  more  than  three-and-twenty  years  of  age,  the  victim  of  the  barbarous 
policy  or  savage  inhumanity  of  her  own  countrymen  !  There  is  something 
peculiarly  unpleasant  in  relating  facts  which  degrade  and  discredit  human 
nature  ;  but  he  who  professes  faithfully  to  delineate  the  character  and  dis- 
position of  a  people,  must  be  careful  not  to  mutilate  facts,  or  to  palliate  errors, 
merely  for  the  sake  of  making  a  pleasing  picture. 

Nothing  worthy  of  notice  occurred  during  the  rest  of  February,  which 
month  it  was  gratifying  to  find  presented,  as  to  temperature,  a  similar  ano- 
maly with  January,  the  mean  being  only  -  20° .41,  which  is  probably  a  high 
one  for  this  latitude. 
March.  On  the  3d  of  March,  the  Esquimaux  were  excluded  from  the  Fury  for 
Mon.  3.  gome  hourSj  on  account  of  a  shovel  having  been  stolen  from  alongside  the 
preceding  day.  Soon  after  this,  Oo-oo-took,  a  middle-aged  man,  who  had 
seldom  visited  the  ships,  was  in  Mr.  Skeoch's  cabin  when  that  gentleman 
explained  to  him  the  reason  of  his  countrymen  being  refused  admittance  ; 
upon  this  he  became  much  agitated,  trembled  exceedingly,  and  complained 
of  being  cold.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  he  thought  Mr.  Skeoch  had 
dived  into  his  thoughts  ;  for  hastening  upon  deck,  he  was  a  minute  or  two 
afterwards  detected  in  bringing  back  the  lost  shovel  from  the  place  where 
he  had  buried  it  behind  our  wall.  A  day  or  two  before  this  occurrence, 
Captain  Lyon  had  in  a  manner  somewhat  similar  recovered  a  knife  that 
had  been  stolen  from  him,  for  which,  by  way  of  punishment,  the  offender 
was  consigned  to  solitary  confinement  for  some  hours  in  the  Hecla's  coal- 
hole. As,  however,  the  Esquimaux  only  laughed  at  this  as  a  very  good 
joke,  and  as  the  time  was  shortly  coming  when  numerous  loose  stores  must 
be  exposed  upon  the  ice  near  the  ships,  I  determined  to  make  use  of  the 


412 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823. 
March. 


In 


9 


i«  ri 


,J 


[ 


■ 


present  well-authenticated  instance  of  theft,  in  trying  the  effect  of  some 
more  serious  penalty.  The  delinquent  was  therefore  put  down  into  the 
Fury's  store-room  passage,  and  closely  confined  there  for  several  hours ; 
when  having  collected  several  of  the  natives  on  board  the  Fury,  I  ordered 
him  to  be  stripped  and  seized  up  in  their  presence,  and  to  receive  a  dozen 
lashes  on  the  back  with  a  cat-o'-nine-tails.  The  instant  this  was  over,  his 
countrymen  called  out  very  earnestly,  "  Timun,  timunna,"  (That's  right, 
that's  right,)  and  seemed  much  relieved  from  the  fright  they  had  before 
been  in  while  the  fate  of  the  thief  seemed  doubtful ;  but  in  three  minutes 
after  not  one  of  them  was  to  be  found  near  the  ships,  for  they  hur- 
ried off  to  the  huts  as  fast  as  their  legs  and  sledges  could  carry  them. 
This  example  proved  just  what  we  desired ;  in  less  than  eight-and-forty 
hours,  men,  women,  and  children  came  to  the  ships  with  the  same  confidence 
as  before,  always  abusing  Oo-oo-took,  pronouncing  themselves  and  us 
uncommonly  good  people,  but  evidently  more  cautious  than  before  of  really 
incurring  our  displeasure.  The  occurrence  just  related,  instead  of  being 
placed  to  the  account  of  these  people's  bad  propensities,  rather  served  to 
remind  us  of  the  rareness  of  such  occurrences,  and  therefore  to  furnish  fresh 
proof  of  their  general  honesty.  It  can,  indeed,  be  scarcely  doubted,  that 
few  if  any  savages  would  have  withstood  so  many  temptations  to  dishonesty 
as  these  Esquimaux  had  for  months  together  been  exposed  to,  without  a 
single  instance  of  theft  occurring. 

This  incident  explained  in  some  degree  the  meaning  of  the  custom  before 
mentioned,  of  stroking  down  the  front  of  their  jackets  with  the  palm  of  the 
hand,  which  we  observed  them  practise  here  on  our  first  acquaintance. 
Oo-oo-took  did  this  so  frequently  at  the  times  when  he  was  most  frightened, 
and  also  the  other  Esquimaux  during  his  punishment,  that  little  doubt  re- 
mained of  its  being  in  part  meant  to  imply  submission. 
Wed.  5.  The  Esquimaux  were  about  this  time  rather  badly  off  for  food,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  winds  having  of  late  been  unfavourable  for  their  fishery  ;  but 
this  had  only  occurred  two  or  three  times  in  the  course  of  the  winter,  and 
never  so  much  as  to  occasion  any  great  distress.  It  is  certain  indeed,  that  the 
quantity  of  meat  which  they  procured  between  the  1st  of  October  and  the 
1st  of  April,  was  sufficient  to  have  furnished  about  double  the  population  of 
working  people,  who  were  moderate  eaters,  and  had  any  idea  of  providing 
for  a  future  day  ;  but  to  individuals  who  can  demolish  four  or  five  pounds  at 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


413 


a  sitting,  and  at  least  ten  in  the  course  of  a  day*,  and  who  never  bestow  a  18'23- 
thought  on  to-morrow,  at  least  with  the  view  to  provide  for  it  by  economy,  ^,-w 
there  is  scarcely  any  supply  which  could  secure  them  from  occasional 
scarcity.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  alternate  feasting  and  fasting  to 
which  the  gluttony  and  improvidence  of  these  people  so  constantly  sub- 
ject them,  may  have  occasioned  many  of  the  complaints  that  proved  fatal 
during  the  winter ;  and  ont  his  account  we  hardly  knew  whether  to  rejoice 
or  not  at  the  general  success  of  their  fishery.  Certain  it  is,  that  on  a 
particular  occasion  of  great  plenty,  one  or  two  individuals  were  seen 
lying  in  the  huts  so  distended  by  the  quantity  of  meat  they  had  eaten,  that 
they  were  unable  to  move,  and  were  suffering  considerable  pain  arising 
solely  from  this  cause.  Indeed  it  is  difficult  to  assign  any  other  probable 
reason  for  the  lamentable  proportion  of  deaths  that  took  place  during  our 
stay  at  Igloolik,  while,  during  a  season  of  nearly  equal  severity,  and  of 
much  greater  privation  as  to  food,  at  Winter  Island,  not  a  single  death 
occurred.  Notwithstanding  their  general  plenty,  there  were  times  in 
the  course  of  this  winter,  as  well  as  the  last,  when  our  bread  dust  was 
of  real  service  to  them,  and  they  were  always  particularly  desirous  of 
obtaining  it  for  their  younger  children.  They  distinguished  this  kind  of 
food  by  the  name  of  kanibroot,  and  biscuit  or  soft  bread  by  that  of  shegaldk, 
the  literal  meaning  of  which  terms  we  never  could  discover,  but  supposed 
them  to  have  some  reference  to  their  respective  qualities. 

Our  lengthened  acquaintance  with  the  Esquimaux  and  their  language,  Fiid.  7. 
which  a  second  winter  passed  among  them  afforded,  gave  us  an  opportunity 

*  Lest  it  should  be  thought  that  this  account  is  exaggerated,  I  may  here  state  that,  as  a 
matter  of  curiosity,  we  one  day  tried  how  much  a  lad  scarcely  full  grown,  would,  if  freely 
supplied,  consume  in  this  way.  The  under-mentioned  articles  were  weighed  before  being 
given  to  him ;  he  was  twenty  hours  in  getting  through  them,  and  certainly  did  not  con- 
sider the  quantity  extraordinary. 

lbs.    oz. 

Sea-horse  flesh,  hard  frozen 4     4 

Ditto,  boiled 4     4 

Bread  and  bread-dust    .     . 112 

Total  of  solids     ....  10     4 
The  fluids  were  in  fair  proportion,  viz., 

Rich  gravy-soup .  \\  pint. 

Raw  spirits 3  wine-glasses. 

Strong  grog 1  tumbler. 

Water 1  gallon  1  pint. 


hi 


\  ■  i 


f'lk 

HI 

\tZ. 

1/7" 
1  KM 

mm 
1     %U 

'ti  Nil 

1  3 

i ,. 

'\t 


:\'r 


i  linn 


„    : 


414 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823. 
March, 


H 


of  occasionally  explaining  to  them  in  some  measure  in  what  direction  our 
country  lay,  and  of  giving  them  some  idea  of  its  distance,  climate,  popula- 
tion, and  productions.  It  was  with  extreme  difficulty  that  these  people  had 
imbibed  any  correct  idea  of  the  superiority  of  rank  possessed  by  some  indi- 
viduals among  us ;  and  when  at  length  they  came  into  this  idea  they  naturally- 
measured  our  respective  importance  by  the  riches  they  supposed  each  to 
possess.  The  ships  they  considered  as  a  matter  of  course  to  belong  to  Cap- 
tain Lyon  and  myself,  and  on  this  account  distinguished  them  by  the  names 
of  Jjyon-oomiak  and  Paree-oomiak  ;  but  they  believed  that  the  boats  and  other 
parts  of  the  furniture  were  the  property  of  various  other  individuals  among  us ; 
they  were  therefore  not  a  little  surprised  to  be  seriously  assured  that  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  belonged  to  any  of  us,  but  to  a  much  richer  and  more 
powerful  person,  to  whom  we  all  paid  respect  and  obedience,  and  at  whose 
command  we  had  come  to  visit  and  enrich  the  Inuuees.  Ewerat,  on  account 
of  his  steadiness  and  intelligence,  as  well  as  the  interest  with  which  he  lis- 
tened to  any  thing  relating  to  Kabloonas,  was  particularly  fit  to  receive  infor- 
mation of  this  nature  ;  and  a  general  chart  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  of  the 
lands  on  each  side,  immediately  conveyed  to  his  mind  an  idea  of  the  distance 
we  had  come,  and  the  direction  in  which  our  home  lay.  This  and  similar 
information  was  received  by  Ewerat  and  his  wife  with  the  most  eager 
astonishment  and  interest,  not  merely  displayed  in  the  "hei-ya!"  which 
constitutes  the  usual  extent  of  Esquimaux  admiration,  but  evidently  enlarg- 
ing their  notions  respecting  the  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  creating  in 
them  ideas  which  could  never  before  have  entered  their  minds.  By  way 
of  trying  their  inclinations,  I  asked  them  if  they  would  consent  to  leave  their 
own  country  and,  taking  with  them  their  children,  go  to  live  in  ours,  where 
they  would  see  no  more  Innuees,  and  never  eat  any  more  seal  or  walrus.  To 
all  this  they  willingly  agreed,  and  with  an  earnestness  that  left  no  doubt  of 
their  sincerity  ;  Togolat  adding  in  an  emphatic  manner,  "  Shagloo  ooagoot  nao" 
(we  do  not  tell  a  falsehood,)  an  expression  of  peculiar  force  among  them. 
The  eagerness  with  which  they  assented  to  this  proposal  made  me  almost 
repent  my  curiosity,  and  I  was  glad  to  get  out  of  the  scrape  by  saying,  that 
the  great  personage  of  whom  I  had  spoken,  would  not  be  pleased  at  my  taking 
them  home,  without  having  first  obtained  his  permission.  Information  of 
the  kind  alluded  to  was  subsequently  given  to  many  of  the  other  Esquimaux, 
some  of  whom  could  at  length  pronounce  the  name  of  "  King  George,"  so 
as  to  be  tolerably  intelligible. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


415 


1823. 
March. 


Sat.  8. 


On  the  8th  Innooksio,  who  had  quite  recovered  from  his  complaint,  and  had 
almost  regained  his  former  strength  and  looks,  left  us  for  the  huts  on  Nan- 
now's  sledge.  The  impatience  of  these  people  to  be  out  in  the  open  air  the 
moment  they  are  free  from  pain,  is  always  extreme,  and  constitutes  one  of 
the  many  difficulties  of  completing  their  cure.  Kooeetseearioo  was  just  at 
this  time  suffering  from  a  relapse  occasioned  by  this  impatience,  to  which 
was  now  added  anew  cause  of  disquietude,  produced  by  the  anticipation  of 
Innooksioo's  departure,  and  the  fear  of  sleeping  keseemee  (alone)  in  the  hos- 
pital. The  apprehensions  which  he  expressed  on  this  subject  were  so  great, 
that  we  determined  to  remove  him  into  our  sick-bay,  as  he  was  now  our  only 
patient ;  but  this  was  done  on  condition  of  his  drinking  as  much  lemon-juice 
as  he  was  desired,  some  pretty  unequivocal  symptoms  of  scurvy  having  now 
appeared  in  him.  Innooksioo  behaved  very  well  at  his  departure,  thanked 
some  of  our  gentlemen  for  their  kindness  to  him  with  great  appearance  of 
cordiality,  and  in  short  left  us  exactly  as  we  could  have  wished. 

A  number  of  walruses  and  of  the  seals  of  both  kinds  caught  by  the  Tues.  11 
Esquimaux  about  this  time,  were  observed  to  be  with  young,  which  circum- 
stance we  had  also  noticed  at  the  same  season  the  preceding  year.  Captain 
Lyon  procured  the  head  of  a  small  walrus,  remarkable  on  account  of  its  hav- 
ing three  tusks,  all  very  short,  but  two  of  them  close  together  on  the  right 
side  of  the  jaw,  and  placed  one  behind  the  other.  On  the  12th  two  families  Wed.  12 
of  Esquimaux  left  Igloolik  for  Arlagnuk,  a  part  of  the  land  to  the  southward, 
and  near  Ping-it-kalik,  where  the  walruses  were  said  to  be  abundant.  Other 
families  soon  after  removed  to  this  station,  towards  which  the  tide  of  emi- 
gration seemed  now  to  be  turned,  and  before  the  close  of  March  about 
fifty  individuals  had  fixed  their  abode  there.  In  these  movements  necessity 
may  during  the  winter  have  considerable  share;  but  in  the  summer  it  is  per- 
haps only  the  love  of  change,  for  which  most  savages  are  distinguished,  that 
can  induce  them  to  leave  Igloolik,  the  shores  of  which  there  need  be  no 
hesitation  in  asserting  would  easily  supply  a  population,  even  of  Esquimaux, 
ten  times  greater  than  theirs  with  food  in  profuse  abundance. 

The  weather  was  now  so  pleasant,  and  the  temperature  in  the  sun  so  com-  Thur.  13. 
fortable  to  the  feelings  when  a  shelter  could  be  found  from  the  wind,  that 
we  set  up  various  games  for  the  people,  such  as  cricket,  foot-ball,  and  quoits, 
which  some  of  them  played  for  many  hours  during  the  day.  There  is  a 
certain  sallowness  in  the  looks  of  people  living  much  by  candle-light,  which 
was  always  very  perceptible  in  our  officers  and  men  during  the  winter,  but 


■■■  '  I; , 


I 


Mil,.;!  '.i- 


1,1 


-I 


416 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


182 i.    which  wore  off  generally  with  the  returning  spring.     The  sun  now  indeed 

March.  .  . 

v^vv;  began  to  be  somewhat  glaring  and  oppressive  to  the  eyes  on  first  coming 
into  daylight ;  and  before  the  end  of  March  some  crape  was  issued  to  be  worn 
as  veils,  a  protection  of  which  most  persons  were  already  glad  to  avail  them- 
selves.   A  thermometer  exposed  to  the  sun  on  the  south  side  of  the  observa- 

Frid.  14.  tory  on  the  14th,  indicated  +18°,  while  another  suspended  freely  without 
any  shelter'  from  the  wind,  stood  at  zero,  that  in  the  shade  being  at  —  9°  at 
the  time. 

Mon.  17.  The  mercury  in  the  barometer  rose  to  30.84  inches  at  ten  P.M.  this  day, 
being  nearly  the  highest  indication  of  this  instrument  we  had  ever  registered 
in  the  polar  regions  *.  This  occurred  with  light  winds  between  the  north 
and  east  and  a  clear  sky,  except  about  the  western  horizon,  over  which  a 
dense  darkish  cloud  hung  during  the  whole  day.  At  night  indeed,  when 
the  mercury  stood  the  highest,  we  experienced  for  the  first  time  this  season 
a  dense  fog,  which  for  several  hours  obscured  objects  at  the  distance  of.  two 
or  three  hundred  yards.  The  mercury  fell  very  gradually  from  this  time, 
but  so  slowly  that  it  had  not  reached  thirty  inches  till  noon  on  the  22d, 
during  the  whole  of  which  time  we  enjoyed  delightful  weather. 

Wed.  19.  Mr.  Mogg  having  accompanied  some  of  the  Esquimaux  on  their  fishing 
excursion  to  the  margin  of  the  land-ice,  in  hopes  of  shooting  some  dovekies 
which  they  reported  to  be  numerous  there,  found  that  a  floe  of  young  ice 
too  weak  to  bear  their  weight,  had  lately  formed  so  as  to  prevent  their 
getting  to  the  water.  A  number  of  sea-horses  being  seen  on  the  sea-ice 
beyond  this,  the  Esquimaux  in  their  anxiety  to  approach  them,  as  a  last  re- 
source, tried  the  strength  of  the  ice  by  putting  a  young  dog  upon  it,  by  which 
they  nearly  drowned  the  little  animal,  without  at  length  succeeding  in  their 
endeavours. 

On  the  21st  a  woman  named  Ootooguak,  who  had  been  brought  to  the  hos- 
pital in  a  very  weak  state,  and  had  been  gradually  sinking  for  some  days 
past,  died,  without  struggle  or  apparent  pain  of  any  kind.  A  short  time  be- 
fore her  death,  of  the  approach  of  which  both  she  and  her  husband  were 
well  aware,  she  took  Mr.  Skeoch's  hand,  and  grasping  it  between  hers  with 
all  the  strength  she  then  possessed,  pressed  it  to  her  lips  as  an  evident  ac- 
knowledgment of  his  attention  to  her.  There  is  something  peculiarly  affect- 
ing in  such  an  acknowledgment  at  a  moment  like  this.     Ootooguak  had  she 

*  The  mercury  stood  at  30.86  inches  at  Melville  Island,  on  the  27th  of  April,  1820. 


IKl 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


417 


recovered  would,  it  is  to  be  feared,  never  have  evinced  her  gratitude  in  so 
feeling  and  unequivocal  a  manner ;  but   when  death  drew  near,  and  the 
things  of  the  world  began  to  lose  their  value,  the  better  feelings  of  our  com- 
mon nature  at  once  gained  the  ascendancy,  and  the  selfishness  of  the  savage 
character  was  lost  in  the  awfulness  of  the  approaching  crisis.     Her  husband 
who  observed  her  take  Mr.  Skeoch's  hand,  and  had  throughout  her  illness 
watched  her  with  unremitting  attention,  was  much  affected  by  this  last  act 
of  his  wife,  and  with  many  tears  earnestly  repeated  his  own  thanks.     An 
hour  or  two  before  her  death,  he  came  over  to  the  ships  for  his  two  boys,  one 
of  whom  was  their  real,  and  the  other  their  adopted,  son,  and  taking  them 
into  the  hospital  told  them  that  their  mother  was  dying.     The  boys  then 
joined  their  father  in  crying  for  a  few  minutes,  after  which  they  went  out  to 
play  with  their  usual  cheerfulness,  and  with  equal  indifference.     As  soon  as 
she  was  dead  her  husband  put  all  her  clothes  on  her,  and  then  agreed  to  our 
proposal  of  sewing  the  body  up  in  a  hammock,  the  face  only  being  left  un- 
covered by  his  desire.      He  also  consented  to  her  being  buried  on  shore,  for 
which  purpose  his  two  brothers  came  at  an  early  hour  on  the  following  day, 
and  with  many  expressions  of  acknowledgment,  attended  to   the  arrange- 
ments for  the  burial.     These  consisted  only  in  the  body  being  placed  on  a 
sledge,  and  drawn  to  the  grave  by  men  ;  though  no  request  was  made  for  the 
dogs  to  be  tied  up  or  put  out  of  the  way,  as  had  been  the  case  in  a  former 
instance.     The  husband  alone  accompanied  us  to  the  grave  over  which,   as 
soon  as  the  body  was  deposited,  he  was  thankful  to  have  some  staves  placed, 
to  prevent  any  weight  resting  immediately  upon  it.     He  next  laid  on  large 
slabs  of  snow,  after  which  he  had  no  objection  to  our  people  throwing  on 
stones  and  earth  ;  which  shews  that  their  principal  care  is  to  avoid  loading  the 
body  with  any  weight.     Nothing  was  deposited  in  or  near  the  grave  but  a  pair 
of  her  spare  boots,  which  were  laid  upon  the  body  near  the  head.  He  came  fre- 
quently afterwards  to  visit  the  grave,  at  an  interval  of  several  days  each  time, 
and  generally  walked  round  it  once,  sometimes  muttering  a  few  words  and  at 
others  in  silence,  but  never  appearing  to  be  much  affected  :  this  custom  is  at- 
tended to  with  scrupulous  care,  and  is  evidently  connected  with  some  super- 
stitious notion  that  renders  it  indispensable  in  their  eyes.     This  man  also 
expressed  great  anxiety  about  his  living  three  days  at  the  ship  after  his  wife's 
death  and,  within  an  hour  after  that  time  was  accomplished,  went  away 
satisfied  and  in  good  spirits.     The  custom  of  not  using  sledges  and  dogs 
for  five  days  after  such   an   event,  which  is  certainly   considered  decent 

3  H 


1823. 
March. 

Frid.  21. 


Sat,  22. 


..-  ::.:■•' 


Il . 


418 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


J 823.    an(j  proper,  is.  not  always  strictly  attended  to  ;  for  several  went  out  to  the 

v?L'  fishery  the  day  following  Ootooguak's  death,  and  one  or  two  came  to  the 
ships  within  three  days.  Some  individuals,  notwithstanding  the  serious 
inconvenience  of  this  practice,  adhered  to  it  more  scrupulously,  and  Toole- 
mak  could  by  no  means  be  prevailed  on  to  part  with  a  dog  for  which  I  had 
bargained,  till  the  five  days  were  completed.  When  however  there  are  no 
relatives  at  hand  to  observe  the  practice,  as  in  the  case  of  the  unfortunate 
Kaga,  it  is  altogether  neglected  ;  so  that  its  non-observance  is  only  perhaps 
considered  to  affect  the  dead,  without  having  any  influence  over  the  living. 

Messrs.  Crozier  and  Ross,  having  spent  one  or  two  days  in  accompanying 
some  of  the  Esquimaux  on  their  fishing  excursions,  found  that  the  same  floe  of 
"  young"  and  weak  ice  as  before  still  opposed  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  the 
catching  of  walruses.  Mr.  Ross  succeeded  in  killing  a  single  dovekey, 
which  proved  extremely  curious  from  the  whiteness  of  its  plumage.  It 
was  probably  on  account  of  the  present  unfavourable  state  of  the  ice  for 
the  walrus- fishery,  that  several  other  families  removed,  before  the  end  of 
March,  to  Pingitkalik,  where  these  animals  were  equally  abundant,  and  more 
easily  procured  ;  for  the  Esquimaux  do  not  acknowledge  the  truth  of  our 
English  proverb,  that  "  enough  is  as  good  as  a  feast."  Previously  to  their 

Wed.  26.  departure,  several  of  them,  with  their  usual  cunning,  paid  two  or  three  "  last 
visits"  to  the  ships  on  as  many  successive  days,  having  found  by  experience 
that  some  extra  presents  were  made  them  on  such  occasions.  We  heard 
about  this  time  of  a  child  six  or  seven  years  of  age  having  recently  been 
drowned,  by  accidentally  falling  into  a  hole  in  the  ice  made  for  soaking  their 
seal-skins. 

At  the  close  of  the  month  of  March  we  were  glad  to  find  that  its  mean  tem- 
perature, being  —  19°.75,  when  taken  in  conjunction  with  those  of  January 
and  February,  appeared  to  constitute  a  mild  winter  for  this  latitude.  There 
were  besides,  some  other  circumstances  which  served  to  distinguish  this 
winter  from  any  preceding  one  we  had  passed  in  the  ice.  One  of  the 
most  remarkable  of  these  was  the   frequent  occurrence   of  hard  well-de- 

Frid.  28.  fined  clouds,  a  feature  we  had  hitherto  considered  as  almost  unknown  in 
the  winter-sky  of  the  polar  regions.  It  is  not  improbable,  that  these  may 
have  in  part  owed  their  origin  to  a  large  extent  of  sea  keeping  open  to  the 
south-eastward  throughout  the  winter,  though  they  not  only  occurred  with 

Mon.  31.  the  wind  from  that  quarter,  but  also  with  the  colder  weather  usually  accom- 
panying north-westerly  breezes.     About  the  time  of  the  sun's  re-appearance, 


" 


»■ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


419 


and  for  a  week  or  two  after  it,  these  clouds  were  not  more  a  subject  of    182:? 
admiration  to  us  on  account  of  their  novelty,  than  from  the  glowing  richness  S^i 
of  the  tints  with  which  they  were  adorned.     It  is  indeed  scarcely  possible 
for  nature,  in  any  climate,  to  produce  a  sky  exhibiting  greater  splendour 
and  richness  of  colouring  than  we  at  times  experienced  in  the  course  of 
this  spring.     The  edges  of  the  clouds  near  the  sun  often  presented  a  fiery 
or  burnished  appearance,  while  the  opposite  side  of  the  heavens  was  distin- 
guished by  a  deep  purple  about  the  horizon,  gradually  softening  upwards 
into  a  warm  yet  delicate  rose-colour  of  inconceivable  beauty.     These  phe- 
nomena have  always  impressed  us  the  most  forcibly  about  the  time  of  the 
sun's   permanent    setting,    and  that  of    his  re-appearance,    especially  the 
latter,  and  have  invariably  furnished  a  particular   subject  of  conversation 
to  us  at  those  periods ;  but  I  do  not  know  whether  this  is  to  be  attributed 
so  much  to  the  colouring  of  the  sky  exactly  at  the  times  alluded  to,  as  to 
our  habit  of  setting  on  every  enjoyment  a  value  proportioned  to  its  scarce- 
ness and  novelty.     Besides  the  colouring  of  the  clouds  just  mentioned,  I 
also  observed  five  or  six  times,  in  the  course  of  the  spring,  those   more  rare 
and  delicate  tints  to  which  allusion  has  already  been  made  in  this  Narrative, 
and  twice  in  that  of  the  preceding  voyage.     This  peculiarity,  in  which  I 
now  observed  no  difference  from  those  of  the  same  kind  before  described, 
Avould  probably  have  been  oftener  seen  but  for  the  glare  of  the  sun  upon 
the  eyes  in  viewing  an  object  so  near  it.     Perhaps  it  has  also  been  seen  in 
other  climates  ;  here  it  is,  I  believe,  most  frequent  in  the  spring,  and  I  have 
never  noticed  it  after  the  summer  temperature  has  commenced. 

Shortly  after  the  sun's  re-appearance,  it  not  unfrequently  happened  about 
noon  that  a  part  of  the  low  shore  to  the  southward  of  the  ships  appeared, 
by  the  effect  of  refraction,  to  be  raised  and  separated,  forming  a  long  nar- 
row streak  of  a  dark  colour,  like  a  cloud,  suspended  a  few  minutes  above 
the  land,  in  a  position  nearly  horizontal. 

Parhelia  and  imperfect  halos  very  often  occurred  in  the  spring,  their 
angular  distance  from  the  sun  being  from  22°  to  23°,  but  having  nothing 
remarkable  either  in  form,  situation  or  colours,  to  need  a  separate  deser- 
tion on  each  occasion.  It  was  sometimes  observable  however,  that  thou-h 
parhelia  appear  to  an  observer  placed  nearly  on  a  level  with  the  sea,  to  be 
at  a  considerable  distance  from  the  eye,  they  are  found,  on  ascending  a 
ittle  eminence,  to  be  produced  on  some  medium  comparatively  close,  per- 
haps only  from  one  to  two  miles  distant.     In  this   case  the  land  or  other 

3  H  2 


■  M  | 


in  .ii  i 


,,! 


'II* 


m 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

'823.  distant  objects  may  be  seen  over  them,  though  there  is  near  them  always 
a  mistiness  to  which  they  perhaps  owe  their  origin.  Although  however 
the  winter  atmosphere  of  these  regions  is  seldom  free  from  numberless  mi- 
nute particles  of  snow,  which  are  abundantly  deposited  upon  any  thing 
left  in  the  open  air,  yet  it  was  not  observable,  except  in  some  cases 
of  snow-drift,  that  parhelia  were  more  frequent  or  distinct  when  this 
deposit  was  the  greatest,  than  when  the  atmosphere  was  comparatively 
clear,  though  in  the  latter  case  they  are  always  to  appearance  most 
distant.  Parhelia  occur  most  frequently,  and  exhibit  the  greatest  inten- 
sity of  light,  at  low  altitudes  of  the  sun.  This  is  often  particularly  ob- 
servable in  the  short  days,  when  these  phenomena  assume  a  very  brilliant 
appearance  soon  after  sunrise,  decrease  in  splendour  towards  noon,  and 
resume  their  brightness  as  the  sun  descends  towards  the  horizon  ;  con- 
tinuing however  distinctly  visible  the  whole  time,  and  being  sometimes 
accompanied  by  a  more  or  less  perfect  halo  undergoing  corresponding 
variations. 

Another  peculiarity  observed  in  this  winter  was  the  rare  occurrence  of 
the  Aurora  Borealis,  and  the  extraordinary  poorness  of  its  display  when- 
ever it  did  make  its  appearance.  It  was  almost  invariably  seen  to  the 
southward,  between  an  E.S.E.  and  a  W.S.W.  bearing,  generally  low,  the 
stationary  patches  of  it  having  a  tendency  to  form  an  irregular  arch,  and 
not  unfrequently  with  coruscations  shooting  towards  the  zenith.  When 
more  diffused  it  still  kept,  in  general,  on  the  southern  side  of  the  zenith  ; 
but  never  exhibited  any  of  those  rapid  and  complicated  movements  observed 
in  the  course  of  the  preceding  winter,  nor  indeed  any  feature  that  renders 
it  necessary  to  attempt  a  particular  description.  The  electrometer  was  fre- 
quently tried  by  Mr.  Fisher,  at  times  when  the  state  of  the  atmosphere 
appeared  the  most  favourable,  but  always  without  any  sensible  effect  being 
produced  on  the  gold  leaf. 

The  difference  in  the  temperature  of  the  day  and  night  began  to  be 
sensible  as  early  as  the  first  week  in  March,  and  the  daily  range  of  the  ther- 
mometer increased  considerably  from  that  time.  The  increase  in  the  average 
temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  however,  is  extremely  slow  in  these  regions, 
long  after  the  sun  has  attained  a  considerable  meridian  altitude  ;  but  this  is  in 
some  degree  compensated  by  the  inconceivable  rapidity  with  which  the  days 
seem  to  lengthen  when  once  the  sun  has  re-appeared.  There  is  indeed  no 
change  which  continues  to  excite  so  much  surprise  as  that  from  almost  con- 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


421 


stant  darkness  to  constant  day  ;  and  this  is  of  course  the  more  sudden  and    182?- 

....  .  ,     %     .  March. 

striking  in  proportion  to  the  height  of  the  latitude.  Even  in  this  compara-  ^y-^ 
tively  low  parallel  the  change  seemed  sufficiently  remarkable ;  for  soon  after 
the  middle  of  March,  only  ten  weeks  after  the  sun's  re-appearance  above 
the  horizon,  a  bright  twilight  appeared  at  midnight  in  the  northern  heavens. 
The  annexed  abstract  contains  a  comparative  view  of  the  mean  tempera- 
ture of  the  atmosphere  during  six  months  of  each  of  the  three  winters  passed 
in  the  polar  regions,  by  this  and  the  preceding  Expedition. 


"■•i 


Months. 

Mean  temperature  of  the  Atmosphere  at 

REMARKS. 

Melville  Island, 
lat.  74f°, 
1819-^0. 

Igloolik, 
lat.  G9|°, 
1S22-23- 

Winter  Island, 
lat.  6bi°; 
1821-22. 

October 

November 

December 

January 

February 

March 

*•        o 

—  3.46 

—  20.60 
-21.79 
-30.09 
-32.19 

—  18.10 

,      o 
412.79 

-19.37 

—  27.89 
-17.07 
-20.41 

-  19.75 

,     o 
+  12.51 

+    7.75 

-12.94 

-22.96 

-24.97 

-11.64 

The  "  corrected  temperature"  in  the 
lower   line    of   each    column   of   this 
Table  is  the  "  registered  temperature" 
■with  a  deduction  of  3°  for  the  warm 
atmosphere  of  the  ship. 

Mean  registered  temperature 

-21.04      j       -15.27 
1 

-   8.71 

Mean  corrected  temperature 

-24                  —18.3               -11.7 

' 


m 


iU  >, 


ra 


»•,. 


ABSTRACT  of  th 

e  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept 

on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

F 

ury,  al 

.  Igloolik,  during 

the  Month  of  March,   1823. 

Day 

Fahrenheit's 
mometer 

rher- 

a!  «  > 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing  Weather. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Milii- 

111  U  HI  . 

Mean. 

Mil  xi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity 

1 

O 

-32 

O 

-39 

O 
-30.58 

53?5 

inches 
29.80 

inciies      inches 
29.7029.733 

NW 

modt. 

fine 

2 

31 

41 

35.79 

52.5 

29.75 

29.70  29.725 

West 

light 

fine 

3 

4 

30 
32 

40 
40 

30.54 
36.75 
32.08 

51 

49.5 

51 

30.07 
30.10 
29.97 

29.81 

QA    A> 

29.930 

West 

XTur 

light 

fine  and  clear 

fine 

cloudy 

5 

26 

36 

29.64  29.747 

JN  W 

NW 

modt. 
fresh 

6 

18 

30 

23.67 

49.5 

29.81 

29.63 

29.723 

West 

strong 

hazy,  drift 

7 
8 

20 
16 

30 
30 

25.33 
22.17 

50 
52.5 

30.13 
30.15 

29.85 
30.00 

30.003 
30  100 

NW 

sw 

light 
and 

squalls 

light 

fine 
fine 

9 

9 

25 

19.42 

53 

29.94 

29.80 

29.S63 

North 

light 

cloudy 

10 

15 

28 

23.42 

54.5 

29.97 

29.81 

29.878 

North 

light 

cloudy 

11 

12 

22 
17 

34 
33 

28.33 
20.03 

54 
53.5 

30.01 
30.00 

29.99 
29.96 

29.997 
29.975 

NW 
NW 

modt 

and 

squally 

light 

clear 
fine 

13 

9i 

28 

14.71 

54.5 

29.93 

29.85 

29.890 

SW 

light 

hazy 

14 

6 

22 

13.29 

56 

29.94 

29.82 

29.858 

West 

light 

fine 

15 

13 

26 

19.29 

58 

30.21 

29.89 

30.027 

NWbN 

light 

hazy  and  small  snow 

16 

18 

29 

21.67 

59 

30.63 

30.30 

30.503 

North 

light 

fine 

17 

14 

20 

18.58 

59.5 

30.84 

30.67 

30.762 

North 

light 

S  A.M.  fine 
I  P.M.  foggy 

18 
19 

14 

29 

21.50 

59.5 

30.79 
30.58 

30.58 
30.20 

30.706 
30.377 

North 
Northerly 

light 
light 

fine 
fine 

5 

25 

15.17 

60.5 

20 

3 

21 

11.42 

61 

30.15 

30.00 

30.107 

NNW 

light 

fine 

21 

3 

13 

9.08 

59.5 

30.10 

30.05 

30.075 

NW 

light 

fine 

22 

+  1 

15 

8.71 

60.5 

30.09 

29.90 

29.990 

NNW 

modt. 

clear 

23 
24 

-  7 
+  2 

16 
15 

10.54 
8.07 

63 
58.5 

29.88 
30.02 

29.78 
29.80 

29.812 
29.932 

WNW 
WNW 

fresh 

and 

squally 

light 

drift 

clear 

25 

4 

15 

3.8S 

60.5 

29.95 

29.89 

29.913 

West 

light 

cloudy 

26 

-  1 

22 

12.21 

61 

29.92 

29.89 

29 .902 

West 

light 

hazy,  snow  at  times 

27 

1 

19 

10.08 

62.5 

30.03 

29.97 

30.003 

NE 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

28 

11 

20 

18.46 

58 

30.03 

29.94 

29.900 

NW 

light 

fine 

29 

12 

27 

18.71 

58.5 

29.97 

29.94 

29.955 

NW 

light 

fine 

30 

6 

25 

15.92 

60.5 

30.12 

30.05 

30.08-i 

NW 

light 

fine 

31 

2 

23 

14.08 

61 

30.29 

30.15  30.230 

NNW 

light 

fine 

+  4 

-41 

-19.75 

56  6 

30.84 

29.63  30. 02S 

| 

mi 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


423 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

VARIOUS   JOURNEYS   TO    THE    ESQUIMAUX    STATIONS ILLNESS    AND     DECEASE    OF    MR. 

ALEXANDER    ELDER PREPARATIONS     FOR     THE     HECLA's     RETURN     TO     ENGLAND 

REMARKABLE    HALOS,     8fC. SHOOTING    PARTIES     STATIONED    AT    ARLAGNUK JOUR- 
NEYS   TO    QUILLIAM    CREEK ARRIVAL     OF     ESQUIMAUX    FROM     THE     NORTHWARD 

ACCOUNT    OF     A     JOURNEY     TO     THE     WESTWARD     FOR     THE     PURPOSE    OF    REACHING 

THE     POLAR     SEA THE     ESQUIMAUX     REPORT     TWO     FISHING-SHIPS     HAVING     BEEN 

WRECKED A      JOURNEY      PERFORMED      TO      COCKBURN       ISLAND DISCOVERY        OF 

MURRAY  MAXWELL  INLET. 


PI 


•\l:  'ki'ilp 


Whatever  hopes  of  an  unusually  mild  winter  might  have  been  excited  by 
the  mean  temperature  of  some  of  the  preceding  months,  the  comparative 
view  exhibited  in  the  foregoing  table,  for  a  longer  period  of  each  winter  that 
we  had  passed  in  these  regions,  did  not  seem  to  hold  out  at  present  a  pro- 
spect of  any  thing  extraordinary.  It  could  indeed  have  been  scarcely  anti- 
cipated that  our  journals  would  have  registered  so  progressive  a  decrease  of 
mean  temperature,  in  proportion  to  the  height  of  our  latitude  as  that  here 
given ;  and  this  circumstance  may  perhaps  be  considered  as  intimating  that 
though  in  small  intervals  of  time,  such  as  particular  and  corresponding 
months,  considerable  differences  may  occur  in  this  respect,  yet  that  in  longer 
periods  the  averages  will  be  found  to  coincide  more  nearly  :— that  nature,°in 
short,  though  ever  varying  in  detail,  still  preserves  her  general  uniformity  ; 
and  that  when  any  considerable  deviation  from  her  usual  course  has  taken 
place  on  one  side,  she  struggles  to  maintain  the  balance  by  some  extraordi- 
nary compensation  on  the  other. 

On  the  1st  of  April  Captain  Lyon  went  out  on  his  sledge  to  the  distant 
station  of  the  Esquimaux,  which  he  found  to  be  situated  eight  or  nine  miles 
to  the  westward  of  Tern  Island,  and  consisting  of  five  snow-huts  built  upon 
the  ice  ;  the  people,  who  were  twenty-eight  in  number,  living  almost  indepen 
dently  of  the  open  water,  by  catching  the  neitie/c  in  its  hole  in  the  manner 
already  described.     They  were  at  this  time  abundantly  furnished  with  food, 


1823. 
April. 

Tues.  1. 


.■'nil. 


: 


Ml 


424 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Wed.  2 


Frid.  4. 


and  were  chiefly  clad  in  seal-skin  dresses.  Among  them  were  two  young 
men  who  were  invalids,  one  of  whom  was  slowly  recovering  from  an  illness 
occasioned  by  excessive  eating,  and  the  other  had  just  fallen  sick  from  the 
same  cause,  but  was  relieved  by  bleeding. 

Captain  Lyon  returning  to  the  ships  on  the  2d,  and  old  Nannow  with  a 
party  of  other  Esquimaux  arriving  from  Pingitkalik  at  the  same  time,  I 
lodged  the  latter  in  my  cabin,  and  on  the  following  day  accompanied  them 
on  their  return  home  ;  one  or  two  other  families  also  setting  off  from  Igloolik 
to  join  their  companions  to  the  southward.  I  found  the  Esquimaux  situated 
about  twenty-three  miles  to  the  southward  and  eastward  of  the  ships  ;  the 
huts  being  built  upon  the  ice  in  immediate  contact  with  the  beach,  and  the 
open  water,  in  which  they  killed  walruses  for  their  subsistence,  being  distant 
from  them  about  three  miles.  The  quantity  of  meat  in  the  huts  at  this  time 
was,  so  great,  that  1  never  remember  to  have  seen  it  more  abundant,  even 
in  the  summer  ;  and  two  more  walruses  were  killed  during  my  stay  there. 
Nannow  and  all  his  household  behaved  to  us  with  a  degree  of  kindness  and 
genuine  hospitality  which  nothing  could  surpass.  Indeed  the  old  man 
seemed  to  be  only  apprehensive  that  he  could  not  do  enough  for  me,  and 
iidgetted  about  the  whole  evening  in  preparing  my  bed  and  repairing  my  dogs' 
harness,  while  his  wife  was  mending  my  boots.  Every  now  and  then  this 
worthy  creature  kept  calling  his  own  "igloo"  bad,  and  mine  good ;  and 
in  the  morning  he  offered  me,  I  believe,  in  turn,  every  article  belonging  to 
him  in  return  for  the  presents  which  I  had  made  him. 

In  returning  on  board  on  the  4th  we  got  out  of  the  road,  which  was  nearly 
covered  with  a  heavy  snow  drift  that  was  flying  at  the  time.  We  were 
therefore  obliged  to  trust  entirely  to  the  instinct  of  the  dogs  ;  and  these 
sagacious  creatures  landed  us  close  to  the  bone-huts  at  Igloolik,  after  tra- 
velling for  more  than  three  hours  without  seeing  a  single  object  at  a  greater 
distance  than  two  or  three  hundred  yards  around  us, 

About  the  first  and  second  weeks  in  April,  the  Esquimaux  were  in  the  habit 
of  coming  up  the  inlet,  to  the  southward  of  the  ships,  to  kill  the  neitiek  or 
small  seal  which  brings  forth  its  young  at  this  season,  and  probably  retires 
into  sheltered  places  for  that  purpose  *.      Besides  the  old  seals  which  were 

*  "  The  netsek  is  the  only  species  of  seal  which  remains  in  the  winter  under  the  ice.  They 
form  in  it  large  caverns,  in  which  they  bring  forth  their  young,  two  at  a  time,  in  March. 
More  than  one  cavern  belongs  to  one  seal,  that  he  may  if  disturbed  in  the  first,  take  shelter  in 
the  second.  No  other  seal  is  caught  in  winter  by  the  Esquimaux"  (in  Labrador.) — Journal 
of  a  Voyage  to  Ungava  Bay  by  the  Missionaries  of  the  Unitas  Fratrum,  p.  36. 


Pit 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


425 


taken  in  the  manner  before  explained,  the  Esquimaux  also  caught  a  great  182?- 
number  of  young  ones  by  fastening  a  hook  to  the  end  of  a  staff,  and  hook-  v-*-^ij 
ing  them  up  from  the  seal-hole  after  the  mother  had  been  killed.  Our  large 
fish-hooks  were  useful  to  them  for  this  purpose,  and  the  beautiful  silvery  skins 
of  these  young  animals  were  occasionally  brought  to  the  ships  as  articles  of 
barter :  those  of  the  foetus  of  the  neitiek  are  more  yellow  than  the  others, 
and  indeed  both  in  colour  and  texture  very  much  resemble  raw  silk. 

We  could  at  this  season  just  make  out  that  a  stone  was  here  and  there  Tues.  8. 
more  perceptible  on  shore  than  during  the  winter,  owing  to  the  tops  of  them 
being  uncovered  by  the  sun's  rays  ;  but  this  was  the  only  change  that  could 
be  observed.  We  had  frequent  occasion  to  notice  about  this  time  that  a 
copious  deposit  of  snow-crystals,  of  a  large  size,  and  of  a  beautiful  arbo- 
rescent form,  took  place  every  night,  as  soon  as  the  temperature  of  the  atmo- 
sphere fell  some  degrees  below  that  of  the  day,  just  as  the  dew  falls  in  tem- 
perate climates.  On  the  13th  a  grouse  was  observed  upon  the  rubbish-heap  Sun.  13. 
alongside  the  Hecla. 

It  is  now  once  more  my  painful  duty  to  record  an  afflicting  visitation  of  Pro-  Tues.  15. 
vidence  which  took  place"  among  us  on  the  morning  of  the  15th,  in  the  death 
of  Mr.  Alexander  Elder,  Greenland  mate  of  the  Hecla.  He  had  complained, 
on  several  different  occasions  in  the  course  of  this  and  the  preceding  winter, 
of  pulmonary  affections,  to  which  perhaps  a  full  habit  of  body  may  in  some 
degree  have  contributed.  His  disease  was  now,  however,  a  confirmed  dropsy, 
which  having  attacked  the  region  of  the  heart,  rapidly  terminated  his  exist- 
ence. Mr.  Elder  had  served  in  the  three  successive  Expeditions  employed 
for  the  discovery  of  a  North-West  Passage,  and  as  a  reward  for  his  good 
conduct,  had  been  raised  from  the  situation  of  leading-man  to  that  of  mate, 
in  which  last  capacity  he  served  both  in  the  Griper  and  the  Hecla.  He  died 
much  regretted  by  many  of  the  officers  and  men,  who  had  known  him 
several  years,  and  by  none  more  deeply  than  by  myself.  Most  sincerely 
indeed  do  I  lament  the  occasion  which  demands  from  me  this  tribute,  due 
to  the  memory  of  an  active  and  valuable  seaman,  as  well  as  an  honest  and. 
upright  man.  His  remains  were  committed  to  the  ground  near  the  Observa- 
tory, with  all  the  solemnity  that  the  occasion  demanded,  and  a  tomb  ofThur.  17. 
stones,  with  a  handsome  tomb-stone,  raised  over  the  grave. 

The  first  ducks  noticed  by  the  Esquimaux  were  mentioned  to  us  on  the 
16th,  and  a  few  days  afterwards  immense  flocks  appeared,  all  of  the  king- 

3  1 


Hl'!|«if 


M 


Ijj   i 


' 


:|ll!ll 


| 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

duck  species,  about  the  open  water  near  the  margin  of  the  ice  ;  but  our  dis- 
tance from  this  was  so  great  that  we  never  saw  any  of  them,  and  the  weather 
was  yet  too  cold  to  station  a  shooting  party  in  that  neighbourhood.  Dove- 
kies  were  now  also  numerous,  and  a  gull  or  two  of  the  silvery  species  had 
been  seen. 

On  the  20th  after  divine  service,  I  took  the  opportunity  of  Captain  Lyon 
and  his  people  being  on  board  the  Fury,  to  communicate  to  the  assembled 
officers  and  ship's  companies  my  intentions  respecting  the  future  movements 
of  the  Expedition  ;  at  the  same  time  requesting  Captain  Lyon  to  furnish  me 
with  a  list  of  any  of  the  Hecla's  men  that  might  volunteer  to  remain  out,  as 
it  would  be  necessary  to  fill  up,  or  perhaps  even  to  increase  the  complement 
of  the  Fury. 

Our  preparations  were  therefore  immediately  commenced,  a  twelve  months' 
provision  and  other  stores  being  received  by  the  Fury,  and  various  necessary 
exchanges  made  in  anchors,  cables,  and  boats  ;  and  in  the  course  of  a  single 
fortnight  the  whole  of  these  were  transported  from  ship  to  ship  without  any 
exposure  or  labour  to  the  men  outside  their  respective  ships,  our  invaluable 
dogs  having  performed  it  for  us  with  astonishing  -ease  and  expedition.  It 
was  a  curious  sight  to  watch  these  useful  animals  walking  off  with  a  bower- 
anchor,  a  boat,  or  a  topmast  without  any  difficulty ;  and  it  may  give  some 
idea  of  what  thsy  are  able  to  perform  to  state,  that  nine  dogs  of  Captain 
Lyon's  dragged  sixteen  hundred  and  eleven  pounds  a  distance  of  seventeen 
hundred  and  fifty  yards  in  nine  minutes,  and  that  they  worked  in  a  similar 
way  between  the  ships  for  seven  or  eight  hours  a  day.  The  road  was, 
however,  very  good  at  this  time,  and  the  dogs  the  best  that  could  be  pro- 
cured. 

On  the  21st  Koo-eet-see-arioo,  who  had  for  a  fortnight  past  been  in  a  sad 
fidget  about  going  away,  and  who  had  now  no  complaint  but  debility,  at 
length  took  his  departure.  He  was  fortunate  in  leaving  us  at  a  time  of  the 
year  when  exposure  to  the  air  was  of  comparatively  little  importance,  and  he 
subsequently  recovered  his  health  sufficiently  to  resume  all  his  occupations. 
I  regret  to  add  that  the  case  was  different  with  our  late  patient  Innooksioo, 
who,  having  suffered  a  relapse  when  at  a  distance  from  us,  died  about  this 
time,  as  we  were  afterwards  informed  by  the  other  Esquimaux.  His  widow, 
Amlo-tooinyak,  was  well  taken  care  of,  living  in  old  Nannow's  hut  for  some 
time,  and  shortly  after  becoming  the  second  wife  of  Ootooguak,one  of  his  sons. 


■ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


4.27 


It  is  certain,  however,  that  for  some  time  she  was  nearly  common  to  every     1323. 
body,  and  it  was  said  to  be  in  consequence  of  a  suggestion  made  on  board  d^lL 
the  ships,  that  she  became  the  acknowledged  wife  of  Ootooguak. 

On  the  evening  of  the  24th,  the  thermometer  being  at  +6°,  some  halos  Thur.  24. 
and  parhelia  appeared  about  the  sun,  which  the  annexed  figure  will  best 
describe.     This  was  the  only  phenomenon  of  the  kind  particularly  worthy  of 
notice  that  occurred  during  the  spring. 


' 


S}  the  sun,  eight  to  ten  degrees  above  the  horizon. 

a,  e,  A  horizontal  circle  of  white  light,  passing  through  the  sun  and  parhelia  ;  upon  this  appeared 
at  times  a  large  white  spot,  exactly  opposite  to  the  sun  in  the  heavens. 

/,  g,  Parhelia  situated  upon  the  inner  halo/,  i,  g,  of  which  the  radius  was  22°  20'. 

h,  i,  I,  Part  of  an  inverted  circle,  touching  the  upper  part  of  the  halo/,  i,  g,  and  sometimes  assuming 
the  form  of  a  bow. 

b,  c,  d,  An  outer  halo,  much  more  brightly  tinged  with  the  prismatic  colours  than  the  inner  one  ; 
its  radius  4S°. 

The  wind  settling  to  the  southward  for  a  few  days  near  the  end  of  April, 
brought  an  increased  and,  to  us,  a  comfortable  degree  of  warmth  ;  and  it  was  Tues-  2g* 
considered  an  event  of  some  interest,  that  the  snow  which  fell  on  the  29th 
dissolved  as  it  lay  on  our  decks,  being  the  first  time  that  it  had  done  so  this 
season.  We  now  also  ventured  to  take  off  some  of  the  hatches  for  an  hour  or 
two  in  the  day,  and  to  admit  some  fresh  air,  a  luxury  which  we  had  not  known 
for  six  months.  The  Esquimaux  about  this  time  began  to  separate  more  than 
before,  according  to  their  usual  custom  in  the  spring ;  some  of  them,  and 

3  I  2 


>:  i 


1 


i::,l 


'f    "'" 


lUlJLJF.JWJ.il 


428 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


: 


Mav. 
Frid.'2 


Thur.  8. 


especially  our  Winter  Island  acquaintance,  setting  off  to  the  little  islands 
called  Ooglit  and  those  in  our  neighbourhood  removing  to  the  north-east 
end  of  Igloolik,  to  a  peninsula  called  Keitjuk-tarruoke,  to  which  the  open 
water  was  somewhat  nearer.  These  people  now  became  so  much  incom- 
moded by  the  melting  of  their  snow  huts,  that  they  were  obliged  to  substitute 
skins  as  the  roofs,  retaining  however  the  sides  and  part  of  the  passages  of 
the  original  habitations.  These  demi-tents  were  miserable  enough  while 
in  this  state,  some  of  the  snow  continually  falling  in,  and  the  floor  being 
constantly  wet  by  its  thawing. 

On  the  2d  of  May  several  of  our  gentlemen  accompanied  the  Esquimaux  to 
the  open  water,  to  endeavour  to  procure  some  ducks,  large  flocks  of  which 
were  flying  about  there  ;  but  a  quantity  of  "  young"  ice  prevented  their 
approaching  them.  In  walking  out  with  the  wind  blowing  against  them  from 
the  sea  to  the  eastward,  they  found  their  faces  covered  with  salt,  the  ther- 
mometer being  from  + 11°  to  +17°  during  the  day. 

Accustomed  as  we  had  been  to  the  rapidity  of  the  changes  produced  by 
warmth  when  it  does  begin  to  operate  in  these  climates,  we  still  could  not 
help  being  surprised  at  the  alteration  which  a  few  days  of  temperate  weather 
in  the  beginning  of  May  effected  in  the  appearance  of  the  land,  many  of  the 
ridges  being  almost  entirely  clear  of  snow,  and  every  hour  discovering  some 
fresh  spots  of  dark  ground.     The  deception  occasioned  by  one  unvaried  and 
extensive  surface  of  white  was  now  also  once  more  perceptible,  principally 
in    making   the  neighbouring  lands  appear  much  nearer  than   before,   and 
discovering  the  hills  and  valleys  ;  whereas  in  the  winter  all  was  blended  to- 
gether, so  as  to  give  no  idea  of  the  true  distance  of  the  land  or  of  its  various 
undulations.     Another  change  which  we  have  invariably  remarked  to  take 
place  in  the  spring,  was  now  daily  more  and  more  observable  ;  this  consisted 
in  the  distinctness  with  which   distant  lands  might  be  seen,    or  rather  in 
those  parts  of  the  coast  coming  in  sight  which  we  had  never  seen  during  the 
winter.     It  is  most  certain  indeed  that,  notwithstanding  all  that  has  been 
said  of  the  superior  transparency  of  the  winter  atmosphere  in  these  regions, 
there  is  none  less  clear  for  viewing  either  celestial  or  terrestrial  objects, 
which  fact  will  I  believe  become  apparent  to  any  person  putting  it  fairly 
Sat.  10.    to   the   test,     At   eleven   P.M.  Ave   had    a  thick  fog,  which   lasted  for  a 
couple  of  hours,  and  another  for  a  short  time  on  the  10th.     Upon  the  spots 
that  were  bare  of  snow  on  shore  we  now  observed  numerous  caterpillars,  of 
the  same  kind  as  those  found  in  equal  abundance,  and  at  the  same  time  of  the 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 

Fury,  at  Igloolik,  during  the  Month  of  April,   1823. 

Fahrenheit's  Ther- 
mometer. 

1 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 

"Winds. 

Day 

Prevailing  Weather. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 
mum. 

Mean. 

i     Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity. 

1 

0 

—  6 

O 

—20 

o 
-11.42 

+61.5 

inches 

30. 20 

inches 

30. 16 

inches 

30.257 

NNW 

light 

fine 

2 

+  5 

15 

6.04 

G1.0 

30. 1( 

29.94 

30.053 

A  .M.  N       ] 

P.M.NNW; 

light 

fine 

3 

2 

16 

6.17 

60.5 

29.97 

29.70 

29.832 

NNW 

fresh 

fine 

4 

0 

9 

3.92 

61.5 

29.  GO 

29.54 

29.503 

NW 

fresh 

cloudy  and  drift 

5 

-  2 

13 

8.33 

61.0 

29.00 

29.50 

29.582 

WNW 

fresh 

hazy  and  drift 

6 

8 

21 

13.92 

62.0 

29.80 

29.70 

29.750 

NW 

modt. 

fine 

7 

6 

25 

15.38 

61.5 

29.98 

29.85 

29.027 

NW 

light 

fine 

8 

+  4 

21 

8.42 

61.0 

30.24 

29.97 

30.112 

NW 

light 

fine 

9 

11 

13 

+0.96 

61.5 

30.28 

30.12 

30.223 

wsw 

light 

cloudy 

10 

12 

15 

3.00 

63.5 

30.16 

30.05 

30.107 

West 

fresh 

cloudy  and  drift 

11 

12 

20 

-3.92 

62.0 

30.16 

30.12 

30.148 

"WSW 

light 

fine 

12 

9 

16 

0.67 

66.5 

30.39 

30.02 

30.225 

NNW 

light 

cloudy 

13 

17 

22 

8.12 

64.0 

30.40 

30.37 

30.390 

West 

light 

fine 

14 

2 

23 

13.33 

63.0 

30.37 

30.05 

30.210 

North 

light 

fine 

15 

-  6 

25 

15.04 

56.5 

29.94 

29.70 

29.808 

NNW 

fresh 

fine 

16 

+  5 

17 

7.12 

56.5 

29.70 

29. 6S 

29.095 

NW 

fresh 

clear  and  drift 

17 

11 

14 

0.83 

54.0 

29.70 

29.58 

29.042 

NW 

strong 

drift 

18 

15 

2 

+7.58 

60.0 

29.80 

29.52 

29.647 

NW 

strong- 

cloudy  and  drift 

19 

2 

15 

-5.42 

58.5 

30.03 

29. 88 

29.902 

North 

light 

fine 

20 

15 

14 

Zero. 

58.0 

29.95 

29.74 

29. 830 

WSW 

light 

cloudy 

21 

8 

14 

-3.50 

59.0 

30.10 

29.85 

29.9C0 

North 

light 

fine 

22 

13 

9 

+3.17 

57.5 

30.20 

30.15 

30.188 

West 

light 

fine 

23 

15 

4 

4.42 

67.5 

30.17 

30.05 

30.104 

North 

light 

cloudy  and  small  snow 

24 

9 

6 

2.33 

66.5 

29.98 

29.88 

29.913 

NNW 

modt. 

clear 

25 

13 

2 

G.0U 

66.0 

29.98 

29.00  29.938 

NNW 

modt. 

hazy  and  snow 

26 

14 

8 

3.50 

66.0 

30.08 

30.00  30.057 

| 

NW 

fresh,  sqls. 

clear 

27 

26 

3 

9.75 

67.5 

30.12 

30.10  30.103 

SE 

ightand) 
variable  j 

hazy  and!  snow 

28 

26 

+  8 

17.42 

68.5 

30.13 

29.83  29.957 

South 

a.m. light) 
p.m.freshj 

clear 

29 

32 

3 

18.92 

70.0 

29.88 

29.78  29.817 

| 

NNW 

light 

hazy  and  snow 

30 

11 

—  6 

4.17 

65.0 

30.10 

29.95 

50.042 

NW 

fresh 

clear 

+32 

—25 

-1.68 

62.2 

30.40 

1 
29  50  29.969 

1 

If, 


'  "I  I 


* 


I 


430 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823. 
May. 


'I 


year  at  Winter  Island.  The  late  mild  weather  having  become  an  inconve- 
nience to  Mr.  Fisher  at  the  Observatory,  owing  to  the  thaw  that  was  going 
on  around  it,  we  now  pitched  a  tent  for  the  reception  of  the  instruments, 
and  Mr.  Fisher's  clock  was  soon  after  set  up  in  it. 

Mon.  12.  Among  other  useful  purposes  to  which  our  dogs  were  put,  they  afforded  an 
opportunity  of  trying,  on  a  more  extensive  scale  than  had  before  been  done 
at  Winter  Island,  the  experiment  of  laying  sand  upon  the  ice  in  order  to  assist 
its  dissolution.  The  sledge  was  therefore  employed  daily  for  a  fortnight  in 
bringing  sand  from  the  shore,  and  lightly  covering  the  ice  with  it  in  the  di- 
rection of  the  open  sea.  The  space  thus  covered  was  twenty-four  feet  in 
width,  a  narrow  line  having  been  before  found  to  cover  itself  very  frequently 
with  drift,  and  the  extent  accomplished  was  about  two-thirds  of  a  mile.  The 
effect  produced  by  this  will  be  mentioned  hereafter. 

Wed.  14.  Towards  the  middle  of  May,  ten  individuals  of  the  Esquimaux  who  were 
strangers  to  us,  consisting  of  three  men,  four  women,  and  three  children, 
arrived  from  Peelig,  a  station  represented  by  them  to  be  from  six  to  ten  days' 
journey  from  Igloolik,  but  of  whose  situation  we  could  never  obtain  any 
very  satisfactory  information.  A  man  named  ToolooaJc,  being  the  fourth  in- 
dividual of  our  acquaintance  distinguished  by  that  favourite  appellation, 
came  to  the  ships  on  the  14th,  accompanied  as  usual  by  some  of  the 
others  to  introduce  him.  It  appeared  from  what  these  people  said,  that  the 
Esquimaux  at  Peelig  had  received  no  intimation  of  our  being  here  ;  so  that 
none  of  the  others  had  gone  that  way  since  our  arrival :  we  gained  no  in- 
formation of  interest  from  the  newly-arrived  party.  The  parts  of  the  laud 
which  had  been  uncovered  were  now  once  more  hidden  from  us  by  a  fresh 
coat  of  snow,  and  indeed  the  whole  prospect  had  resumed,  in  every  respect, 
its  winter  appearance. 

Mon.  19.  Some  of  our  gentlemen,  on  going  out  on  the  19th  to  Arlagnuk,  where  a 
part  of  the  Esquimaux  still  remained,  found  that  that  the  open  water  had 
now  approached  the  shore  there  within  three-quarters  of  a  mile,  and  that 
the  ducks  were  more  numerous  than  before.  They  succeeded  in  killing 
some  of  these,  and  Ooyarraseo,  who  proved  a  most  active,  intelligent,  and 
obliging  young  man,  immediately  carried  down  his  canoe  to  try  to  pick  them 
up,  but  without  success,  the  swell  being  so  considerable  at  the  margin  of  the 
ice  that,  though  he  managed  to  launch  her,  he  could  not  steady  her  suffi- 
ciently to  get  into  the  hole.  He  explained  at  the  same  time,  that  in  such 
cases,   and  when   very  desirous  of  getting   out,   they  sometimes  lash   two 


§L 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


431 


canoes  together,  to  give  the  requisite  stability.  Some  long-tailed  ducks 
were  noticed  by  the  Esquimaux  on  the  21st,  at  which  time  some  silvery  gulls 
were  more  frequently  seen  than  before,  but  they  were  not  numerous.  On  the 
22d  the  Esquimaux  observed,  for  the  first  time  this  season,  the  tracks  of  two 
deer ;  and  the  snow-buntings,  which  are  usually  some  of  the  earliest  visitants 
to  these  reigions  in  the  spring,  began  now  to  appear  in  flocks ;  but  it  was 
seldom  that  a  stray  bird  of  any  kind  was  to  be  seen  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
the  ships. 

On  the  26th,  Captain  Lyon  went  out  on  his  sledge  to  Arlagnuk,  and  suc- 
ceeded in  killing  fourteen  pair  of  king-ducks,  a  part  of  which  only  the 
Esquimaux,  who  picked  them  up  in  their  canoes,  thought  proper  to  return, 
secreting  the  rest  for  their  own  use.  Finding  that  nothing  but  a  boat  was 
wanting  to  ensure  us  a  supply  of  ducks  from  time  to  time,  we  now  sent  a 
party  with  an  officer,  and  our  small  boats  from  each  ship,  these  being  carried 
on  sledges  to  Arlagnuk,  where  our  shooting-parties  were  established  close  to 
the  open  water,  which  extended  from  thence  to  the  south-eastward,  as  far  as 
the  eye  could  reach. 

Favourable    as   the   first   part  of  the  month  of  May  had  appeared  with 
respect  to  temperature,  its  close  was  by  no  means  equally  promising,  and  on 
the  1st  of  June,  at  two  A.M.,  the  thermometer  stood  at  +8°.     This  unusually 
low  temperature,  much  exceeding  in  severity  any  thing  we  had  experienced 
at  Melville  Island  at  the  same  season,  rendered  it  necessary  to  defer  for  a 
time  a  journey  which  it  was  proposed  that  Captain  Lyon  should  undertake, 
across  the  land  to  the  westward  at  the  head  of  Quilliam  Creek,  and  thence, 
by  means  of  the  ice,  along  the  shores  of  the  Polar  Sea,  in  the  direction  to- 
wards Akkoolee.     The  object  of  this  journey,  like  that  of  most  of  the  others 
which  had  been  performed  in  various  directions,  was  to  acquire  all  the  infor- 
mation within  our  reach,  of  those  parts  of  the  continental  coast  to  which  the 
ships  were  denied  access  ;  and  it  was  hoped  that  at  the  coming  season  some 
judgment  might  be  formed  of  the  probable  state  of  the  ice  along  that  shore 
in  the  summer,  by  which  the  future  movements  of  the  Fury  might  be  influ- 
enced.    Captain  Lyon  was  to  be  accompanied  by  two  men,  and  a  complete 
supply  of  every  kind  for  a  month's  travelling  was  to  be  drawn  on  a  sledge 
by  ten   excellent  dogs,  which   he   had   taken   great  pains  to  procure   and 
train  for  such  occasions.     As  I  was  desirous  of  ascertaining  beyond  any 
doubt  the  identity  of  the  Khemig,  to  which  I  had  sailed  in  the  autumn,  with 
that  seen  by  Captain  Lyon  on  his  journey  with  the  Esquimaux,  I  determined 


1823. 
May. 

Wed.  21. 
Thur.  22. 


Mon.  26, 


June. 
Sun.  !► 


V  ■■'■ 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


433 


to  accompany  the  travellers  on  my  sledge  as  far  as  the  head  of  Quilliam  1823- 
Creek,  and  by  victualling  them  thus  far  on  their  journey,  enable  them  to  ^^, 
gain  a  day  or  two's  resources  in  advance.  Another  object  which  I  had  in 
view  was  to  endeavour  to  find  a  lake  mentioned  by  Toolemak  ;  who  assured 
me  that  if  I  could  dig  holes  in  the  ice,  which  was  five  feet  thick,  plenty  of 
large  salmon  might  be  caught  with  hooks,  an  experiment  which  seemed  at 
least  well  worth  the  trying. 

Our  first  shooting-parties,  being  relieved  on  the  5th,  brought  with  them  a  Thur.  5. 
hundred  and  twenty  ducks  which,  as  well  as  all  other  game  that  might 
be  procured  this  season  except  venison,  1  directed  to  be  served  as  an 
extra  allowance  to  the  officers  and  men.  These  proved  the  more  acceptable 
in  consequence  of  our  usual  supply  of  the  hearts,  livers,  and  kidneys  of  the 
walrus  having  lately  failed  us,  the  Esquimaux  having  little  or  none  to  spare. 
So  accustomed  had  we  been,  indeed,  to  this  supply,  that  the  sudden  failure 
of  it  was  esteemed  a  greater  loss  than  we  could  have  supposed  possible  a 
twelvemonth  before.  We  were  much  shocked  about  this  time  to  hear  of  the 
death  of  poor  Togolat,  at  a  station  somewhat  to  the  southward  of  Ooglit. 
About  six  weeks  before  this  she  had  been  unwell  at  Igloolik,  when  Mr.  Ed- 
wards, having  seen  and  prescribed  for  her,  recommended  that  she  should  be 
brought  to  the  ship.  I  proposed  this  to  Ewerat,  and  offered  to  send  my 
sledge  for  her  and  to  lodge  them  both  in  my  cabin,  to  all  which  he  seemed 
to  agree  ;  but  with  a  degree  of  caprice  almost  unaccountable,  even  in  a 
savage,  set  off  the  very  next  morning  to  the  southward.  Here,  as  we  heard 
from  time  to  time,  she  continued  constantly  ailing  ;  but  Ewerat  still  moved 
further  and  further  out  of  our  reach,  and  at  length  lost  his  wife  to  whom  he 
was  certainly  very  much  attached.  We  regretted  the  death  of  this  poor 
woman  extremely,  for  she  was  one  of  our  first  and  principal  acquaintance, 
and  we  knew  that  our  friend  Ewerat  would  sadly  feel  her  loss. 

On  the  7th,  the  weather  being  more  favourable  than  before,  Captain  Lyon  Sat.  7. 
and  myself  set  out  to  the  westward  at  half-past  eleven  A.M.,  and  the  ice 
proving  level,  reached  Khemig  at  half-past  five  ;  when  it  was  satisfactory  to 
find  that  the  route  followed  by  Captain  Lyon  on  his  journey  with  Toolemak 
was  precisely  that  which  I  had  supposed,  every  feature  of  the  land,  of  which 
the  fog  had  before  scarcely  allowed  him  a  glimpse,  being  now  easily  recog- 
nised and  every  difficulty  cleared  up.  Continuing  our  journey  among  the 
Coxe  Islands  till  seven  o'clock,  we  landed  upon  one  of  them,  and  were 
not  sorry  to  find  abundance  of  water  on  every  rock,  though  on  the  loose 

3  K 


»;: 


H 


'A 

\ 

m 

t 

s 


Mon.  9. 


Wed.  11 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

soil  of  the  land  about  the  ships,  none  had  yet  appeared.  Proceeding  at 
eight  A.M.  on  the  8th,  Ave  soon  met  with  numerous  tracks  of  deer  upon  the 
ice,  which,  together  with  the  seals  that  lay  in  great  numbers  near  their 
holes,  expedited  our  journey  very  considerably,  the  dogs  frequently  setting 
off  at  full  gallop  on  sniffing  one  of  them.  Landing  at  the  head  of  Quilliam 
Creek  at  half-past  one,  we  took  up  an  advantageous  position  for  looking 
about  us,  in  order  to  determine  on  the  direction  of  Captain  Lyon's  route 
over  land,  which  all  the  Esquimaux  concurred  in  representing  as  a  laborious 
one.  The  land  is  here  almost  entirely  high,  a  range  of  lofty  hills  stretch- 
ing in  a  north-west  and  south-easl  direction  at  the  back  of  the  creek,  and 
intercepting  the  view  to  the  westward.  Much  of  this  rugged  land  had  now 
lost  its  snow,  and  the  only  route  that  seemed  practicable  for  a  sledge  was 
in  about  a  S.b.E.  direction  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  which  appeared  after- 
wards to  take  a  more  westerly  turn.  We  met  with  several  rein-deer  imme- 
diately on  our  landing ;  and  while  in  pursuit  of  them  Captain  Lyon  dis- 
covered a  lake  two  or  three  miles  long  and  a  quarter  of  a  mile  broad,  a 
short  distance  from  the  tents,  which  we  concluded  to  be  that  of  which  I  was 
in  search.  As  some  of  our  party  were  suffering  from  snow-blindness  and, 
what  is  scarcely  less  painful,  severe  inflammation  of  the  whole  face  occa- 
sioned by  the  heat  of  the  sun,  we  remained  here  for  the  rest  of  this  day  to 
make  our  final  arrangements. 

At  nine  A.M.  on  the  9th  we  struck  the  tents,  and  Captain  Lyon  set  off 
to  the  southward,  while  we  drove  over  to  the  lake,  which  is  one  mile 
N.N.W.  of  the  head  of  the  creek,  and  after  three  or  four  hours'  labour 
completed  a  hole  through  the  ice,  which  was  very  dark-coloured,  brittle, 
and  transparent  and,  as  Toolemak  had  said,  about  live  feet  thick.  The 
water  which  was  eleven  fathoms  deep  flowed  up  within  a  couple  of  inches 
of  the  surface,  over  which  lay  a  covering  of  snow  eighteen  inches  in  depth. 
In  confident  hope  of  now  obtaining  some  fish,  we  proceeded  exactly  ac- 
cording to  Toolemak's  instructions  ;  but,  after  four-and-twenty  hours'  trial 
at  all  depths,  not  even  a  single  nibble  rewarded  our  labour ;  so  that  after 
obtaining  observations,  which  gave  the  latitude  of  the  head  of  the  creek 
69°  32  20",  and  its  longitude  1°  33'  14"  W.  of  the  Fury,  we  set  off  on  our 
return  down  the  creek  on  the  10th. 

Coasting  the  south  shore,  on  which  I  wished  to  obtain  observations  and 
angles  for  the  survey,  we  the  next  day  entered  a  small  bay  where  we  pitched 
our  tent ;  our  whole  party  being  so  snow-blind  with  endeavouring  to  distin- 


[\<m 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


435 


guish  the  land  from  the  ice,  (so  entirely  were  both  covered  with  snow,)  that    1823- 

.  June, 

we  could  literally  no  longer  muster  one  eye  among  three  of  us  to  direct  »^-v-^> 

the  sledge.  I  found  a  handkerchief  tied  close,  but  not  too  tightly,  round 
the  eyes  for  a  whole  night,  to  be  a  more  effectual  remedy  for  this  dis- 
agreeable complaint  than  any  application  of  eye-water ;  and  my  companions, 
being  induced  to  try  the  same  experiment,  derived  equal  benefit  from  it. 
The  12th  proved  so  inclement  a  day,  with  hard  gales  from  the  N.W.  and  Thur.  12. 
N.E.,  and  continued  snow  and  drift,  that  no  observations  ';ould  be  obtained, 
and  we  were  glad  to  keep  within  the  shelter  of  the  tent.  On  the  following 
day,  after  waiting  for  observations,  which  gave  the  lat.  69°  18'  33",  and  the  Frid.  13. 
long.  31'  36"  W.  of  the  Fury,  we  set  off  for  Arlagnuk,  where  I  wished  to 
visit  our  shooting  parties.  A  bay  on  the  south  shore,  subsequently  named 
after  Mr.  Mogg,  of  the  Hecla,  was  reserved  for  future  examination,  it  being 
impossible  to  distinguish  the  coast  line  till  the  snow  was  more  cleared  from 
the  land ;  this  was  in  fact  much  less  the  case  at  this  period  than  it  had  been 
during  the  second  week  in  May.  Reaching  Arlagnuk  towards  evening,  we 
found  that  our  parties  had  each  thirty  or  forty  ducks  ready  for  the  ships ; 
and  that  the  Esquimaux  had  lately  altogether  deserted  this  station,  owing  to 
the  scarcity  of  walruses,  and  had  removed  to  Ooglit,  where  these  animals 
were  said  to  be  abundant  at  this  season.  Leaving  our  people  on  the  morning 
of  the  14th,  I  returned  on  board  soon  after  noon,  where  I  found  that  nothing  Sat.  14. 
worthy  of  particular  notice  had  occurred  during  my  absence.  The  latitude 
of  our  tents  at  Arlagnuk,  which  was  one  mile  to  the  southward  of  the  point 
more  properly  so  called,  was,  by  the  mean  of  several  observations  by  Mr. 
Ross,  69°  11'  33",  and  I  found  it,  by  chronometer,  23'  09"  East  of  the  Fury's 
winter  station.  This  shore,  the  whole  way  along  the  south  coast  of  Hooper 
Inlet,  from  the  head  of  Quilliam  Creek,  is  composed  nearly  of  the  same  loose 
limestone  formation  as  that  of  Igloolik. 

The  golden  plovers  and  sand-pipers  now  appeared  occasionally  in  flocks, 
and  a  few  were  sometimes  brought  in  by  our  sportsmen.  Black  and  red- 
throated  divers  had  also  made  their  appearance  about  the  small  ponds  and 
lakes  at  Arlagnuk,  as  well  as  a  few  brent  and  bernacle  geese.  The  two 
latter  are  considered  by  the  Esquimaux,  though  certainly  erroneously,  as  the 
same  species,  of  which  they  take  the  bernacle  to  be  the  male  bird.  They  of 
course,  therefore,  call  both  by  one  name  (neer-luk,)  from  which,  as  we  after- 
wards learned,  the  island  of  Neerlonakto,  which  abounds  in  these  birds,  has 
received  its  appellation.     Some  silvery  gulls  and  king-ducks  began  occasion- 

3  K  2 


i.       | 


' 


i 


fc  ii\s*'Kvrwnc  v/.j 


I  flit 

1. 


I  "Mini if 


Hi 


436 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823. 
June. 


ally  to  hover  about  the  ships,  being  attracted  by  the  pools  of  water  near 
them.  These  had  now  become  considerable,  in  consequence  of  the  sand  and 
other  substances  with  which,  immediately  in  their  neighbourhood,  the  ice 
was  lightly  covered  in  many  places.  The  quickness  and  certainty  with 
which  this  process  goes  on  under  these  circumstances,  induced  me  on  this 
occasion  to  try  the  experiment  of  dispensing  with  the  usual  wTet  and  laborious 
operation  of  sawing  the  ice  round  the  Fury.  The  event  was  such  as  to  answer 
every  expectation,  not  the  smallest  injurious  strain  having  been  suffered 
by  the  ship's  bends,  notwithstanding  the  alteration  of  wTeight  and  stowage  ; 
and  the  ship  gradually  liberated  herself  by  the  dissolution  of  the  ice  about 
the  beginning  of  July.  The  Hecla  being  surrounded  by  the  masses  squeezed 
up  to  a  great  thickness  in  the  preceding  autumn,  was  obliged  to  dig  a  trench 
and,  after  sawing  the  rest,  to  pull  out  the  blocks  as  usual ;  but  with  a  single 
winter's  formation  around  a  ship,  strengthened  as  ours  were,  I  believe  she 
may  safely  be  left  to  liberate  herself,  and  that  she  will  usually  be  free  in  time 
to  take  advantage  of  the  other  ice  breaking  up. 

Frid.  20.  On  the  20th  three  or  four  other  Esquimaux,  strangers  to  us,  arrived  at 
Igloolik  from  the  northward,  and  we  found  from  two  young  men  who  visited 

Sat.  21.  us  on  the  following  day  that  they  came  from  Too-noo-nek,  a  place  undoubtedly 
situated  somewhere  on  the  western  coast  of  Baffin's  Bay,  or  about  some  of  the 
inlets  communicating  with  it,  as  they  had  there  seen  several  Kabloona  ships 
employed  in  killing  whales.  It  is  not  improbable,  from  the  various  accounts  of 
the  direction  and  distance  of  Toonoonek,  communicated  by  the  Esquimaux 
through  the  usual  medium  of  their  charts,  that  the  part  of  the  sea-coast  so 
named  lies  at  no  great  distance  from  Pond's  Bay,  in  lat.  72|°,  which  has  lately 
become  a  common  rendezvous  of  our  Davis'  Strait  fishermen.  Of  this  fact 
we  had,  in  the  course  of  the  winter,  received  intimation  from  these  people 
from  time  to  time,  and  had  even  some  reason  to  believe  that  our  visit  to  the 
Esquimaux  of  the  River  Clyde  in  1820  was  known  to  them  ;  but  what  most 
excited  our  interest  at  this  time  was  the  sledge  brought  by  the  new-comers, 
the  runners  being  composed  of  large  single  pieces  of  wood,  one  of  them 
painted  black  over  a  lead-coloured  priming,  and  the  cross-bars  consist- 
ing of  heading-pieces  of  oak-butts,  one  flat  board  with  a  hinge-mark  upon  it, 
the  upper  end  of  a  skid  or  small-boat's  davit,  and  others  that  had  evidently 
and  recently  been  procured  from  some  ship.  On  one  of  the  heading-pieces 
we  distinguished  the  letters  Brea — ,  shewing  that  the  cask  had,  according  to 
the  custom  of  the  whalers,  contained  bread  on  the  outward  passage.     The 


I 

1~u 

Si 

m* 

T\ 

w1 

Wi 

V 

L« 

-1 

*! 

\ 


'':>", 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


437 


1823. 
June. 


nature  of  all  these  materials  led  us  to  suppose  that  it  must  have  been  pro- 
cured from  some  vessel  Avrecked  or  damaged  on  the  coast ;  and  this  suspicion 
was  on  the  following  day  confirmed  by  our  obtaining  information  that,  at  a 
place  called  Akkoodneak,  a  single  day's  journey  beyond  Toonoonek,  two  ships 
like  ours  had  been  driven  on  shore  by  the  ice,  and  that  the  people  had 
gone  away  in  boats  equipped  for  the  purpose,  leaving  one  ship  on  her  beam 
ends  and  the  other  upright,  in  which  situation  the  vessels  were  supposed  still 
to  remain  *. 

We  observed  on  this  occasion,  as  on  our  first  arrival  at  Igloolik,  that  the 
neAv  Esquimaux  were  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  others  to  interpret  to 
them  our  meaning,  which  circumstance,  as  it  still  appeared  to  me,  was  to 
be  attributed  as  before  to  our  speaking  a  kind  of  broken  Esquimaux  that 
habit  had  rendered  familiar  to  our  old  acquaintance,  rather  than  to  any 
essential  difference  in  the  true  languages  of  the  two  people. 

Toolemak,  having  some  time  before  promised  to  accompany  me   to  the  Mon.  23 
fishing-place,  taking  with  him  his  wife,  together  with  his  sledge,  dogs,  and 
tent,  made  his  appearance  from  Ooglit  on  the  23d,  bringing  however  only 
the  old  lady  and  abundance  of  meat.     Having   lent   him  a  tent  and  two 
of  our  dogs,  and  hired  others  to  complete  his  establishment,  we  set  out 
together  at  five  A.M.  on  the  24th,  my  own  party  consisting  of  Mr.  CrozierTues.24, 
and  a  seaman  from  each  ship.     Arriving  at  Khemig  towards  noon,  we  found 
among  the  islands  that  the  ice  was  quite  covered  with  water,  owing  probably 
to  the  radiation  of  heat  from  the  rocks.     The  weather  indeed  proved  in- 
tensely hot  this  day,  the  thermometer  in  the  shade  at  the  ships  being  as  high  as 
51°,  and  the  land  in  this  neighbourhood  preventing  the  access  of  wind  from 
any  quarter.     The  travelling  being  good  beyond  this,  we  arrived  within  four 
or  five  miles  of  the  head  of  Quilliam  Creek  at  ten  P.M.,  where  we  pitched 
the  tents  for  the.night.  In  this  day's  journey  ten  dogs  had  drawn  my  sledge 
a  distance  of  forty  statute  miles  since  the  morning,  the  weight  on  the  sledge 
being  about  twelve  hundred  pounds  and  half  of  the  road  very  indifferent. 
It  is  the  custom  of  the  Esquimaux,  even  when  meat  is  most  abundant,  to 
feed  these  invaluable  animals  only  once  a  day,  and  that  in  the   evening, 
which  they  consider  to  agree  with  them  better  than  more  frequent  meals  ; 
we  always  observed  the  same  practice  with  ours,  and  found  that  they  per- 
formed their  journeys  the  better  for  it. 

*  We  have  since  heard  that  these  ships  were  the  Dexterity  of  Leith  and  the  Aurora  of 
Hull,  which  were  wrecked  on  the  28th  of  August  1821,  about  the  latitude  of  72°. 


ilMffiHll 


i 


y 

= 

< 

Ml,  ' 
i 

fci 

R 

I 

i 

.< 

438 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823. 
June. 


■Hi 


We  saw  in  the  course  of  the  day  a  few  deer,  numerous  king  and  long- 
tailed  ducks,  and  red-throated  divers  ;  also  some  geese  then  new  to  us,  and 
which,  on  procuring  a  specimen  a  day  or  two  after,  proved  to  be  the  snow- 
goose  (anas  hyberborea).  These  last  are  fond  of  feeding  on  the  wet  grass 
and  moss  on  the  banks  of  the  numerous  streams  and  lakes  in  this  country. 
They  were  seen  at  Arlagnuk,  and  by  Captain  Lyon  on  his  journey,  about  the 
same  time,  so  that  the  period  of  their  arrival  in  this  latitude  seems  to  have 
been  very  well  marked. 
Wed.  25.  On  the  morning  of  the  25th,  while  passing  close  to  a  point  of  land, 
Toolemak  suddenly  stopped  his  sledge,  and  he  and  his  wife  walked  to  the 
shore,  whither  I  immediately  followed  them.  The  old  woman,  preceding 
her  husband,  went  up  to  a  circle  of  stones,  of  which  there  were  two  or  three 
on  the  spot,  and  kneeling  down  within  it  cried  most  loudly  and  bitterly  for 
the  space  of  two  or  three  minutes,  while  Toolemak  also  shed  abundant  tears, 
but  without  any  loud  lamentation.  On  inquiring  presently  after,  I  found 
that  this  was  the  spot  on  which  their  tent  had  been  pitched  in  the  summer, 
and  that  the  bed-place  on  which  the  old  woman  knelt  had  been  that  of  their 
adopted  son  Noogloo,  whose  premature  death  we  had  all  so  much  regretted. 
The  grief  displayed  on  this  occasion  seemed  to  have  much  sincerity  in  it, 
and  there  was  something  extremely  touching  in  this  quiet  but  unaffected 
tribute  of  sorrow  on  the  spot,  which  so  forcibly  reminded  them  of  the  object 
of  their  parental  affection.  I  have  much  gratification  in  adding  in  this  place 
another  circumstance  which,  though  trifling  in  itself,  deserves  to  be  no- 
ticed as  doing  honour  to  these  people's  hearts.  They  had  always  shewn  par- 
ticular attachment  to  a  dog  they  had  sold  me,  and  which  bore  the  same 
name  as  a  young  man,  a  son  of  their  own,  whom  they  had  formerly  lost.  In 
the  course  of  this  journey,  the  old  woman  would  constantly  call  the  dog 
"  Eerninga"  (son),  which  the  affectionate  animal  never  failed  to  repay  by 
jumping  up  and  licking  her  face  all  over,  whenever  his  trace  would  allow 
him  ;  and  at  night,  after  Toolemak  had  fed  his  own  dogs,  he  frequently 
brought  to  our  tent  an  extra  piece  of  meat  expressly  for  Annuwtalik,  to  whom 
these  poor  people  seemed  to  take  a  mournful  pleasure  in  now  transferring 
their  affection. 

Landing  close  to  the  head  of  the  inlet  on  the  south  shore,  we  proceeded 
with  difficulty  a  couple  of  miles  over  land  till  we  came  to  a  river,  the  limits 
of  which  the  warmth  of  the  weather  was  just  rendering  discernible,  and 
which  our  guides  informed  us  was  to  be  our  fishing-place.     It  was  interest- 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


439 


ing  to  observe  that,  in  every  case  of  doubt  as  to  the  situation  of  a  place,    1823- 
the  best  route,  or  the  most  advisable  method  of  overcoming  any  difficulty,  vi^L 
Toolemak  invariably  referred  to  his  wife  ;  and  a  consultation  of  some  minutes 
was  held  by  these  two  before  they  would  determine  on  what  was  to  be  done, 
or  even  return  an  answer  to  our  questions  respecting  it.     Pitching  our  tents 
upon  the  banks  of  the  river,  we  went  upon  the  ice,  which  was  still  quite 
solid  except  close  to  the  shores,  and  soon  made  two  or  three  holes  for  a  hook 
and  line,  the  thickness  of  the  ice  in  the  middle  being  from  six  to  seven  feet. 
The  Esquimaux  fish-hook  is  generally  composed  of  a  piece  of  ivory,  having  a 
hook  of  pointed  iron,  without  a  barb,  let  into  it.  The  ivory  they  consider  useful 
in  attracting  the  salmon,  but  they  also  bait  the  hook  with  a  piece  of  blubber 
well  cleared  of  its  oil  by  chewing,  and  securely  tied  on  with  a  thread  of  sinew 
so  as  to  cover  nearly  the  whole  of  the  hook.    A  small  piece  of  bone,  rein-deer's 
horn,  or  wood,  serves  as  a  rod,  and  with  this  they  keep  the  bait  constantly 
in  motion  up  and  down,  the  bait  being  from  one  to  three  feet  below  the 
lower  surface  of  the  ice.     Previously  however  to  commencing  the  fishery, 
the  old  lady,  who  took  the  principal  part  in  this  employment,  muttered  some 
words,  to  me  altogether  incomprehensible,  over  the  hole,  to  which  Toolemak 
in  a  formal  manner,  added  something  about  fish  and  Kabloonas ;  and  the 
whole  of  this  preparatory  ceremony  seemed  intended  to  propitiate  the  spirit, 
to  whose  department  the  salmon  particularly  belonged.     The  lady   (for  it 
seems  she  is  a  female)  did  not,  however,  appear  to  lend  a  very  favourable  ear 
to  our  wants  or  Toolemak's  rhetoric,  for  after  many  hours'  patient  trial  on  this 
and  the  following  day,  only  two  fish  were  seen  and  one  caught  to  repay  Thur.  26. 
our  labour. 

On  the  27th  Toolemak  and  his  wife  went  over  to  a  small  shallow  lake  Frid.  27. 
on  the  opposite  side  of  the  river,  where  they  caught  three  or  four  fish  of 
the    salmon  kind,  but   none  more   than  one  pound    in  weight.     He  then 
came  back  to  the  tent,  and  made  a  small  spear  according  to  their  own 
fashion  ;  but  with  this,  to  his  great  disappointment,  he  could  not  strike  a 
single  fish.     A  sort  of  fish-gig,  which  we  made  out  of  four  large  hooks  lashed 
back  to  back  at  the  end  of  a  light  staff,  succeeded  much  better,  the  bait 
being  played  in  the  usual  manner  to  attract  the  fish,  which  were  then  hooked 
up  with  great  ease  and  certainty  by  this  instrument.     In  this  manner  we 
soon  caught  a  dozen  of  the  same  kind  as  before,  and  the  rest  of  our  party 
had  in  the  mean  time  killed  a  deer. 
Toolemak  began  now  to  be  extremely  impatient  to  return  home,  his  prin-  Sat  28, 


>MU. 


Jli<UHJI. 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

cipal  anxiety  arising,  I  believe,  from  a  childish  desire  to  know  what  I 
should  give  him  for  his  trouble  ;  and  when,  in  writing  a  note  to  Lieutenant 
Nias,  1  enumerated  the  articles  I  intended  to  present  to  him,  he  expressed 

ever  before  seen  escape  him.  Among  these 
was  one  of  the  rifle-guns  supplied  as  presents,  together  with  a  sufficient 
quantity  of  ammunition  to  last  him  one  summer,  after  which  the  gun  would 
probably  become  useless  itself  for  want  of  cleaning.  It  was  astonishing  to 
see  the  readiness  with  which  these  people  learned  to  fire  at  a  mark,  and 
the  tact  they  displayed  in  every  thing  relating  to  this  art.  Boys  from  twelve 
to  sixteen  years  of  age  would  fire  a  fowling-piece,  for  the  first  time,  with 
perfect  steadiness ;  and  the  men,  with  very  little  practice,  would  very  soon 
become  superior  marksmen*.  As,  however,  the  advantage  they  could  derive 
from  the  use  of  fire-arms  must  be  of  very  short  duration,  and  the  danger 
to  any  careless  individuals  very  considerable,  we  did  not  on  any  other  occa- 
sion consider  it  prudent  to  furnish  them  in  this  manner. 

On  the  morning  of  the  28th,  Toolooak  left  us  for  the  ships,  carrying  with 
him  our  venison  to  be  left  there,  and  having  first  explained  when  and  where 
the  Esquimaux  catch  the  fish  with  which  he  had  supplied  us  the  preceding 
summer ;  for  it  now  appeared  that  they  were  not  found  in  great  abundance, 
or  of  that  magnitude,  in  the  river  ;  but  at  the  mouth  of  a  very  small  stream 
about  two  miles  lower  down  the  creek  on  the  same  side.  Their  method  is, 
to  place  in  the  bed  of  the  stream,  which  is  quite  narrow  and  seldom  or 
never  so  deep  as  a  man's  middle  though  running  with  great  force,  two  or 
three  separate  piles  of  stones,  which  serve  the  double  purpose  of  keeping  off 
the  force  of  the  stream  from  themselves,  and  of  narrowing  the  passage 
through  which  the  fish  have  to  pass  in  coming  up  from  the  sea  to  feed  ;  thus 
giving  the  people  an  opportunity  of  striking  them  with  their  spears,  and 
throwing  them  on  shore  without  much  difficulty.  We  at  first  supposed  that 
the  salmon  ascended  the  stream  into  lakes  above  for  the  purpose  of  spaAvn- 
ing ;  but  this  could  not  here  be  the  case,  as  the  water  became  much  too 
shallow  for  this  at  less  than  a  hundred  yards  from  the  sea.     Our  fishermen 

*  A  fine  lad,  of  about  sixteen,  being  one  day  out  in  a  boat  with  one  of  our  gentlemen  at 
Arlagnuk,  reminded  him,  with  a  serious  face,  that  he  had  laid  a  gun  down  full-cocked. 
There  happened  to  be  no  charge  in  the  gun  at  the  time ;  but  this  was  a  proof  of  the  attention 
the  boy  had  paid  to  the  art  of  using  fire-arms,  as  well  as  an  instance  of  considerate  and  manly 
caution,  scarcely  to  have  been  expected  in  an  individual  of  that  age. 


§L 


___^w^^  W^>^*^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


441 


afterwards  found  that  they  never  went  up  a  quarter  of  that  distance,  merely 
playing  about  the  entrance  to  pick  up  their  food,  which  was  found  to 
consist  of  a  very  small  fish  abundant  at  the  mouth  of  the  stream.  The 
latter  are  probably  therefore  brought  down  by  the  streams  at  this  season 
from  the  lakes  above,  and  occasion  the  salmon  to  resort  to  the  spots  in 
which,  it  seems,  they  are  annually  found  by  the  Esquimaux.  With  respect 
to  their  spawning,  it  does  not  appear  necessary  for  them  to  ascend  any 
streams  for  that  purpose,  if  abundance  of  fresh  water  be  all  that  is  requisite 
for  it ;  as  the  water  of  the  creek  was  not  merely  drinkable,  but  perfectly 
fresh  almost  down  to  its  entrance. 

After  Toolemak's  departure  Ave  remained  two  or  three  days  longer,  but 
only  succeeded  in  killing  one  more  deer  and  three  or  four  dozen  fish  of  the 
same  kind  and  size  as  before.  The  whole  country  had  by  this  time  become 
almost  deluged  with  water,  innumerable  ponds  and  streams  appearing  on 
every  side,  as  if  all  at  once  let  loose  by  magic;  so  rapid  had  been  the  change 
during  a  single  week  of  fair  and  temperate  weather  !  The  ice  on  the  deep 
lakes  was  from  five  to  seven  feet  in  thickness,  and  bade  fair  not  to  be  entirely 
dissolved  during  the  summer ;  that  on  the  shallow  ones  was  already  very 
thin  and  rapidly  decaying. 

The  river  we  were  now  leaving,  and  which  I  named  after  my  companion 
Mr.  Crozier,   was   about  three  hundred  yards  in  breadth  abreast  of  our 
tents  ;  but  this  part  afterwards  proved  only  a  small  branch  of  it,  the  main 
stream  coming  from  the  south-eastward  along  the  foot  of  the   hills  which 
Captain  Lyon  was  endeavouring  to  pass  ;  and  indeed,  as  we  had  every  reason 
subsequently  to  believe,  being  the  very  route  he  had  pursued,  though  it  was 
then  so  completely  covered  with  snow  in  most  parts  as  to  allow  the  ice  to  be 
distinguished  only  in  a  few  places.     The  rocks  in  this  neighbourhood  are 
principally  composed  of  a  reddish  granite,  but  gneiss  also  frequently  appears 
among  them.     The  sides  of  many  of  these  are  quite  precipitous,  in  which 
case  water,  either  in  a  stream  or  a  lake,  is  generally  found  at  their  base. 
There  is,  however,  between  the  hills  abundant  vegetation,  affording  excel- 
lent feeding  for  the  deer  which  were  at  this  time  very  scarce  here.     The 
lakes  and  ponds  are  the  resort  of  numerous  ducks  of  the  king  and  long- 
tailed  species,  and  a  few  red-throated  divers.     We  saw  also  some  brent  and 
snow-geese,  and  Mr.  Crozier  obtained  a  single  specimen  of  the  latter.     A 
bird  like  a  crane,  standing  three  or  four  feet  high,  and  with  very  long  legs, 
fairly  outran  our  party  in  a  long  chase,  and  then  with  difficulty  rose  on  the 

3   I 


1823. 
June. 


:  ■::       i   I 


•N 


I 


■ 


»ilU»  !> 


K.  ■ 


\m\ 


2VSE2 


n*G* 


mssrx-i 


442 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


i 


'4,,"JJpii 


wing.     We  supposed  this  to  have  been  the  ardea  canadensis,  one  of  which 
species  was  killed  by  Captain  Lyon  on  his  journey  back  to  the  ships. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  1st  of  July  we  shifted  our  tents  over  land  and 
TueY'l.  down  the  creek  as  far  as  the  salmon  stream.     In  performing  this  short 
journey  over  bare  ground,  I  was  enabled  to  form  some  conception  of  the 
difficulties  likely  to  be  encountered  by  Captain  Lyon   and  his  companions  ; 
for  even  with  our  light  load  the  dogs  could  scarcely  move  at  times.     One  of 
the  strongest  of  eleven  fell  down  in  a  fit,  occasioned  by  over-exertion  ;  the 
poor  animal  lay  on  his  side,  foaming  at  the  mouth  for  a  minute  or  two,  but 
soon  recovered  sufficiently  to  be  able  to  walk  ;  and  being  taken  out  of  the 
sledge  was  quite  strong  again  the  next  day.     We  had  scarcely  arrived  at 
the  stream,  when  Toolemak's  account  was  very  satisfactorily  confirmed  by 
our  finding  on  the  ice  near  its  mouth  part  of  two  fine  salmon,  above  two 
feet  in  length,  that  had  been  thrown  up  by  the  force  of  the  torrent,  and  a 
similar  one  was  seen  in  the  water.      Our  provisions  being  now  out,  we  pre- 
pared for  returning  to  the  ships  the  following  day  ;  and  I  determined  in  a 
short  time  to  send  out  Mr.  Crozier  with  a  larger  party,  well  equipped  with 
every  thing  necessary  for  procuring  us  both  fish  and  deer.     We  therefore 
left  our  tent,  spare  ammunition,  and  various  other  articles  that  would  be 
required  here,  buried  under  a  heap  of  stones  near  the  stream,  and  on  the 
Wed.  2.  morning  of  the  2d,  set  out  for  the  ships.     The  change  which  one  week  had 
'  made  upon  the  ice  it  is  quite  impossible  to  conceive,  the  whole  surface  being 
now  chequered  with  large  and  deep  pools  of  water,  where  not  a  symptom  of 
thawing  had  before  appeared.     This  continued  the  whole  way  to  the  ships, 
which  we  reached  at  eight  P.M.,  finding  Captain  Lyon  and  his  party  returned, 
after  a  laborious  but  unsuccessful  endeavour  to  penetrate  over  land  to  the 
westward.     The  following  account  of  this  excursion  was  accompanied  by  a 
chart  illustrating  the  position  of  the  mountainous  land  and  the  daily  route 
of  the  party,  which  have  been  transferred  to  the  general  survey. 


June  9. 


"  On  the  9th  separating  from  Captain  Parry,  we  proceeded  in  a  S.S.E. 
direction  over  what  appeared  a  level  plain,  while  on  the  right  our  view  was 
bounded  by  rugged  mountains  of  granite.  As  we  advanced  the  weather 
gradually  thickened,  and  a  heavy  S.W.  wind  accompanied  by  small  snow  and 
drift,  hid  the  land  from  us,  so  that  we  could  strike  into  no  direct  course  for 
the  sledge.     At  noon  therefore,  having  travelled  three  hours,  we  tented  on 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


3 

s 


10. 


11. 


the  snow  to  vait  for  better  weather ;  thermometer  40°.  Towards  evening 
the  snow  ceased,  and  at  six  P.M.  we  again  moved  forward  over  a  plain  so 
flat  that  I  fancied  it  was  a  lake,  until  by  accidentally  breaking  through  the 
deep  crust  of  snow  which  covered  it,  we  saw  moss  and  grass.  At  thirty 
minutes  after  ei^ht  the  Aveather  again  thickened,  but  before  it  did  so  we 
were  enabled  to  observe  that  the  low  land  ran  for  several  miles  in  a  southerly 
direction.  The  granite  mountains  at  this  part  assumed  a  more  rounded 
form  and  were  enirely  covered  with  snow.  Having  travelled  in  the  course 
of  this  day  above  tight  hours,  S.S.E.,  we  tented  for  the  night  on  the  snow. 
A  heavy  gale  with  tiick  snow  and  drift  continued  to  render  us  very  uncom- 
fortable at  a  temperature  of  25°. 

"  This  severe  weaher  continued  until  five  P.M.  on  the  10th,  when  the 
snow  ceased,  but  the  sky  was  so  cloudy,  and  the  view  so  limited  that  we 
remained  completely  h  the  dark  as  to  our  road.  Determining  however  to 
attempt  to  make  some  \esting,  we  ascended  some  high  and  rounded  hills  in 
nearly  a  west  direction.  The  recently  fallen  snow  was  so  deep  that  the  dogs 
were  buried  to  their  belli*,  and  even  our  snow-shoes  were  but  of  little  assist- 
ance to  us.  A  flock  of  se  en  ducks  passed  us  flying  to  the  south-west.  After 
two  hours'  extreme  exerti<n  we  reached  the  summit  of  the  smooth  hills,  and 
thence  saw  a  chain  of  mountains  lying  immediately  across  our  path  at  about 
three  miles'  distance. 

"  Heavy  snow  and  calm  \eather  obliged  us  to  tent  on  the  hills,  which,  on 
clearing  away  the  snow  for  i  sleeping-place,  we  found  to  be  covered  with 
shingle  limestone  on  a  bed  of  yellow  marl.  Thermometer,  at  ten  P.M.,  20°. 
Heavy  snow  all  night ;  and  onthe  11th  it  still  continued  to  fall  thickly  until 
thirty  minutes  after  three  P. It.,  when  clearing  a  little,  I  determined  on 
attempting  to  pass  through  a  snail  opening  in  the  mountains  about  W.S.W. 
of  us.  The  snow  which  had  niw  fallen  with  but  little  intermission  for  two 
days  and  nights  was  so  deep,  tint  we  proceeded  very  slowly  and  with  great 
labour,  and  the  mountains  were  as  completely  covered  as  in  the  middle  of 
winter.  After  two  hours'  toil  in  ascending  a  steep  hill  we  arrived  on  what 
we  conceived  was  good  table  land,  when  we  suddenly  found  ourselves  on  the 
brink  of  a  precipice,  and  a  chain  of  mountains  extending  from  north  to  S.E. 
On  stopping  the  sledge  it  sank  so  deep  in  a  wreath  of  snow  that  all  our 
efforts  to  move  it  were  in  vain  ;  fee  dogs  were  quite  overcome,  and  we  were 
quite  at  a  stand.  We  therefore  unloaded  it  and  threw  away  about  one  hun- 
dred weight  of  such  things  as  could  be  spared,  after  which  about  half  an 


B 


*  *^tf^xw^rv*^  r£r*< 


OP  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


445 


June. 


14.. 


hour's  labour  extricated  it.  When  reloaded  it  overset  and  I  was  almost 
tempted  to  abandon  it,  for  I  saw  how  impossible  it  was  for  even  an  unloaded 
man  to  climb  the  snow-covered  and  steep  mountains  west  of  us.  I  however 
resolved  at  last  on  returning  to  the  low  land,  and  by  tracking  along  the  foot 
of  the  hills,  look  out  for  the  first  opening  to  the  westward.  Seven  hours' 
travelling  over  the  plain  brought  us  to  the  foot  of  a  mountain  which  I  had 
observed  to  bear  about  S.E.,  and  here  we  tented. 

'  A  heavy  snow-gale  confined  us  to  the  tent  during  the  12th  and  13th,  and  12.  &  13 
a  part  of  the  14th,  a  few  minutes'  sun  at  noon  on  the  13th,  (the  first  time  we 
had  seen  it  since  leaving  Captain  Parry,)  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  obtain- 
ing the  meridian  altitude,  and  on  the  14th  by  sights  for  the  chronometer,  I 
obtained  the  longitude.     Lat.  69°  15'  6"  long.,  1°  11'  30"  W.  of  Hecla. 

'  At  five  P.M.  on  the  14th,  we  proceeded  in  a  south-easterly  direction 
along  the  foot  of  the  rocky  hills.  On  the  snow  which  was  very  soft  we 
saw  a  bear's  track,  and  on  a  patch  of  shingle  found  several  sea-shells. 
Five  hours'  travelling  brought  us  to  the  end  of  the  chain  of  hills,  and  from 
this  point  we  saAV  the  ship  with  a  glass  about  N.E.,  twenty  miles.  I  had 
for  some  time  suspected  that  we  had  taken  the  wrong  route,  as  no  Es- 
quimaux could  have  passed  with  a  sledge  over  the  mountains  at  whose 
feet  we  had  been  travelling  ;  I  had  however  better  hopes  at  this  place  by 
seeing  the  hills  become  lower  and  trend  to  the  south-westward,  which  an- 
swered in  a  great  measure  with  the  Esquimaux  description  of  the  land  they 
passed  over.  At  the  foot  of  this  point  lay  a  narrow  lake  of  about  three 
miles  in  length,  and  near  it  was  a  small  but  deep  craggy  ravine.  On  the 
shingle  ridges  we  saw  several  Esquimaux  circles,  and  a  golden  plover  passed 
us  on  the  Aving.  Travelling  hence  about  three  miles  southerly  we  tented  on 
the  snow,  the  wind  being  at  N.W.,  and  the  night  extremely  cold. 

"  The  morning  of  the  15th  was  thick  and  cold  and  the  N.W.  wind  was 
unabated.  Soon  after  noon  we  proceeded  in  a  westerly  direction  but  with- 
out having  any  fixed  object  to  guide  us.  In  this  manner  we  travelled  for  two 
hours,  when  the  weather  clearing  Ave  saw  the  hills  turning  to  the  soutrnvard, 
to  which  direction  Ave  altered  our  course  ;  and  having  gone  fonvard  for  tAVO 
hours  more,  tented  on  the  snoAv  for  a  short  time  as  tAvo  of  the  dogs  Avere  so 
fatigued  as  to  be  scarcely  able  to  walk.  In  fact,  the  whole  of  them  were  much 
distressed,  for  they  were  unaccustomed  to  land  travelling,  and  the  depth 
of  the  snow  ahvays  caused  the  sledge  to  hang  as  a  dead  Aveight.  At  nine 
P.M.,  having  rested,  we  proceeded  and  travelled  until  one  A.M.  on  the 


iiii'S 


l II'  i  - rl:t!-'  '    ' 


in  I; 


15. 


rilii.iii'i 


1VUU* 


^Vnaa^ 


•in. 


ii 


1823. 
June. 


16. 


17. 


446 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


16th,  when  we  tented  on  some  flat  rocks  on  which  we  procured  abundance 
of  water,  which  luxury  we  had  hitherto  enjoyed  but  sparingly.  We  here 
saw  one  small  plant  of  saxifrage  in  blossom. 

"  The  morning  of  the  16th  was  mild  and  fine,  but  towards  noon  wind 
and  sleet  came  strong  from  the  westward  :  as  our  snow-shoes  required  repair 
and  our  feet  were  much  blistered,  I  took  advantage  of  our  being  on  a 
good  dry  rock  to  refresh  ourselves  and  dogs.  We  saw  a  fox,  two  plovers, 
and  several  buntings.  Deer  tracks  were  numerous  and  recent,  but  the  howl- 
ing and  fighting  of  our  wild  and  restless  dogs  quite  drove  the  animals  away 
from  us. 

"  In  the  evening  we  advanced  and,  following  the  direction  of  the  moun- 
tains on  our  right,  made  a  south-easterly  course  over  a  large  lake  of  about 
ten  miles  in  length  by  from  one  to  four  in  breadth,  on  the  shores  of  which 
in  some  places  the  ice  was  pushed  up  in  high  transparent  hummocks,  we 
saw  some  wolf  tracks,  and  a  few  plovers,  knots,  and  sandlings.  One  deer 
passed  at  a  distance.  At  this  place  there  was  not  an  eminence  in  any  direc- 
tion which  was  without  some  piles  of  stones  placed  by  the  Esquimaux 
hunters.  Turning  the  hills  to  the  S.S.W.  we  passed  over  low  but  exceed- 
ingly rocky  ground,  amongst  which  the  snow  was  continually  knee-deep, 
and  the  poor  dogs  were  so  exhausted  that  we  were  obliged  to  stop  on  a 
little  rock  in  a  lake  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains.  The  whole  day  had  been 
so  cloudy  and  thick  that  we  had  no  idea  of  what  kind  of  country  lay  beyond 
us.  The  snow  was  literally  covered  by  deer-tracks,  and  we  saw  three  of 
these  animals  but  the  dogs  frightened  them  from  us. 

"  A  fresh  easterly  wind  was  blowing  on  the  17th,  which  was  very  cold. 
In  order  to  obtain  a  view  amongst  the  mountains,  I  walked  out,  accompanied 
by  one  of  the  men,  for  nine  hours,  and  we  got  about  eight  miles  south  of  the 
tent  to  the  top  of  the  highest  place  we  could  find.  From  hence  we  saw- 
about  fifteen  miles  over  other  mountains  extending  from  north  to  south-east, 
while  on  the  left  the  appearance  of  low  land  was  unaltered.  On  our  return, 
we  killed  a  doe,  of  which  I  gave  the  better  half  as  a  refreshment  to  the  dogs. 
At  half-past  two  P.M.  on  the  18th  we  started  south-east  about  eight  miles  over 
a  lake  to  a  low  point,  at  which  we  were  obliged  to  tent  for  the  night,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  heavy  snow-storm  which  prevented  our  seeing  half  a  mile  in  any 
direction.  While  tenting,  a  large  buck  walked  slowly  past  us,  and  was 
killed  ;  of  this  animal  we  gave  two-thirds  to  the  dogs. 

"  The  night  was  bleak  and  tempestuous,  and  we  found  on  the  morning 


i  ^a^MAiJ^r^sr^^^m^^frs >m j£      i  *ev. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


447 


'I  I 


of  the  19th  that  the  snow  had  fallen  some  inches  in  depth,  and  the  whole    J823- 

June. 


country  round  us  was  covered.  Towards  noon  it  ceased  snowing,  but  the 
piercing  cold  gale  was  unabated  and  drift  flew  in  clouds.  Soon  after  two 
P.M.  we  quitted  the  point  for  another,  which  still  bore  about  south-east,  at 
which  we  arrived,  after  passing  over  a  very  flat  plain  or  lake  for  about  seven 
miles.  The  snow  was  here  firmer  than  we  had  found  it  of  late,  and  the 
mountains  formed  a  bight  of  about  four  miles  in  depth  on  our  right.  From 
this  point  a  distant  part  of  the  range  bore  south,  and  promised  to  turn  to  the 
westward,  as  we  could  see  nothing  beyond  it ;  we  in  consequence  proceeded 
briskly  for  it,  and  had  travelled  six  miles  or  half-way,  Avhen  we  saw  it  take 
a  sweep  to  very  distant  hills,  south-east.  '  All  my  hopes  of  making  westing 
now  ceased,  and  I  was  aware  that  nothing  could  be  done  in  this  direction, 
which  certainly  was  not  the  route  crossed  by  the  natives  in  their  passage  to 
the  Western  Sea.  I  therefore  struck  from  off  the  plain  to  the  foot  of  the 
high  land  about  three  miles  on  our  right,  where  we  tented,  and  I  determined 
on  waiting  till  the  gale  should  moderate,  when  I  could  retrace  my  steps  to 
Quilliam  Creek,  and  from  thence  proceed,  if  the  season  Avould  permit,  in 
some  other  direction. 

The  north-east  gale  continued  during  the  fore  part  of  the  day,  yet  I 
should  have  set  out  had  it  not  been  for  the  severe  pain  it  caused  our  faces, 
and  its  influence  on  our  snow-shoes,  which  it  sometimes  turned  quite  aside 
and  almost  tripped  us  up.  Four  large  white  birds,  with  black-tipped  wings, 
passed  at  some  distance.  In  the  afternoon  we  started,  and  travelling  eight 
hours  over  the  snow,  which  was  somewhat  hardened  by  the  gale,  reached 
the  little  rocky  isle  on  which  we  had  passed  the  17th. 

"  The  wind  was  unabated  on  the  21st,  and  at  three  P.M.  we  started,  but 
were  soon  detained  by  one  of  the  dogs  slipping  his  harness  and  giving  chase 
to  a  couple  of  deer,  which  he  pursued  with  great  spirit  to  the  hills,  where  he 
soon  disappeared,  regardless  of  all  our  cries  to  stop  him.  At  the  expiration  of 
a  couple  of  hours,  and  when  we  had  advanced  two  or  three  miles,  giving  him 
up  for  lost,  we  saw  him  tracking  our  footsteps,  and  he  soon  came  up  much 
fatigued.  We  travelled  nine  hours  on  this  day,  yet  very  slowly,  for  I  had 
sprained  my  foot  amongst  the  rocks  some  days  before  and  it  had  now 
become  very  troublesome.  Soon  after  midnight  we  arrived  and  tented  at 
the  place  where  we  slept  on  the  16th ;  deer  were  abundant,  and  a  buck  was 
shot  near  the  tent.  We  this  day  saw  four  brent-geese  and  several  large 
flocks  of  ducks. 


19. 


'"Ill 


20. 


21. 


Hi'! 


»|H:ll, 


448 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"  As  my  leg  was  swoln  and  painful,  I  determined  on  resting  for  the  day, 
which  was  warm  but  gloomy,  the  thaw  proceeding  very  rapidly.  With  the 
exception  of  saxifrage,  I  observed  no  plant  in  bloom,  but  the  grasses  and 
mosses  were  shooting  luxuriantly,  and  promised  abundant  provision  to  the 
vast  quantities  of  deer  which  we  continually  saw.  In  fact,  such  was  their 
number,  that  had  we  been  employed  as  a  shooting,  instead  of  a  travelling 
party,  we  might  have  procured  enough  to  supply  both  ships  constantly,  were 
they  not  too  distant  for  the  conveyance  of  the  venison. 

"  The  23d  was  fine  and  very  warm,  which  softened  the  snow  so  much  that 
the  snow-shoes  sank  several  inches  at  every  step.  Starting  at  five  P.M.,  we 
travelled  for  nine  hours  over  the  still  deeply-covered  plain,  in  order  to  reach 
the  point  whence  we  had  seen  the  ships ;  Ave  here  found  the  valley  quite 
flooded,  and  the  ravine  beginning  to  run.  While  we  were  tenting,  we  saw  a 
fox  prowling  on  a  hill-side,  and  heard  him  for  some  hours  after,  in  different 
places,  imitating  the  cry  of  the  brent-goose.  The  night  was  cold,  and  we 
felt  it  very  sensibly  after  the  most  sultry  day  I  ever  remember  to  have  seen 
in  this  country  ;  our  faces  and  hands  smarted  most  severely  and  were  much 
swollen  by  the  scorching  of  the  sun.  The  24th  was  also  a  very  hot  day,  and 
I  found  the  country  so  universally  flooded  that  I  gave  up  all  idea  of  proceed- 
ing for  Quilliam  Creek,  and  determined  during  the  night  to  make  for  the 
ships.  When  the  evening  cooled  we  proceeded  over  the  plain,  and  wading, 
rather  than  walking,  through  deep  snow  and  water  for  eight  hours,  arrived 
at  four  A.M.  on  the  25th  at  the  sea-side,  about  eight  miles  to  the  south-west 
of  the  ships.  Here  we  gladly  tented  and  rested  ;  Dunn  killed  a  brown  and 
ash-coloured  crane  (ardea  canadiensis,  Linn.)  which  pitched  near  us. 

"  Starting  at  four  A.M.  on  the  26th,  we  waded  for  eight  hours  to  the 
ships,  and  when  amongst  the  hummocks,  about  a  mile  from  the  Hecla,  were 
so  completely  buried  in  the  wet  snow,  that  we  were  obliged  to  make  a  signal 
for  assistance,  as  we  were  too  much  fatigued  to  clear  the  sledge.  A  party 
was  sent,  and  with  their  help  we  arrived  on  board  at  noon. 

"  We  had  now  obtained  sufficient  proof  that  no  passage  was  practicable 
in  a  southerly  direction  to  the  sea,  and  had  also  learned  by  experience  the 
extreme  difficulty  of  carrying  a  sledge  over  land,  even  with  so  fine  a  team  of 
dogs  as  mine.  That  some  other  way  might  be  found  to  obtain  a  view  of  the 
Western  Sea,  I  was  yet  in  hopes  ;  but  it  was  not  possible  to  pass  over  land 
at  this  time,  from  the  state  in  which  the  thawing  had  left  the  snow.  A  more 
advanced  period  of  the  season  might  perhaps  be  more  favourable  ;  but  even 


v .  o  jk ^wxtf^'v*»2ff^»:m^>£^-sHi^      ■  *r*< 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


449 


a  walking  party,  laden  with  tent  and  provisions,  would  make  but  little  pro-     1823 
gress  over  the  mountains."  ^ne* 


Pii 

'it.!  "" i., 


Had  it  not  been  for  our  preceding  year's  experience  in  this  neighbourhood,  ju]y 
the  present  appearance  of  the  ice,  and  the  rapid  progress  which  it  seemed  Wed-  2- 
to  be  daily  making  towards  dissolution,  would  have  flattered  us  with  hopes  of 
an  early  release,  which,  as  we  now  too  well  know,  must  have  ended  in  dis- 
appointment. The  space  we  had  covered  with  sand,  and  which  was  now 
called  the  canal,  was  from  a  foot  to  eighteen  inches  deep,  with  water 
throughout  its  whole  extent ;  and  such  was  the  benefit  evidently  to  be  de- 
rived from  it,  that  could  the  same  thing  have  been  carried  the  whole  way 
down  to  the  open  water,  the  first  south-easterly  gale  would  probably  have 
caused  a  total  disruption,  and  at  once  liberated  the  ships.  As  it  was,  there 
could  be  little  doubt  that  it  would  still  very  considerably  facilitate  our  escape, 
which,  with  this  assistance,  it  was  reasonable  to  hope  might  yet  be  effected 
before  the  conclusion  of  the  month  of  July,  though  we  had  still  six  miles  of 
ice  interposed  between  us  and  the  open  water. 

Our  shooting  parties  to  the  southward  had  of  late  been  tolerably  suc- 
cessful, not  less  than  two  hundred  and  thirty  ducks  having  been  sent  in  to 
the  ships  in  the  course  of  the  last  week.  Mr.  Ross  had  procured  a  specimen 
of  a  gull  having  a  black  ring  round  its  neck,  and  which,  in  its  present  plu- 
mage, we  could  not  find  described.  This  bird  was  alone  when  it  was  killed, 
but  flying  at  no  great  distance  from  a  flock  of  tern,  which  latter  it  somewhat 
resembles  in  size  as  well  as  in  its  red  legs ;  but  is  on  closer  inspection  easily 
distinguished  by  its  beak  and  tail,  as  well  as  by  a  beautiful  tint  of  most 
delicate  rose-colour  on  its  breast. 

The  first  continued  rain  that  Ave  had  seen  this  season  fell  for  several 
hours  on  the  morning  of  the  2d,  though  a  few  drops  had  before  been 
observed  on  the  15th  and  29th  of  June.  For  the  remainder  of  the  month 
of  July  we  experienced  a  great  deal  of  rain  and  fog,  with  long  southerly  and 
easterly  winds,  and  a  high  mean  daily  temperature. 

On  my  arrival  at  the  ships  I  found  several  new  Esquimaux  on  board  who, 
to  the  number  of  twenty,  had  lately  arrived  from  Toonoomt-roocUuk,  a  place 
situated  to  the  westward  and  northward  of  Igloolik  and  somewhere  upon 
the  opposite  coast  of  Cockburn  Island.  The  distance  to  this  place  was 
stated  by  the  Esquimaux  to  be  from  six  to  eight  days'  journey,  of  which  one 

3  M 


tilliii 


^ti 


?■; 


|!||IMM 


PS 


450 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823.  only  was  occupied  in  crossing  to  the  great  northern  inlet  we  had  seen  on 
Jl^L  this  side  of  Cockburn  Island,  and  the  rest  in  travelling  overland  to  a  corre- 
sponding inlet  of  the  sea,  on  the  other.  This  party  confirmed  the  former 
account  respecting  the  two  ships  that  had  been  forced  on  shore  ;  and  indeed, 
as  an  earnest  of  its  truth,  one  man  named  Adloo,  who  was  said  to  have  actu- 
ally seen  them  in  this  state,  was  a  day  or  two  afterwards  met  by  our  people 
at  Arlagnuk,  while  travelling  to  the  southward,  and  having  on  his  sledge  a 
o-reat  deal  of  wood  of  the  same  kind  as  that  before  described. 

This  information  having  excited  considerable  interest,  Lieutenant  Hopp- 
ner  who  had  taken  great  pains  to  ascertain  the  facts  correctly  volunteered 
his  services  to  accompany  some  of  the  Esquimaux,  who  were  said  to  be  going 
northwards  very  shortly,  and  to  obtain  every  information  on  this  and  other 
subjects  which  might  lie  within  the  scope  of  such  a  journey.     Although  1 
was  not  sanguine  as  to  his  principal  object  of  reaching  one  or  more  of  the 
Esquimaux  stations  on  the  northern  shores  of  Cockburn  Island,  wi  h  guides 
so  uncertain  and  capricious,  yet  I  could  not  but  consider  the .attempt  as 
likely  to  produce  something  of  interest;  more  especially  as  we  had  never  been 
able  to  approach  in  the  ships  those  parts  of  the  coast  which  would  constitute 
their  firstor  second  day's  journey.    I  therefore  directed  Lieutenant  Hoppner 
to  proceed  on  this  service,  accompanied  by  three  men,  and  *™*^&**** 
Frid  4    best  dogs  to   assist  in  carrying  their  baggage.      On  the  night  of  the  4th, 
having  Lard  that  a  party  of  the  Esquimaux  intended  setting  out  the  follow- 
in-  morning,  Lieutenant  Hoppner  and  his  people  went  out  to  their  tents  to 
be°in  readiness  to  accompany  them.     We  were  surprised  to  find,  the  next 
day,  that  not  only  Lieutenant  Hoppner's  intended  guide,  but  the  whole  ot 
the  rest  of  these  people,  had  altogether  left  the  island  and,  as  ^afterwards 
proved,  permanently  for  the  summer.     We  were  now  therefore,  for  the  first 
time  since  our  arrival  here,  entirely  deserted  by  the  natives    only  two  or 
three  of  whom  again  visited  the  ships  during  the  remainder  of  our  stay      It 
appears  probable,  indeed,  that  these  wandering  people  are  in  the  habit  ot 
residing  at  their  various  stations  only  at  particular  intervals  of  time    perhaps 
with  the  intention  of  not  scaring  the  walruses  and  seals  too  much  by  a  very 
long  residence  at  one  time  upon  the  same  spot.     What  made  this  appear  still 
more  likely  was  the  present  state  of  their  winter  habitations  at  Igloohk  which, 
though  offensive  enough  at  about  the  same  time  the  preceding  year,  were  then 
wholesome  and  comfortable  in  comparison.      Besides  quantities  of  putrid 
walrus  flesh,  blubber,  and  oil,  carcasses  of  dogs  and  even  of  human  beings 


'  &&$ 


1  >>ittir.&**X&£>T>te*rP^  "Vk4.Vt        i  *£T*(. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


451 


1823. 
July. 


*«*-y"«W> 


recently  deceased  were  now  to  be  seen  exposed  in  their  neighbourhood. 
What  remained  of  the  corpse  of  Keimooseuk  was  of  course  wholly  uncovered  ; 
a  second  of  a  child  on  which  the  wolves  had  feasted,  was  also  lying  about ; 
and  a  third,  of  a  newly-born  infant,  was  discovered  in  the  middle  of  a  small 
lake  by  Mr.  Richards,  who  caused  them  all  to  be  buried  under  ground.  All 
this  seemed  to  indicate,  that  the  Esquimaux  had  not  occupied  the  bone 
huts  for  at  least  one  winter  previous  to  our  arrival,  though  Igloolik  cer- 
tainly appears  to  be  one  of  their  principal  rendezvous,  forming,  as  it  were, 
a  sort  of  central  link  in  the  very  extensive  chain  of  these  people's  peregri- 
nations. 

On  the  6th  we  despatched  a  party  of  four  men,  under  Messrs.  Crozier  Sun.  6. 
and  Bird,  to  the  fishing  station  at  Quilliam  Creek,  equipping  them  with  a 
trawl-net  and  every  other  requisite  for  obtaining  a  supply  of  salmon  for 
the  ships.  Soon  after  Captain  Lyon,  who  was  desirous  of  occupying  a  few 
days  in  shooting  in  that  neighbourhood,  also  set  off  in  the  same  direction, 
taking  with  him  a  small  skin-boat  which  he  had  constructed  for  the  use  of  our 
fishermen,  and  which  proved  of  great  service  in  shooting  the  net  across 
the  mouth  of  the  stream. 

Our  stock  of  meat  for  the  dogs  being  nearly  expended,  and  no  sea-horses 
having  yet  been  seen  near  the  shore,  I  sent  Mr.  Ross  with  a  sledge  to  Tern 
Island  on  the  13th,  in  expectation  of  being  supplied  by  the  Esquimaux.  Sun.  13. 
Mr.  Ross  returned  on  the  14th  without  success,  the  whole  of  the  natives  Mon.  14, 
having  left  the  island  after  plundering  the  birds'  nests,  as  they  had  done  the 
preceding  year.  The  open  water  was  at  this  time  about  a  mile  and  a  half 
short  of  the  island,  differing  little,  if  any  thing,  from  its  position  at  the 
same  season  of  the  last  year.  The  birds  now  the  most  abundant  here, 
besides  tern  which  were  also  numerous,  were  eider-ducks,  of  which  im- 
mense flocks  were  flying  about ;  and  it  is  their  eggs  for  which  the  Esqui- 
maux principally  visit  the  island. 

Finding  that  our  valuable  dogs  must  be  now  wholly  dependent  on  our  Tues.  15. 
own  exertions  in  providing  meat,  a  boat  from  each  ship  was  carried  down 
to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  open  water,  and  shortly  afterwards  two  others, 
to  endeavour  to  kill  walruses  for  them.  This  was  the  more  desirable  from 
the  probability  of  the  Fury's  passing  her  next  winter  where  no  natives 
were  resident,  and  the  consequent  necessity  of  laying  in  our  stock  for  that 
long  and  dreary  season,  during  the  present  summer.  Our  people  therefore 
pitched  their  tents  near  the  old  Esquimaux  habitations  ;  and  thus  were  four 

3   M  2 


""*'  I 


lU    li 


ijhlilj, 


452 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


boats  constantly  employed  whenever  the  weather  would  permit,  for  the  three 
succeeding  weeks. 

On  the  16th  Lieutenant  Hoppner  and  his  party  returned  to  the  ships, 
having  only  been  enabled  to  travel  to  the  south  shore  of  Cockbum  Island, 
on  account  of  their  guides  not  yet  proceeding  any  farther.  Two  of  the 
Esquimaux  accompanied  our  travellers  back  to  Igloolik  and,  being  loaded 
with  various  useful  presents  from  the  ships,  returned  home  the  following 
day.  Lieutenant  Hoppner's  account  of  his  journey,  comprising  several 
anecdotes  tending  to  shew  the  disposition  and  habits  of  these  people,  is 
here  given  in  his  own  words. 


"  We   left  the   ship  at  fifteen  minutes   past    eleven   P.M.   on    the  4th, 
and  arrived    at  the  Esquimaux   tents   about   five   in    the   morning.       The 
Esquimaux  were  all  asleep,  but  being  disturbed  by  the  noise  of  our  arrival, 
they  flocked  round  us  to  know  the  cause  of  so  early  a  visit.  Our  intention  of 
accompanying  them  seemed  to  afford  great  amusement,  and  many  jokes  were 
passed  apparently  at  our  expense.     Having  rested  about  two  hours,  we  were 
disturbed  by  the  whispers  and  stifled  laugh  of  the  women  and  children  ;  and 
on  going  out  found  the  tents  all  struck,  the  men  already  gone,  and  every 
appearance  of  the  party,  with  whom  we  intended  to  travel,  having  fairly  given 
us  the  slip.  This  unexpected  departure  somewhat  embarrassed  us ;  but  we  im- 
mediately prepared  to  follow  them,  and  were  relieved  from  our  anxiety  by  find- 
ing that  they  were  still  at  the  edge  of  the  ice.     Perceiving  we  were  really  in 
earnest,  and  that  our  dogs,  of  which  they  had  only  a  few  wretched  animals,  Avere 
likely  to  be  of  use  to  them,  Erichiuk  suffered  us  to  place  the  loads  upon  his 
sledge.    We  left  Keiyuk-tarruoke  at  thirty  minutes  past  nine,  in  company  with 
four  other  sledges  ;  and  after  clearing  the  grounded  hummocks,  travelled  at 
a  good  pace  in  a  north-easterly  direction.  When  we  got  about  five  miles  from 
Igloolik,  the  water  became  knee  deep  on  the  ice,  which  rendered  walking 
extremely  fatiguing.    The  men  and  several  of  the  women  dispersed  them- 
selves in  all  directions  in  pursuit  of  seals ;  whilst  the  sledges  were  left  entirely 
to  the  management  of  the  females  who  remained  by  them.     Our  assistance 
soon  became  necessary,  and  before  the  end  of  the  day  we  quite  gained  their 
favour.   It  was  at  first  the  intention  of  the  men  to  go  to  Tern  Island  to  collect 
eggs,  but  about  seven  P.M.   the  weather  assuming  a  threatening  appear- 
ance, they  determined  to  encamp  on  the  ice.  The  number  of  stoppages,  and 


I 


*oi  ^a^xa^.^^^^  .  *r*< 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


453 


ill  i 


the  winding  course  which  we  made  to  pick  up  the  seals  left  by  the  hunters, 
rendered  the  day's  journey  extremely  fatiguing  and  unpleasant,  particularly 
as  we  suffered  a  good  deal  from  cold.  After  travelling  about  twenty  miles, 
we  at  length  halted  at  thirty  minutes  past  seven  P.M.  As  we  had  nothing 
but  our  blanket-bags  to  place  between  us  and  the  ice,  Erichiuk  kindly  fur- 
nished us  with  staves  procured  from  the  ships,  with  which  we  floored  the  tent, 
and  passed  the  night  much  more  comfortably  than  we  had  anticipated.  The 
encampment  was  formed  on  a  small  dry  ridge  of  ice,  almost  the  only  spot 
free  from  Avater  that  we  had  seen  during  the  afternoon.  In  consequence  of 
their  success,  the  Esquimaux  passed  the  evening  feasting  on  raw  flesh; 
only  one  or  two  taking  the  trouble  to  light  their  lamps. 

'  The  weather  being  fine  on  the  6th,  we  broke  up  the  encampment  at 
thirty  minutes  past  seven  A.M.,  and  travelled  about  fifteen  miles  in  a  N.N.E. 
direction.  The  hunters  of  both  sexes  again  dispersing  themselves,  many 
seals  were  killed  merely  for  their  skins,  and  the  carcasses  left  on  the  ice, 
after  being  deprived  of  the  entrails,  of  which  the  Esquimaux  seemed  parti- 
cularly fond.  At  seven  P.M.  we  landed  on  the  north  shore,  and  pitched  our 
tent  on  a  rocky  point  in  the  midst  of  the  Esquimaux  encampment.  The 
women  brought  us  some  roots  of  the  potentilla  pidchella,  which  they  had 
pulled  whilst  collecting  dwarf- willow  for  their  fires,  and  which  had  a 
pleasant  flavour,  resembling  liquorice,  but  not  so  sweet.  They  seemed 
fond  of  it,  and  had  brought  in  a  considerable  quantity,  which  they  ate 
without  cleansing  from  the  soil.  Nearly  all  the  women  had  large  kettles 
full  of  seals'  flesh  boiling  outside  of  the  tents  ;  when  it  was  ready  the 
master  of  the  tent  announced  it  by  three  loud  shouts,  to  collect  the  rest  of 
the  men  to  partake  of  it.  They  had  scarcely  finished  one  before  another  was 
ready,  to  which  they  were  again  summoned ;  and  in  this  manner  they  kept  up 
the  feast  until  a  late  hour. 

"  On  the  7th  the  weather  was  gloomy  with  light  rain  occasionally.  The 
Esquimaux  remained  at  home  all  day,  most  of  them  being  laid  up  with  snow- 
blindness.  No  intelligence  could  be  gained  relative  to  their  future  movements  ; 
the  women,  who  are  always  the  most  communicative,  seemed  to  know  nothing ; 
and  the  men  were  either  heedless  of  our  inquiries,  or  very  unsatisfactory  in 
their  answers.  The  land  gradually  rose  behind  our  tents  to  hills  of  considerable 
height,  well  clothed  with  herbage,  and  seeming  likely  to  afford  game  ;  but 
after  a  long  walk  we  saw  only  a  few  deer-tracks,  two  grouse,  and  some  ducks, 
all  so  wild  that  it  was  impossible  to  get  near  them,     From  the  top  of  a 


1823. 
July. 


7.. 


in 


tiiN*  1\ 


■til., 


i:w 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 

hill  about  three  miles  N.E.b.E.  from  the  tents,  we  saw  a  wide  expanse  of 
ice,  bounded  by  high  land  to  the  northward,  apparently  about  the  same  dis- 
tance as  Neerlo-nakto  was  from  us.  Its  eastern  point,  which  seemed  low, 
bore  E.N.E.,  and  was  nearly  in  a  line  with  the  north  point  of  the  easternmost 
of  the  Calthorpe  Islands.  Our  view  to  the  westward  was  bounded  beyond 
N.W.  by  the  land  we  stood  on,  which  however  did  not  appear  to  approach 
that  seen  to  the  northward.  A  strait,  about  three  miles  in  breadth,  and  of  the 
same  length,  separated  the  land  we  were  on  from  the  Calthorpe  Islands. 
This  channel  was  clear  of  ice,  appeared  deep,  and  had  a  strong  tide  or  current 
setting  through  it  to  the  southward.  I  endeavoured  to  learn  from  the  Esqui- 
maux  whether  the  land  joined  to  the  westward  and  formed  a  bay,  but  was 
unsuccessful  in  my  inquiries.  This  inlet  was  named  after  Captain  Sir  Murray 
Maxwell,  of  the  Royal  Navy.  In  the  evening  we  visited  the  tent  of  the  old 
man  from  Toonoonek.  He  was  an  Angetkok  and  seemed  fond  of  exhibiting 
his  skill.  He  sat  with  his  arms  drawn  out  of  the  sleeves  of  his  jacket  and 
apparently  folded  over  his  breast,  but  in  reality  employing  his  fingers  tapping 
upon  the  skins  he  sat  on.  This  noise  I  was  told  was  made  by  his  Tornga,  or 
spirit,  and  a  great  many  questions  were  put  to  him  by  the  bystanders  ;  these 
were  answered  by  tapping  in  a  particular  manner,  and  the  sounds  were 
then  interpreted  by  the  craft  of  the  old  Angetkok. 

"  A  fine  day  ;  nearly  all  the  men  went  out  sealing,  accompanied  by  some 
of  the  women  regularly  equipped  for  the  hunt.  Our  people  returned  in 
the  evening  with  the  carcass  of  a  deer  ;  they  had  been  ten  or  twelve  miles 
to  the  westward,  in  which  direction  they  said  the  land  improved  in  vegetation ; 
but  the  few  living  creatures  which  they  saw  were  as  wild  as  those  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  tents. 

"  The  weather  being  very  inclement  on  the  9th,  confined  every  body  within 
the  tents.  In  the  afternoon  there  was  a  dance  at  the  Angetkok's,  where  nearly 
the  whole  party  was  assembled.  The  old  man  opened  the  ball  by  a  performance 
which  seemed  a  medley  of  conjuring  and  dancing  ;  several  other  men  stood  up 
after  him,  and  last  of  all  his  son  :  when  he  had  finished  most  of  the  company 
retired,  upon  which  he  rushed  into  the  tent,  and  seizing  his  youngest  wife 
by  the  hair  beat  her  severely.  She  seemed  at  first  inclined  to  resist,  and  took 
up  a  tin-pot,  as  if  intending  to  throw  it  at  him  ;  he  immediately  kicked  her 
out  of  the  tent,  and  struck  her  several  heavy  blows  with  a  walrus  tusk.  His 
other  wife,  fearing  what  was  to  follow,  had  placed  her  child  in  her  hood, 
as  if  to  protect  herself  from  the  wrath  of  her  husband.     Having  satisfied  his 


■»13\  ^^tt^'vM«r£>^^t^^  v^m  j^      >  ^r*< 


OF  A  NORTH. WEST  PASSAGE. 


455 


vengeance  on  the  young  one,  he  rushed  in  again,  and,  snatching  the  child  1823- 
away,  beat  the  other  poor  woman  in  a  most  barbarous  manner  over  the  head  vJ^L 
with  some  heavy  weapon  which  he  had  snatched  up  on  his  entrance.  She  never 
spoke  and,  although  streaming  with  blood,  scarcely  attempted  to  defend  her- 
self from  his  fury.  Having  continued  to  use  her  thus  for  some  minutes,  one 
of  the  men  present  held  his  hand,  upon  which  he  quietly  seated  himself 
and  remained  sulky  the  rest  of  the  evening.  The  woman  retired  soon  after 
with  her  child  some  distance  from  the  tent,  where  I  found  her  giving  vent 
to  her  feelings  by  the  most  piercing  cries.  Two  or  three  women  stood  round 
her  who,  having  satisfied  their  curiosity,  left  her  without  shewing  the  slightest 
symptom  of  pity.  The  only  cause  we  could  discover  for  this  brutal  transac- 
tion was,  because  they  had  not  sung  when  their  husband  was  dancing.  He 
took  no  notice  of  it  at  the  time ;  but  appears  to  have  meditated  revenge 
whilst  seemingly  wrapt  up  in  his  amusement.  In  the  evening  we  found  a 
small  party  assembled  in  the  same  tent  to  hear  the  different  spirits  whom  the 
Angetkok  was  going  to  send  into  their  presence.  He  came  in  soon  after  and, 
taking  his  station  behind  the  screen,  descended  after  previously  putting 
a  few  questions  to  the  bystanders.  The  performance  differed  very  little  from 
Toolemak's.  Ten  torngas  rose  in  succession,  some  of  whom  did  not  confine 
themselves  to  speaking  alone,  but  scratched  and  thumped  against  the  skin 
behind  the  person  addressed.  The  Angetkok's  wife  sung  during  the  cere- 
mony, but  appeared  to  take  little  interest  in  it,  and  when  her  duties  per- 
mitted directed  all  her  attention  to  us. 

"  The  weather  was  dull  on  the  10th,  with  occasional  fogs.  About  ten  A.M. 
there  appeared  a  general  move  amongst  our  Esquimaux  friends.  On  inquiry 
it  appeared  that  four  families  were  going  to  the  eastward,  whilst  the  party  to 
which  we  Avere  attached  intended  to  remain  another  day,  and  then  continue 
their  journey  towards  Toonoonee-roochiuk.  Having  gone  out  with  our  guns 
the  Esquimaux  men  of  our  party  took  advantage  of  our  absence  and  set  off 
for  Tern  Island  to  collect  eggs ;  carefully  concealing  their  intentions  from 
us  lest  we  should  propose  to  accompany  them.  It  was  not  until  they 
were  nearly  out  of  sight  that  they  told  the  man,  who  remained  to  look  after 
our  tent,  where  they  were  going,  the  idea  of  having  deceived  us  seeming  to 
afford  them  much  amusement. 

"  The  early  part  of  the  11th  was  hazy;  towards  noon  it  cleared  away 
and  became  fine.  We  had  felt  rather  cold  during  the  night,  which  was  the 
first  we  had  found  at  all  uncomfortable.     Our  men  went  aAvay  to  the  west- 


10. 


n. 


hi 


IMli,-  Lnnlli'l 


•\\?-\ 


450 


nTTSSCTB'MEl 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


ward  in  pursuit  of  deer ;  before  they  left  the  tent  they  informed  me,  that 
the  women  had  mentioned  their  intention  of  continuing  their  journey  next 
day  towards  a  station  where  they  procure  fish.  I  made  inquiries,  but 
could  hear  nothing ;  and  as  it  appeared  from  their  previous  conduct  that 
they  were  unwilling  to  acquaint  me  with  their  designs,  I  directed  the  men 
to  gather  all  the  information  they  could.  It  was  now  become  evident  that 
they  did  not  intend  going  direct  to  Toonoonee-roochiuk  ;  but  as  I  con- 
ceived a  longer  stay  with  them  might  furnish  something  interesting,  I 
determined  on  it ;  more  especially  as  the  distance  to  Igloolik  was  greater 
than  we  could  conveniently  travel  without  diminishing  our  loads.  The 
Esquimaux  returned  in  the  evening  with  a  few  seals,  some  ducks,  and  a 
great  many  eggs.  They  had  emptied  the  latter  out  of  their  shells  into 
walrus  bladders,  containing  each  between  two  and  three  gallons.  They 
gave  us  two  ducks  and  half  a  dozen  eggs,  an  act  of  generosity  of  which 
they  seemed  to  think  highly,  but  with  which  we  were  by  no  means  satis- 
fied, after  being  disappointed  of  a  trip  to  the  island,  where  we  might  have 
collected  some  for  ourselves. 

"  We  remained  stationary  on  the  12th,  the  Esquimaux  stating  that  their 
dogs  were  too  lame  to  travel.  They  buried  most  of  their  tin  pots  and 
iron  hoops,  which  looked  as  if  they  intended  returning  soon.  One  of  the 
women  excited  our  attention  by  the  ingenuity  she  displayed  in  mending 
a  tin  kettle  which  she  had  procured  from  the  ships,  and  which  had  become 
unsoldered.  She  paid  little  attention  to  our  instructions,  and  at  length  com- 
pleted the  task,  in  her  own  way,  by  suspending  the  kettle  over  the  flame  of  the 
lamp,  and  dropping  pieces  of  solder  obtained  from  the  rim  of  a  meat  canister, 
which  when  melted  she  spread  with  a  spike-nail  over  the  joint.  In  the 
evening  we  were  diverted  by  Kooeetseearioo,  who  went  through  the  whole 
ceremony  of  raising  Tornga.  My  men  put  up  a  screen,  behind  which  he 
went  after  some  persuasion,  and  performed  the  whole  of  his  part  with 
great  skill,  particularly  the  diving  scene,  where  he  managed  his  voice  so  well 
that  it  really  appeared  to  come  some  distance  from  under  ground.  It  would 
seem  from  this  that  the  art  is  not  difficult  and  that,  from  the  ridicule  with 
which  they  seemed  to  treat  it,  they  were  not  imposed  on.  The  old  people 
alone  seemed  to  pay  respect  to  the  Angetkoks,  while  the  young  ones  inva- 
riably treated  their  mysteries  with  contempt. 

"  At  half-past  ten  A.M.  on  the  13th,  we  quitted  this  station,  which  by  the 
mean  of  five  meridian  altitudes  is  in  lat.  69°  42'  29",  and  by  the  mean  of  seven 


^::aaw»n*^\j^  *  w£>*^sa*iPWfe*ftVs4Jte      i  *ev< 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


457 


Hi"    ''■!'!!•  i 


1823. 
July. 


sets  of  observations  for  the  chronometer,  in  long.  00°  46'  22"  E.  of  the  ships' 
winter  station.    The  ice  was  so  full  of  cracks  and  holes  that  it  was  with  diffi- 
culty the  sledge  could  proceed,  and  it  was  only  enabled  to  stand  the  heavy 
shocks  it  received  by  the  looseness  of  its  construction.  Two  large  seals  being 
seen  on   the  ice,  the  sledges  stopped  while  two   of  the  Esquimaux  went   in 
pursuit  of  them.     It  was  full  two  hours  before  they  got  close  to  one  of  them, 
which  they  effected  by  crawling  feet  foremost  towards  the  animal ;  one  man 
lying  concealed  behind  the  other  who,  by  scraping  the  ice  with  his  spear, 
and  moving  his  feet  in  imitation  of  a  seal's-flipper,  deceived  the  animal  until 
they  got  within  six  or  seven   yards  of  it.     They  then  remained  stationary- 
some  time  as  if  to  accustom  the  seal  to  them  ;  when  at  length  the  nearest 
man,  springing  on  his  feet,  darted  his  spear  which  however  striking  a  bone 
did  not  take  effect.    Notwithstanding  the  quickness  of  the  movement,  the 
animal  was  half  down  the   hole  before  the  spear  quitted  the  man's  hand. 
At  four  o'clock,  having  advanced  about  fourteen  miles  along  shore    to  the 
westward,    the  party  stopped  at  a  rocky  point,  where  they  signified  their 
intention  of  remaining  some  days.     A  few  miles  to  the  westward  a  low  point 
ran  out  with  several  small  islands  off  it.     Beyond  this  point  was  an  exten- 
sive opening,  which  the  Esquimaux  represented  to  be  a  bay  which  they  go 
tip  on  their  route   to  Toonoonee-roochiuk.    Dunn  joined  us   about  an  hour 
after  our  arrival,  with  the  intelligence  of  having  killed  a  deer  five  or  six 
miles  to  the  westward.     By  promising  the  Nerooka*,  a  sledge  was  easily 
procured,  upon  which  my  two  men  went,  accompanied  by  one  of  the  Esqui- 
maux, to  bring  it  in.      Our  provisions  being  nearly  expended,    I   desired 
the  men  to  endeavour  to  bargain  with  their  companion  for  his  sledge  to  carry 
us  to  Neerlonakto ;  whilst  I  also  endeavoured  to  hire  one  in  the  event  of 
their  failure.     In  the  evening  Erichiuk  and  some  others  had  a  long  conversa- 
tion about  the  ships  going  to  Toonoonee-roochiuk,  an  event  they  seemed 
very  anxious  to  bring  about.     He  persisted  in  saying  it  was  practicable  for 
them  to  go  by  a  western  route  ;  and  as  he  still  continued  positive  after  I  had 
explained  to  him  that  we  found  the  Strait  blocked  up  by  ice  last  summer, 
I  concluded  that  he  alluded  to  some  other  opening  which  the  formation  of 
the  land  precluded  us  from  seeing  at  present. 

'  The  man  who  had  promised  us  his  sledge  the  preceding  evening,  now  Mon.  14. 


K1! 


iriii:::!::  :'  i  I 


!fi"j   ■' 


*  A  part  of  the  deer,  before  mentioned  by  Captain  Lyon,  as  considered  a  great  delicacy  by 
these  people. 

3  N 


inn 


458 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1823. 
July. 


V^-y-%^ 


I''""*! 


refused  it,  because  we  did  not  immediately  comply  with  his  demands  for 
the  deer's  sinews.     In  consequence  of  this  I  determined,  if  he  persisted 
in  his  refusal  next  morning,  to  construct  a  light  sledge  with  our  boarding- 
pikes  to  carry  our  baggage,  which  by  this  time  was  become  tolerably  light. 
Tues.  15.      "  On  the  receipt  of  the  sinews  and  some  of  the  flesh  however,  he  was 
again  willing  to  lend  his  sledge  the  following  day ;  we  therefore  prepared 
to  move  immediately  after  breakfast.     The  latitude   of  this  station  by  one 
meridian  altitude  was  69°  46'  12"  N.,  the  longitude,  by  mean  of  two  sets  of 
sights  for  the  chronometer,  was  00°  34'  42"  east  of  the  ships.  The  Esquimaux 
seemed  sorry  to  part  from  us,  a  feeling  rendered  reciprocal  by  the  kindness 
which  they  had  uniformly  shewn  us.     It  is  but  justice  to  say  that  I  never  ex- 
perienced more  attention  in  my  life,  and  that  their  whole  conduct  towards 
us  seemed  expressive  of  a  grateful  feeling  for  the  advantages  which  they  had 
derived  from  their  intercourse  with  the  ships.    Our  party  was  increased  to 
six  by  two  of  the  natives  joining  us  just  as  we   were  starting.     The   ice 
was  tolerably  smooth  and  had  but  little  water  on  it,  so  that  my  men,  who 
walked  more  than  two-thirds  of  the  way,  did  it  without  fatigue,  and  at  half 
an  hour    past  six  P.M.  we  landed   on   Neerlonaktoo.      Our  companions, 
who  had  volunteered  to  carry  us  to  the  ships,  were  anxious  to  proceed,  but 
compassion  for  our  poor  dogs  would  not  suffer  me  to  hear  of  it.     Although 
these  people  were  kind  and  attentive  to  us,  they  did  not  think  it  necessary 
to  extend  this  feeling  to  our  dogs,  which  were  become  very  lame,  nor  would 
they  even  supply  us  with  a  piece  of  skin  to  make  boots  for  them,  without 
demanding   an  exorbitant  price.     Whilst  on    Neerlonaktoo  we   saw  three 
deer  and  great  numbers  of  geese  and  other  water  fowl,  but  they  were  so  shy 
that  all  our  attempts  to  get  near  them  were  ineffectual. 

'  Leaving  the  island  at  forty-five  minutes  past  eleven,  on  the  16th,  we 
arrived  on  Iglooiik  at  twenty  minutes  past  one.  Having  loaded  our  own 
dogs,  the  Esquimaux  left  theirs  moored  to  a  stone,  where  they  were  to 
remain  without  food  until  their  return ;  and  walking  across  the  island  we 
reached  the  ships  at  four  P.M." 


Wed.  16. 


«w 


•>< 


1 1' 


■hum 


EXTRAORDINARY    DISRUPTION    OF    ICE    IN    QUILLIAM    CREEK- — SOME    APPEARANCE    OF 

SCURVY  AMONG  THE  SEAMEN  AND  MARINES ACCOUNT  OF  A  JOURNEY  WITH  SLEDGES 

TO    COCKBURN    ISLAND DISCOVERY    OF    GIFFORD  RIVER COMMENCE  CUTTING  THE 

ICE  OUTSIDE  THE  SHIPS  TO  RELEASE  THEM  FROM  THEIR  WINTER-QUARTERS- 
CONSIDERATIONS    RESPECTING    THE    RETURN    OF    THE^  EXPEDITION    TO    ENGLAND 

UNFAVOURABLE  STATE  OF  THE  ICE  AT  THE  EASTERN  ENTRANCE  OF  THE  STRAIT- 
PROCEED  TO  THE  SOUTHWARD SHIPS  BESET  AND  DRIFTED  UP  LYON  INLET- 
DECEASE   OF    MR.   GEORGE    FIFE FINAL    RELEASE    FROM   THE    ICE,  AND  ARRIVAL  IN 

ENGLAND REMARKS  UPON  THE  PRACTICABILITY  OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


Among  the  various  changes  which  the  warmth  of  the  returning  summer  was    i823„ 
now  producing  around  us,  none  was  more  remarkable  than  that  noticed  by  ^^^ 
Captain  Lyon  on  his  present  excursion  to  Quilliam  Creek,  and  which,  in  aThur.  17. 
note  received  from  him  by  the  return  of  the  sledges,  on  the  17th,  he  thus 
describes  :     "  Between  the  two  points  forming  the  entrance  of  the  creek,  we 
saw  a  high  wall  of  ice  extending  immediately  across  from  land  to  land,  and 
on  arriving  at  it  found  that  by  some  extraordinary  convulsion  the  floe  had 
burst  upwards,  and  that  immense  masses  of  ice  had  been  thrown  in  every 
direction.     Several  blocks  eight  or  nine  feet  in  thickness  and  many  yards   in 
diameter  were  lying  on  the  level  solid  floe  ;  yet  we  were  for  some  time  at  a 
loss  to  discover  whence  they  had  been  ejected,  till  at  length  Ave  found  a 
hole  or  pool,  which  appeared  so  small  as  to  be  hardly  capable  of  containing 
the  immense  fragments  near  it ;  yet  from  this  place  alone  must  they  have 
been  thrown." 

Captain  Lyon  subsequently  added,  that  "  the  water,  which  was  found  to 
be  quite  fresh  was  running  rapidly  to  seaward  in  this  opening ;  and  it  seemed 
probable  that  the  vast  accumulation  from  the  streams  at  the  head  of  the 
creek,  although  at  about  ten  miles'  distance,  had  burst  a  passage  and  thus 
ejected  the  ice.     The  force  employed  for  this  purpose  may  be  conceived, 

3  N  2 


1823. 
July. 


460 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


'  '"  t*m< 


Frid.18. 


Sat.  19. 


when  I  mention  that  of  several  masses  of  ice  one  in  particular  was  above 
eight  feet  thick,  full  forty  yards  in  circumference,  and  lay  more  than  five 
hundred  yards  from  the  pool.  No  traces  could  be  found  of  the  manner  in 
which  these  bodies  had  been  transported,  as  not  a  single  small  fragment  was 
seen  lying  about,  to  warrant  the  supposition  that  they  had  fallen  >vith  a 
shock.  Neither  were  there  any  marks  observable  on  the  smooth  un- 
cracked  floe  to  cause  a  suspicion  that  they  had  slidden  over  it,  the  general 
appearance  of  the  floe  at  this  place  being  the  same  as  at  all  other  parts  of  the 
inlet,  and  bearing  no  marks  of  having  had  any  rush  of  water  over  it." 

The  ducks  having  now  nearly  deserted  the  neighbourhood  of  Arlagnuk, 
and  the  travelling  there  becoming  inconvenient  for  sledges,  our  shooting-party 
was  removed  to  Igloqlik  and  shortly  after  recalled  on  board.  The  number 
of  ducks  procured  by  both  ships  during  this  part  of  the  season  was  about 
nine  hundred,  of  which  above  two-thirds  were  king-ducks,  and  by  far  the 
greater  part  of  the  rest,  of  the  long-tailed  species.  The  weather  was  now, 
at  times  extremely  sultry,  bringing  out  swarms  of  mosquitoes  that  soon 
became  very  troublesome  even  on  board  the  ship.  A  thermometer  sus- 
pended in  the  middle  of  the  observatory  and  exposed  to  the  sun's  rays,  was 
observed  by  Mr.  Fisher  to  stand  at  92°  at  five  P.M.  on  the  18th. 

On  the  19th  Captain  Lyon  returned  from  Quilliam  Creek,  bringing  with 
him  the  whole  of  our  party  stationed  there,  the  ice  being  now  so  broken  up 
in  that  neighbourhood  as  to  render  the  fishing  dangerous  without  proper  boats. 
On  this  journey,  which  it  took  two  days  to  perform,  eleven  dogs  drew  a 
weight  of  two  thousand  and  fifty  pounds,  of  which  six  hundred  and  forty 
were  salmon,  and  ninety-five  venison,  procured  by  our  people.  The  fish 
had  all  been  caught  in  the  trawl;  and  treble  the  quantity  might  easily  have 
been  taken  with  a  seine  had  Ave  known  how  wide  the  mouth  of  the  stream 
was  to  become.  They  varied  in  length  from  twenty  to  twenty-six  inches, 
and  one  of  the  largest,  when  cleaned,  weighed  eight  pounds  and  a  half;  but 
their  average  weight  in  this  state  did  not  exceed  two  pounds  and  a  quarter. 
The  distance  of  the  fishing-place  from  the  ships,  the  dangerous  state  of  the 
ice,  and  the  soreness  of  the  dogs'  feet  from  travelling  on  the  rough  honey- 
combed ice,  prevented  our  taking  any  further  advantage  of  this  very  accept- 
able change  of  diet. 

The  following  remarks  made  by  Captain  Lyon,  during  his  late  excursion, 
furnishes  some  information  of  considerable  interest  to  naturalists.  '  I  had 
in  the  course  of  my  walks  several  opportunities  of  observing  the  nests  of 


I 


t'/A  &  &$X  ix^^\ifcf<xw{^^^^\&M^^^      i  £r*'. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


46 1 


many  of  the  smaller  kinds  of  birds.  The  sand-piper,  (tringa  cinerea),  and  l8*23- 
the  phalarope,  (phalaropus  platj/rinchm),  lay  each  four  eggs  on  a  tuft  of  v-*-y>L> 
withered  grass  in  swampy  ground  ;  but  no  care  is  taken  to  form  any  nest. 
The  snow-buntings  and  Lapland  finches  construct  their  nests  in  much  the 
same  manner  as  our  English  finches,  and  line  them  with  white  deer's  hair  in 
a  very  beautiful  manner.  The  outer  part  is  of  dried  grass  and  rather 
bulky  compared  with  the  size  of  the  inner  nest.  Each  of  the  last  men- 
tioned birds  lays  seven  eggs,  but  the  bunting  prefers  building  in  the  crevice  - 
of  a  rock,  or  amongst  loose  stones,  while  the  Lapland  finch  constructs  its 
nest  on  the  ground  amongst  grass  and  moss.  Mr.  Crozier  found  the  nest 
of  a  snow-goose  containing  five  eggs  ;  and  I  saw  seventeen  of  these  fine 
birds  walking  on  a  hill  side  in  a  long  line,  as  our  domestic  geese  travel  on 
commons,  one  acting  as  leader  and  being  rather  in  advance  of  the  rest. 
Near  the  lake  in  which  these  birds  had  been  swimming  I  found  an  amazing 
quantity  of  the  quill  feathers  of  brent-geese,  but  saw  none  of  the  birds 
from  which  they  had  moulted.  On  the  banks  of  the  same  piece  of  water, 
which  was  above  a  mile  in  length,  I  observed  long  ridges  formed  entirely  of 
the  dung  of  mice  and  in  depth  from  four  to  five  inches.  I  cannot  conjec- 
ture how  this  could  have  been  brought  here,  nor  how  so  vast  a  quantity 
of  mice  could  have  assembled  near  the  banks  of  the  lake,  for  we  saw  none 
of  their  holes,  and  the  ground  being  very  swampy  was  not  such  as  they 
generally  frequent." 

Although  the  dissolution  of  the  ice  was  hourly  going  on,  yet  no  very  sen- 
sible alteration  had  taken  place  for  some  time  past,  such  as  might  give  us  hopes 
of  a  speady  release  from  our  confinement,  The  barrier  of  ice  still  remaining 
fixed  between  the  ships  and  the  sea  was  above  five  miles  in  breadth,  though 
we  lay  at  the  very  mouth  of  the  bay,  and  the  only  chance  of  our  soon 
getting  out  rested  on  an  accidental  crack  in  the  floe,  extending  from  near  the 
point  of  Oongalooyat  across  to  the  main  land,  and  which  had  lately  become 
somewhat  wider.  Being  thus  detained  I  determined  on  despatching  Lieu- 
tenant Hoppner  once  more  to  the  northward,  for  the  purpose  of  examining 
a  great  bay  or  inlet  of  Cockburn  Island,  that  we  had  never  been  able  to 
approach  in  the  ships,  and  which  Ave  supposed  to  correspond  with  that 
delineated  by  the  Esquimaux  in  their  charts,  as  forming  the  first  day's  journey 
to  Toonoonee-roochiuk.  Lieutenant  Hoppner  accordingly  left  us  on  the  2lst  Mon.  21. 
with  that  intention,  being  accompanied  by  two  men  and  furnished  with  a 
sledge  and  ten  dogs. 


if! 


HlM 


rs 


462 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Tues.  29. 


"i 


Nothing  worthy  of  notice  occurred  till  the  29th,  when  a  patch  of  ice  a 
mile  broad  separated  from  the  outer  margin  of  our  barrier  and  drifted 
away.  The  canal  formed  by  laying  sand  on  the  ice  was  now  quite  through 
in  most  places,  shewing  that  the  plan  would,  in  this  latitude  at  least,  always 
ensure  a  ship's  escape  at  an  earlier  season  than  by  the  regular  course  of 
nature,  provided  it  could  be  carried  the  whole  way  down  to  the  open 
water. 
Wed.  30.  I  am  now  under  the  disagreeable  necessity  of  entering  on  a  subject, 
which  I  had  at  one  time  ventured  to  hope  need  scarcely  have  occu- 
pied any  part  of  this  Narrative  :  I  mean  that  of  the  scurvy,  some  slight, 
but  unequivocal,  symptoms  of  which  disease  were  this  day  reported  to 
me  by  Mr.  Edwards,  to  have  appeared  among  four  or  five  of  the  Fury's 
men,  rendering  it  necessary,  for  the  lirst  time  during  the  voyage,  to  have 
recourse  to  anti-scorbutic  treatment  among  the  seamen  or  marines.  During 
our  first  winter,  the  only  instance  in  which  any  such  symptoms  had  been 
discovered  occurred  in  Mr.  Jermain,  the  purser  of  the  Hecla,  who 
however  recovered  by  the  usual  treatment,  as  the  summer  advanced. 
This  short  and  dubious  season  being  ended,  the  carpenter  and  boat- 
swain of  the  Hecla  were  also  affected ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  second 
winter  Mr.  Jermain's  complaint  returned  with  greater  severity.  In  the 
months  of  February  and  March,  Messrs.  Henderson,  Halse,  and  Scallon,  of 
the  Fury,  were  occasionally  disposed  to  scurvy ;  Mr.  Edwards  was  for  a  week 
,  or  two  pretty  severely  attacked  by  it,  and  my  own  gums  becoming  some- 
what livid  rendered  a  short  course  of  additional  lemon-juice  necessary  to 
restore  them.  These  cases  hoAvever  shortly  and  permanently  recovered ; 
but  in  the  spring  and  even  as  late  as  the  month  of  June,  when  there  was 
reason  to  hope  that  every  symptom  of  this  kind  would  have  been  removed  by 
the  increased  warmth  and  cheerfulness  of  the  season,  and  the  change  of 
diet  afforded  by  the  game,  the  disease  again  made  its  appearance  in  the 
carpenter  and  boatswain  of  the  Hecla,  and  soon  after  attacked  the  gunner 
and  Mr.  Fife,  the  Greenland  master.  These  cases  which  were  much  more 
severe  than  any  we  had  before  experienced,  had  not  now  recovered,  when 
the  gums  of  four  or  five  of  the  Fury's  men  betrayed  this  insidious  disease 
lurking  within  them,  and  made  it  necessary  to  administer  lemon-juice  to 
them  in  more  copious  quantities  than  ordinary. 

It  will  perhaps  be  considered  a  curious  and  singular  fact  in  the  history  of 
sea-scurvy,  that  during  the  whole  of  the  preceding  part  of  this  voyage,  none 


€  ^  '/A  yvsatfXWwlA'vitfS  i   ■  £^iKS»sn\&^^^<^^       >  £r*< 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


463 


amongst  us  but  officers  should  have  been  in  the  slightest  degree  affected  by 
it,  a  circumstance  directly  contrary  to  former  experience.  To  whatever 
causes  this  might  be  attributed,  it  could  not  however  but  be  highly  gratify- 
ing to  be  thus  assured,  that  the  various  means  employed  to  preserve  the 
health  of  the  seamen  and  marines  had  proved  even  beyond  expectation 
efficacious. 

That  a  ship's  company  should  begin  to  evince  symptoms  of  scurvy  after 
twenty-seven  months'  entire  dependence  upon  the  resources  contained  within 
their  ship,  (an  experiment  hitherto  unknown,  perhaps,  in  the  annals  of  naviga- 
tion, even  for  one-fourth  part  of  that  period,)  could  scarcely  indeed  be  a  subject 
of  wonder,  though  it  was  at  this  particular  time  a  matter  of  very  sincere  regret. 
From  the  health  enjoyed  by  our  people  during  two  successive  winters,  unas- 
sisted as  we  had  been  by  any  supply  of  fresh  anti-scorbutic  plants  or  other 
vegetables,  I  had  begun  to  indulge  a  hope  that  with  a  continued  attention  to 
their  comforts,  cleanliness,  and  exercise,  the  same  degree  of  vigour  might, 
humanly  speaking,  be  ensured  at  least  as  long  as  our  present  liberal  resour- 
ces should  last.  Present  appearances  however  seemed  to  indicate  differently  ; 
for  though  our  sick-list  had  scarcely  a  name  upon  it,  and  almost  every  indi- 
vidual was  performing  his  accustomed  duty,  yet  we  had  at  length  been  im- 
pressed with  the  unpleasant  conviction  that  a  strong  predisposition  to  disease 
existed  among  us,  and  that  no  very  powerful  exciting  cause  was  wanting 
to  render  it  more  seriously  apparent.  Such  a  conviction  at  the  present 
crisis  was  peculiarly  disagreeable  ;  for  I  could  not  but  lament  any  cir- 
cumstance tending  to  weaken  the  confidence  in  our  strength  and  re- 
sources at  a  time  when  more  than  ordinary  exertion  was  about  to  be  required 
at  our  hands. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  30th,  Lieutenant  Hoppner  and  his  party  returned 
on  board,  having  discovered  that  the  inlet  in  question  communicated  with  a 
considerable  river,  which  we  jointly  named  after  our  mutual  and  highly- 
esteemed  friend  Mr.  Gifford.  Lieutenant  Hoppner's  account  of  his  journey 
is  here  subjoined. 


1823. 
July. 


'  At  a  quarter  past  four  Ave  left  the  Hecla,  and  having  reached  the  head  of 
the  bay  at  half-past  six,  the  party  who  were  there  in  readiness  carried  the 
sledge  across  the  isthmus ;  after  which  service  they  returned  to  the  ship. 
The  fog  was  now  so  thick  that  it  was  impossible  to  proceed  towards  Neerlo- 
nakto,    we  therefore  kept  along  the  land-ice  of  Igloolik,    when  supposing 


21, 


M 


464 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


J823. 
July. 

22. 


23. 


24. 


' 


ourselves  nearly  abreast  of  the  former  island,  we  went  on  shore  to  wait  for 
better  weather. 

"  Thick  foggy  weather  continued  until  four  P.M.,  on  the  22d,  when,  it 
becoming  clearer,  we  recommenced  our  journey,  passing  between  Neerlo- 
naktoo  and  three  small  whitish  islands  off  its  south-west  end,  which  at  a 
distance  are  easily  mistaken  for  hummocks  of  '  dirty'  ice.  The  ice  after- 
wards began  to  improve  ;  but  we  were  obliged  by  several  wide  cracks  extend- 
ing from  Neerlo-naktoo  to  the  west  land  and  the  islands  in  Richards's  Bay, 
to  go  some  distance  round  to  find  parts  sufficiently  narrow  to  cross.  At 
eleven  P.M.  we  pitched  our  tent  on  the  north-east  island  in  Richards's 
Bay  ;  the  ice  was  so  much  broken  up  all  round  it  that  it  was  with  difficulty 
we  landed. 

"  It  rained  hard  all  night,  with  thick  hazy  weather  which  did  not  clear  away 
until  noon  the  following  day.  We  immediately  prepared  to  move  ;  but  it  was 
twenty-five  minutes  past  one  P.M.  before  we  got  away,  owing  to  the  time  taken 
up  in  shoeing  the  dogs,  which  for  two  people  was  a  tedious  operation.  We 
stood  directly  over  towards  the  north  land,  finding  the  ice  so  bad  for  the  first 
six  or  seven  miles  as  to  make  it  reasonable  to  expect  that  a  very  few  days 
would  render  it  impassable.  Towards  the  centre  of  the  strait  it  became  very 
good,  and  continued  so  until  we  got  near  the  north  shore,  where  we  found 
it  in  much  the  same  state  as  on  the  opposite  side.  Several  of  the  cracks  ex- 
tended from  land  to  land,  and  were  so  wide  as  to  cause  us  much  perplexity  in 
crossing  them.  At  a  quarter  past  nine  we  landed  on  a  low  sandy  beach 
which  forms  the  south-east  point  of  the  opening  we  saw  to  the  north-west, 
when  on  our  former  journey  with  the  Esquimaux. 

"  The  weather  during  the  early  part  of  the  day  was  tolerably  fine,  but  in  the 
afternoon  became  foggy,  with  heavy  showers  of  rain.  The  dogs  being  a  good 
deal  fagged,  I  determined  to  give  them  a  day's  rest,  expecting  we  should  be 
able  to  ascertain  the  extent  of  the  inlet  on  foot.  Having  waited  without  success 
to  get  the  meridian  altitude,  I  walked,  up  the  inlet  and,  crossing  the  two  first 
points  of  land,  picked  up  a  piece  of  fresh  skin,  which  convinced  me  that 
our  friends  the  Esquimaux  had  not  much  the  start  of  us.  A  high  mount  on 
the  south  side,  about  twelve  or  fourteen  miles  distant,  becoming  a  very  pro- 
minent object,  I  made  towards  it,  hoping  from  thence  to  see  the  termination  of 
the  inlet,  which  here  varied  from  one  to  three  miles  in  breadth.  At  five  P.M., 
finding  the  hill  above-mentioned  still  too  distant  for  me  to  reach  on  foot,  I 
landed  on  the  right-hand  shore,  from  whence  the  opening  appeared  to  extend  at 


«  ••.  ■ .  'A ;ia ^>: k^-^yr ^*s»i^^/^^r^^x^M'^ Vki.v*       i  *  r*-. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


465 


least  a  day's  journey  for  the  sledge,  continuing  about  the  same  breadth  and  1823. 
not  appearing  to  terminate  even  at  the  furthest  point  seen.  After  resting  <J^L> 
a  short  time,  I  returned  towards  the  tent,  determining,  if  our  people  had 
killed  any  thing  which  would  furnish  a  supply  of  food  for  the  dogs,  to  run  up 
with  the  sledge  next  day,  and  if  possible  reach  its  termination.  Having 
walked  about  five  miles  back,  I  discovered  an  Esquimaux  tent  on  the  north 
side,  which  being  pitched  behind  a  point  had  escaped  my  notice  on 
passing  up,  and  which  proved  to  belong  to  some  of  our  old  friends.  As 
the  want  of  food  for  the  dogs  had  made  me  fearful  we  should  be  obliged  to 
abandon  our  object  before  its  accomplishment,  I  immediately  bargained  with 
them  for  a  supply,  promising  to  visit  them  the  next  day.  They  had  a  few 
pieces  of  very  fine  looking  fish  drying  on  the  rocks.  After  stopping  with 
them  about  ten  minutes  I  took  my  leave,  and,  on  reaching  the  point  next 
above  our  tent,  found  that  the  rest  of  the  Esquimaux  had  arrived  during  my 
absence. 

"  At  twenty  minutes  past  twelve  on  the  25th  we  struck  our  tent  and  25- 
proceeded  up  the  inlet,  stopping  a  few  minutes  at  the  first  point,  where 
we  purchased  some  meat  for  the  dogs,  and  got  the  promise  of  a  seal  on 
our  return.  At  three  P.M.  we  arrived  at  the  tent  of  Erichiuk,  from  whom 
we  purchased  some  more  meat  and  a  very  fine  salmon.  The  Esquimaux 
told  us  we  might  reach  the  head  of  the  inlet  to-day ;  we  therefore  left 
one  of  our  dogs  which  was  lame  in  Erichiuk's  charge,  and  resumed  our 
journey,  with  the  intention  of  lightening  the  sledge  at  the  first  convenient 
place.  At  four  P.M.,  having  reached  two  small  islets  situated  nearly  in 
mid-channel,  we  buried  whatever  we  could  well  spare,  to  ensure  the  ac- 
complishment of  our  object;  and  having  stopped  half  an  hour  to  refresh 
ourselves,  we  set  off  at  a  quick  pace.  The  weather  was  so  thick  that 
it  was  but  very  rarely  we  got  a  glimpse  of  the  shores  on  each  side  of  us ; 
when  we  did,  they  seemed  rocky  and  steep ;  but  a  short  distance  from  the 
beach  the  land  appeared  well  clothed  with  vegetation.  As  we  advanced  the 
ice  became  very  thin  and  rotten,  and  gave  indications  of  our  approach  to 
its  termination :  at  length,  about  half  past  nine,  we  found  ourselves 
within  fifty  yards  of  the  water,  and  were  obliged  to  pick  our  way  to  the 
shore  over  a  very  rotten  surface.  On  landing  we  were  gratified  by  the  sight 
of  a  noble  sheet  of  water,  a  mile  and  a  half  in  breadth  and  perfectly  fresh. 
The  tide  was  out,  but  there  was  no  current  perceptible  in  the  middle,  nor 

3  o 


,.  '1 


II:,'  " 

jh 

pi  III 

!'!■? 


tf 


iillii  »■ 


lij.i!    ill  I  I 


466 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


did  we  notice  any  during  the  whole  time  of  our  stay.  The  Esquimaux  had 
informed  us  of  a  large  fall,  but  as  we  neither  saw  nor  heard  any  thing  of  it, 
it  must  be  a  good  way  higher  up,  our  point  of  view  extending  full  fifteen 
miles,  when  it  terminated  in  two  bluff  points,  between  which  the  stream 
seemed  to  wind.  To  these  points,  to  all  appearance,  it  continued  about  the 
same  breadth,  and  from  the  colour  of  the  water  it  must  be  deep  enough  for 
ships  of  large  burden.  The  land  on  each  side  was  high,  and  where  we  stood 
was  more  closely  covered  with  vegetation  than  any  spot  I  had  ever  seen  in 
these  regions.  The  dwarf  willow  grew  to  a  height  and  size  almost  entitling 
it  to  be  called  a  shrub,  and  the  Andromeda  tetragona  was  in  the  greatest 
abundance. 

"  On  the  26th  I  sent  one  of  my  men  to  the  top  of  a  high  hill  behind  our  tent, 
but  his  view  from  thence  was  not  more  extensive  than  what  we  had  already 
procured.  After  stopping  to  get  the  meridional  altitude,  which  gave  the 
lat.  70°  06' 42"  N.,  the  longitude,  by  chronometer,  being  0°  39' 48"  W.  of 
the  ships,  we  set  out  on  our  return.  As  the  ice  was  broken  up  for  two  miles 
below  us,  we  endeavoured  to  get  on  the  solid  floe  by  a  narrow  neck  about 
one  hundred  yards  broad  ;  but  having  got  half  way  it  proved  so  thin  and 
rotten  that  I  considered  it  better  to  return,  than  to  run  the  risk  of  crossing 
it.  The  dogs  dragged  the  sledge  along  shore  until  we  came  to  the  firm  ice, 
performing  their  task  much  better  than  we  expected.  We  now  returned 
down  the  river,  and,  having  picked  up  the  things  left  on  the  island,  arrived 
at  the  Esquimaux  tents  at  half-past  eight.  They  received  us  very  kindly, 
assisting  to  unload  the  sledge  and  carry  the  things  to  the  top  of  the  hill. 
We  purchased  of  them  some  very  fine  salmon,  which  they  caught  in  a 
small  rivulet  emptying  itself  into  a  bay  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the 
tents. 

"  The  27th  proving  a  fine  day,  the  men  all  went  out  with  their  fishing- 
spears  at  high-water,  but  returned  in  a  short  time,  saying  there  were  no  fish, 
from  which  it  is  probable  that  they  only  come  here  occasionally,  resorting 
at  other  times  to  other  places  of  the  same  description,  with  which  the  river 
abounds.  The  latitude  of  this  station  is  70°  0'  13"  N. ;  longitude,  by  chrono- 
meter, 0°  5'  40"  W.  of  the  ships.  We  left  our  friends  about  one  P.M.  ;  they 
continued  civil  to  the  last,  although  the  temptation  to  rob  us  was  too  great  for 
them  to  resist.  This,  however,  they  did  in  a  sly  sort  of  way,  removing  things 
from  where  we  had  placed  them  with  the  idea,  perhaps,  that  we  should  not  miss 


•  .  :^  a3^«o-^\Mfi^^^:^^^^^^      ^&w 


in 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


467 


them  until  we  had  taken  our  departure.  On  tasting  the  water  at  this  station, 
which  is  not  more  than  seven  or  eight  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  opening, 
it  proved  nearly  fresh.  We  kept  close  along  the  north  shore,  passing  over 
very  bad  ice,  with  cracks  extending  across  to  the  eastern  part  of  the  Strait. 
It  appeared  only  to  want  a  strong  breeze  from  the  westward  to  drive  it  out, 
as  it  was  quite  detached  from  the  land.  At  nine  P.M.  we  landed  on  a  small 
rocky  island,  the  easternmost  of  a  group  about  fifteen  miles  from  the  spot  where 
we  left  the  Esquimaux  on  our  former  journey.  From  this  point  I  could  see 
both  the  places  Ave  visited  during  that  trip,  and  could  now  clearly  ascertain 
that  the  land  was  connected  ;  as  the  only  part  which  had  been  doubtful  was 
in  a  bay  formed  by  the  north-eastern  point  of  the  river,  and  another  about 
five  miles  to  the  westward  of  our  present  station,  where  (the  land  being  rather 
low)  there  was  an  appearance  of  an  opening ;  this  day's  journey,  however, 
proved  the  continuity  of  the  coast.  Our  time  being  limited,  I  did  not  think 
it  worth  while  going  any  further  to  the  eastward ;  but  as  the  dogs  would 
require  a  day's  rest  previously  to  carrying  us  over  to  Igloolik,  I  determined 
to  remain  here  until  the  29th  for  that  purpose. 

"  The  weather  was  so  thick  that  it  was  not  until  past  ten  on  the  29th  that  29. 
we  left  the  north  land,  and  at  seven  arrived  on  the  west  end  of  Neerlo-  ' 
naktoo,  where  we  stopped  for  the  night,  our  dogs  being  too  much  tired  to 
proceed.  We  found  the  ice  in  coming  over  far  better  than  I  expected.  It 
was  however  separated  from  both  lands  by  wide  cracks,  and  did  not  average 
more  than  two  feet  in  thickness  as  far  as  I  could  judge  ;  it  appeared  nearly 
in  the  same  state  as  last  year  at  this  season. 

"  Leaving  Neerlo-naktoo  at  half-past  eleven  on  the  30th,  we  reached  30. 
Igloolik  at  two  P.M.  The  ice  between  the  two  islands  was  almost  impassa- 
ble for  a  sledge  in  some  places,  but  the  pools  were  all  frozen  over,  for  the  first 
time,  during  the  last  night.  We  found  great  difficulty  in  landing  on  Igloolik, 
the  ice  having  broken  up  into  detached  pieces  along  its  shores.  In  getting 
the  sledge  across  from  one  end  to  the  other,  we  were  frequently  near  losing 
it,  the  dogs  having  to  swim  across  several  of  the  spaces  between  the  broken 
pieces  of  ice.  Having  crossed  the  isthmus,  we  got  sight  of  the  ships  and 
arrived  on  board  about  four  P.M." 


1823. 
July. 


v^-r^/ 


i 

1 

&< 

1 

<   I 

H'iiii,, 

1    1 

il.Wlii  | 


'ill' 


The  first  of  August  had  now  arrived  ;  and  yet,  incredible  as  it  may  appear,   August. 
the  ships  were  as  securely  confined  in  the  ice  as  in  the  middle  of  winter,  ex- 


3  o  2 


I'll: 


•■n  mi 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 
Fury,  at  Igloolik,  during  the  Month  of  July,  1823. 


Prevailing  Weather. 


cloudy 

cloudy 

rain 

cloudy 

cloudy,  rain  at  limes 

cloudy,  rain  at  times 

cloudy  and  rain 

cloudy 
cloudy  and  rain 
hazy  and  rain 
cloudy 
cloudy 
cloudy 
fine 
fine 
fine 
fine 
cloudy 
fine 
cloudy  and  rain 
fojrgy  and  rain 
foggy  and  rain 
foggy  and  rain 
foggy  and  rain 
hazy  and  rain 
cloudy 
hazy 
hazy  and  rain 
cloudy 
cloudy 
hazy  and  rain 


WjtZi&ssxi:     \±*i^V&*v^&&T>&M^>?*^3t-      fifByK 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


469 


cept  that  a  pool  of  water  about  twice  their  own  length  in  diameter  was  now  1823v 
open  around  them*.  I  determined,  therefore,  notwithstanding  the  apparent  ^^j 
hopelessness  of  sawing  our  way  through  four  or  five  miles  of  ice,  to  begin 
that  laborious  process  ;  not  indeed  with  the  hope  of  cutting  a  canal  suffi- 
ciently large  to  allow  the  passage  of  the  ships  to  sea,  but  with  a  view  to 
weaken  it  so  much  as,  in  some  measure,  to  assist  its  disruption  whenever  any 
swell  should  set  in  upon  its  margin.  On  this  and  the  following  day,  there-  Sat.  2. 
fore,  all  the  gear  was  carried  down  for  that  purpose,  and  a  large  tent  pitched 
for  the  ships'  companies  to  dine  in,  the  distance  being  too  great  to  allow 
them  to  return  on  board  to  their  meals.  On  the  3d,  however,  we  Avere  Sun.  3» 
saved  a  great  deal  of  unnecessary  labour,  by  the  ice  opening  out  at  the 
crack  before  mentioned,  so  that  our  sawing  might  now  be  commenced  within 
a  mile  of  the  Fury.  After  divine  service,  therefore,  all  hands  were  sent 
from  both  ships  to  bring  back  the  tent  and  tools  to  the  point  of  Oongalooyat, 
and  the  parties  were  recalled  from  the  walrus-fishery,  except  a  single  boat's 
crew :  these  also  returned  on  board  a  few  days  after,  the  whole  number 
of  sea-horses  killed  being  eight,  and  one  large  seal.  It  is  remarkable 
that  all  the  walruses  were  males,  of  which  a  skeleton  was  made  on  board 
each  ship  as  anatomical  specimens.  The  Hecla's  two  boats  had  one  day  a 
very  narrow  escape  in  assaulting  a  herd  of  these  animals  ;  for  several  of 
them,  being  wounded,  made  so  fierce  an  attack  on  the  boats  with  their 
tusks,  as  to  stave  them  in  a  number  of  places,  by  which  one  was  immediately 
swamped  and  the  other  much  damaged.  The  Fury's  boats  being  fortunately 
in  sight  prevented  any  further  danger ;  two  of  the  walruses  were  killed  and 
secured,  and  the  damaged  boats  lightened  and  towed  to  the  shore,  from 
which  they  had  been  several  miles  distant. 

On  the  4th  our  sawing  work  was  commenced,  with  the  usual  alacrity  on  Mon.  4„ 
the  part  of  the  officers  and  men,  and  three  hundred  and  fifty  yards  of  ice 
were  got  out  before  night,  its  thickness  varying  from  one  to  four  feet,  but 
very  irregular  on  account  of  the  numerous  pools  and  holes.  An  equal  length 
was  accomplished  on  the  following  day,  though  not  without  excessive  fa- 
tigue and  constant  wet  to  the  men,  several  of  whom  fell  into  the  water  by 
the  ice  breaking  under  them. 

*  This  circumstance  afforded  a  very  favourable  opportunity  of  obtaining  a  complete  set  of 
steady  observations  on  the  deviation  of  the  magnetic  needle  on  board  the  Fury;  these  are 
given  in  the  Appendix. 


i    ' 


isiit1 


Wed.  6. 


470 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Thur.  7 


On  the  5th,  the  register-thermometer,  which  had  been  placed  in  the  ground  in 
the  winter,  was  taken  up,  though,  to  our  astonishment,  the  ground  above  and 
about  it  had  become  nearly  as  hard  and  compactly  frozen  as  when  we  dug  the 
hole  to  put  it  down.  How  this  came  about  we  were  quite  at  a  loss  to  determine  ; 
for  the  earth  had  been  thrown  in  quite  loosely,  whereas  its  present  consoli- 
dated state  implied  its  having  been  thoroughly  thawed  and  frozen  again.  It 
occupied  two  men  ten  days  to  extricate  it,  which,  as  they  approached  the 
thermometer,  was  done  by  a  chisel  and  mallet  to  avoid  injury  by  jarring. 
This,  however,  was  not  sufficient  to  prevent  mischief,  the  instrument  being 
so  identified  with  the  frozen  earth,  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  strike  the 
ground  near  it  without  communicating  the  shock  to  the  tubes,  tsvo  of  which 
were  in  consequence  found  to  be  broken.  Thus  ended  our  experiment  for 
ascertaining  the  temperature  of  the  earth  during  the  winter ;  an  experiment 
which  it  would  seem,  from  this  attempt,  scarcely  practicable  to  make  in  any 
satisfactory  manner  without  some  apparatus  constructed  expressly  for  the 

purpose. 

On  the  6th,  the  work  was  continued  as  before,  and  about  four  hundred  yards 
of  ice  were  sawn  through  and  floated  out,  leaving  now  a  broad  canal,  eleven 
hundred  yards  in  length,  leading  from  the  open  water  towards  that  formed 
by  the  gravelled  space.  In  the  course  of  this  day's  work,  one  of  the  seamen 
of  the  Hecla  fell  into  the  water  by  the  ice  giving  way,  and  very  narrowly 
escaped  drowning,  as  it  was  not  easy  for  the  other  people  to  approach  him. 
He  was  taken  out  scarcely  sensible  ;  but  being  immediately  conveyed  on 
board  the  Fury  was  by  care  and  attention  recovered  in  a  few  hours. 

When  the  lateness  of  the  season  to  which  the  ships  had  now  been  detained 
in  the  ice  is  considered,  with  reference  to  the  probability  of  the  Fury's 
effecting  any  thing  of  importance  during  the  short  remainder  of  the  present 
summer,  it  will  not  be  wondered  at  that,  coupling  this  consideration  with  that 
of  the  health  of  my  officers  and  men,  I  began  to  entertain  doubts  whether  it 
would  still  be  prudent  to  adopt  the  intended  measure  of  remaining  out  in  the 
Fury  as  a  single  ship ;  whether,  in  short,  under  existing  circumstances,  the 
probable  evil  did  not  far  outweigh  the  possible  good.  In  order  to  assist  my 
own  judgment  on  this  occasion  upon  one  of  the  most  material  points,  I  re- 
quested the  medical  officers  of  the  Fury  to  furnish  me  with  their  opinions 
"  as  to  the  probable  effect  that  a  third  winter  passed  in  these  regions  would 
produce  on  the  health  of  the  officers,  seamen,  and  marines  of  that  ship,  tak- 
ing into  consideration  every   circumstance  connected  with  our  situation." 


I* 


*Oi  S&&SX  to^'A  \*£e&t  t^KX^m^&M^^iJt       i  £?*• 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


471 


Mr.  Edwards's  reply,  with  which  in  substance  that  of  Mr.  Skeoch  coincided,     1823. 
is  here  given,  as  being  at  once  more  concise  as  to  expression,  and  of  infinitely  i^H' 
greater  weight  as  to  opinion,  than  any  remarks  I  could  myself  have  offered  on 
this  subject. 

"  During  the  last  winter  and  subsequently,  the  aspect  of  the  crew  of  the 
Fury  in  general,  together  with  the  increased  number  and  character  of  their 
complaints,  strongly  indicated  that  the  peculiarity  of  the  climate  and  service 
was  slowly  effecting  a  serious  decay  of  their  constitutional  powers.  The 
recent  appearance  also  of  several  cases  of  incipient  scurvy  in  the  most  fa- 
vourable month  of  the  year,  and  occurring  after  a  more  liberal  and  continued 
use  of  fresh  animal  food  than  we  can  calculate  upon  procuring  hereafter,  are 
confirmatory  proofs  of  the  progression  of  the  evil. 

"  With  a  tolerable  prospect  of  eventual  success,  other  circumstances 
remaining  unchanged,  I  should  yet  expect  an  increase  of  general  debility, 
with  a  corresponding  degree  of  sickness,  though  at  the  same  time  confident 
of  our  resources  being  equal  to  obviate  serious  consequences.  But  consi- 
dering the  matter  in  the  other  point  of  view,  namely,  as  a  single  ship,  it 
assumes  a  much  more  important  shape.  It  is  not  necessary  that  I  should 
dwell  on  the  altered  circumstances  in  which  the  crew  would  then  be  placed, 
as  they  are  such  as  you  must  long  ago  have  foreseen  and  weighed.  I  allude 
to  the  increase  of  labour  and  exposure  resulting  from  the  separation  of  the 
vessels,  the  privation  of  many  salutary  occupations,  mental  and  corporeal, 
attending  their  union,  and,  I  may  add,  at  this  late  period  of  the  season,  the 
hopelessness  of  the  success  of  the  ensuing  navigation  being  such  as  to  excite 
feelings  sufficiently  lively  to  counteract  those  depressing  causes.  It  is  im- 
possible, in  fact,  to  reflect  on  the  subject  and  not  to  apprehend  a  less  favour- 
able result  than  might  be  expected  under  the  preceding  conditions." 

Enclosing  to  Captain  Lyon  the  replies  of  the  medical  gentlemen,  I  now 
also  requested  his  opinion  whether,  under  existing  circumstances,  he  still 
considered  it  expedient  to  adopt  the  measure  originally  intended,  with  respect 
to  the  separation  of  the  two  ships.  1  had  scarcely  despatched  a  letter  to  this 
effect  when,  at  ten  A.M.  on  the  8th,  the  ice  about  the  Fury  began  to  move, 
the  pools  breaking  Up,  and  the  gravelled  canal  soon  entirely  closing.  A 
breeze  springing  up  from  the  northward  at  this  time,  all  sail  was  made 
upon  the  ship,  and  the  ice  gradually  driving  out  as  it  detached  itself  from  the 
shore,  the  Fury  got  into  open  water  about  one  P.M.  The  Hecla,  however 
still  remained  in  the  middle  of  her  winter's  floe,  which,  though  it  moved  a 


m 


472 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


km 


I 


. 


i823'  little  with  the  rest  at  first,  did  not  come  out  of  the  bay.  In  the  course  of  the 
t^S  afternoon,  finding  her  still  stationary,  I  determined  to  occupy  the  time  in 
stretching  over  to  the  northward,  for  the  purpose  of  examining  the  state 
of  the  fixed  ice  at  the  eastern  mOuth  of  the  strait ;  and  arriving  at  its 
margin  by  ten  P.M.  found  it  attached  to  both  shores  from  the  north- 
eastern part  of  Neerlo-naktoo  across  to  Murray  Maxwell  Inlet.  It  was  the 
general  opinion  that  this  ice  was  in  a  more  solid  state  than  at  the  same 
time  and  place  the  preceding  year,  but  its  situation  did  not  I  believe  differ 
half  a  mile  from  what  it  had  then  been.  As  the  sun  went  down  nearly  in  the 
direction  of  the  Strait,  we  obtained  from  the  mast-head  a  distinct  and  exten- 
sive view  in  that  quarter,  and  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  more  hopeless 
prospect  than  this  now  presented.  One  vast  expanse  of  level  solid  ice  occu- 
pied the  whole  extent  of  sea  visible  to  the  westward,  and  the  eye  weaned 
itself  in  vain  to  discover  a  single  break  upon  its  surface. 

Having  finished  this  examination,  which  at  once  destroyed  every  hope 
I  had  never  ceased  to  indulge  of  a  passage  through  the  Strait,  we  returned 
towards  Igloolik  to  rejoin  the  Hecla.  It  was  not,  however,  till  the  morn- 
ing of  the  9th  that  we  observed  her  to  be  moving  out  of  the  bay  ;  when 
at  length  (for  the  first  time  perhaps  that  such  an  event  ever  occurred,) 
she  drove  to  sea  in  the  middle  of  the  floe.  Thus  at  the  mercy  of  the  ice, 
she  was  carried  over  the  shoals  off  the  south-east  point  off  Igloolik  in  six  and 
.a  half  fathoms,  but  was  then  fortunately  drifted  into  deeper  water.  The 
swell  on  the  outside  was  all  that  was  wanting  to  break  up  her  icy  prison, 
which  separating  at  seven  A.M.  finally  released  her  from  confinement, 

Having  soon  afterwards  received  Captain  Lyon's  answer  to  my  communi- 
cation, it  was  necessary  for  me  to  come  to  a  final  determination  on  the  sub- 
ject therein  alluded  to.  I  shall  first  however  insert  Captain  Lyon's  reply, 
both  because  it  is  proper  that  his  opinion  should  be  recorded,  and  because  it 
is  impossible  for  me  either  more  clearly  or  more  briefly  to  communicate  the 
substance  of  my  own. 

"  As  I  consider  the  health  of  your  crew  as  of  most  importance  in  every 
point  of  view,  I  shall  in  the  first  place  state  that,  independently  of  the  weighty 
opinions  of  your  medical  officers,  it  has  for  some  time  been  my  opinion  that 
the  Fury's  passing  a  third  winter  in  this  country  would  be  extremely  hazard- 
ous. I  am  induced  thus  to  express  myself  from  the  great  change  I  have 
observed  in  the  constitution  of  the  officers  and  men  of  the  Hecla,  and  by  the 
appearance  of  some  very  severe  cases  of  scurvy  since  the  summer  has  com- 


1 


^^^MAlk^r^^fi^^^vm-  H  v..     s^Js..  -  \r&w. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


473 


menced;  I    am  also  aware  that  the  same  scorbutic  symptoms  have  been 
noticed,  and  do  still  exist,  in  the  Fury. 

V  Our  long  continuance  on  one  particular  diet,  almost  total  deprivation  of 
fresh  animal  and  vegetable  food  for  above  two  years,  and  the  necessary  and 
close  confinement  for  several  months  of  each  severe  winter,  are  undoubtedly 
the  causes  of  the  general  alteration  of  constitution  which  has  for  some  time 
past  been  so  evident.  I  therefore  conceive  that  a  continued  exposure  to  the 
same  deprivations  and  confinements,  the  solitude  of  a  single  ship,  and  the 
painful  monotony  of  a  third  winter  to  men  Avhose  health  is  precarious,  would 
in  all  probability  be  attended  with  very  serious  consequences. 

"  When  at  the  commencement  of  the  last  winter  I  gave  it  as  my  opinion, 
that  the  service  would  be  benefited  by  your  remaining  out  in  the  Fury,  as 
you  proposed,  and  still  attempting  a  further  passage  to  the  westward,  I  did 
not  anticipate  so  long  a  confinement  in  the  ice  as  we  have  unfortunately 
experienced,  and  formed  my  opinion  on  the  supposition,  and  in  the  full 
expectation  that  we  should  be  at  liberty  about  the  1st  of  July  of  this  year,  and 
that  the  general  good  health  which  then  prevailed  would  still  continue.   From 
our  being  detained  until  the  present  time,  however,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the 
season  in  which  it  is  possible  to  navigate  has  now  so  far  passed,  that  nothing 
material  can  be  effected  either  by  one  or  both  ships.     We  know  from  the 
experience  of  last  year,  that  it  is  not  before  the  end  of  August  or  the  beginning 
of  September  that  the  ice  breaks  up  in  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla,  and 
that  it  is  not  until  that  period  that  you  will  be  enabled  to  re-examine  its 
western  entrance.     Even  when  you  should  have  done  so  and,  as  there  is 
every  reason  to  expect,  found  it  still  closed,  you  would  have  barely  sufficient 
time  to  return  to  Igloolik  to  pass  another  winter.     Again,  should  the  sea 
prove  open  to  the  south-eastward,  and  should  you  deem   it  expedient  to 
attempt,  by  rounding  the  very  extensive  land  in  that  direction,  to  find  some 
other  passage  to  the  westward,  I  conceive  that  the  extreme  lateness  of  the 
season  would  not  admit  of  your  making  discoveries  of  any  importance,  or  at 
all  events  of  such  importance  as  to  Avarrant  your  passing  a  third  winter,  at 
the  risk  of  the  safety  of  your  officers  and  crew. 

"  Having  now  stated  my  reasons  for  changing  my  former  opinion,  I  beg  to 
advise  that  the  Fury  and  Hecla  return  to  England  together  as  soon  as  such 
arrangements  respecting  the  removal  of  stores  and  provisions  as  you  may 
judge  proper  to  make  shall  be  completed." 

Under  such  circumstances,  to  which  may  be  added  the  uncertainty  of 

3  p 


1823. 
August. 


:::: ■ 


!':i;  ii  | 


r^ 


474 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Ml  Hi 


1823-    the   Hecla's   liberation   from   the  ice  to   the   southward    before    the    close 
Ji^L'  of  the   season,   I  no  longer  considered  it  prudent  or  justifiable,  upon  the 
slender  chance  of  eventual  success  now  before  us,  to  risk  the  safety  of  the 
officers  and  men  committed  to  my  charge,  and  whom  it  was  now  my  first  wish 
to   re-conduct  in  good  health  to  their  country  and  their  friends.     Having 
communicated  my  intentions  to  the  officers  and  ships'  companies,  I  directed 
several  additions  to  be  made  to  their  ordinary  allowance  of  provisions,  par- 
ticularly in  the  various  anti-scorbutics,  which  had  hitherto  been  reserved  for 
cases  of  emergency  ;  and  then  beating  up  to  our  winter  station  which,  by 
desire  of  Mr.  Fisher,  our  Chaplain  and  Astronomer,   I  named  Turton  Bay, 
we  anchored  there  in  the  afternoon  in  ten  fathoms,  and  immediately  com- 
menced our  preparations  for  lightening  the  Fury.     Seven  months'  provisions, 
a  bower  anchor,  and  a  few  other  stores  were  received  by  the  Hecla,  some  of 
her  water  before  filled  as  ballast  being  started  to  make  room  for  them  ;  and 
such  other  arrangements  made  as  circumstances  would  permit  for  improving 
the  stowage  of  the  Fury's  hold.     The  bay  was  now  entirely  clear  of  ice  in 
every  part ;  and  so  changed  was  its  appearance  in  the  course  of  the  last  four- 
and-twenty  hours,  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  to  believe  it  the  same  place 
that  we  had  been  accustomed  daily  to  look  upon  for  the  ten   preceding 
months. 

The  conveyance  and  stowage  of  the  stores  had  scarcely  been  completed, 
when  some  loose  ice  drifting  into  the  bay  with  the  tide,  on  the  night  of  the 
Sun.  10.  10th,  obliged  us  hastily  to  get  under  way  and  stand  out.  On  the  following 
Mon.  11.  morning  I  ran  across  to  the  main-land  in  the  Fury,  for  the  purpose  of  erect- 
ing, in  compliance  with  my  instructions,  a  flag-staff  fifty-six  feet  in  height, 
having  at  its  top  a  ball  made  of  iron  hoops  and  canvass,  ten  feet  in  diameter, 
and  a  cylinder  buried  near  its  foot,  containing  a  parchment  with  some 
account  of  our  visit  to  this  place.  In  the  mean  time,  I  requested  Captain 
Lyon  to  stand  over  to  the  point  of  Igloolik  where  our  walruses  had  been 
landed,  and  to  bring  off  these  as  well  as  our  boats  and  tents  remaining 
there.  The  ice  soon  after  coming  in  upon  the  point,  it  was  not  without  risk 
of  the  Hecla's  being  dangerously  beset,  that  Captain  Lyon  succeeded  in 
bringing  off  every  thing  but  one  boat.  This  was  indeed  no  great  loss  to 
us,  though  a  great  acquisition  to  the  Esquimaux,  for  being  almost  worn 
out,  I  had  intended  to  break  her  up  previously  to  leaving  the  ice.  Besides 
this  we  purposely  left  our  sledges,  and  a  quantity  of  wood  in  pieces  of  a 
convenient  size  for  bows,  spears,  and  paddles,  distributing  them  about  in 


ml 


.,,< 


>   V 


€  * :% ^wxtt^^«^Wf>M*^\feArs^^^      i  *r*'. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


475 


several  places,  that  one  or  two  individuals  might  not  make  a  prize  of  the    1823. 
whole.  August. 

The  Hecla  rejoining  us  on  the  morning  of  the  12th,  we  stood  out  to  the  Tues.  12. 
eastward  and  finally  took  our  departure  from  Igloolik.     In  the  forenoon  a 
thick  fog  came  on,  which,  with  a  good  deal  of  loose  ice  drifting  about,  gave 
us  some  trouble  in  clearing  the  land ;  after  which  we  made  the  Calthorpe 
Islands,  the  wind  being   southerly  with  thick   rainy  weather.     This   con- 
tinued till  the  following  afternoon,  when  a  change  of  wind  soon  brought  a  Wed.  13. 
clearer  atmosphere,  enabling  us  to  bear  up  for  the  main-land,  which  we  made 
near  the  three  islands  called  Ooglit,  and  then  ran  along  it  to  the  southward 
in  a  perfectly  open  sea.     We  saw  here  a  great  many  walruses,  but  no  ani- 
mals of  any  other  kind.     In  the  course  of  the  night  the  favourable  breeze 
failed  us  and,  on  the  morning  of  the   14th,  was  succeeded  by  a  southerly  Thur.  14. 
wind,  the  ships  being  close  to  another  island  called  Ooglit  about  twelve 
leagues  to  the  S.S.W.  of  the  others.     We  were  here  immediately  visited  by 
our  old  acquaintance  the  Esquimaux,  several  of  whom  came  off  in  their 
canoes  in  the  course  of  the  morning,  as  if  determined  to  lose  no  opportunity 
of  profiting  by  us.     Among  these  was  our  worthy  old  friend  Nannow,  to 
whom  every  body  was  glad  to  give  something ;  and  indeed  they  all  received 
as  many  presents  as  their  canoes  could  safely  carry  or  tow  on  shore.     Their 
tents,    nine  in   number,  were  pitched   on  the  main-land,    a  little   to   the 
northward  of  Ooglitt,  at  a  station  they  call  Ag-wisse-5-wik ,  of  which  we  had 
often  heard  them  speak  at  Igloolik.     They  now  also  pointed  out  to  us  Ami- 
tioke,  at  the  distance  of  four  or  five  leagues  to  the  southward  and  westward, 
which  proved  to  be  the  same  piece  of  low  land  that  we  had  taken  for  it  in 
first  coming  up  this  coast.      The  Esquimaux  told  us  that  a  number  of  their 
younger  men  were  inland  in  pursuit  of  deer,  and  that  the  rest  had  abundant 
supplies  of  walrus,  which  animals  we  saw  in  considerable  numbers  about 
this  place. 

The  failure  of  the  wind  was  not  the  only  cause  of  our  detention  here  ;  the 
ice,  whose  margin  we  had  begun  to  perceive  as  we  approached  this  part  of 
the  coast,  now  closing  in  completely  with  the  land,  so  as  to  prevent  the  pos- 
sibility of  our  making  any  farther  progress  for  the  present.  The  closeness  of 
the  main  body  of  ice  to  the  land  at  this  time,  compared  with  its  position  a 
month  earlier  the  preceding  year,  was  undoubtedly  to  be  attributed  to  the 
prevalence  of  southerly  and  easterly  winds  which  we  had  lately  experienced, 

3  p  2 


'1! 


11114.1 


Hi  film!  ill  i 


mm 


".v: 


•   !;! 


476 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


II 

1823. 
August. 


"nm 


while  those  from  the  opposite  quarter  could  alone  drive  it  off  the  land.    The 
ice  was  here  very  heavy,  being  covered  with  large  hummocks,  reminding  us 
of  what  we  had  to  encounter  in  coming  up  this  coast.     It  was  also  covered 
in  almost  every  part  with  sand  and  small  stones,  making  its  general  aspect  of 
a  brownish  colour,  only  a  few  patches  of  white  ice  appearing  here  and 
there.     How  these  substances  had  been  brought  here  in  such  abundance, 
another  year's  experience  of  the  phenomena  of  these  seas  had  not  taught  us 
to  explain  ;  and  before  we  left  this  coast,  we  saw  many  hundred  square  miles 
of  ice  thus  covered.     In  all  the  intervals  between  the  hummocks  were  large 
pools  of  water,  which  had  in  many  instances  formed  deep  circular  beds, 
twenty  or  thirty  feet  in  diameter,  in  shape  like  the  crater  of  a  volcano. 
Most  of  the   pools  had  found  their  way  through  to  the  sea  below,  and  the 
smallest  swell  would  have  broken  every  floe-piece  into  numberless  masses : 
indeed,  as  it  Avas,  there  were  few  to  be  seen  of  more  than  three  or  four  acres 

in  extent. 

Being  thus  detained,  I  despatched  Mr.  Ross  to  Ooglit  to  observe  the 
meridian  altitude,  which  gave  the  latitude  of  its  south  point  68°  23'  58", 
and    he  found   the    mineralogical    character   exactly  the   same    as   that   of 
Igloolik.     About  the  middle   of  the  island,  which   is   quite  low,  are  two 
bone  winter-huts,  conspicuous  at  some  distance  to  seaward.     It  was  low 
water  at  half-past  eleven  A.M.,  making  the  time  of  high  water  here  on  full 
and  change  days  a  quarter  past  eleven. 
15  to  21.      We  were  now  for  some  days  all  but  beset  in  this  neighbourhood,  calms 
or  light  southerly  and  easterly  breezes   constantly  prevailing.     During  this 
time  the  main  body  of  ice   remained,  in  most  parts,   close  to  the  shore  ; 
leaving  us  only  a  "hole"  of  water  to  work  about  in,  and  much  nearer  to 
the  land  than  on    this  shoal  and  shelving   coast  was    altogether   safe    for 
the  ships.     Notwithstanding  this,  however,  we  had   soon  occasion  to   ob- 
serve that  they  not  only  kept  their  ground,  but  even  drew  to  the  southward, 
owing  no  doubt  to  the  current  before  found  to  set  in  that  direction  along 
the  coast. 
Frid.  22.      On  the  morning  of  the  22d,  being  off  Amitioke,  the  ice  became  more 
slack  along  the  shore,  and  a  breeze  from  the  northward  enabled  us  to  make 
some  progress.     I  may  here  take  occasion  to  remark  that,  in  the  course  of 
this  summer,  we  experienced  not  only  an  unusual  proportion  of  southerly  and 
easterly  winds,  but  observed  also,  that  these  were  more  frequently  attended 


:  i  'M  &££  w ^A \i    -^  • « ^^^sr^^^  **£J&       « ^r^: 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


477 


with  clear  weather  than  is  generally  the  case  ;  while  on  the  other  hand  a    1823- 

•  A  U-  P"  U  S  t 

great  deal  of  close  thick  weather  occurred  with  breezes  from  the  northern  i-4-*j* 
quarter.  The  present  northerly  wind  had  scarcely  sprung  up  an  hour  before 
a  thick  fog  came  on,  frequently  obscuring  the  land  from  us  as  we  ran  along, 
at  the  distance  of  half  a  mile  to  a  mile  and  a  half.  Thus  circumstanced,  the 
Fury  was  once  in  the  course  of  the  day  placed  in  a  very  awkward  situation, 
the  water  quickly  shoaling  to  six  fathoms,  and  the  ice  preventing  for  a  time 
the  possibility  of  hauling  out.  Having  at  length  gained  an  offing  of  a  couple 
of  miles,  we  were  obliged  to  make  the  ships  fast  to  a  floe-piece,  the  ice 
entirely  closing  around  us. 

Continuing  to  drift  to  the  southward,  we  observed  on  the  23d,  in  latitude  Sat.  23. 
67°  40'  18"  Cape  Brown  bearing  S.E.b.S.,  five  or  six  miles  distant.  On  the  fol- 
lowing day  at  noon  we  had  passed  Cape  Penrhyn,  our  drift  having  been  twenty-  Sun.  24. 
one  miles  in  twenty -four  hours,  though  closely  beset,  and  without  a  single  pool 
of  water  in  sight  the  whole  time.  The  current  was  observed  to  be  parti- 
cularly strong  when  immediately  off  Cape  Penrhyn,  taking  the  ships  round 
that  headland  at  the  rate  of  two  or  three  knots  for  one  hour.  In  the  night 
of  the  24th,  we  drifted  out  to  the  distance  of  nine  or  ten  miles  from  the 
land  ;  and  on  the  25th  at  noon  had  reached  the  latitude  of  67°  17'  28,"  being  Mon.  25. 
rather  to  the  southward  of  the  Barrow  River.  It  was  probably  the  influence 
of  this  stream  that  caused  the  ships  thus  to  set  off  from  the  land,  this  being 
the  only  instance  in  which  they  did  so.  The  ice  was  also  rather  more  slack 
here,  of  which  circumstance  we  took  advantage  to  warp  the  ships  a  mile 
nearer  in  shore  ;  it  was,  however,  still  of  the  same  heavy  kind  as  before. 
Scarcely  a  single  bird  had  been  seen  since  leaving  Igloolik,  and  the  walruses 
were  extremely  rare  on  this  coast,  to  the  southward  of  Amitioke. 

The  ice  remained  close  the  whole  of  the  26th  ;  but  we  continued  as  usual  Tues.  26. 
to  drift  generally  to  the  southward,  and  the  next  morning  being  off  Owiittee-  Wed.  27. 
week,  were  enabled  to  cast  off  and  make  sail,  the  ice  being  rather  more 
open  than  before.  Being  favoured  by  a  commanding  northerly  breeze  we  ran 
a  considerable  distance  to  the  southward,  having  however  only  just  room  to 
sail  between  the  points  of  the  closely  packed  ice  and  a  flat  dangerous  shore. 
A  few  small  low  islands  were  here  discovered  and  added  to  the  chart.  In 
the  evening  we  were  once  more  arrested  in  our  progress  and  obliged  to  make 
fast,  being  two  or  three  miles  short  of  Point  Elizabeth,  and  within  three 
quarters  of  a  mile  of  the  shore.  On  the  making  of  the  flood-tide  at  night,  the 
ships  were  hurried  past  the  point  in  seven  fathoms,  and  not  having  been  able 


Mi 


478 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


I  Will 


1823. 
August. 

Sat.  30. 


to  make  fast  to  the  same  floe-piece  were  now  separated  a  mile  or  two  and  soon 
again  beset.     Without  escaping  for  a  moment  from  our  confined  situation, 
and  almost  without  perceiving  any  motion  of  the  masses  of  ice  among  them- 
selves, we  had  at  noon  on  the  30th  drifted   down  within  a  mile  of  a  small 
island,  lying  near  the  north-east  point  of  Winter  Island,  and  which  I  now 
Sun.  31.  named  after  Mr.  Crawford.     On  the  31st  the  tide  took  us  through  between 
these,  the  breadth  of  the  passage  being  three-quarters  of  a  mile,  in  no  less 
than  sixteen  fathoms  water.     We  then  passed  within  a  dangerous  reef  of 
rocks  lying  a  full  mile  from  the  shore,  and  having  numerous  heavy  masses  of 
grounded  ice  upon  it.     After  clearing  this  in  a  good  depth  of  water  we  were, 
by  the  evening,  carried  along  shore  within  a  mile  of  Cape  Fisher.     Being 
desirous  of  seeing  whether  the  Esquimaux  had  meddled  with  the  tombs  of  our 
departed  shipmates,  I  despatched  a  party  on  shore  over  the  loose  ice,  and 
was  glad  to  find  on  their  return,  which  was  not  accomplished  without  diffi- 
culty, that  both  were  in  good  order.     Among  the  specimens  of  plants  which 
Mr.  Ross  brought  on  board  were  some  radishes,  onions,  and  mustard  and 
cress,  found  at  our  gardens.     The  onions  had  a  very  pungent  smell  and 
taste,  and  the  whole  were  in  that  healthy  state  which,  however  dwarfish 
their  growth,  would  have  rendered  them  very  acceptable  if  more  abundant. 
The  Esquimaux  had  certainly  visited  the  island  since  our  departure,  as  several 
tin  canisters,  left  for  them  on  a  particular  spot,  had  been  removed. 

Thus  had  we,  in  a  most  singular  manner,  once  more  arrived  at  our  old 
winter-quarters,  with  scarcely  a  single  successful  exertion  on  our  parts 
towards  effecting  that  object.  The  distance  from  Ooglit  to  our  present 
station  was  about  one  hundred  and  sixty  miles  along  the  coast.  Of  this  we 
had  never  sailed  above  forty,  the  rest  of  the  distance  having  been  accom- 
plished while  we  were  immoveably  beset  by  mere  drifting.  The  interval 
thus  employed  having  been  barely  eight  days,  gives  an  average  drift  to  the 
southward  of  above  fifteen  miles  per  day. 

The  phenomena  of  the  tides  had  now  been  precisely  similar  to  those  before 
observed  on  this  coast,  and  may  be  stated  in  few  words.  The  flood-tide 
comes  from  the  northward,  but  is  aided  also  by  a  current  from  the  same 
quarter,  rendering  its  stream  both  stronger  and  of  longer  duration  than  that 
of  the  ebb.  The  latter  is  indeed  scarcely  perceptible  with  a  northerly 
breeze,  and  even  with  the  wind  from  the  southward  does  not  usually  affect 
a  ship's  drift  for  more  than  three  hours  each  tide.  This  being  the  case, 
I  do  not  know  how  a  ship  could  effect  a  passage  along  this  coast  to  the 


IMF 


*^^^«W^^l^i^^^^v^^^v^s^^/!;\^^: 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


479 


H'li'wui 


1823. 
August. 


Sept. 
Mon.  1. 


northward,  after  the  land-ice  has  once  been  detached  from  the  shores  ;  for 
having  nothing  by  which  to  hold  on,  whenever  the  ice  closes,  she  can  only- 
have  the  alternative  of  running  into  it  or  of  being  driven  on  shore.  In  the 
former  case  she  would  in  all  probability,  as  we  have  seen,  be  drifted  back 
to  the  southward  at  the  rate  of  about  fifteen  miles  per  day,  and  in  the  latter 
could  scarcely  contrive  to  escape  without  serious  damage. 

At  daylight  on  the  1st  of  September  we  found  ourselves  within  three  or 
four  hundred  yards  of  the  rocks  on  the   eastern  side  of  Winter  Island,  the 
soundings  having  gradually  decreased  to  eleven  fathoms.     Had  it  remained 
dark  an  hour  longer  the  Fury  would  in  all  probability  have  gone  on  shore  ; 
but  happily  the  ice  was  slack  enough  to  allow  us  to  warp  clear  of  danger 
soon  after   day-break.      The   Hecla   had   in  the  mean   time   been   drifted 
round  Cape  Fisher,  and  several  miles  to  the  westward  towards  Lyon  Inlet, 
in  which  direction  the  Fury  was  also  carried  in  the  afternoon.     The  wind  Wed. 
now  setting  in  easterly,  both  ships  drove  with  the  ice  up  the  inlet,  and  on 
the  4th  were  abreast   of  Safety  Cove,    though  fortunately  on  the  western  Thur. 
side,  clear  of  the  dangers  of  the  Bay  of  Shoals.     A  light  breeze  then  spring- 
ing up  from  the  north-west,  we  again  began  to  move  down  the  inlet ;  and  on 
the  evening  of  the  6th,  after  making  a  little  progress  with  the  sails  in  the  Sat.  6 
course  of  the  last  two  days,  were  once  more  met  by  an  easterly  breeze  off 
Cape  Edwards,  the  ice  being  still  as  closely  packed  as  possible.     The  young 
ice  also  began  at  times  to  annoy  us,  by  forming  to  a  considerable  thickness 
at  night,  so  as  to  cement  the  larger  masses  strongly  together.     The  weather 
now  became  chilly  immediately  after  sunset,  and  we  considered  it  rather  a 
premature  decrease  of  temperature  in   this  latitude,  when  the  thermometer 
was  observed  to  fall  to  24°  on  the  morning  of  the  31st  of  August.     A  very 
unusual   deposition  of  dew  took  place   every  evening  about  this   season, 
immediately  after  the  sun  had  set,  and  was  in  an  hour  or  two  converted  into 
hoar  frost. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  6th  I  was  much  pained  at  being  informed  by 
telegraph  from  the  Hecla,  that  Mr.  Fife,  Greenland  Master  of  that  ship,  had 
just  expired,  an  event  which  for  some  days  past  there  had  been  but  too  much 
reason  to  apprehend ;  the  scurvy  having  within  the  last  three  weeks  conti- 
nued to  increase  considerably  upon  him.  It  is  proper  for  me,  however,  both 
in  justice  to  the  medical  Officers  under  whose  skilful  and  humane  care  he 
was  placed,  and  to  the  means  with  which  we  were  in  this  way  so  liberally 
supplied,  to  state  that  during  a  part  of  that  time  Mr.  Fife  had  taken  so  great 
a  dislike  to  the  various  anti-scorbutics  which  were  administered  to  him,  that 


i  . 


\%w\ 


nr^ 


mm 


1>i 

H» 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 
Fury,  during  the  Month  of  August,   1S23. 


Fahrenheit's 
Thermometer. 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

Prevailing 

Day 

Place. 

-  is 

Weather. 

Maxi- 

Mint 

Mean. 

Maxi- 
mum. 

Mini- 

Mean. 

Direction. 

Velocity. 

1    - 

O                O 

+4       +31 

f30.92 

29.95 

inches 
29.70 

inches 

29.7:.'2 

SE 

modt. 

hazy,  rain 

2 

52 

30 

38.67 

,30.03 

29.90 

29.995 

SE 

light 

cloudy 

3 

55 

34 

45.40 

29.97 

29.93 

29.942 

East 

light 

fine 

4| 

52 

37 

43.90 

29.93 

29.87 

29.900 

NNW 

light 

fine 

5    i 

At  or 

51 

35 

42.92 

29.91 

29.87 

29.890 

a.m.NNW  i 
p.m.  SSE.  S 

light 

fine 

6. 

near  the 

54 

30 

44.58 

29.93 

29.90 

29.908 

S.  Westerl} 

light 

fine 

7 

".  Island 

54 

40 

45.92 

29.90 

29.70 

29.810 

NNE 

light 

clear 

8 

of 

52 

31 

40.92 

29.08 

29.50 

29.628 

NNE 

modt. 

cloudy 

9 

Igloolik. 

42 

33 

36.83 

32.08 

29.62 

29.50 

29.560 

WNW 

fresh 

cloudy 

10 

44 

32 

39.18 

32.25 

29.66 

29.57 

29.615 

NW 

modt. 

fine 

11 

44 

32 

38.17 

32.S8 

29.78 

29.70 

29.747 

a.  m.  NW  } 
p.  m.   SE  j 

light 

fine 

12    - 

35 

33 

34.00 

31.83 

29.74 

29.45 

29.577 

SE 

a.m.  Southerly    < 
p.m.  NNW      J 

modt. 

hazy  with  rain 

13    ■ 

41 

32 

36.25 

32.00 

29.72 

29.44 

29.568 

modt. 

hazy  with  rain 

14 

44 

35 

38.25 

33.58 

29.82 

29.76 

29.800 

SSE 

modt. 

fine 

15 

S 
0 

36 

34 

35.42 

34.45 

29.80 

29.80 

29.800 

SSE 

modt. 

•  hazy  with  rain 

16 

ei" 

g 
a 

48 

34 

40.00 

30.25 

29.83 

29.79 

29.810 

Westerly 

light 

foggy 

17 

46 

35 

38.25 

35.92 

29.85 

29.S0 

29.815 

SSE 

modt. 

cloudy 

18 

to 

ft 

41 

34 

37.00 

36.00 

29. SO 

29.56 

29.713 

NEasterly 

light 

cloudy 

19 

a> 

37 

34 

35.75 

33.88 

29.52 

29.44 

29.497 

a.m.  NE  ) 
p  m.  SE  5 

modt. 

hazy  with  sleet  &  rain 

20 

Ss  a 

39 

34 

35.83 

33.25 

29.67 

29.55 

29.610 

Southerly 

light 

cloudy 

21 

<M    GQ 

0»H 

45 

34 

39.25 

33.46 

29.73 

29.65 

29.693 

Easterly 

light 

cloudy 

22 

>    8-S 

40 

33 

35.92 

33.08 

29.70 

29.38 

29.580 

Northerly 

light 

hazy  with  rain 

23 

cu  0 

41 

33 

36.25 

31.17 

29.30 

29.03 

29.122 

NNW 

a.m.lisM    > 
n  in.  mout*  C 

heavy  rain 
cloudy 

24 

as 

38 

30 

31.46 

30.62 

29.49 

29.29 

29.393 

Southerly 

modt. 

cloudy 

25 

03    O 

41 

34 

36.00 

31.17 

29.80 

29.49 

29.658 

East 

light 

cloudy 

1  26 

0 

40 

29 

34.46 

31.04 

29.83 

29.78 

29.807 

S  Easterly 

light 

cloudy 

27 

*3 

37 

28 

33.25 

29.91 

29.76 

29.65 

29.695 

NNE 

modt. 

cloudy 

28 

36 

33 

34.75 

30.08 

29.92 

29.64 

29.78S 

NNW 

modt. 

cloudy 

29 

47 

31 

37.67 

30.25 

30.21 

30.02 

30.100 

Northerly 

light 

fine 

30 

O 

39 

26 

33.33 

29.96 

30.29 

30.20 

30.272 

NWesterly 

light 

fine 

31 

- 

1 

j    38 

24 

31.50 

30.08 

30.29 

30.27 

30.28C 

SW 

light 

fine 

55 

24 

37.77 

32.40 

30.29 

29.03 

29.754 

i  w  lk  7»  wa1J^^«k^.^m^v^  *  wass      i  «.ry. 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


431 


!!|ii|!lM 


he  could  seldom  be  induced  to  use  any  of  them.  The  disease,  in  conse-  *823. 
quence,  reduced  him  to  a  state  of  extreme  debility,  which  at  length  carried  v^-v^ 
him  off  almost  without  pain.  The  Hecla  being  at  the  time  closely  beset, 
and  in  a  situation  of  great  danger  among  the  shoals  off  Winter  Island,  Cap- 
tain Lyon  caused  the  remains  of  the  deceased  to  be  committed  to  the  sea 
with  all  the  solemnity  which  circumstances  would  permit.  I  cannot  close 
this  melancholy  notice  without  expressing  my  most  sincere  regret,  to  which 
I  may  venture  to  add  that  of  Captain  Lyon  and  the  other  officers,  for  the 
loss  of  this  very  deserving  individual,  whose  qualities  as  a  seaman  and  navi- 
gator, had  it  pleased  God  to  spare  his  life,  would  have  rendered  him  an 
ornament  to  the  naval  service,  into  which  he  was  to  have  been  admitted  as  a 
Master  on  the  return  of  the  ships  to  England.  Mr.  Crawford,  the  mate  of 
the  Fury,  was  appointed,  for  the  present,  to  act  as  Master  of  the  Hecla  in 
the  room  of  Mr.  Fife. 

In  the  night  of  the  6th,  the  ships,  which  had  before  nearly  closed  each 
other,  were  again  separated  to  the  distance  of  several  miles,  though  no 
motion  was  perceptible  in  the  masses  of  ice  about  them.  The  Hecla  was 
now  carried  towards  Winter  Island,  and  the  Fury  up  Lyon  Inlet,  so  that  on 
the  10th  we  had  reached  the  islands  off  Five-hawser  Bay  within  three-quar-  Wed. 
ters  of  a  mile,  where  the  Hecla  was  barely  visible  from  the  mast-head.  On 
the  evening  of  the  11th,  however,  the  wind  at  length  began  to  freshen  from  Thur.il. 
the  north-west,  when  the  ice  almost  immediately  commenced  driving  down 
the  inlet  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  an  hour,  carrying  the  Fury  with  it  and  within 
half  a  mile  of  the  rocks,  the  whole  way  down  to  Cape  Martineau,  but  keep- 
ing her  in  deep  water.  In  the  mean  time  the  Hecla  had  been  swept  into 
much  more  dangerous  situations,  passing  along  the  east  and  south  sides  of 
Winter  Island ;  and  after  driving  nearly  up  to  Five-hawser  Bay,  being  carried 
near  some  dangerous  shoals  about  Cape  Edwards,  where  Captain  Lyon 
expected  every  other  tide  that  she  would  take  the  ground.  Indeed  for  the 
last  ten  or  twelve  days  the  situation  of  the  Hecla  had  been  one  of  imminent 
danger,  and  every  exertion  to  remove  her  from  it  had  proved  unavailing. 
From  this  time,  however,  the  ice  continued  to  drive  to  the  southward  and, 
by  some  means  or  other,  the  ships  once  more  closed  each  other.  It  was 
now  observable,  as  on  a  former  occasion  in  this  neighbourhood,  that  the  ice 
did  not  carry  the  ships  in  the  direction  opposite  to  the  wind,  but  much  more 
towards  Southampton  Island ;  so  that  on  the  14th  we  were  once  more  off  Sun.  14. 
Fife  Rock,  and  had,  by  great  exertions   in  warping,   nearly  rejoined   the 

3   Q 


i.,i 


482 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


!  Mttk 

Nil., 


1823.    Hecla.      We  now  also  observed  a  dark  water-sky  to  the  eastward,    which 
Sept.  J 

v-*~r>~-  assured  us  that  a  clear  sea  could  be  at  no  great  distance  in  that  direction. 

Mon.  15.  On  the  following  day,  when  the  ships  had  closed  each  other  within  a  mile, 
Ave  could  see  the  clear  water  from  the  mast-head,  and  the  Hecla  could  now 
have  been  easily  extricated.  Such  however  are  the  sudden  changes  that 
take  place  in  this  precarious  navigation,  that  not  long  afterwards  the  Fury 
was  quite  at  liberty  to  sail  out  of  the  ice,  while  the  Hecla  was  now,  in  her  turn, 
so  immoveably  set  fast,  and  even  cemented  between  several  very  heavy 
masses,  that  no  power  that  could  be  applied  was  sufficient  to  move  her  an  inch. 

Tues.  16.  In  this  situation  she  remained  all  the  16th,  without  our  being  able  to  afford 
her  any  assistance  ;  and  the  frost  being  now  rather  severe  at  night,  we  began 
to  consider  it  not  improbable  that  we  might  yet  be  detained  for  another 
winter.      We  were  perhaps   indeed  indebted  for  our  escape  to  a  strong 

Wed.  17.  westerly  breeze  which  blew  for  several  hours  on  the  17th,  when,  the  ice 
being  sufficiently  close  to  allow  our  men  to  Avalk  to  the  assistance  of  the 
Hecla,  we  succeeded,  after  seven  hours'  hard  labour,  in  forcing  her  into 
clear  water,  when  all  sail  was  made  to  the  eastward,  and  our  course  shaped 
for  the  Trinity  Islands  in  a  perfectly  open  sea. 

We  thus  finally  made  our  escape  from  the  ice  after  having  been  almost 
immoveably  beset  in  it  for  twenty-four  days  out  of  the  last  twenty-six,  in  the 
course  of  which  time  the  ships  had  been  taken  over  no  less  than  one  hun- 
dred and  forty  leagues  of  ground,  generally  very  close  to  the  shore,  and 
always  unable  to  do  any  thing  towards  effecting  their  escape  from  danger. 
When  it  is  considered  that,  to  have  taken  the  ground  in  this  situation,  with 
strong  and  high  tides  keeping  the  ice  in  constant  motion,  must  have  almost 
involved  the  certain  loss  of  the  ships,  and  without  the  possibility  of  one 
offering  assistance  to  the  other,  we  cannot  but  consider  this  as  one  of  the 
most  providential  escapes  it  has  ever  been  our  lot  to  experience. 

I  cannot  help  here  remarking  how  closely  the  band  of  packed  ice,  from 
which  we  had  now  just  escaped,  appears  to  keep  to  the  shores  both  of  the 
continent  and  of  Southampton  Island,  unless  driven  off  the  land  by  strong 
north-westerly  breezes.  After  now  leaving  this  body  of  it  we  saw  no  more 
on  our  return  to  the  eastward,  which  circumstance  agrees  with  the  accounts 
of  Baffin  in  1615,  and  of  Fox  in  1631  ;  the  former  having  stretched  over 
from  Southampton  Island  to  the  Trinity  Islands  without  obstruction,  and  the 
latter  appearing  not  to  have  seen  any  ice  the  whole  way  up  to  his  farthest 
north.     I  have  no  doubt  that  the  same  clear  sea  would  be  found  to  extend 


uiitF" 


i 


■  Ji^^^».i^l^««^^^^«^^Ar  yMJte*      ri&vk 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE.  483 

some  distance  to  the  northward  of  where  Fox  turned  back,  and  that  the    1823- 
band  of  ice  from  which  we  had  now  extricated  our  ships  continues  down  to  5?t 
the  neighbourhood  of  Carey's  Swan's  Nest,  producing  the  obstruction  occa- 
sionally met  with  by  the  Hudson's  Bay  ships  on  their  return  homewards  in 
the  autumn. 

During  the  time  we  were  beset  in  and  near  Lyon  Inlet,  advantage  was 
taken  of  the  deep  water  to  try  its  temperature  at  different  depths,  as  shewn 
in  the  following  Table  : 


lll'ini  ! 


Days,  1823. 

Time. 

Whole 
depth  of 
Water. 

Water 

bi ought  up 

from  a  depth 

of 

Temperature  of 

Water  brought 
up. 

Surface 
Water. 

Air. 

September  3d,     . 

2  P.M. 

Fathoms. 

190 

Fathoms. 

180 

30 

30.5 

40 

„            4th,    , 

4       „ 
9  A.M. 

176 
207 

150 

200 

30 
30.5 

30 
30.5 

38 
37 

»                       }! 

Noon. 

175 

170 

30.5 

30.5 

39 

»               >; 

2  P.M. 

184 

140 

31 

31 

42 

»                       !> 

7       „  ' 

108 

100 

30.5 

30 

37 

„            5th, 
«             6th, 

1       „ 

11.30  AM. 
4  P.M. 

175 
126 
139 

160 
125 
130 

31.4 
30.7 
30 

31.7 
30.7 
30  5 

37 
36 
34 

)>                     » 

6       „ 

150 

135 

30 

30.5 

33 

„             7th, 

8       „ 
Noon. 

124 

105 

115 

100 

29.5 
30.5 

30 
31 

30 
36 

??                       3) 

2  P.M. 

129 

124 

30.2 

31 

36 

99                       99 

5       „ 

120 

115 

29.5 

30.2 

33 

99                       39 

„             8th, 

7       „ 
7  A.M. 
10       ,. 
3.30  P.M. 

110 
125 
113 
119 

105 
120 
108 
110 

29.5 
29.5 
29.6 

29.7 

29.5 
29.7 
30.5 
30 

32 
33 
35 
36 

„             9th, 

8        , 
11.30  A.M. 

106 
132 

106 
120 

29 

30 

30 
30.5 

34 
38 

„           10th, 
„           Hth, 

7  P.M. 
11  A.M. 
7.30     „ 

125 
145 
128 

100 
140 
120 

30 
30 
30 

30 
30 
30 

35 
37 
35       | 

mm 


#  'jfi 


The  wind  still  favouring  us  after  our  leaving  the  ice,  we  made  the  land 
near  the  Trinity  Islands  on  the  evening  of  the  18th,  and  passed  Salisbury 
Island  the  following  day.  Meeting  with  no  obstruction  whatever  we  ran 
with  a  favourable  breeze  down  Hudson's  Strait,  and  at  noon  on  the  23d  had  Tues.  23. 

3  Q  2 


I 


484 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


Ill 


1823. 
Sept. 


October. 
Thur.  2. 


Tues.  7, 


passed  Button's  Isles,  from  which  we  took  our  final  departure.  Icebergs  of 
large  dimensions  occurred  from  about  the  seventy-third  degree  of  longitude 
downwards  to  the  entrance  of  the  Strait,  and  we  remarked  that  below  the 
sixty-third  degree  of  latitude  the  land  was  still  comparatively  clear  of  snow. 

From  the  time  of  our  quitting  the  ice  we  began  occasionally  to  notice 
flocks  of  dovekies,  and  soon  afterwards  kittiwakes  and  mallemucks  with 
their  young  became  numerous,  especially  after  leaving  Hudson's  Strait.  In 
passing  Cape  Farewell  we  saw  only  one  or  two  shearwaters,  probably  in 
consequence  of  our  being  too  far  to  the  southward  of  that  head-land.  A 
very  gradual  increase  took  place  in  the  temperature  of  the  sea-water  as  well 
as  in  that  of  the  atmosphere  as  we  advanced  to  the  eastward,  which  changes 
will  best  be  shown  by  reference  to  the  Meteorological  Abstract  for  the  month 
of  September.  The  Aurora  Borealis  was  visible  more  or  less  almost  every 
night  during  our  passage  across  the  Atlantic  ;  it  occurred  generally  in  large 
detached  and  irregular  patches  of  yellowish  light  indifferently  in  all  parts 
of  the  heavens,  and  frequently  afforded  as  much  light  as  the  moon  in  her 
quarters.  In  a  single  instance,  when  the  light  'happened  to  be  confined  to 
one  portion  of  the  heavens,  it  was  so  vivid  as  to  make  the  shadows  of  objects 
distinctly  visible  on  the  deck.  On  the  same  night,  the  phenomenon  assumed 
the  form  of  a  brilliant  arch  extending  across  the  heavens  through  the  zenith 
from  true  east  to  west.  It  often  happened  also  in  cloudy  weather,  that  the 
Aurora  produced  the  same  kind  of  general  light  at  night  as  the  moon  does 
under  similar  circumstances  ;  the  compasses  were  never  perceptibly  affected 
by  this  phenomenon. 

On  the  24th  of  September,  in  lat.  60°  30'  and  long.  61°  30',  we  picked 
up  a  piece  of  yellow  pine-tree,  ten  feet  long  from  the  root  and  a  foot  in 
diameter;  it  was  quite  sound,  not  at  all  water-logged,  and  had  no  appear- 
ance of  being  worm-eaten.  On  the  30th,  in  lat.  57°  35',  long.  39°  30',  we 
passed  another  tree  of  considerably  larger  size  ;  and  on  the  2d  of  October, 
in  lat.  58°  10',  long.  30°  05',  observed  a  spar  from  twenty  to  thirty  feet 
in  length. 

We  were  now  generally  favoured  by  strong  westerly  winds,  and  nothing 
worthy  of  notice  occurred  till  the  7th,  when  being  in  lat.  59°  26',  and  long. 
10°  55',  a  Six's  thermometer  was  sent  down  to  a  depth  of  three  hundred 
and  fifty  fathoms,  and  indicated  a  temperature  of  50i°,  that  of  the  surface 
being  the  same,  and  of  the  air  53°.  A  solan  goose  was  seen  on  this  and 
the  preceding   day,    and   these   birds   became   more   numerous  as  we  ap- 


1.  ' 


*'/J\ 


,/    ;>,-' 


^^yi\^^<XT:^^^/rw^r^:M «  y^J& 


ABSTRACT  of  the  METEOROLOGICAL  JOURNAL  kept  on  board  His  Majesty's  Ship 
Fury,  during  the  Month  of  September,   1823. 


[Temperature  of  Ail 
iu  Shade. 

Barometer. 

Prevailing 
Winds. 

~)ay 
1 

Place. 

<occ 

1 

Prevailing  Weather. 

Maxi- 

Mini- 

Mean. 

Maxi- 

Mini- 

Mean. 

1 

Direction. 

Velocity. 

-j 

+3°r 

O 

+23 

o 

-(-33.2.1 

1       o 
+29.92 

1    inches 
30. 25 

inches 

!    30.0- 

inches 

30.123 

1 

E 

light 

cloudy 

2 

37 

31 

34.00 

29.88 

30. 0( 

29.8: 

29.92C 

Easterly 

light 

cloudy 

3 

40 

31 

34.42 

.    29.9.5 

29.8 

29.75 

(29.807 

NE 

modt. 

hazy 

4 

0> 

42 

32 

36.42 

30.40 

29.91 

29.8; 

29.8C2 

Northerly 

light 

small  rain 

5 

s 

37 

28 

33.92 

30.62 

29. 9£ 

29.91 

29.960 

N.  Wester]) 

light 

clear 

G 

o 

38 

2G 

31.27 

30.14 

30.lt 

29.96 

30.043 

NW 

light 

fine 

7 

3G 

23 

29.79 

29.83 

30.11 

30.06 

30.100 

S.  Easterly 

light 

fine 

8 

u 

o 

37 

29 

33.58 

29.71 

30.07 

29.8-1 

30.000 

EbS 

light 

cloudy 

Q 

a 

40 

33 

35.17 

30.04 

29.72 

29.49 

29.627 

ESE 

light 

fog  and  rain. 

10 

39 

34 

35.67 

30.00 

29.38 

29.10 

29.233 

ENE 

modt. 

cloudy 

11 

3G 

30 

34.17 

29.79 

29.40 

29.11 

29.245 

North 

fresh 

cloudy 

12 

-> 

34.5 

27 

30.71 

29.04 

29.80 

29.52 

29.C75 

WNW 

fresh 

cloudy 

13 

-    a 

37 

29 

32.17 

29.00 

29.80 

29.70 

29.767 

fa.m.S.Westeriy 
1  p.m.  S.Easterly 

light 

cloudy— snow 

14 

p. 

32 

27 

29.83 

28.21 

29.79 

29.72 

29.700 

Westerly 

light 

cloudy 

15 

32 

23 

28.04 

2S.12 

29.90 

29.72 

29.828 

WNW 

modt. 

cloudy 

1G 

pa 
its 

33 

21 

27.92 

27.  SS 

29.97 

29.89 

29.946 

West 

modt 

cloudy 

17 

.  O 

30 

24 

26.40 

30.15 

29.97 

29.89 

29.940 

NW 

modt. 

cloudy 

18 

"a 

34.5 

26 

28.88 

32.17 

29.83 

29.  SO 

29.805 

West 

light 

cloudy — small  snow 

19 

o 
-c! 

29 

20 

27.38 

32.83 

29.83 

29.8?. 

29.830 

NNE 

modt. 

cloudy 

20 

30 

28 

29.29 

33.65 

29.90 

29.85 

29.873 

NNE 

light 

cloudy 

21 

33 

28 

29.92 

33.29 

29.  SS 

29  79 

29.850 

NNE 

light 

cloudy 

22 

be 

34 

26 

28.67 

32.21 

29.87 

29.77 

29.812 

NNW 

modt. 

fine                 jj 

23    ■ 

'3 

IB 

35 

26 

29.83 

32.00 

30.02 

29.92 

29.972 

ssw 

modt. 

clear 

24    • 

■v    -*2>  -w    O    0) 

40.5 

32 

37.46 

38.00 

29.90 

29.83 

29.875 

sw 

fresh 

cloudy 

25 

l^^l 

44 

39 

41.38 

41.50 

29.88 

21.S2' 

29.838 

ssw 

modt. 

cloudy 

26 

oDia       o 

w  s*  t« 

5  *  go  S 

51 

41 

43.83 

42.58 

29.99 

29.78 

29.908 

WNW 

light 

fine 

27 

44 

40 

41.92 

42.58 

29.80 

29.50 

29.647 

Southerly 

fresh 

hazy 

28 

51 

40 

43.12 

43.37 

30.00 

29.87. 

29.943 

Westerly 

modt. 

fine 

29    - 

43 

39 

41.75 

43.17 

29.94 

1 

29. 661'. 

29.830 

Northerly 

modt. 

fine 

30    < 

)ff  the  entrance 
to  Davis'  Strait. 

49 

40 

42.75 

44.33 

29.90 

29.70! 

29.828 

WNW 

fresh 

fine 

1 

51 

23 

33.76 

! 

33.15 

30.22 

1 
29.10  29.S2S 

1             1 

II 


486 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


! 


1823.  proached  the  Orkneys,  which  we  made  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  the  wind 
v-*-r-w  being  moderate  from  the  southward.  It  can  scarcely  perhaps  be  imagined 
by  those  who  have  not  been  similarly  situated,  with  what  eager  interest  one 
or  two  vessels  were  this  day  descried  by  us,  being  the  first  trace  of  civi- 
lized man  that  we  had  seen  for  the  space  of  seven  and  twenty  months.  The 
breeze  increasing  to  a  fresh  gale  from  the  southward  in  the  course  of  the 
night,  with  a  heavy  sea  from  the  same  quarter,  rendering  it  impossible  for 
us  to  make  any  progress  in  that  direction,  I  determined  to  put  into  Lerwick 
in  the  Shetland  Islands,  to  procure  refreshments  and  await  a  change  of 
wind  in  our  favour.     We  accordingly  bore  up  Tor  that  harbour  early  on  the 

Frid.  10.  morning  of  the  10th,  and  at  thirty  minutes  past  ten  A.M.  anchored  there, 
where  we  were  immediately  visited  by  a  great  number  of  the  inhabitants, 
anxious  to  greet  us  on  our  return  to  our  native  country. 

1  feel  it  utterly  impossible  adequately  to  express  the  kindness  and  atten- 
tion we  received  for  the  three  or  four  days  that  we  were  detained  in 
Bressay  Sound  by  a  continuance  of  unfavourable  winds.  On  the  first  infor- 
mation of  our  arrival  the  bells  of  Lerwick  were  set  ringing,  the  inhabitants 
flocked  from  every  part  of  the  country  to  express  their  joy  at  our  unex- 
pected return,  and  the  town  was  at  night  illuminated  as  if  each  individual 

Sun.  12.  had  a  brother  or  a  son  among  us.  On  the  12th,  being  Sunday,  the  officers 
and  men  of  both  ships  attended  divine  service  on  shore,  when  the  worthy 
minister,  the  Reverend  Mr.  Menzies  *,  who  was  before  well  known  to 
many  among  us,  offered  up  in  the  most  solemn  and  impressive  manner  a 
thanksgiving  for  our  safe  return  ;  at  the  same  time  calling  upon  us,  with 
great  earnestness,  never  to  forget  what  we  owed  to  Him  who  had  been 
"  about  our  path,  and  about  our  bed,  and  who  spieth  out  all  our  ways." 
The  peculiarity  of  the  circumstances  under  which  we  had  joined  the  con- 
gregation, the  warmth  of  feeling  exhibited  by  every  person  assembled 
within  the  sacred  walls,  together  with  the  affectionate  energy  of  the 
preacher,  combined  to  produce  an  effect  of  which  words  can  convey  but 
little  idea,  but  which  will  not  easily  be  effaced  from  the  minds  of  those  who 
were  present  on  this  affecting  occasion. 

Men.  13.      On  the  13th,  a  breeze  springing  up  from  the  northward,  we  took  leave  of 
our  kind  and  hospitable  friends,  deeply  sensible  of  the   cordial  and  affec- 


*  This  faithful  minister  and  most  estimable  member  of  society  has  since  gone  to  receive  the 
reward  of  his  labours  ;  but  he  will  long  live  in  our  grateful  remembrance. 


t>  jb  Z£  &5X  i).^\^1«f^^«^^is^^       i  *ey. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


487 


tionate  reception  Ave  had  experienced  ;  and  being  still  favoured  by  the  wind    1823- 
were  abreast  of  Buchaness  the  following  evening.     It  was  my  intention  to  wv' 
have  put  into  Leith,  in  order  to  procure  anchors  and  pilots  previously  to 
venturing  upon  the  English  coast,  but  the  wind  breaking  us  off  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  15th,  prevented  our  approaching  that  part  of  the  coast,  and  we  Wed.  15. 
continued  our  course  to  the  southward.     On  the  16th,  being  off  Whitby,  I  Thur.  16. 
went  on  shore  there,  accompanied  by  Mr.  Fisher  the  astronomer,  and  after 
receiving  the  cordial  greetings  of  a  great  number  of  the  worthy  inhabitants 
of  Whitby,   who    had  assembled   to  meet  us    on  landing,  set   off  for  Lon- 
don and  arrived  at  the  Admiralty  on  the  morning  of  the  18th.     The  ships, 
after  touching  at  the  Humber  for  pilots,  arrived  in  the  River  Thames  shortly 
afterwards,  and  were  paid  off  at  Deptford  on  the  14th  of  November. 


Having  thus  concluded  the  Narrative  of  this  our  second  attempt  to  disco- 
ver a  North-West  Passage,  it  may  be  proper  for  me  to  offer  a  few  remarks  on 
its  probable  existence  and  practicability.  That  such  a  passage  exists,  and 
that  its  outlet  on  the  western  side  will  be  found  at  Bhering's  Strait,  the  dis- 
coveries of  the  last  six  years,  combined  with  the  previous  researches  of 
Cook  and  Hearne  and  Mackenzie,  have  scarcely  left  a  doubt ;  indeed,  the 
various  points  at  which  the  northern  coast  of  America  has  now  been  satis- 
factorily laid  down,  from  Icy  Cape  on  the  west  to  the  shores  of  Melville 
Peninsula  on  the  east,  afford  a  strong  presumption  in  favour  of  the  opinion 
that  this  Continent  does  not  in  any  part  extend  far  beyond  the  70th  or  71st 
parallel  of  latitude. 

While  the  probability  of  the  existence  of  the  Passage  has  been  greatly 
strengthened  by  the  efforts  of  our  various  Expeditions  by  land  and  sea,  as 
well  as  by  those  of  the  Russians  about  Icy  Cape,  the  hope  of  its  ultimate 
accomplishment  has,  notwithstanding  our  late  failure,  received  no  inconsi- 
derable encouragement.  That  the  sea  is  sometimes  navigable  upon  the 
northern  shores  of  America  is  no  longer  a  matter  of  speculation  or  con- 
jecture, but  stands  recorded  upon  the  authority,  and  to  the  honour,  of  our 
distinguished  countryman  Captain  Franklin  and  his  brave  companions.  A 
single  view  of  the  drawings  accompanying  his  description  of  their  extraor- 
dinary canoe-navigation  along  these  desolate  shores,  must  at  once  convey  to 
the  minds  of  those  who  are  interested  in  the  accomplishment  of  this  long- 
sought  object,  a  degree  of  encouragement  which  the  most  sanguine  could 


«k 


Htm 


Ml     i 


ttlllllM 


ill. 


ihH>! 


M!:i|  ' 


I 


j 

•48S 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"HHF 


scarcely  have  experienced  before.  And  although  there  can  be  no  doubt, 
that  the  various  changes  of  wind  and  tide  would  occasionally  block  up  with 
ice  the  shores  surveyed  by  Captain  Franklin,  yet  the  open  water  he  observed 
is  a  proof  that  the  ice  has  a  considerable  space  to  move  about  in  ;  and  I 
cannot,  therefore,  but  entertain  a  very  confident  hope  that  if  a  ship  could 
once  be  got  upon  that  coast,  she  might,  by  patience  and  perseverance,  ulti- 
mately complete  the  desired  object. 

The  report  of  the  Russian  ships  that  lately  visited  Icy  Cape  is,  also,  as 
respects  the  state  of  the  ice,  as  favourable  as  the  most  sanguine  mind  could 
wish  ;  for  their  description  is  precisely  that  of  a  kind  of  navigation  through 
which  our  ships  have  already  held  their  course,  uninjured,  for  hundreds  of 
leagues,  and  through  which,  therefore,  they  may,  under  Providence,  be 
ao-ain  conducted  by  similar  exertions.  When,  indeed,  a  body  of  ice  has 
been  once  detached  from  the  land,  and  has  acquired  some  room  to  recede 
from  it,  which  appears  to  be  the  case  in  the  summer  about  Icy  Cape,  it  is 
seldom  that  a  ship  need  despair  of  making  progress,  unless  the  season  be  too 
far  advanced  to  allow  her  to  take  advantage  of  the  occasional  openings. 

Reports  so  favourable  as  these  of  the  state  of  the  ice  during  the  summer 
upon  the  central  and  western  parts  of  the  north  coast  of  America,  certainly 
combine  to  offer  a  new  view  of  the  enterprise  in  which  Ave  have  late  been 
engaged.  From  these  and  from  the  late  failure  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla  in 
endeavouring  to  force  their  way  into  the  Polar  Sea,  it  would  appear  that  the 
principal  difficulty  lies  on  this  eastern  or  Atlantic  side  ;  and  it  becomes, 
therefore,  a  matter  of  more  interest  than  ever  to  inquire  by  what  route  a  ship 
is  most  likely  to  reach  that  part  of  the  coast  lately  discovered  and  surveyed 
by  Captain  Franklin. 

The  opinion  I  have  before  given  as  to  the  advantages  of  continuous  land  in 
the  navigation  of  the  Polar  Seas,  has  been  considerably  strengthened  by  our 
subsequent  experience  for  the  last  three  seasons  ;  and  I  am  more  than  ever 
impressed  with  the  belief  that  the  only  way  in  which  a  ship  can,  with  toler- 
able certainty,  succeed  in  penetrating  any  considerable  distance  is  by  watch- 
ing the  openings  occasionally  produced  by  winds  and  tides  between  a  body 
of  ice,  when  detached  and  moveable,  and  some  land  continuous  in  the  de- 
sired direction.  I  have  here  adverted  to  this  only  for  the  purpose  of  further 
remarking  that,  however  unsuccessful  have  been  our  late  endeavours,  they 
were  unquestionably  directed  to  the  right  place,  and  that,  with  the  limited 
geographical  information  we  then  possessed,  no  other  route  than  that  pointed 


■^  3K M^^X%^^^\^f'<X^^^^M^\^M^^^^t        %  ir^i 


Bill,  IN    I 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


489 


out  in  my  Instructions,  could  possibly  have  been  pursued  with  any  reasonable 
hope  of  success* 

Circumstances,  however,  beyond  the  reach  of  any  previous  speculation, 
have  combined  to  oppose  an  insurmountable  barrier  to  our  entrance  into  the 
Polar  Sea  by  the  route  lately  pursued,  and  consequently  preventing  us  from 
reaching  the  northern  shore  of  the  continent  of  America,  along  which  it 
would  have  been  our  object  to  proceed.  The  state  of  the  ice  for  two  suc- 
cessive summers  in  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla  seems  to  indicate, 
that  the  obstruction  we  there  met  with  is  dependent  rather  on  locality  than 
on  season ;  for  the  phenomenon  of  two  consecutive  winters  of  extraordinary 
severity  is  one  of  extremely  rare  occurrence.  It  is  more  than  probable,  that 
the  obstacles  which  finally  arrested  our  progress  in  the  Strait  are  to  be 
mainly  attributed  to  the  current  we  found  setting  to  the  eastward  through  it ; 
and  which  coincides  with  that  observed  by  Captain  Franklin  and  by  the 
Russians  to  the  westward.  This  stream,  in  finding  its  way  out  through  the 
Strait,  would  undoubtedly  have  the  effect  of  keeping  the  ice  close  home  upon 
its  western  mouth,  so  as  to  prevent  the  egress  of  a  ship  in  that  direction ; 
and  I  cannot  help  thinking  that,  on  this  account,  the  navigation  of  that  Strait 
will  seldom  if  ever  be  practicable. 

Being  thus  unavoidably  shut  out  from  the  northern  shores  of  the  continent, 
it  remains  to  inquire  by  what  other  opening  there  may  be  the  best  chance  of 
approaching  it  the  nearest ;  for  the  principle  of  coasting  it,  whenever  it  can 
be  reached,  must  still  in  my  opinion  be  carefully  kept  in  view.  There  is 
no  /mown  opening  which  seems  to  present  itself  so  favourably  for  this  pur- 
pose as  Prince  Regent's  Inlet.  This  leads  me  to  observe  that,  had  we  even 
succeeded  in  fairly  entering  the  Polar  Sea  by  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and 
Hecla,  the  geographical  information  obtained  from  the  Esquimaux,  and  on 
which  I  conceive  the  greatest  reliance  may  be  placed,  would  probably  have 
induced  me  so  far  to  depart  from  the  strict  tenor  of  my  instructions,  as 
to  attempt  a  passage  across  the  mouth  of  the  great  bay  lying  on  the  south- 
western side  of  Melville  Peninsula,  instead  of  coasting  its  winding  and  pro- 
bably much-indented  shores.  Indeed  I  consider  that  the  spirit  of  my  In- 
structions was  fulfilled,  as  far  as  they  regarded  my  close  examination  of  the 
coast  of  America,  from  the  moment  that  I  had  discovered  the  Strait  whick 
terminated  that  coast  to  the  northward ;  and  that  had  I  been  fortunate  enough, 
to  succeed  in  entering  the  Polar  Sea,  that  my  business  then  was  to  get  to  the 
westward  in  the  shortest  way  I  was  able.  It  being  therefore  no  longer  necessary 

3  R 


490 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


L>1 


. 

m 

s 

\ 

• 

* 

' 

to  follow  the  continent  on  the  western  side  of  Melville  Peninsula,  it  appears  to 
be  of  very  little  importance  whether  a  future  attempt  be  made  from  Cape  Kater, 
which  lies  near  the  bottom  of  Prince  Regent's  Inlet,  or  from  Cape  Englefield 
at  the  western  entrance  of  the  Strait  of  the  Fury  and  Hecla.  Indeed  the 
chance  of  success  is  rather  in  favour  of  the  former  of  these  two  stations, 
both  on  account  of  the  shorter  distance  to  Point  Turnagain  of  Captain 
Franklin,  which  from  thence  does  not  exceed  four  hundred  and  fifty  miles, 
as  well  as  from  the  probability  to  which  I  have  before  alluded,  of  the 
ice  being  almost  constantly  pressed  by  the  westerly  current  against  the 
western  mouth  of  the  Strait.  The  view  which  we  obtained  from  the  southern 
part  of  Prince  Regent's  Inlet  in  1819  was  not,  indeed,  very  encouraging  as 
to  the  state  of  the  ice  at  that  particular  time  ;  but  our  business  at  that  time 
lying  in  a  different  direction,  we  remained  only  a  few  hours  on  the  spot, 
and  could  not  therefore  judge  what  favourable  changes  might  have  been 
produced  by  the  various  alterations  in  wind  and  tide.  The  ice  was,  however, 
certainly  detached  from  the  shores,  and  in  motion;  in  which  case  a  hope 
may  always  be  cherished  of  occasional  openings  in  our  favour. 

In  estimating  the  probability  of  success  in  this  attempt,  it  is  proper  for 
me  here  to  remark  that  the  difficulty  of  giving  any  very  decided  opinion 
upon  it  arises,  not  simply  from  the  general  uncertainty  attending  a  naviga- 
tion of  so   precarious  a  nature  as  that  to  which  we  have  lately  been  accus- 
tomed, as  because  there  is  nothing  in  our  late  experience  which  can  pro- 
perly be  considered  analogous  to  it.     To  enter  a  body  of  heavy  ice,  of  great 
and  uncertain  extent,  without  any  known  land  stretching  in  the  desired 
direction,  is  an  enterprise  differing  in  character  from  almost  any   hitherto 
attempted  with  success.     In  1819,  indeed,  the  Hecla  and  Griper  crossed  the 
barrier  of  ice  occupying  the  centre  of  Baffin's  Bay  for  a  distance  of  about 
ninety   miles,  and   succeeded   in  reaching  the  open  water  off  Sir  James 
Lancaster's  Sound  ;  and  since  that  time  numbers  of  whalers  have  done  the 
same :  but  this  distance  is  small  in  comparison  with  that  which  ships  would 
have  to  traverse,  from  the  bottom  of  Prince  Regent's  Inlet  to  any  part  of 
the  navigable  channel  discovered  by  Captain  Franklin,  and  Avhich  it  would 
be  their  first  object  to  reach.  It  is  however  by  no  means  improbable,  that  some 
intervening  land  may  be  discovered  in  this  interval  to  assist  a  ship's  progress 
to  the  south-westward  ;  and  that,  by  patience  and  perseverance,  she  might 
succeed  in  gaining  the  shores  of  the  continent,  where  it  may  be  expected 
that  only  the  ordinary  difficulties  of  this  navigation  would  once  more  present 


v    ■  ::A;tf£#Xtt<^^'tiii^  KfiBv*. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


491 


themselves.  It  is  possible  at  the  same  time  that,  in  so  vast  an  expanse  of 
sea,  channels  of  open  water  may  occur  to  assist  a  ship's  progress  to  the 
westward. 

It  appears,  then,  that  the  chief  difficulty  to  be  anticipated  in  the  accomplish- 
ment of  this  passage,  will  consist  in  getting  the  ships  upon  that  part  of  the 
continent,  which,  from  the  very  best  authority,  we  know  to  be  navigable.  I 
trust  that  the  endeavours  of  the  two  Expeditions  lately  employed  under  my 
orders  have  at  least  served  the  useful  purpose  of  shewing  where  the  passage 
is  not  to  be  effected,  and  of  thus  bringing  within  very  narrow  limits  the 
question  as  to  where  any  future  attempt  should  be  made.  In  submitting, 
which  I  do  with  considerable  diffidence,  the  foregoing  view  of  the  subject, 
it  has  not  been  my  intention  to  create  or  magnify  difficulties,  but  to  suggest 
as  well  as  I  am  able  the  best  mode  of  overcoming  them.  For  my  own  part, 
I  never  felt  more  sanguine  of  ultimate  success  in  the  enterprise  in  which  I 
have  lately  been  engaged,  than  at  the  present  moment ;  and  I  cannot  but 
entertain  a  confident  hope  that  England  may  yet  be  destined  to  succeed  in 
an  attempt  which  has  for  centuries  past  engaged  her  attention,  and  interested 
the  whole  civilized  world. 


END    OF    THE    NARRATIVE. 


ii 11 

H ' 

iitiiji 

it  i  fji- 

w 


III  If  ' 


3  R 


492 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


,  -'MB: 


SOME  FURTHER  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  ESQUIMAUX  OF  MELVILLE  PENINSULA  AND 

THE  ADJOINING  ISLANDS  j  MORE  PARTICULARLY  WINTER 

ISLAND  AND  IGLOOLIK. 


w 


IMF" 


The  number  of  individuals  composing  the  tribe  of  Esquimaux  assembled  at 
Winter  Island  and  Igloolik  was  two  hundred  and  nineteen,  of  whom  sixty-nine 
were  men,  seventy-seven  women,  and  seventy-three  children.  Two  or  three 
of  the  men,  from  their  appearance  and  infirmities,  as  well  as  from  the  age  of 
their  children,  must  have  been  near  seventy  ;  the  rest  were  from  twenty  to 
about  fifty.  The  majority  of  the  women  were  comparatively  young,  or  from 
twenty  to  five  and  thirty,  and  three  or  four  only  seemed  to  have  reached  sixty. 
Of  the  children,  about  one-third  were  under  four  years  old,  and  the  rest 
from  that  age  upwards  to  sixteen  or  seventeen.  Out  of  one  hundred  and 
fifty-five  individuals  who  passed  the  winter  at  Igloolik,  we  knew  of  eighteen 
deaths  and  only  of  nine  births. 

The  stature  of  these  people  is  much  below  that  of  Europeans  in  general. 
One  man,  who  was  unusually  tall,  measured  five  feet  ten  inches,  and  the 
shortest  was  only  four  feet  eleven  inches  and  a  half.  Of  twenty  individuals 
of  each  sex  measured  at  Igloolik,  the  range  was — 


MEN. 
From  5  ft.  10  in.  to  4  ft.  11  in. 
.     .     5  ft.  51  in.     .     .     . 


"WOMEN. 
From  5  ft.  3|  in.  to  4  ft.  8f  in. 


The  average  height 5  ft.  5*  in 5  ft.  0|  in. 

The  women,  however,  generally  appear  shorter  than  they  really  are,  both 
from  the  unwieldy  nature  of  their  clothes,  and  from  a  habit  which  they 
early  acquire,  of  stooping  considerably  forward  in  order  to  balance  the  weight 
the  child  they  carry  in  their  hood. 

In  their  figure  they  are  rather  well-formed  than  otherwise.  Their  knees 
are  indeed  rather  large  in  proportion,  but  their  legs  are  straight,  and  the 
hands  and  feet,  in  both  sexes,  remarkably  small.  The  younger  individuals 
were  all  plump,  but  none  of  them  corpulent ;  the  women  inclined  the  most  to 
this  last  extreme,  and  their  flesh  was,  even  in  the  youngest  individuals,  quite 
loose  and  without  firmness. 


*.  ^  :^i  s&  d  v .  ■  tt^yi^ittXvfSVX&i^&M^  ¥M=  Jfe        i  *r#': 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


493 


Their  faces  are  generally  round  and  full,  eyes  small  and  black,  nose  also 
small  and  sunk  far  in  between  the  cheek  bones,  but  not  much  flattened. 
It  is  remarkable  that  one  man,  Te-a,  his  brother,  his  wife  and  two  daughters 
had  good  Roman  noses,  and  one  of  the  latter  was  an  extremely  pretty  young 
woman.  Their  teeth  are  short,  thick,  and  close,  generally  regular,  and  in 
the  young  persons  almost  always  white.  The  elderly  women  were  still  well 
furnished  in  this  way,  though  their  teeth  were  usually  a  good  deal  worn 
down,  probably  by  the  habit  of  chewing  the  seal-skins  for  making  boots. 

In  the  young  of  both  sexes  the  complexion  is  clear  and  transparent,  and 
the  skin  smooth.  The  colour  of  the  latter,  when  divested  of  oil  and  dirt,  is 
scarcely  a  shade  darker  than  that  of  a  deep  brunette,  so  that  the  blood  is 
plainly  perceptible  when  it  mounts  into  the  cheeks.  In  the  old  folks,  whose 
faces  were  much  wrinkled,  the  skin  appears  of  a  much  more  dingy  hue,  the 
dirt  being  less  easily  and  therefore  less  frequently  dislodged  from  them. 

Besides  the  smallness  of  their  eyes,  there  are  two  peculiarities  in  this 
feature  common  to  almost  all  of  them.  The  first  consists  in  the  eye  not 
being  horizontal  as  with  us,  but  coming  much  lower  at  the  end  next  the  nose 
than  at  the  other.  Of  the  second  an  account,  by  Mr.  Edwards,  will  be 
given  in  another  place. 

By  whatever  peculiarities,  however,  they  may  in  general  be  distinguished, 
they  are  by  no  means  ill-looking  people  ;  and  there  were  among  them  three 
or  four  grown-up  persons  of  each  sex  who,  when  divested  of  their  skin- 
dresses,  their  tattooing  and,  above  all  of  their  dirt,  might  have  been  consi- 
dered pleasing-looking  if  not  handsome  people  in  any  town  in  Europe.  This 
remark  applies  more .  generally  to  the  children  also,  several  of  whom  had 
complexions  nearly  as  fair  as  that  of  Europeans,  and  whose  little  bright 
black  eyes  gave  a  fine  expression  to  their  countenances. 

The  hair  both  of  males  and  females  is  black,  glossy,  and  straight.  The 
men  usually  wear  it  rather  long,  and  allow  it  to  hang  about  their  heads  in  a 
loose  and  slovenly  manner.  A  few  of  the  younger  men,  and  especially  those 
who  had  been  about  the  shores  of  the  Welcome,  had  it  cut  straight  upon  the 
forehead,  and  two  or  three  had  a  circular  patch  upon  the  crown  of  the  head, 
where  the  hair  was  quite  short  and  thin,  somewhat  after  the  manner  of 
Capuchin  friars.  The  women  pride  themselves  extremely  on  the  length 
and  thickness  of  their  hair  ;  and  it  was  not  without  reluctance  on  their  part, 
and  the  same  on  that  of  their  husbands,  that  they  were  induced  to  dispose 
of  any  of  it.     When  inclined  to  be  neat  they  separate  their  locks  into  two 


in- 1 


WW 


m 


494 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


!'!| 


HI 


L>1 


'"'  NUB 

equal  parts,  one  of  which  hangs  on  each  side  of  their  heads  and  in  front  of 
their  shoulders.  To  stiffen  and  bind  these  they  use  a  narrow  strap  of  deer- 
skin, attached  at  one  end  to  a  round  piece  of  bone,  fourteen  inches  long, 
tapered  to  a  point,  and  covered  over  with  leather.  This  looks  like  a  little 
whip,  the  handle  of  which  is  placed  up  and  down  the  hair,  and  the  strap 
wound  round  it  in  a  number  of  spiral  turns,  making  the  tail,  thus  equipped, 
very  much  resemble  one  of  those  formerly  worn  by  our  seamen.  The  strap 
of  this  article  of  dress,  which  is  altogether  called  a  togleegd,  is  so  made  from 
the  deer-skin  as  to  shew,  when  bound  round  the  hair,  alternate  turns  of 
white  and  dark  fur,  which  give  it  a  very  neat  and  ornamental  appearance. 
On  ordinary  occasions  it  is  considered  slovenly  not  to  have  the  hair  thus 
dressed,  and  the  neatest  of  the  women  never  visited  the  ships  without  it. 
Those  who  are  less  nice  dispose  their  hair  into  a  loose  plait  on  each  side, 
or  have  one  togleega  and  one  plait ;  and  others  again,  wholly  disregarding 
the  business  of  the  toilette,  merely  tacked  their  hair  in  under  the  breast  of 
their  jackets.  Some  of  the  women's  hair  was  tolerably  fine,  but  would  not 
in  this  respect  bear  a  comparison  with  that  of  an  Englishwoman.  In  both 
sexes  it  is  full  of  vermin,  which  they  are  in  the  constant  habit  of  picking  out 
and  eating ;  a  man  and  his  wife  will  sit  for  an  hour  together,  performing 
for  each  other  that  friendly  office.  The  women  have  a  comb,  (12.)*  which, 
however,  seems  more  intended  for  ornament  than  use,  as  we  seldom  or  never 
observed  them  comb  their  hair.  When  a  woman's  husband  is  ill  she  wears  her 
hair  loose,  and  cuts  it  off  as  a  sign  of  mourning  if  he  dies ;  a  custom  agreeing 
with  that  of  the  Greenlanders  f .  It  is  probable  also,  from  what  has  been  before 
said,  that  some  opprobrium  is  attached  to  the  loss  of  a  woman's  hair  when 
no  such  occasion  demands  this  sacrifice  j.  The  men  wear  the  hair  on  the 
upper  lip  and  chin,  from  an  inch  to  an  inch  and  a  half  in  length,  and  some 
were  distinguished  by  a  little  tuft  between  the  chin  and  lower  lip. 

The  dresses  both  of  male  and  female  are  composed  almost  entirely  of  deer- 
skin, in  which  respect  they  differ  from  those  of  most  Esquimaux  before  met 

*  This  and  the  other  numbers  thus  occurring  in  the  course  of  this  chapter,  refer  to  the 
corresponding  numbers  in  the  two  Engravings  of  Implements,  fyc. 

+  Crantz's  History  of  Greenland,  London  edition,  1767,  i.  138,  240.  In  the  following 
account  of  the  Esquimaux,  references  will  occasionally  be  made  to  Crantz  and  Egede,  as 
well  to  point  out  any  dissimilarity,  as  any  resemblance,  between  these  people  and  the  nations 
of  Greenland. 

'%  Id.  ibid. 


v.  ■  :&'Ag&£S&*£&'&g&  ■  £S+^£&£^&JiP%**^      r*yw 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


495 


with.  In  the  form  of  the  dress  they  vary  very  little  from  those  so  repeat- 
edly described.  The  jacket,  which  is  close,  but  not  tight,  all. round,  comes 
as  low  as  the  hips  and  has  sleeves  reaching  to  the  wrist.  In  that  of  the 
women,  the  tail  or  flap  behind  is  very  broad,  and  so  long  as  almost  to  touch 
the  ground  ;  while  a  shorter  and  narrower  one  before  reaches  half-way  down 
the  thigh.  The  men  have  also  a  tail  in  the  hind  part  of  their  jacket,  but  of 
smaller  dimensions  ;  but  before,  it  is  generally  straight,  or  ornamented  by  a 
single  scollop.  The  hood  of  the  jacket,  which  forms  the  only  covering  for 
their  head,  is  much  the  largest  in  that  of  the  women,  for  the  purpose  of 
holding  a  child.  The  back  of  the  jacket  also  bulges  out  in  the  middle  to 
give  the  child  a  footing,  and  a  strap  or  girdle  below  this,  and  secured  round 
the  waist  by  two  large  wooden  buttons  in  front,  prevents  the  infant  from 
falling  through  when,  the  hood  being  in  use,  it  is  necessary  thus  to  deposit 
it.  The  sleeves  of  the  women's  jackets  are  made  more  square  and  loose 
about  the  shoulders  than  those  of  the  men,  for  the  convenience,  as  we  under- 
stood, of  more  readily  depositing  a  child  in  the  hood  ;  and  they  have  a 
habit  of  slipping  their  arms  out  of  them,  and  keeping  them  in  contact  with 
their  bodies,  for  the  sake  of  warmth,  just  as  we  do  with  our  fingers  in  our 
gloves  in  very  cold  weather. 

In  winter  every  individual,  when  in  the  open  air,  wears  two  jackets,  of 
which  the  outer  one  (Cdppe-tigga)  has  the  hair  outside,  and  the  inner  one 
(Atteega)  next  the  body.  Immediately  on  entering  the  hut  the  men  take  off 
their  outer  jacket,  beat  the  snow  from  it,  and  lay  it  by.  The  upper  garment 
of  the  females,  besides  being  cut  according  to  a  regular  and  uniform  pat- 
tern, and  sewed  with  exceeding  neatness,  which  is  the  case  with  all  the 
dresses  of  these  people,  has  also  the  flaps  ornamented  in  a  very  becoming 
manner  by  a  neat  border  of  deer-skin,  so  arranged  as  to  display  alternate 
breadths  of  white  and  dark  fur.  This  is,  moreover,  usually  beautified  by  a 
handsome  fringe,  consisting  of  innumerable  long  narrow  threads  of  leather 
hanging  down  from  it.  This  ornament  is  not  uncommon  also  in  the  outer 
jackets  of  the  men.  When  seal-hunting,  they  fasten  up  the  tails  of  their 
jackets  with  a  button  behind. 

Their  breeches,  of  which  in  winter  they  also  wear  two  pair,  and  similarly 
disposed  as  to  the  fur,  reach  below  the  knee,  and  fasten  with  a  string 
drawn  tight  round  the  waist.  Though  these  have  little  or  no  waist-band,  and 
do  not  come  very  high,  the  depth  of  the  jackets,  which  considerably  overlap 
them,  serves  very  effectually  to  complete  the  covering  of  the  body. 


l    • 


■ 


:hMi; 


ullllt) 


I 


496 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


i 

'"  Mill) 

Their  legs  and  feet  are  so  well  clothed  that  no  degree  of  cold  can  well 
affect  them.  When  a  man  goes  on  a  sealing  excursion,  he  first  puts  on  a  pair 
of  deer-skin  boots  (Allekteega)  with  the  hair  inside  and  reaching  to  the 
knee,  where  they  tie.  Over  these  come  a  pair  of  shoes  of  the  same  mate- 
rial;  next  a  pair  of  dressed  seal-skin  boots  perfectly  water-tight;  and  over 
all  a  corresponding  pair  of  shoes,  tying  round  the  instep.  These  last  are 
made  just  like  the  mocassin  of  a  North-American  Indian,  being  neatly 
crimped  at  the  toes,  and  having  several  serpentine  pieces  of  hide  sewn 
across  the  sole  to  prevent  wearing.  The  water-tight  boots  and  shoes  are 
made  of  the  skin  of  the  small  seal,  (neitiek)  except  the  soles,  which  consist 
of  the  skin  of  the  large  seal  (oguke)  ;  this  last  is  also  used  for  their  fishing- 
lines.  When  the  men  are  not  prepared  to  encounter  wet,  they  wear  an  outer 
boot  of  deer-skin  with  the  hair  outside. 

The  inner  boot  of  the  women,  unlike  that  of  the  men,  is  loose  round  the 
leg,  coming  as  high  as  the  knee-joint  behind,  and  in  front  carried  up,  by  a 
long  pointed  flap,  nearly  to  the  waist,  and  there  fastened  to  the  breeches. 
The  upper  boot,  with  the  hair  as  usual  outside,  corresponds  with  the  other 
in  shape,  except  that  it  is  much  more  full,  especially  on  the  outer  side,  where 
it  bulges  out  so  preposterously  as  to  give  the  women  the  most  awkward, 
bow-legged  appearance  imaginable.  This  superfluity  of  boot  has  probably 
originated  in  the  custom,  still  common  among  the  native  women  of  Labrador, 
of  carrying  their  children  in  them.  We  were  told  that  these  women  some- 
times put  their  children  there  to  sleep  ;  but  the  custom  must  be  rare  among 
them,  as  we  never  saw  it  practised.  These  boots,  however,  form  their  prin- 
cipal pockets,  and  pretty  capacious  ones  they  are.  Here,  also,  as  in  the 
jackets,  considerable  taste  is  displayed  in  the  selection  of  different  parts  of 
the  deer-skin,  alternate  strips  of  dark  and  white  being  placed  up  and  down 
the  sides  and  front  by  way  of  ornament.  The  women  also  wear  a  mocassin 
(Itteegega)  over  all,  in  the  winter-time. 

One  or  two  persons  used  to  wear  a  sort  of  ruff  round  the  neck,  composed 
of  the  longest  white  hair  of  the  deer-skin,  hanging  down  over  the  bosom  in 
a  manner  very  becoming  to  young  people.  It  seemed  to  afford  so  little 
additional  warmth  to  persons  already  well  clothed,  that  I  am  inclined 
rather  to  attribute  their  wearing  it  to  some  superstitious  notion.  The  chil- 
dren between  two  and  eight  or  nine  years  of  age  had  a  pair  of  breeches  and 
boots  united  in  one,  with  braces  over  their  shoulders  to  keep  them  up. 
These,  with  a  jacket  like  the  others,  and    a  pair  of  deer-skin  mittens, 


%>'/J 


.'  .^> 


i  ±*rt*xr ^^^TW^r^^m^^^t      ■  &w. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


497 


with  which  each  individual  is  furnished,  constitute  the  whole  of  their 
dress.  Children's  clothes  are  often  made  of  the  skins  of  very  young  fawns 
and  of  the  marmot,  as  being  softer  than  those  of  the  deer. 

The  Esquimaux,  when  thus  equipped,  may  at  all  times  bid  defiance  to  the 
rigour  of  this  inhospitable  climate  ;  and  nothing  can  exceed  the  comfortable 
appearance  which  they  exhibit  even  in  the  most  inclement  weather.  When 
seen  at  a  little  distance,  the  white  rim  of  their  hoods,  whitened  still  more  by 
the  breath  collecting  and  freezing  upon  it,  and  contrasted  with  the  dark  faces 
which  they  encircle,  render  them  very  grotesque  objects  ;  but  while  the  skin 
of  their  dresses  continues  in  good  condition,  they  always  look  clean  and 
wholesome. 

To  judge  by  the  eagerness  with  which  the  women  received  our  beads, 
especially  small  white  ones,  as  well  as  any  other  article  of  that  kind,  we 
might  suppose  them  very  fond  of  personal  ornament.  Yet  of  all  that  they 
obtained  from  us  in  this  way  at  Winter- Island,  scarcely  any  thing  ever  made 
its  appearance  again  during  our  stay  there,  except  a  ring  or  two  on  the 
finger,  and  some  bracelets  of  beads  round  the  wrist ;  the  latter  of  these  was 
probably  considered  as  a  charm  of  some  kind  or  other.  We  found  among 
them,  at  the  time  of  our  first  intercourse,  a  number  of  small  black  and  white 
glass  beads,  disposed  alternately  on  a  string  of  sinew  and  worn  in  this 
manner.  They  would  also  sometimes  hang  a  small  bunch  of  these,  or  a 
button  or  two,  in  front  of  their  jackets  and  hair ;  and  many  of  them,  in  the 
course  of  the  second  winter,  covered  the  whole  front  of  their  jackets  with 
the  beads  they  received  from  us. 

The  most  common  ornament  of  this  kind,  exclusively  their  own,  consists 
in  strings  of  teeth,  sometimes  many  hundred  in  number,  which  are  either 
attached  to  the  lower  part  of  the  jacket  like  the  fringe  before  described,  or 
fastened  as  a  belt  round  the  waist.  Most  of  these  teeth  are  of  the  fox  and 
wolf,  but  some  also  belonged  to  the  musk-ox,  (oomingmuk),  of  which  animal, 
though  it  is  never  seen  at  Winter-Island,  we  procured  from  the  Esquimaux 
several  of  the  grinders  and  a  quantity  of  the  hair  and  skin.  The  bones  of 
the  kdblee-drioo,  supposed  to  be  the  wolverene,  constitute  another  of  their  or- 
naments ;  and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  all  these  possess  some  ■imaginary- 
qualities,  vas  specific  charms  for  various  purposes*.  The  most  extraordinary 
amulet,  if  it  be  one,  of  this  kind,  was  a  row  of  foxes'  noses  attached  to  the 


Egede's  Description  of  Greenland,  London  Edition,  1745,  p.  194. 


3  S 


:"'  i 


* 


'    ! 


II 


life 


■ 


. 


Bi 


r* 


498 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"Hilt 


fore-part  of  a  woman's  jacket  like  a  tier  of  black  buttons.  I  purchased 
from  Iligliuk  a  semicircular  ornament  of  brass,  serrated  at  the  upper  edge 
and  brightly  polished,  which  she  wore  over  her  hair  in  front  and  which  was 
very  becoming.  The  handsomest  thing  of  this  kind,  however,  was  under- 
stood to  be  worn  on  the  head  by  men,  though  we  did  not  learn  on  what 
occasions.  (7.)  It  consisted  of  a  band  two  inches  in  breadth,  composed  of 
several  strips  of  skin  sewn  together,  alternately  black  and  yellow ;  near  the 
upper  edge,  some  hair  was  artfully  interwoven,  forming  with  the  skin  a  very 
pretty  checquer-work :  along  the  lower  edge  were  suspended  more  than  a 
hundred  small  teeth,  principally  of  the  deer,  neatly  fastened  by  small  double 
tags  of  sinew  and  forming  a  very  appropriate  fringe. 

Among  their  personal  ornaments  must  also  be  reckoned  that  mode  of 
marking  the  body,  called  tattooing  which,  of  the  customs  not  essential  to 
the  comfort  or  happiness  of  mankind,  is  perhaps  the  most  extensively  prac- 
tised throughout  the  world.  Among  these  people  it  seems  to  be  an  ornament 
of  indispensable  importance  to  the  women,  not  one  of  them  being  without 
it.     The  operation  is  performed  about  the  age  of  ten  or  sometimes  earlier, 
and  has  nothing  to  do  with  marriage,  except  that,  being  considered  in  the 
light  of  a  personal  charm,  it  may  serve  to  recommend  them  as  wives.     The 
parts  of  the  body  thus  marked  are  their  faces,  arms,  hands,  thighs,  and  in 
some  few  women  the  breasts,  but  never  the  feet  as  in  Greenland*.     The 
operation,  which  by   way   of  curiosity  most  of   our  gentlemen  had  prac- 
tised on  their  arms,  is  very  expeditiously  managed  by  passing  a  needle  and 
thread,  the  latter  covered  with  lamp-black  and  oilf,  under  the  epidermis, 
according  to  a  pattern  previously  marked  out  upon  the  skin.  Several  stitches 
being  thus  taken  at  once,  the  thumb  is  pressed  upon  the  part,  while  the 
thread  is  drawn  through,  by  which  means  the  colouring  matter  is  retained 
and  a  permanent  dye  of  a  blue  tinge  imparted  to  the  skin.     A  woman  ex- 
pert at  this  business  will  perform  it  very  quickly  and  with  great  regularity, 
but  seldom  without  drawing  blood  in  many  places,  and  occasioning  some 
inflammation.     Where   so   large  a  portion  of  the  surface   of   the  body  is 
to  be  covered,  it  must  become  a  painful  as  Avell  as  tedious  process,  espe- 
cially as,  for  want  of  needles,  they  often  use  a  strip  of  whalebone  as  a 
substitute.     For  those  parts  where  a  needle  cannot  conveniently  be  passed 
under  the  skin,  they  use  the  method  by  puncture,  which  is   common  in 


»m 


*  Crantz,  I.  138. 


t  Id.  Ibid. 


22 


8 

I 


1 

' 

1&tf 


as 


■■ '■:-■■■  I 


.■  'f 


iiiffliiillill 


"      1    :'. 


¥,*■*■  ;..'■'.■  j-  ,MiS  "V V'1'  i'*r '  *  pi'^'f'jj 


'■^-'''^'^fi^lfililitlllillJI'^illlltwijit!^  ;■■.'''        ■  .■'.■. 


oSA    i  »:J&fca*3^*KJ^*£^  -,:..' 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


499 


other  countries,  and  by  which  our  seamen  frequently  mark  their  hands  and 
arms.  The  pattern  which  these  people  adopt,  and  which  is  nearly  the  same 
in  all,  will  best  and  can  indeed  be  only  understood  by  reference  to  Cap- 
tain Lyon's  drawings,  in  which  it  is  faithfully  delineated.  Several  of  the 
men  had  a  little  of  this  kind  of  mark  on  the  back  part  of  their  hands  ; 
and  with  them  we  understood  it  to  be  considered  as  a  souvenir  of  some  dis- 
tant or  deceased  person  who  had  performed  it. 

In  their  winter-habitations,  I  have  before  mentioned  that  the  only  mate- 
rials employed  are  snow  and  ice  ;  the  latter  being  made  use  of  for  the  win- 
dows alone.     The  work  is  commenced  by  cutting  from  a  drift  of  hard  and 
compact  snow  a  number  of  oblong  slabs,  six  or  seven  inches  thick  and 
about  two  feet  in  length,  and  laying  them  edgeways  on  a  level  spot,  also 
covered  with  snow,  in  a  circular  form  and  of  a  diameter  from  eight  to  fifteen 
feet,  proportioned  to  the  number  of  occupants  the  hut  is  to  contain.     Upon 
this  as  a  foundation  is  laid  a  second  tier  of  the  same  kind,  but  with  the 
pieces  inclining  a  little  inwards,  and  made  to  fit  closely  to  the  lower  slabs 
and  to  each  other,  by  running  a  knife  adroitly  along  the  under  part  and 
sides.     The  top  of  this  tier  is  now  prepared  for  the  reception  of  a  third,  by 
squaring  it  off  smoothly  with  a  knife,  all  which  is  dexterously  performed  by 
one  man  standing  within  the  circle  and  receiving  the  blocks  of  snow  from 
those  employed  in  cutting  them   without.     When  the  wall  has  attained  a 
height  of  four  or  five  feet,  it  leans  so  much  inward  as  to  appear  as  if  about 
to  tumble  every  moment,  but  the  workmen  still  fearlessly   lay  their  blocks 
of  snow  upon  it,  until  it  is  too  high  any  longer  to  furnish  the  materials  to 
the  builder  in  this  manner.     Of  this  he  gives  notice  by  cutting  a  hole  close 
to  the  ground  in  that  part  where  the  door  is  intended  to  be,  which  is  near 
the  south  side,  and  through  this  the  snow  is  now  passed.     Thus  they  con- 
tinue till  they  have  brought  the  sides  nearly  to  meet  in  a  perfect  and  well- 
constructed  dome,  sometimes  nine  or  ten  feet  high  in  the  centre  ;  and  this 
they  take  considerable  care  in  finishing,  by  fitting  the  last  block  or  key-ston'& 
very  nicely  in  the  centre,  dropping  it  into  its  place  from  the  outside  though 
it  is  still  done  by  the  man  within.     The  people  outside  are  in  the  mean  time 
occupied  in  throwing  up  snow  with  the  pooalleray ,  or  snow-shovel,  (5.)  and 
in  stuffing  in  little  wedges  of  snow  where  holes  have  been  accidentally  left. 
The  builder  next  proceeds  to  let  himself  out  by  enlarging  the  proposed 
door-way  into  the  form  of  a  Gothic  arch  three  feet  high,  and  two  feet  and  a 
half  wide  at  the  bottom,  communicating  with  which  they  construct  two 

3  s  2 


iltiin  ' 


mm 


lift) 


il;i 


:; 


500 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


'"'■•« 


4 


passages,  as  sliewn  in  the  annexed  ground-plan,  each  from  ten  to  twelve 
feet  lon°-  and  from  four  to  five  in  height,  the  lowest  being  that  next  the 
hut. 


feet. 


The  roofs  of  these  passages  are  sometimes  arched,  but  more  generally- 
made  flat  by  slabs  laid  on  horizontally.  In  first  digging  the  snow  for  build- 
ing the  hut,  they  take  it  principally  from  the  part  where  the  passages  are  to 
be  made,  which  purposely  brings  the  floor  of  the  latter  considerably  lower 
than  that  of  the  hut,  but  in  no  part  do  they  dig  till  the  bare  ground  appears. 

The  work  just  described  completes  the  walls  of  a  hut,  if  a  single  apart- 
ment only  be  required  ;  but  if,  on  account  of  relationship,  or  from  any  other 
cause,  several  families  are  to  reside  under  one  roof,  the  passages  are  made 
common  to  all,  and  the  first  apartment  (in  that  case  made  smaller)  forms  a 
kind  of  anti-chamber,  from  which  you  go  through  an  arched  door- way  five 
feet  high  into  the  inhabited  apartments.  When  there  are  three  of  these, 
which  is  generally  the  case,  the  whole  building  with  its  adjacent  passages, 
forms  a  tolerably  regular  cross. 


\  >.'/■•. 


,  3^«^i>^^*^nv&^f^^MJfe        i  *u*'. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


501 


For  the  admission  of  light  into  the  huts  a  round  hole  is  cut  on  one  side  of 
the  roof  of  each  apartment,  and  a  circular  plate  of  ice,  three  or  four  inches 
thick  and  two  feet  in  diameter,  let  into  it.  The  light  is  soft  and  pleasant 
like  that  transmitted  through  ground  glass,  and  is  quite  sufficient  for  every 
purpose.  When  after  some  time  these  edifices  become  surrounded  by  drift, 
it  is  only  by  the  windows,  as  I  have  before  remarked,  that  they  could  be 
recognised  as  human  habitations.  It  may  perhaps  then  be  imagined  how 
singular  is  their  external  appearance  at  night,  when  they  discover  themselves 
only  by  a  circular  disk  of  light  transmitted  through  the  windows  from  the 
lamps  within. 

The  next  thing  to  be  done  is  to  raise  a  bank  of  snow  two  and  a  half  feet 
high,  all  round  the  interior  of  each  apartment,  except  on  the  side  next  the 
door.  This  bank,  which  is  neatly  squared  off,  forms  their  beds  and  fire-place, 
the  former  occupying  the  sides  and  the  latter  the  end  opposite  the  door. 
The  passage  left  open  up  to  the  fire-place  is  between  three  and  four  feet 
wide.  The  beds  are  arranged  by  first  covering  the  snow  with  a  quantity  of 
small  stones,  over  which  are  laid  their  paddles,  tent-poles,  and  some  blades  of 
whalebone :  above  these  they  place  a  number  of  little  pieces  of  net-worlk, 
made  of  thin  slips  of  whalebone,  and  lastly  a  quantity  of  twigs  of  birch  *  and 
of  the  andromeda  tetragona.  Their  deer-skins,  which  are  very  numerous, 
can  now  be  spread  without  risk  of  their  touching  the  snow  ;  and  such  a  bed  is 
capable  of  affording  not  merely  comfort  but  luxurious  repose,  in  spite  of  the 
rigour  of  the  climate.  The  skins  thus  used  as  blankets  are  made  of  a  large 
size  and  bordered,  like  some  of  the  jackets,  with  a  fringe  of  long  narrow  slips 
of  leather,  in  which  state  a  blanket  is  called  keipilc. 

The  fire  belonging  to  each  family  consists  of  a  single  lamp,  or  shallow 
vessel  of  lapis  ollaris,  its  form  being  the  lesser  segment  of  a  circle.  (2.)  The 
wick,  composed  of  dry  moss  rubbed  between  the  hands  till  it  is  quite  inflam- 
mable, is  disposed  along  the  edge  of  the  lamp  on  the  strait  side,  and  a  greater 
or  smaller  quantity  lighted  according  to  the  heat  required  or  the  fuel  that 
can  be  afforded.  When  the  whole  length  of  this,  which  is  sometimes  above 
eighteen  inches,  is  kindled,  it  affords  a  most  brilliant  and  beautiful  light 

*  This  birch  they  said  had  been  procured  from  the  southward,  by  way  of  Noowook.  We 
never  met  with  any  of  the  same  kind  in  those  parts  of  the  country  which  we  visited,  except 
that  observed  by  Captain  Lyon  in  the  deserted  habitations  of  the  Esquimaux  near  Five 
Hawser-Bay. 


' "] 

'  I'i'l 

M 

M 


m' 


a     i 


!    I 


ii  ■ 


502 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


1  Ml 


without  any  perceptible  smoke  or  offensive  smell.  The  lamp  is  made  to 
supply  itself  with  oil,  by  suspending  a  long  thin  slice  of  whale,  seal,  or  sea- 
horse blubber  near  the  flame,  the  warmth  of  which  causes  the  oil  to  drip  into 
the  vessel  until  the  whole  is  extracted.  Immediately  over  the  lamp  is  fixed 
a  rude  and  ricketty  frame-work  of  wood,  from  which  their  pots  are  suspended, 
and  serving  also  to  sustain  a  large  hoop  of  bone,  having  a  net  stretched  tight 
within  it.  This  contrivance,  called  Innetat,  is  intended  for  the  reception  of 
any  wet  things,  and  is  usually  loaded  with  boots,  shoes,  and  mittens. 

The  fire-place  just  described  as  situated  at  the  upper  end  of  the  apartment, 
has  always  two  lamps  facing  different  ways,  one  for  each  family  occupying 
the  corresponding  bed-place.  There  is  frequently  also  a  smaller  aud  less- 
pretending  establishment  on  the  same  model,  lamp,  pot,  net  and  all,  in  one 
of  the  corners  next  the  door ;  for  one  apartment  sometimes  contains  three 
families,  which  are  always  closely  related,  and  no  married  woman  or  even  a 
widow  without  children  is  without  her  separate  fire-place. 

With  all  the  lamps  lighted  and  the  hut  full  of  people  and  dogs,  a  thermo- 
meter placed  on  the  net  over  the  fire  indicated  a  temperature  of  38°  ;  when 
removed  two  or  three  feet  from  this  situation  it  fell  to  32°,  and  placed  close 
to  the  wall  stood  at  23°,  the  temperature  of  the  open  air  at  the  time  being 
25°  below  zero.  A  greater  degree  of  warmth  than  this,  produces  extreme 
inconvenience  by  the  dropping  from  the  roofs.  This  they  endeavour  to 
obviate,  by  applying  a  little  piece  of  snow  to  the  place  from  which  a  drop 
proceeds,  and  this  adhering  is  for  a  short  time  an  effectual  remedy  ;  but  for 
several  weeks  in  the  spring,  when  the  weather  is  too  warm  for  these  edifices, 
and  still  too  cold  for  tents,  they  suffer  much  on  this  account, 

The  most  important  perhaps  of  the  domestic  utensils,  next  to  the  lamp 
already  described,  are  the  ootkooseeks  or  stone  pots  for  cooking.  (1.)  These 
are  hollowed  out  of  solid  lapis  ollaris,  of  an  oblong  form,  wider  at  the  top  than  at 
the  bottom,  all  made  in  similar  proportion  though  of  various  sizes,  correspond- 
ing with  the  dimensions  of  the  lamp  which  burns  under  it.  The  pot  is  sus- 
pended by  a  line  of  sinew  at  each  end  to  the  frame-work  over  the  fire,  and 
thus  becomes  so  black  on  every  side  that  the  original  colour  of  the  stone  is  in. 
nopart  discernible.  Many  of  them  were  cracked  quite  across  in  several  places, 
and  mended  by  sewing  with  sinew  or  rivets  of  copper,  iron,  or  lead,  so  as 
with  the  assistance  of  a  lashing  and  a  due  proportion  of  dirt  to  render  them, 
quite  water-tight.     I  may  here  remark,  that  as  these  people  distinguish  the 


t n  A** „»,^M !** Ml  na*,»LgAll ^>j^g>y^  TOiraiVrre 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


503 


Wager  River  by  the  name  of  Od/cfosee/c-salik*  we  were  at  first  led  to  conjecture 
that  they  procured  their  pots,  or  the  material  for  making  them,  in  that  neigh- 
bourhood :  this,  however,  they  assured  us  was  not  the  case,  the  Avhole  of 
them  coming  from  Akkoolee,  where  the  stone  is  found  in  very  high  situations. 
One  of  the  women  at  Winter  Island,  who  came  from  that  country,  said  that 
her  parents  were  much  employed  in  making  these  pots,  chiefly  it  seems  as 
articles  of  barter.  The  asbestos  which  they  use  in  the  shape  of  a  roundish 
pointed  stick,  called  tatko,  for  trimming  the  lamps,  is  met  with  about  Repulse 
Bay,  and  generally  as  they  said  on  low  land. 

Besides  the  ootkooseeks,  they  have  circular  and  oval  vessels  of  whalebone 
of  various  sizes  which,  as  well  as  their  ivory  knives  made  out  of  a  walrus' 
tusk,  (16.)  are  precisely  similar  to  those  described  on  the  western  coast  of  Baf- 
fin's Bay  in  1 820  f .     They  have  also  a  number  of  smaller  vessels  of  skin  sewed 
neatly  together ;  and  a  large  basket  of  the  same  material,  resembling  a  com- 
mon sieve  in  shape,  but  with  the  bottom  close  and  tight,  is  to  be  seen  in 
every  apartment,     Under  every  lamp  stands  a  sort  of  "  save-all,"  consisting 
of  a  small  skin  basket  for  catching  the  oil  that  falls  over.     Almost  every 
family  was  in  possession  of  a  wooden  tray  very  much  resembling  those  used 
to  carry  butchers'  meat  in  England,  and  of  nearly  the  same  dimensions,  which 
we  understood  them  to  have  procured  by  way  of  Noowook.     They  had  a 
number  of  the  bowls  or  cups  already  once  or  twice  alluded  to  as  being 
made  out  of  the  thick   root  of  the  horn  of  the   musk-ox.  (26.)     Of  the 
smaller  part  of  the  same  horn  they  also  form  a  convenient  drinking-cup,  (9.) 
sometimes  turning  it  up  artificially  about  one-third  from  the  point,  so  as  to 
be  almost  parallel  to  the  other  part,  and  cutting  it  full  of  small  notches  as  a 
convenience  in  grasping  it.  (8.)     These  or  any  other  vessel  for  drinking  they 
call  Immoochiuk. 

Besides  the  ivory  knives,  the  men  were  well  supplied  with  a  much  more 
serviceable  kind,  made  of  iron,  and  called  panna.  (14.)  The  form  of  this  knife 
is  very  peculiar,  being  seven  inches  long,  two  and  a  quarter  broad,  quite 
straight  and  flat,  pointed  at  the  end,  and  ground  equally  sharp  at  both  edges  ; 
this  is  firmly  secured  into  a  handle  of  bone  or  wood,  above  a  foot  long,  by 
two  or  three  iron  rivets.     This  formidable  looking  weapon,  of  which  Cap- 

*  It  will  be  seen  by  the  chart  that  the  Esquimaux  gave  us  information  of  an  arm  of  the 
sea  lying  opposite  to  Wager  River,  on  the  Northern  Coast  of  America,  which  tney  also  dis- 
tinguish by  the  same  name,  and  which  is  only  one  or  two  days1  journey  distant  from  the  other, 
f  Journal  of  the  Voyage  of  1819-20,  p.  286. 


Iti;'   '»: 


rhi  I'1  ' 


i  mhW  i 


. 


^^j^^e^,v^g^^v%^c^p^^^^^r 


TT 


u 


HIilR: 


■i 


i 


504 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


tain  Lyon's  drawing  renders  any  further  description  unnecessary,  has  all 
the  appearance  of  a  most  destructive  spear  head,  but  is  nevertheles  put  to 
no  other  purpose  than  that  of  a  very  useful  knife,  which  the  men  are  scarcely 
ever  without,  especially  on  their  sealing  excursions.  For  these,  and  several 
knives  of  European  form,  they  are  probably  indebted  to  an  indirect  commu- 
nication with  our  factories  in  Hudson's  Bay.  The  same  may  be  observed  of 
the  best  of  their  women's  knives,  (ooloo,)  on  one  of  which,  of  a  larger  size 
than  usual,  were  the  names  of  "  Wild  and  Sorby."  When  of  their  own 
manufacture,  the  only  iron  part  was  a  little  narrow  slip  let  into  the  bone  and 
secured  by  rivets.  (27.)  It  would  be  superfluous  to  offer  any  further  verbal 
description  of  these  knives,  of  which  Crantz  has  put  one  into  the  hand  of  a 
Greenland  woman  in  plate  3,  p.  136,  of  his  first  volume.  It  is  curious  to  ob- 
serve in  this  and  in  numerous  other  instances,  how  exactly,  amidst  all  the  di- 
versity of  time  and  place,  these  people  have  preserved  unaltered  their  manners 
and  habits.  That  which  an  absurd  dread  of  innovation  does  in  China,  the 
want  of  intercourse  with  other  nations  has  effected  among  the  Esquimaux. 

Of  the  horn  of  the  musk-ox  they  make  also  very  good  spoons  much  like 
ours  in  shape  ;  and  I  must  not  omit  to  mention  their  marrow-spoons,  (pattek- 
riiulc,  from  pdttek,  marrow,)  made  out  of  long  narrow  hollowed  pieces  of  bone, 
of  which  every  housewife  has  a  bunch  of  half  a  dozen  or  more  tied  to- 
gether, and  generally  attached  to  her  needle-case.  (25.) 

For  the  purpose  of  obtaining  fire  the  Esquimaux  use  two  lumps  of  com- 
mon iron  pyrites,  from  which  sparks  are  struck  into  a  little  leathern  case, 
containing  moss  well  dried  and  rubbed  between  the  hands.  If  this  tinder 
does  not  readily  catch,  a  small  quantity  of  the  white  floss  of  the  seed  of 
the  ground  willow  is  laid  above  the  moss.  As  soon  as  a  spark  has  caught,  it 
is  gently  blown  till  the  fire  has  spread  an  inch  around,  when,  the  pointed 
end  of  a  piece  of  oiled  wick  being  applied,  it  soon  bursts  into  a  flame,  the 
whole  process  having  occupied  perhaps  two  or  three  minutes. 

Among  the  articles  in  their  possession,  which  must  have  been  obtained 
by  communication  along  shore  with  Hudson's  Bay,  were  two  large  copper 
kettles,  several  open  knives  with  crooked  wooden  handles,  and  many  frag- 
ments of  copper,  iron,  and  old  files.  On  a  small  European  axe  was  observed 
the  name  of  "  Foster*." 

*  It  may  perhaps  be  the  means  of  saving  useless  conjectures  at  some  future  time  to  mention, 
that  on  several  knives  made  by  the  armourer  of  the  Hecla,  the  name  of  "  James  Wilkes" 
■was  marked,  together  with  the  Prince  of  Wales's  feathers. 


-'».  ' 


^'lASEfcS 


im^y^M^s&M^^^t-     ram 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


505 


In  enumerating  the  articles  of  their  food  we  might  perhaps  give  a  list  of 
every  animal  inhabiting  these  regions,  as  they  certainly  will  at  times  eat 
any  one  of  them.  Their  principal  dependence  however  is  on  the  rein-deer, 
(tobktoo  ;)  musk-ox,  (oomingmiik,)  in  the  parts  where  this  animal  is  found  ; 
whale,  (dggawek;)  walrus,  (ei-u-ek  ;)  the  large  and  small  seal,  (ogukz  and 
neitiek;)  and  two  sorts  of  salmon,  the  ewee-taroke,  fsalmo  alpinus?)  and 
ichluowolce.  The  latter  is  taken  by  hooks  in  fresh-water  lakes,  and  the 
former  by  spearing  in  the  shoal  water  of  certain  inlets  of  the  sea.  Of  all 
these  animals,  they  can  only  procure  in  the  winter  the  walrus  and  small  seal 
upon  this  part  of  the  coast ;  and  these  at  times,  as  we  have  seen,  in  scarcely 
sufficient  quantity  for  their  subsistence. 

They  certainly  in  general  prefer  eating  their  meat  cooked,  and  while 
they  have  fuel  they  usually  boil  it ;  but  this  is  a  luxury  and  not  a  necessary 
to  them.  Oily  as  the  nature  of  their  principal  food  is,  yet  they  commonly 
take  an  equal  proportion  of  lean  to  their  fat,  and  unless  very  hungry  do 
not  eat  it  otherwise.  Oil  they  seldom  or  never  use  in  any  way  as  a  part  of 
their  general  diet ;  and  even  our  butter,  of  which  they  were  fond,  they  would 
not  eat  without  a  due  quantity  of  bread*.  They  do  not  like  salt  meat 
as  well  as  fresh,  and  never  use  salt  themselves  ;  but  ship's  pork  or  even  a 
red  herring  did  not  come  amiss  to  them.  Of  pea-soup  they  would  eat  as 
much  as  the  sailors  could  afford  to  give  them ;  and  that  word  was  the  only 
one,  with  the  exception  of  our  names,  which  many  of  them  ever  learned  in 
English.  Among  their  own  luxuries  must  be  mentioned  a  rich  soup  called 
kayo,  made  of  blood,  gravy,  and  water,  and  eaten  quite  hot.  In  obtaining 
the  names  of  several  plants,  which  will  be  found  in  the  vocabulary,  we 
learned  that  they  sometimes  eat  the  leaves  of  sorrel,  (kongoklc,)  and  those  of 
the  ground  willow ;  as  also  the  red  berries,  (paoona-rootilc,)  of  the  vaccinum 
uliginosum,  and  the  root  of  the  potentilla  pidchella  ;  but  these  cannot  be  said  to 
form  a  part  of  their  regular  diet ;  scurvy  grass  they  never  eat. 

Their  only  drink  is  water ;  and  of  this  when  they  can  procure  it  they 
swallow  an  inconceivable  quantity ;  so  that  one  of  the  principal  occupations 
of  the  women  during  the  winter  is  the  thawing  of  snow  in  the  ootkooseks  for 
this  purpose.  They  cut  it  into  thin  slices,  and  are  careful  to  have  it  clean,  on 

*  Toolooak,  who  was  a  frequent  visitor  at  the  young  gentlemen's  mess-table  on  board  the 
Fury,  once  evinced  this  taste,  and  no  small  cunning  at  the  same  time,  by  asking  alternately 
for  a  little  more  bread,  and  a  little  more  butter,  till  he  had  made  a  hearty  meal. 

3  T 


41,;. 


Ill  I 


fin 


I  i 


506 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


which  account  they  will  bring  it  from  a  distance  of  fifty  yards  from  the 
huts.  They  have  an  extreme  dislike  to  drinking  water  much  above  the 
temperature  of  32°.  In  eating  their  meals  the  mistress  of  the  family,  having 
previously  cooked  the  meat,  takes  a  large  lump  out  of  the  pot  with  her 
fingers  and  hands  it  to  her  husband,  who  placing  a  part  of  it  between  his 
teeth  cuts  it  off  with  a  large  knife  in  that  position,  and  then  passes  the 
knife  and  meat  together  to  his  next  neighbour.  In  cutting  off  a  mouthful 
of  meat  the  knife  passes  so  close  to  their  lips,  that  nothing  but  constant 
habit  could  ensure  them  from  the  danger  of  the  most  terrible  gashes  ;  and  it 
would  make  an  English  mother  shudder  to  see  the  manner  in  which 
children,  five  or  six  years  old,  are  at  all  times  freely  trusted  with  a  knife  to 
be  used  in  this  way. 

The  length  of  one  of  the  best  of  seven  canoes  belonging  to  these  Esqui- 
maux was  twenty-five  feet,  including  a  narrow-pointed  projection,  three 
feet  long  at  each  end,  which  turns  a  little  upward  from  the  horizontal.  The 
extreme  breadth,  which  is  just  before  the  circular  hole,  was  twenty-one 
inches  and  the  depth  ten  inches  and  a  half.  The  plane  of  the  upper  sur- 
face of  the  canoe,  except  in  the  two  extreme  projections,  bends  downwards 
a  little  from  the  centre  towards  the  head  and  stern,  giving  it  the  appearance 
of  what  in  ships  is  called  "  broken-backed."  The  gunwales  are  of  fir,  in 
some  instances  of  one  piece,  three  or  four  inches  broad  in  the  centre  and 
tapering  gradually  away  towards  the  ends.  The  timbers,  as  well  as  the 
fore-and-aft  connecting  pieces,  are  of  the  same  material,  the  former  being 
an  inch  square,  and  sometimes  so  close  together  as  to  require  between  forty 
and  fifty  of  them  in  one  canoe ;  which  when  thus  "  in  frame"  is  one  of  the 
prettiest  things  of  the  kind  that  can  be  imagined.  The  skin  with  which 
the  canoe  is  covered  is  exclusively  that  of  the  ?icitiek,  prepared  by  scraping 
off  the  hair  and  fat  with  an  ooloo,  and  stretching  it  tight  on  a  frame  over  the 
fire  ;  after  which  and  a  good  deal  of  chewing,  it  is  sewn  on  by  the  women 
with  admirable  neatness  and  strength.  Their  paddles  have  a  blade  at  each 
end,  the  whole  length  being  nine  feet  and  a  half;  the  blades  are  covered 
with  a  narrow  plate  of  bone  round  the  ends  to  secure  them  from  splitting  : 
they  are  always  made  of  fir,  and  generally  of  several  pieces  scarfed  and 
woolded  together. 

In  summer  they  rest  their  canoes  upon  two  small  stones  raised  four 
feet  from  the  ground  ;  and  in  winter,  on  a  similar  structure  of  snow ;  in 
one  case  to  allow  them  to   dry  freely,  and  in  the  other  to  prevent  the 


v  •  :a  ^a^&^f^^H^v  r$gw> 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


507 


snow-drift  from  covering,  and  the  dogs  from  eating  them.  The  difficulty 
of  procuring  a  canoe  may  be  concluded  from  the  circumstance  of  there 
being  at  Winter  Island  twenty  men  able  to  manage  one,  and  only  seven 
canoes  among  them.  Of  these  indeed  only  three  or  four  were  in  good 
repair ;  the  rest  being  wholly  or  in  part  stripped  of  the  skin,  of  which  a 
good  deal  was  occasionally  cut  off  during  the  winter,  to  make  boots,  shoes, 
and  mittens  for  our  people.  We  found  no  oomiak,  or  women's  boat,  among 
them,  and  understood  that  they  were  not  in  the  habit  of  using  them, 
which  may  in  part  be  accounted  for  by  their  passing  so  much  of  the  summer 
in  the  interior ;  they  knew  very  well  however  what  they  were,  and  made 
some  clumsy  models  of  them  for  our  people. 

In  the  weapons  used  for  killing  their  game  there  is  considerable  variety, 
according  to  the  animal  of  which  they  are  in  pursuit.  The  most  simple 
of  these  is  the  oonak,  which  they  use  only  for  killing  the  small  seal.  It 
consists  of  a  light  staff  of  wood,  four  feet  in  length,  having  at  one  end 
the  point  of  a  narwhal's  horn,  from  ten  to  eighteen  inches  long,  firmly 
secured  by  rivets  and  wooldings :  at  the  other  end,  is  a  smaller  and  less 
effective  point  of  the  same  kind.  To  prevent  losing  the  ivory  part,  in  case 
of  the  wood  breaking,  a  stout  thong  runs  along  the  whole  length  of  the 
wood,  each  end  passing  through  a  hole  in  the  ivory,  and  the  bight  secured 
in  several  places  to  the  staff.  In  this  weapon,  as  far  as  it  has  yet  been 
described,  there  is  little  art  or  ingenuity  displayed ;  but  a  considerable  degree 
of  both  in  an  appendage  called  sidtko  (13),  consisting  of  a  piece  of  bone 
three  inches  long,  and  having  a  point  of  iron  at  one  end,  and  at  the  other 
end  a  small  hole  or  socket  to  receive  the  point  of  the  oonak.  Through  the 
middle  of  this  instrument  is  secured  the  allek,  or  line  of  thong,  of  which 
every  man  has,  when  sealing,  a  couple  of  coils,  each  from  four  to  six  fathoms 
long,  hanging  at  his  back.  These  are  made  of  the  skin  of  the  oguke  as  in 
Greenland  *,  and  are  admirably  adapted  to  the  purpose,  both  on  account  of 
their  strength,  and  the  property  which  they  possess  of  preserving  their  plia- 
bility even  in  the  most  intense  frost. 

When  a  seal  is  seen,  the  siatko  is  taken  from  a  little  leathern  case  in 
which,  when  out  of  use,  it  is  carefully  enclosed,  and  attached  by  its  socket 
to  the  point  of  the  spear  (18)  ;  in  this  situation  it  is  retained  by  bring- 
ing the  allek  tight  down  and  fastening  it  round  the  middle  of  the  staff  by 
what  seamen  call  a  "  slippery  hitch,"  which  may  instantly  be  disengaged 


*  Crantz,  I.,  125. 


3  T  2 


hi  I !..!'  I 


II 


iiii 


: 


i*f 


:Ji 


; 


liillil!    I 


u 


508 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


ill 


****** 


by  pulling  on  the  other  end  of  the  line.  As  soon  as  the  spear  has  been 
thrown,  and  the  animal  struck,  the  siatko  is  thus  purposely  separated,  and 
being  slung  by  the  middle  now  performs  very  effectually  the  important 
office  of  a  barb,  by  turning  at  right  angles  to  the  direction  in  which  it  has 
entered  the  orifice.  This  device  is  in  its  principle  superior  even  to  our  barb ; 
for  the  instant  any  strain  is  put  upon  the  line  it  acts  like  a  toggle,  opposing 
its  length  to  a  wound  only  as  wide  as  its  own  breadth. 

The  dkleak,OY  akleegd,  used  for  the  large  seal,  has  a  blown  bladder  attached 
to  the  staff,  for  the  purpose  of  impeding  the  animal  in  the  water  (18). 
The  weapon  with  two  long  parallel  prongs  of  bone  or  iron,  obtained  from 
the  natives  of  the  Savage  Islands,  these  people  also  called  a/deak,  and  said 
it  was  for  killing  seals. 

The  third  and  largest  weapon  is  that  called  katteeli/c  (20),  with  which  the 
walrus  and  whale  are  attacked.  The  staff  of  this  is  not  longer,  but  much 
stouter  than  that  of  the  others,  especially  towards  the  middle,  where  there  is 
a  small  shoulder  of  ivory  securely  lashed  to  it  for  the  thumb  to  rest  against, 
and  thus  to  give  additional  force  in  throwing  or  thrusting  the  spear.  The 
ivory  point  of  this  weapon  is  made  to  fit  into  a  socket  at  the  end  of  the  staff, 
where  it  is  secured  by  double  thongs  (21),  in  such  a  manner  as  steadily  to 
retain  its  position  when  a  strain  is  put  upon  it  in  the  direction  of  its  length,  but 
immediately  disengaging  itself  with  a  sort  of  spring,  when  any  lateral  strain ' 
endangers  its  breaking.  The  siatko  is  always  used  with  this  spear ;  and  to 
the  end  of  the  allek,  when  the  animal  pursued  is  in  open  water,  they  attach 
a  whole  seal-skin,  (Iww-ivut-td,)  inflated  like  a  bladder,  for  the  purpose  of 
tiring  it  out  in  its  progress  through  the  water. 

They  have  a  spear  called  ippoo  for  killing  deer  in  the  water.  They  de- 
scribed it  as  having  a  light  staff  and  a  small  head  of  iron  ;  but  they  had  none 
of  these  so  fitted  in  the  winter.  The  mlgiiee,  or  dart  for  birds  (19),  has, 
besides  its  two  ivory  prongs  at  the  end  of  the  staff,  three  divergent  ones  in  the 
middle  of  it,  with  several  small  double  barbs  upon  them  turning  inwards  ;  they 
differ  from  the  nugaitof  Greenland*,  and  that  of  the  Savage  Islands,  in  having 
these  prongs  always  of  unequal  lengths.  To  give  additional  velocity  to  the  bird- 
dart,  they  use  a  thro  wing-stick  (no/ce-shak)  which  is  probably  the  same  as  the 
"  hand-board  "  figured  by  Crantz.  It  consists  of  a  flat  board  about  eighteen 
inches  in  length,  having  a  groove  to  receive  the  staff,  two  others  and  a  hole 
for  the  fingers  and  thumb,  and  a  small  spike  fitted  for  a  hole  in  the  end  of  the 

*  Crantz. 


m 


lit) 

III, 

,«""•*".«,.. 


£ 


I 

lt=a— — 


c  * :%  ^^^U-^^^^f<^^^^M^\^M^^i^      '  &w. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


509 


staff.  This  instrument  is  used  for  the  bird-dart  only.  The  spear  for  salmon 
or  other  fish,  called  kd/ekee-wei,  consists  of  a  wooden  staff  with  a  spike  of 
bone  or  ivory,  three  inches  long,  secured  at  one  end.  On  each  side  of  the 
spike  is  a  curved  prong,  much  like  that  of  a  pitch-fork,  but  made  of  flexible 
horn  which  gives  them  a  spring,  and  having  a  barb  on  the  inner  part  of  the 
point  turning  downwards.  Their  fish-hooks  (kakliokia)  consist  only  of  a  nail 
crooked  and  pointed  at  one  end,  the  other  being  let  into  a  piece  of  ivory  to 
which  the  line  is  attached.  A  piece  of  deer's  horn  or  curved  bone,  only  a 
foot  long,  is  used  as  a  rod,  and  completes  this  very  rude  part  of  their  fishing- 
gear  (10). 

Of  their  mode  of  killing  seals  in  the  winter,  I  have  already  spoken  in  the 
course  of  the  foregoing  narrative,  as  far  as  we  were  enabled  to  make  our- 
selves acquainted  with  it.  In  their  summer  exploits  on  the  water,  the  killing 
of  the  whale  is  the  most  arduous  undertaking  which  they  have  to  perform ; 
and  one  cannot  sufficiently  admire  the  courage  and  activity  which,  with  gear 
apparently  so  inadequate,  it  must  require  to  accomplish  this  business. 
Okotook,  who  was  at  the  killing  of  two  whales  in  the  course  of  a  single 
summer,  and  who  described  the  whole  of  it  quite  con  amove,  mentioned  the 
names  of  thirteen  men  who,  each  in  his  canoe,  had  assisted  on  one  of  these 
occasions.  When  a  fish  is  seen  lying  on  the  water,  they  cautiously  paddle 
up  astern  of  him  till  a  single  canoe,  preceding  the  rest,  comes  close  to  him 
on  one  quarter,  so  as  to  enable  the  man  to  drive  the  katteelik  into  the 
animal  with  all  the  force  of  both  arms.  This  having  the  siatko,  a  long  allele, 
and  the  inflated  seal-skin  attached  to  it,  the  whale  immediately  dives,  taking 
the  whole  apparatus  with  him  except  the  katteelik  which,  being  disengaged 
in  the  manner  before  described,  floats  to  the  surface  and  is  picked  up  by 
its  owner.  The  animal  re-appearing  after  some  time,  all  the  canoes  again 
paddle  towards  him,  some  warning  being  given  by  the  seal-skin  buoy  float- 
ing on  the  surface.  Each  man  being  furnished  like  the  first,  they  repeat  the 
blows  as  often  as  they  find  opportunity,  till  perhaps  every  line  has  been  thus 
employed.  After  pursuing  him  in  this  manner,  sometimes  for  half  a  day,  he 
is  at  length  so  wearied  by  the  resistance  of  the  buoys,  and  exhausted  by  loss 
of  blood,  as  to  be  obliged  to  rise  more  and  more  often  to  the  surface  when, 
by  frequent  wounds  with  their  spears,  they  succeed  in  killing  him,  and  tow 
their  prize  in  triumph  to  the  shore.  It  is  probable  that  with  the  whale,  as 
with  the  smaller  sea-animals,  some  privilege  or  perquisite  is  given  to  the  first 
striker ;  and,  like  our  own  fishermen,  they  take  a  pride  in  having  it  known 


I'Wicj 


-?:  i: 


Wtf 


a 


1 

HI 

-I 

'"■»» 


Si 


510 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


that  their  spear  has  been  the  first  to  inflict  a  wound.     They  meet  with  the 
most  whales  on  the  coast  of  Eiwillik. 

In  attacking  the  walrus  in  the  water,  they  use  the  same  gear,  but  much 
more  caution  than  with  the  whale,  always  throwing  the  katteelik  from  some 
distance,  lest  the  animal  should  attack  the  canoe  and  demolish  it  with  his 
tusks.  The  walrus  is  in  fact  the  only  animal  with  which  they  use  any  cau- 
tion of  this  kind.  They  like  the  flesh  better  than  that  of  the  seal ;  but 
venison  is  preferred  by  them  to  either  of  these,  and  indeed  to  any  other  kind 
of  meat. 

At  Winter  Island  they  carefully  preserved  the  heads  of  all  the  animals 
killed  during  the  winter,  except  two  ox  three  of  the  walrus  which  we  ob- 
tained with  great  difficulty.  There  is  probably  some  superstition  attached 
to  this,  but  they  told  us  that  they  were  to  be  thrown  into  the  sea  in  the 
summer,  which  a  Greenlander*  studiously  avoids  doing ;  and  indeed,  at 
Igloolik,  they  had  no  objection  to  part  with  them  before  the  summer 
arrived.  As  the  blood  of  the  animals  which  they  kill  is  all  used  as  food  of 
the  most  luxurious  kind,  they  are  careful  to  avoid  losing  any  portion  of  it ; 
for  this  purpose  they  carry  with  them  on  their  excursions  a  little  instrument 
of  ivory  called  tdopoota,  in  form  and  size  exactly  resembling  a  "  twenty- 
penny "  nail  (25),  with  which  they  stop  up  the  orifice  made  by  the  spear, 
by  thrusting  it  through  the  skin  by  the  sides  of  the  wound,  and  securing 
it  with  a  twist.  I  must  here  also  mention  a  simple  little  instrument  called 
keip/cuttuk,  being  a  slender  rod  of  bone  nicely  rounded,  and  having  a  point 
at  one  end  and  a  knob  or  else  a  laniard  at  the  other  (17).  The  use  of 
this  is  to  thrust  through  the  ice  where  they  have  reason  to  believe  a  seal  is  at 
work  underneath.  This  little  instrument  is  sometimes  made  as  delicate  as  a 
fine  wire,  that  the  seal  may  not  see  it ;  and  a  part  still  remaining  above  the 
surface  informs  the  fishermen  by  its  motion  whether  the  animal  is  employed 
in  making  his  hole  :  if  not,  it  remains  undisturbed,  and  the  attempt  is  given 
up  in  that  place. 

One  of  the  best  of  their  bows  was  made  of  a  single  piece  of  fir,  four  feet 
eight  inches  in  length,  flat  on  the  inner  side  and  rounded  on  the  outer, 
being  five  inches  in' girth  about  the  middle  where,  however,  it  is  strength- 
ened on  the  concave  side,  when  strung,  by  a  piece  of  bone  ten  inches  long, 
firmly  secured  by  tree-nails  of  the  same  material.     At  each  end  of  the  bow 

*  Crantz,  I.,  216. 


'  ■•:  %< .jks&z^&^zk&z^^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


511 


is  a  knob  of  bone,  or  sometimes  of  wood  covered  with  leather,  with  a  deep 
notch  for  the  reception  of  the  string.  The  only  wood  which  they  can  procure, 
not  possessing  sufficient  elasticity  combined  with  strength,  they  ingeniously 
remedy  the  defect  by  securing  to  the  back  of  the  bow,  and  to  the  knobs  at 
each  end,  a  quantity  of  small  lines,  each  composed  of  a  plat  or  "  sinnet"  of 
three  sinews.  The  number  of  lines  thus  reaching  from  end  to  end  is  gene- 
rally about  thirty;  but  besides  these,  several  others  are  fastened  with  hitches 
round  the  bow,  in  pairs,  commencing  eight  inches  from  one  end,  and  again 
united  at  the  same  distance  from  the  other,  making  the  whole  number  of 
strings  in  the  middle  of  the  bow  sometimes  amount  to  sixty.  These  being 
put  on  with  the  bow  somewhat  bent  the  contrary  way,  produce  a  spring  so 
strong  as  to  require  considerable  force  as  well  as  knack  in  stringing  it,  and 
giving  the  requisite  velocity  to  the  arrow.  The  bow  is  completed  by  a 
woolding  round  the  middle  and  a  wedge  or  two,  here  and  there,  driven  in 
to  tighten  it.  A  bow  in  one  piece  is  however  very  rare ;  they  generally 
consist  of  from  two  to  five  pieces  of  bone  of  unequal  lengths,  secured  toge- 
ther by  rivets  and  tree-nails  (22). 

The  arrows  vary  in  length  from  twenty  to  thirty  inches,  according  to  the 
materials  that  can  be  commanded.  About  two-thirds  of  the  whole  length  is 
of  fir  rounded,  and  the  rest  of  bone  let  by  a  socket  into  the  wood,  and 
having  a  head  of  thin  iron,  or  more  commonly  of. slate,  secured  into  a  slit  by 
two  tree-nails.  Towards  the  opposite  end  of  the  arrow  are  two  feathers, 
generally  of  the  spotted  oval,  not  very  neatly  lashed  on*.  The  bow-strino- 
consists  of  from  twelve  to  eighteen  small  lines  of  three-sinew  sinnet,  having 
a  loose  twist,  and  with  a  separate  becket  of  the  same  size  for  going  over  the 
knobs  at  the  end  of  the  bow. 

We  tried  their  skill  in  archery  by  getting  them  to  shoot  at  a  mark  for  a 
prize,  though  with  bows  in  extremely  bad  order  on  account  of  the  frost  and 
their  hands  very  cold.  The  mark  was  two  of  their  spears  stuck  upright  in 
the  snow,  their  breadth  being  three  inches  and  a  half.  At  twenty  yards 
they  struck  this  every  time  ;  at  thirty  sent  the  arrows  always  within  an  inch 
or  two  of  it ;  and  at  forty  or  forty-five  yards,  I  should  think,  would  generally 
hit  a  fawn  if  the  animal  stood  still.  These  weapons  are  perhaps  sufficient 
to  inflict  a  mortal  wound  at  something  more  than  that  distance,  for  which, 

*  An  arrow-head  of  a  more  complicated  form,  but  of  which  we  did  not  discover  the  par- 
ticular use,  is  figured  in  the  engraving  (15). 


H>ii"'" 


p 


512 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


however,  a  strong  arm  would  be  required.  The  animals  which  they  kill  with 
the  bow  and  arrow  for  their  subsistence  are  principally  the  musk-ox  and  deer, 
and  less  frequently  the  bear,  wolf,  fox,  hare,  and  some  of  the  smaller 
animals. 

It  is  a  curious  fact,  that  the  musk-ox  is  very  rarely  found  to  extend  his 
migrations  to  the  eastward  of  a  line  passing  through  Repulse  Bay,  or  about 
the  meridian  of  86°  West,  while,  in  a  northern  direction,  we  know  that  he 
travels  as  far  as  the  seventy-sixth  degree  of  latitude.  In  Greenland  this 
animal  is  known  only  by  vague  and  exaggerated  report;  on  the  western 
coast  of  Baffin's  Bay  it  has  certainly  been  seen,  though  very  rarely,  by  the 
present  inhabitants  ;  and  the  eldest  person  belonging  to  the  Winter  Island 
tribe  had  never  seen  one  to  the  eastward  of  Eiwillik,  where,  as  well  as  at 
Akkoblee,  they  are  said  to  be  numerous  on  the  banks  of  fresh-water  lakes 
and  streams.  The  few  men  who  had  been  present  at  the  killing  of  one  of 
these  creatures,  seemed  to  pride  themselves  very  much,  upon  it.  Toolooak, 
who  was  about  seventeen  years  of  age,  had  never  seen  either  the  musk-ox 
or  the  kdblee-drioo,  a  proof  that  the  latter,  also,  is  not  common  in  this  corner 
of  America. 

The  rein-deer  are  killed  by  the  Esquimaux  in  great  abundance  in  the 
summer  season,  partly  by  driving  them  from  islands  or  narrow  necks  of  land 
into  the  sea,  and  then  spearing  them  from  their  canoes  ;  and  partly  by  shoot- 
ing them  from  behind  heaps  of  stones  raised  for  the  purpose  of  watching 
them,  and  imitating  their  peculiar  bellow  or  grunt.  Among  the  various  arti- 
fices which  they  employ  for  this  purpose,  one  of  the  most  ingenious  consists  in 
two  men  walking  directly  from  the  deer  they  wish  to  kill,  when  the  animal 
almost  always  follows  them.  As  soon  as  they  arrive  at  a  large  stone,  one  of 
the  men  hides  behind  it  with  his  bow,  while  the  other  continuing  to  walk 
on  soon  leads  the  deer  within  range  of  his  companion's  arrows.  They  are 
also  very  careful  to  keep  to  leeward  of  the  deer,  and  will  scarcely  go  out 
after  them  at  all  when  the  weather  is  calm.  For  several  weeks  in  the  course 
of  the  summer,  some  of  these  people  almost  entirely  give  up  their  fishery  on 
the  coast,  retiring  to  the  banks  of  lakes  several  miles  in  the  interior,  which 
they  represent  as  large  and  deep  and  abounding  with  salmon,  while  the 
pasture  near  them  affords  good  feeding  to  numerous  herds  of  deer. 

The  distance  to  which  these  people  extend  their  inland  migrations,  and 
the  extent  of  coast  of  which  they  possess  a  personal  knowledge,  are  really 
very  considerable.    Of  these  we  could  at  the  time  of  our  first  intercourse  form 


mHHT 


'    *.  ^:jt,\3^xi$^^  t^s&x^/itywi 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


513 


no  correct  judgment,  from  our  uncertainty,  as  to  the  length  of  what  they  call  a 
seenik  (sleep),  or  one  day's  journey,  by  which  alone  they  could  describe  to 
us,  with  the  help  of  their  imperfect  arithmetic,  the  distance  from  one  place  to 
another.  But  our  subsequent  knowledge  of  the  coast  has  cleared  up  much 
of  this  difficulty,  affording  the  means  of  applying  to  their  hydrographical 
sketches  a  tolerably  accurate  scale  for  those  parts  which  we  have  not  hitherto 
visited.  A  great  number  of  these  people,  who  Avere  born  at  Amitioke  and 
Igloolik,  had  been  to  Noowook,  or  nearly  as  far  south  as  Chesterfield  Inlet, 
which  is  about  the  ne  plus  ultra  of  their  united  knowledge  in  a  southerly 
direction.  Not  one  of  them  had  been  by  water  round  to  Akkoolee,  but 
several  by  land  ;  in  which  mode  of  travelling  they  only  consider  that 
country  from  three  to  five  days'  journey  from  Repulse  Bay.  Okotook  and 
a  few  others  of  the  Winter  Island  tribe  had  extended  their  peregrinations 
a  considerable  distance  to  the  northward,  over  the  large  insular  piece  of 
land  to  which  we  have  applied  the  name  of  Cockburn  Island  ;  which  they 
described  as  high  land,  and  the  resort  of  numerous  rein-deer.  Here 
Okotook  informed  us  he  had  seen  icebergs,  which  these  people  call  by 
a  name  (piccalooi/ak)  having  in  its  pronunciation  some  affinity  to  that  used 
in  Greenland*.  By  the  information  afterwards  obtained  when  nearer  the 
spot,  we  had  reason  to  suppose  this  land  must  reach  beyond  the  seventy- 
second  degree  of  latitude  in  a  northerly  direction  ;  so  that  these  people  pos- 
sess a  personal  knowledge  of  the  Continent  of  America  and  its  adjacent 
islands,  from  that  parallel  to  Chesterfield  Inlet  in  63|°,  being  a  distance  of 
more  than  five  hundred  miles  reckoned  in  a  direct  line,  besides  the  numer- 
ous turnings  and  windings  of  the  coast  along  which  they  are  accustomed  to 
travel.  Evverat  and  some  others  had  been  a  considerable  distance  up  the 
Wager  River ;  but  no  record  had  been  preserved  among  them  of  Captain 
Middleton's  visit  to  that  inlet  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century. 

Of  the  continental  shore  to  the  westward  of  Akkoolee,  the  Esquimaux 
invariably  disclaimed  the  slightest  personal  knowledge ;  for  no  land  can  be 
seen  in  that  direction  from  the  hills.  They  entertain,  however,  a  confused 
idea  that  neither  Esquimaux  nor  Indians  could  there  subsist  for  want  of 
food.  Of  the  Indians  they  know  enough  by  tradition  to  hold  them  in 
considerable  dread,  on  account  of  their  cruel  and  ferocious  manners.  When, 
on  one  occasion,  we  related  the  circumstances  of  the  inhuman   massacre 


,*  Illuliak. 


3  V 


M 


liliiiii*-! 


!':!!:  ; 


|lii« 


„|,<M  I* 


A«l 


: 


,r, 


T~' 


"M 

» 


514 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


described  by  Hearne,  they  crowded  round  us  in  the  hut,  listening  with  mute 
and  almost  breathless  attention ;  and  the  mothers  drew  their  children  closer 
to  them,  as  if  to  guard  them  from  the  dreadful  catastrophe.  It  is  worthy 
of  notice,  that  they  call  the  Indians  by  a  name  (Eert-kei-le&)  which  appears 
evidently  the  same  as  that  *  applied  by  the  Greenlanders  to  the  man-eaters 
supposed  to  inhabit  the  eastern  coast  of  their  country,  and  to  whom  terror 
has  assigned  a  face  like  that  of  a  dog. 

The  Esquimaux  take  some  animals  in  traps,  and  by  a  very  ingenious  con- 
trivance of  this  kind  they  caught  two  wolves  at  Winter  Island.  It  consists  of 
a  small  house  built  of  ice,  at  one  end  of  which  a  door,  made  of  the  same 
plentiful  material,  is  fitted  to  slide  up  and  down  in  a  groove  ;  to  the  upper 
part  of  this  a  line  is  attached  and,  passing  over  the  roof,  is  led  down  into  the 
trap  at  the  inner  end,  and  there  held  by  slipping  an  eye  in  the  end  of  it  over 
a  peg  of  ice  left  for  the  purpose.  Over  the  peg,  however,  is  previously 
placed  a  loose  grummet,  to  which  the  bait  is  fastened,  and  a  false  roof  placed 
over  all  to  hide  the  line.  The  moment  the  animal  drags  at  the  bait  the 
grummet  slips  off  the  peg,  bringing  with  it  the  line  that  held  up  the  door, 
and  this  falling  down  closes  the  trap  and  secures  him. 

A  trap  for  birds  is  formed  by  building  a  house  of  snow  just  large  enough 
to  contain  one  person,  who  closes  himself  up  in  it.  On  the  top  is  left  a  small 
aperture,  through  which  the  man  thrusts  one  of  his  hands  to  secure  the  bird 
the  moment  he  alights  to  take  away  a  bait  of  meat  laid  beside  it.  It  is  prin- 
cipally gulls  that  are  taken  thus  ;  and  the  boys  sometimes  amuse  themselves  in 
this  manner.  A  trap  in  which  they  catch  foxes  has  been  mentioned  in  ano- 
ther place. 

The  sledges  belonging  to  these  Esquimaux  were  in  general  large  and 
heavily  constructed,  being  more  adapted  to  the  carriage  of  considerable 
burdens  than  to  very  quick  travelling.  They  varied  in  size,  being  from  six 
and  a  half  to  nine  feet  in  length,  and  from  eighteen  inches  to  two  feet  in 
breadth.  Some  of  those  at  Igloolik  were  of  larger  dimensions,  one  being 
eleven  feet  in  length,  and  weighing  two  hundred  and  sixty-eight  pounds, 
and  two  or  three  others  above  two  hundred  pounds.  The  runners  are 
sometimes  made  of  the  right  and  left  jaw-bones  of  a  whale ;  but  more 
commonly  of  several  pieces  of  wood  or  bone  scarfed  and  lashed  together, 
the  interstices  being  filled  to  make  all  smooth  and  firm  with  moss  stuffed 

*  Erkiglit.     Crantz,  I.  208,  269. 


»r  ^  v  *rv<T*. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


515 


in  tight,  and  then  cemented  by  throwing  water  to  freeze  upon  it.     The 
lower  part  of  the  runner  is  shod  with  a  plate  of  harder  bone,  coated  with 
fresh-water  ice  to  make  it  run  smoothly,  and  to  avoid  wear  and  tear,  both 
which  purposes  are  thus  completely  answered.     This  coating  is  performed 
with  a  mixture  of  snow  and  fresh-water  about  half  an  inch  thick,  rubbed  over 
it  till  it  is  quite  smooth  and  hard  upon  the  surface,  and  this  is  usually 
done  a  few  minutes  before  setting  out  on  a  journey.     When  the  ice  is  only 
m  part  worn  off,  it  is  renewed  by  taking  some  water  into  the  mouth,  and 
spirting  it  over  the  former  coating.  We  noticed  a  sledge  which  was  extremely 
curious,  on  account  of  one  of  the  runners  and  a  part  of  the  other  bein°-  con- 
structed without  the  assistance  of  wood,  iron,  or  bone  of  any  kind.     For 
this  purpose,  a  number  of  seal-skins  being  rolled  up  and  disposed  into  the 
requisite  shape,  an  outer  coat  of  the  same  kind  was  sewed  tightly  round 
them  ;  this  formed  the  upper  half  of  the  runner,  the  lower  part  of  which 
consisted  entirely  of  moss  moulded  while  wet  into  the  proper  form,  and 
being  left  to  freeze,  adhering  firmly  together  and  to  the  skins.     The  usual 
shoeing  of  smooth  ice  beneath  completed  the  runner,  which  for  more  than 
six  months'out  of  twelve,  in  this  climate,  was  nearly  as  hard  as  any  wood  ;  and 
for  winter  use,  no  way  inferior  to  those  constructed  of  more  durable  mate- 
rials.    The  cross-pieces  which  form  the  bottom  of  the  sledge  are  made  of 
bone,  wood,  or  any  thing  they  can  muster.     Over  these  is  generally  laid  a 
seal-skin  as  a  flooring,  and  in  the  summer-time  a  pair  of  deer's  horns  are 
attached  to  the  sledge  as  a  back,  which  in  the  winter  are  removed,  to  enable 
them  when  stopping  to  turn  the  sledge  up,  so  as  to  prevent  the  dogs  running 
away  with  it.     The  whole  is  secured  by  lashings  of  thong,  giving  it  a  degree 
of  strength  combined  with  flexibility  which  perhaps  no  other  mode  of  fasten- 
ing could  effect. 

The  dogs  of  the  Esquimaux,  of  which  these  people  possessed  above  a 
hundred,  have  been  so  often  described  that,  there  may  seem  little  left  to 
add  respecting  their  external  appearance,  habits,  and  use.  Our  visits  to 
Igloolik  having,  however,  made  us  acquainted  with  some  not  hitherto 
described,  I  shall  here  offer  a  further  account  of  these  invaluable  animals. 
In  the  form  of  their  bodies,  their  short  pricked  ears,  thick  furry  coat, 
and  bushy  tail,  they  so  nearly  resemble  the  wolf  of  these  regions  that, 
when  of  a  light  or  brindled  colour,  they  may  easily  at  a  little  distance  be 
mistaken  for  that  animal.  To  an  eye  accustomed  to  both,  however,  a  differ- 
ence is  perceptible  in  the  wolf's  always  keeping  his  head  down,  and  his  tail 

3   U   2 


*uig*^-  T^+jtrxex^MiK****^**  ■■».■  ■ 


;:■!•■' 


"rr*. 


£1 


516 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


between  his  legs  in  running,  whereas  the  dogs  almost  always  carry  their 
tails  handsomely  curled  over  the  back.  A  difference  less  distinguishable, 
when  the  animals  are  apart,  is  the  superior  size  and  more  muscular  make  of 
the  wild  animal,  especially  about  the  breast  and  legs.  The  wolf  is  also,  in 
general,  full  two  inches  taller  than  any  Esquimaux  dog  we  have  seen  ;  but 
those  met  with  in  1818,  in  the  latitude  of  76°,  appear  to  come  nearest  to  it 
in  that  respect.  The  tallest  dog  at  Igloolik  stood  two  feet  one  inch  from 
the  ground,  measured  at  the  withers  ;  the  average  height  was  about  two 
inches  less  than  this. 

The  colour  of  the  dogs  varies  from  a  white,  through  brindled,  to  black 
and  white,  or  almost  entirely  black.  Some  are  also  of  a  reddish  or  ferrugi- 
nous colour,  and  others  have  a  brownish-red  tinge  on  their  legs,  the  rest  of 
their  bodies  being  of  a  darker  colour,  and  these  last  were  observed  to  be 
generally  the  best  dogs.  Their  hair  in  the  winter  is  from  three  to  four  inches 
long ;  but  besides  this,  nature  furnishes  them  during  this  rigorous  season, 
with  a  thick  under  coating  of  close  soft  wool,  which  they  begin  to  cast  in 
the  spring.  While  thus  provided,  they  are  able  to  withstand  the  most  incle- 
ment weather  without  suffering  from  the  cold,  and  at  whatever  temperature 
the  atmosphere  may  be  they  require  nothing  but  a  shelter  from  the  wind  to 
make  them  comfortable,  and  even  this  they  do  not  always  obtain.  They  are 
also  wonderfully  enabled  to  endure  the  cold  even  on  those  parts  of  the  body 
which  are  not  thus  protected,  for  we  have  seen  a  young  puppy  sleeping, 
with  its  bare  paw  laid  on  an  ice-anchor,  with  the  thermometer  at  —  30°, 
which  with  one  of  our  dogs  would  have  produced  immediate  and  intense 
pain,  if  not  subsequent  mortification.  They  never  bark,  but  have  a  long 
melancholy  howl  like  that  of  the  wolf,  and  this  they  will  sometimes  perform 
in  concert  for  a  minute  or  two  together.  They  are  besides  always  snarling 
and  fighting  among  one  another,  by  which  several  of  them  are  generally 
lame.  When  much  caressed  and  well-fed,  they  become  quite  familiar  and 
domestic  ;  but  this  mode  of  treatment  does  not  improve  their  qualities  as 
animals  of  draught.  Being  desirous  of  ascertaining  whether  these  dogs  are 
wolves  in  a  state  of  domestication,  a  question  which  we  understood  to  have 
been  the  subject  of  some  speculation,  Mr.  Skeoch  at  my  request  made  a  ske- 
leton of  each,  when  the  number  of  all  the  vertebra  was  found  to  be  the  same 
in  both*,  and  to  correspond  with  the  well-known  anatomy  of  the  wolf. 

When  drawing  a  sledge,  the  dogs  have  a  simple  harness  (annoo)  of  deer  or 

*  Cervical,  7;  dorsal,  13;  lumbar,  7;  sacral,  3;  caudal,  19. 


'  ^^$»^Aw*3^lr  r*g**< 


'. » t 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


517 


11 


seal-skin,  going  round  the  neck  by  one  bight,  and  another  for  each  of  the  fore- 
legs, with  a  single  thong  leading  over  the  back  and  attached  to  the  sledge  as  a 
trace.  Though  they  appear  at  first  sight  to  be  huddled  together  without  regard 
to  regularity,  there  is,  in  fact,  considerable  attention  paid  to  their  arrangement, 
particularly  in  the  selection  of  a  dog  of  peculiar  spirit  and  sagacity,  who  is 
allowed,  by  a  longer  trace,  to  precede  the  rest  as  leader,  and  to  whom,  in 
turning  to  the  right  or  left,  the  driver  usually  addresses  himself.  This  choice 
is  made  without  regard  to  age  or  sex,  and  the  rest  of  the  dogs  take  prece- 
dency according  to  their  training  or  sagacity,  the  least  effective  being  put 
nearest  the  sledge.  The  leader  is  usually  from  eighteen  to  twenty  feet  from 
the  fore  part  of  the  sledge,  and  the  hindmost  dog  about  half  that  distance, 
so  that  when  ten  or  twelve  are  running  together,  several  are  nearly  abreast 
of  each  other.  The  driver  sits  quite  low  on  the  fore-part  of  the  sledge,  with 
his  feet  overhanging  the  snow  on  one  side,  and  having  in  his  hand  a  whip  (6.) 
of  which  the  handle,  made  either  of  wood,  bone,  or  whalebone,  is  eighteen 
inches,  and  the  lash  more  than  as  many  feet  in  length.  The  part  of  the 
thong  next  the  handle  is  platted  a  little  way  down  to  stiffen  it  and  give  it  a 
spring,  on  which  much  of  its  use  depends  ;  and  that  which  composes  the  lash 
is  chewed  by  the  women  to  make  it  flexible  in  frosty  weather.  The  men 
aequire  from  their  youth  considerable  expertness  in  the  use  of  this  whip,  the 
lash  of  which  is  left  to  trail  along  the  ground  by  the  side  of  the  sledge,  and 
with  which  they  can  inflict  a  very  severe  blow  on  any  dog  at  pleasure. 
Though  the  dogs  are  kept  in  training  entirely  by  fear  of  the  whip,  and  indeed 
without  it  would  soon  have  their  own  way,  its  immediate  effect  is  always 
detrimental  to  the  draught  of  the  sledge  ;  for  not  only  does  the  individual 
that  is  struck  draw  back  and  slacken  his  trace,  but  generally  turns  upon  his 
next  neighbour,  and  this  passing  on  to  the  next  occasions  a  general  diver- 
gency, accompanied  by  the  usual  yelping  and  shewing  of  teeth.  The  dogs 
then  come  together  again  by  degrees,  and  the  draught  of  the  sledge  is  acce- 
lerated ;  but  even  at  the  best  of  times,  by  this  rude  mode  of  draught  the 
traces  of  one-third  of  the  dogs  form  an  angle  of  thirty  or  forty  degrees  on 
each  side  of  the  direction  in  which  the  sledge  is  advancing.  Another  great 
inconvenience  attending  the  Esquimaux  method  of  putting  the  dogs  to, 
besides  that  of  not  employing  their  strength  to  the  best  advantage,  is  the 
constant  entanglement  of  the  traces  by  the  dogs  repeatedly  doubling  under 
from  side  to  side  to  avoid  the  whip,  so  that,  after  running  a  few  miles,  the 
traces  always  require  to  be  taken  off  and  cleared. 


Ml 


HI 


•ii|M 


a 


518 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


In  directing  the  sledge  the  whip  acts  no  very  essential  part,  the  driver  for 
this  purpose  using  certain  words,  as  the  carters  do  with  us,  to  make  the  dogs 
turn  more  to  the  right  or  left.  To  these  a  good  leader  attends  with  admira- 
ble precision,  especially  if  his  own  name  be  repeated  at  the  same  time,  look- 
ing behind  over  his  shoulder  with  great  earnestness,  as  if  listening  to  the 
directions  of  the  driver.  On  a  beaten  track,  or  even  where  a  single  foot  or 
sledge-mark  is  occasionally  discernible,  there  is  not  the  slightest  trouble  in 
guiding  the  dogs  ,  for  even  in  the  darkest  night  and  in  the  heaviest  snow- 
drift, there  is  little  or  no  danger  of  their  losing  the  road,  the  leader  keeping 
his  nose  near  the  ground,  and  directing  the  rest  with  wonderful  sagacity. 
Where,  however,  there  is  no  beaten  track,  the  best  driver  among  them  makes 
a  terribly  circuitous  course,  as  all  the  Esquimaux  roads  plainly  shew  ;  these 
generally  occupying  an  extent  of  six  miles,  when  with  a  horse  and  sledge 
the  journey  would  scarcely  have  amounted  to  five.  On  rough  ground,  as 
among  hummocks  of  ice,  the  sledge  would  be  frequently  overturned  or 
altogether  stopped  if  the  driver  did  not  repeatedly  get  off,  and  by  lifting  or 
drawing  it  to  one  side  steer  it  clear  of  those  accidents.  At  ail  times, 
indeed,  except  on  a  smooth  and  well-made  road,  he  is  pretty  constantly  em- 
ployed thus  with  his  feet,  which,  together  with  his  never-ceasing  vocifera- 
tions and  frequent  use  of  the  whip,  renders  the  driving  of  one  of  these 
vehicles  by  no  means  a  pleasant  or  easy  task.  When  the  driver  wishes  to 
stop  the  sledge,  he  calls  out  "  Wo,  woa,"  exactly  as  our  carters  do,  but 
the  attention  paid  to  this  command  depends  altogether  on  his  ability  to 
enforce  it.  If  the  weight  is  small  and  the  journey  homeward,  the  dogs  are 
not  to  be  thus  delayed  ;  the  driver  is  therefore  obliged  to  dig  his  heels  into 
the  snoAv  to  obstruct  their  progress  ;  and  having  thus  succeeded  in  stopping 
them,  he  stands  up  with  one  leg  before  the  foremost  cross-piece  of  the  sledge 
till,  by  means  of  laying  the  whip  gently  over  each  dog's  head,  he  has  made 
them  all  lie  down.  He  then  takes  care  not  to  quit  his  position ;  so  that 
should  the  dogs  set  off  he  is  thrown  upon  the  sledge,  instead  of  being  left 
behind  by  them. 

With  heavy  loads  the  dogs  draw  best  with  one  of  their  own  people,  espe- 
cially a  woman,  walking  a  little  way  a-head  ;  and  in  this  case  they  are  some- 
times enticed  to  mend  their  pace  by  holding  a  mitten  to  the  mouth,  and  then 
making  the  motion  of  cutting  it  with  a  knife,  and  throwing  it  on  the  snow,  when 
the  dogs  mistaking  it  for  meat,  hasten  forward  to  pick  it  up.  The  women 
also  entice  them  from  the  huts  in  a  similar  manner.     The  rate  at  which  they 


'    •   ■&£j&S£&&iTBX:     ■■  *«^fcA^ :•**!&        f£t^. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


519 


travel  depends,  of  course,  on  the  weight  they  have  to  draw  and  the  road  on 
which  their  journey  is  performed.  When  the  latter  is  level  and  very  hard 
and  smooth,  constituting  what  in  other  parts  of  North  America  is  called 
"  good  sleighing,"  six  or  seven  dogs  will  draw  from  eight  to  ten  hundred 
weight,  at  the  rate  of  seven  or  eight  miles  an  hour  for  several  hours  to- 
gether, and  will  easily  under  those  circumstances  perform  a  journey  of  fifty 
or  sixty  miles  a  day  ;  on  untrodden  snow,  five-and-twenty  or  thirty  miles 
would  be  a  good  day's  journey.  The  same  number  of  well-fed  dogs,  with  a 
weight  of  only  five  or  six  hundred  pounds  (that  of  the  sledge  included)  are 
almost  unmanageable,  and  will  on  a  smooth  road  run  any  way  they  please 
at  the  rate  often  miles  an  hour.  The  work  performed  by  a  greater  number  of 
dogs  is,  however,  by  no  means  in  proportion  to  this ;  owing  to  the  imperfect 
mode  already  described  of  employing  the  strength  of  these  sturdy  creatures, 
and  to  the  more  frequent  snarling  and  fighting  occasioned  by  an  increase  of 
numbers. 

In  the  summer,  when  the  absence  of  snow  precludes  the  use  of  sledges, 
the  dogs  are  still  made  useful  on  journeys  and  hunting  excursions,  by 
being  employed  to  carry  burdens  in  a  kind  of  saddle-bags  laid  across  their 
shoulders.  A  stout  dog  thus  accoutred  will  accompany  his  master,  laden 
with  a  weight  of  about  twenty  to  twenty-five  pounds.  When  leading  the 
dogs,  the  Esquimaux  take  a  half  hitch  with  the  trace  round  their  necks 
to  prevent  their  pulling,  and  the  same  plan  is  followed  when  a  sledge  is 
left  without  a  keeper.  They  are  also  in  the  habit  of  tethering  them,  when 
from  home,  by  tying  up  one  of  the  four  legs  ;  but  a  still  more  effectual 
method  is  similar  to  that  which  we  saw  employed  by  the  Greenlanders  of 
Prince  Regent's  Bay,  and  consists  in  digging  with  their  spears  tAvo  holes 
in  the  ice  in  an  oblique  direction  and  meeting  each  other,  so  as  to  leave  an 
eye-bolt  to  which  the  dogs  are  fastened. 

The  scent  of  the  Esquimaux  dogs  is  excellent ;  and  this  property  is  turned 
to  account  by  their  masters  in  finding  the  seal  holes,  which  these  invaluable 
animals  will  discover  entirely  by  the  smell  at  a  very  great  distance.  The 
track  of  a  single  deer  upon  the  snow  will  in  like  manner  set  them  off  at  a  full 
gallop,  when  travelling,  at  least  a  quarter  of  a  mile  before  they  arrive  at  it, 
when  they  are  with  difficulty  made  to  turn  in  any  other  direction  ;  and  the 
Esquimaux  are  accustomed  to  set  them  after  those  animals  to  hunt  them  down 
when  already  wounded  with  an  arrow.  In  killing  bears  the  dogs  act  a  very 
essential  part,  and  two  or  three  of  them  when  led  on  by  a  man  will  eagerly 


liHilll!  I 
li      111 


Ijtll11:"'1 


m 


5^! 


V 


•1 


;<  •■ 


520 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


attack  one  of  those  ferocious  creatures.  An  Esquimaux  seldom  uses  any  other 
weapon  than  his  spear  and  panna  in  this  encounter,  for  which  the  readiness  of 
the  dogs  may  be  implied  from  the  circumstance  of  the  word  "nennook" 
(bear)  being  often  used  to  encourage  them  when  running  in  a  sledge.  In- 
deed the  only  animal  which  they  are  not  eager  to  chase  is  the  wolf,  of  which 
the  greater  part  of  them  seem  to  have  an  instinctive  dread,  giving  notice  at 
night  of  their  approach  to  the  huts  by  a  loud  and  continued  howl.  There 
is  not  one  dog  in  twenty  among  them  that  will  voluntarily,  or  indeed  without 
a  great  deal  of  beating,  take  the  water  if  they  think  it  is  out  of  their  depth, 
and  the  few  that  would  do  so  were  spoken  of  as  extraordinary  exceptions. 

The  Esquimaux  in  general  treat  their  dogs  much  as  an  unfeeling  master 
does  his  slaves  ;  that  is,  they  take  just  as  much  care  of  them  as  their  own 
interest  is  supposed  to  require.  The  bitches  with  young  are  in  the  winter 
allowed  to  occupy  apart  of  their  own  beds,  where  they  are  carefully  attended 
and  fed  by  the  women,  who  will  even  supply  the  young  ones  with  meat  and 
water  from  their  mouths  as  they  do  their  own  children,  and  not  unfre- 
quently  also  carry  them  in  their  hoods  to  take  care  of  them.  It  is  probably 
on  this  account  that  the  dogs  are  always  so  much  attached  to  the  women, 
who  can  at  any  time  catch  them  or  entice  them  from  the  huts,  when  the 
men  fail.  Two  females  that  were  with  young  on  board  the  Fury  in  the 
month  of  February  brought  forth  six  and  seven  at  a  litter,  and  the  former 
number  were  all  females.  Their  feeding  which,  both  in  summer  and  winter, 
principally  consists  of  Mow,  or  the  skin  and  part  of  the  blubber  of  the  walrus, 
is  during  the  latter  season  very  precarious,  their  masters  having  then  but 
little  to  spare.  They  therefore  become  extremely  thin  at  that  time  of  the 
year,  and  would  scarcely  be  recognised  as  the  same  animals  as  when  regu- 
larly fed  in  the  summer.  No  wonder  therefore  that  they  will  eat  almost  any 
thing  however  tough  or  filthy,  and  that  neither  whipping  nor  shouting  will 
prevent  their  turning  out  of  the  road,  even  when  going  at  full  speed,  to  pick 
up  whatever  they  espy.  When  at  the  huts  they  are  constantly  creeping  in 
to  pilfer  what  they  can,  and  half  the  time  of  the  people  sitting  there  is 
occupied  in  vociferating  their  names,  and  driving  them  by  most  unmerciful 
blows  out  of  the  apartments.  The  dogs  have  no  water  to  drink  during  the 
winter,  but  lick  up  some  clean  snow  occasionally  as  a  substitute  ;  nor  indeed 
if  water  be  offered  them  do  they  care  about  it  unless  it  happens  to  be  oily. 
They  take  great  pleasure  in  rolling  in  clean  snow,  especially  after  or  during 
a  journey,  or  when  they  have  been  confined  in  a  house  during  the  night. 


m 


\m 


.  ■&j*-MteX&2^-&!ttrfs*&&^>&*;-<-  s*«J£       r*gw. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


521 


Notwithstanding  the  rough  treatment  which  they  receive  from  their  masters 
their  attachment  to  them  is  very  great,  and  this  they  display  after  a  short 
absence  by  jumping  up  and  licking  their  faces  all  over  with  extreme  delight. 
The  Esquimaux  however  never  caress  them,  and  indeed  scarcely  ever  take  any 
notice  of  them  but  when  they  offend,  and  they  are  then  not  sparing  in  their 
blows.  The  dogs  have  all  names  to  which  they  attend  with  readiness, 
■whether  drawing  in  a  sledge  or  otherwise.  Their  names  are  frequently  the 
same  as  those  of  the  people,  and  in  some  instances  are  given  after  the  rela- 
tions of  their  masters,  which  seems  to  be  considered  an  act  of  kindness  anions: 
them.  Upon  the  whole,  notwithstanding  the  services  performed  by  these 
valuable  creatures,  I  am  of  opinion  that  art  cannot  well  have  done  less 
towards  making  them  useful,  and  that  the  same  means  in  almost  any  other 
hands  would  be  employed  to  greater  advantage. 


In  the  disposition  of  these  people,  there  was  of  course  among  so  many 
individuals  considerable  variety  as  to  the  minute  points  ;  but  in  the  general 
features  of  their  character,  which  with  them  are  not  subject  to  the  changes 
produced  by  foreign  intercourse,  one  description  will  nearly  apply  to  all. 
The  virtue  which,  as  respected  ourselves,  we  could  most  have  wished 
them  to  possess  is  honesty,  and  the  impression  derived  from  the  early  part 
of  our  intercourse  was  certainly  in  this  respect  a  favourable  one.  A  great 
many  instances  occurred,  some  of  which  have  been  related,  where  they 
appeared  even  scrupulous  in  returning  articles  that  did  not  belong  to  them  ; 
and  this  too  when  detection  of  a  theft,  or  at  least  of  the  offender,  would 
have  been  next  to  impossible.  As  they  grew  more  familiar  with  us,  and  the 
temptations  became  stronger,  they  gradually  relaxed  in  their  honesty,  and 
petty  thefts  were  from  time  to  time  committed  by  several  individuals  both 
male  and  female  among  them. 

The  bustle  which  any  search  for  stolen  goods  occasioned  at  the  huts  was 
a  sufficient  proof  of  their  understanding  the  estimation  in  which  the  crime 
was  held  by  us.  Until  the  affair  was  cleared  up,  they  would  affect  great 
readiness  to  shew  every  article  which  they  had  got  from  the  ships,  repeating 
the  name  of  the  donor  with  great  warmth  as  if  offended  at  our  suspicions, 
yet  with  a  half-smile  on  their  countenance  at  our  supposed  credulity  in 
believing  them.     There  was  indeed  at  all  times  some  degree   of  trick  and 

3  x 


\\MH 


in » ■ 


-!- 


'1WJ-L 


t 

\ 

4 

IS 




'F 


532 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


cunning  in  this  shew  of  openness  and  candour;  and  they  would  at  times 
bring  back  some  very  trifling  article  that  had  been  given  them  tendering 
it  as  a  sort  of  expiation  for  the  theft  of  another  much  more  valuable. 
When  a  search  was  making  they  would  invent  all  sorts  of  lies  to  screen 
themselves,  not  caring  on  whom  besides  the  imputation  fell ;  and  more  than 
once,  they  directed  our  people  to  the  apartments  of  others  who  were  inno- 
cent of  the  offence  in  question.  If  they  really  knew  the  offendert  hey  were 
generally  ready  enough  to  inform  against  him,  and  this  with  an  air  of 
affected  secrecy  and  mysterious  importance  ;  and  as  if  the  dishonesty  of 
another  constituted  a  virtue  in  themselves,  they  would  repeat  this  informa- 
tion frequently,  perhaps  for  a  month  afterwards,  setting  up  their  neigh- 
bour's offence  as  a  foil  to  their  own  pretended  honesty. 

In  appreciating  the  character  of  these  people  for  honesty,  however,  we 
must  not  fail  to  make  due  allowance  for  the  degree  of  temptation  to  which 
they  were  daily  exposed,  amidst  the  boundless  stores  of  wealth  which 
our  ships  appeared  to  them  to  furnish.  To  draw  a  parallel  case,  we  must 
suppose  an  European  of  the  lower  class  suffered  to  roam  about  amidst 
hoards  of  gold  and  silver  ;  for  nothing  less  valuable  can  be  justly  compared 
with  the  wood  and  iron  that  every  where  presented  themselves  to  their  view 
on  board  the  ships.  The  European  and  the  Esquimaux,  who  in  cases  so 
similar,  both  resist  the  temptation  of  stealing,  must  be  considered  pretty 
nearly  on  a  par  in  the  scale  of  honesty  ;  and  judging  in  this  manner,  the 
balance  might  possibly  be  found  in  favour  of  the  latter,  when  compared 
with   any  similar  number  of  Europeans  taken  at  random  from  the  lower 

In  what  has  been  hitherto  said,  regard  has  been  had  only  to  their  deal- 
ings with  Hi:  In  their  transactions  among  themselves  there  is  no  doubt  that, 
except  in  one  or  two  privileged  cases,  such  as  that  of  destitute  widows,  the 
strictest  honesty  prevails,  and  that  as  regards  the  good  of  their  own  commu- 
nity they  are  generally  honest  people.  We  have  in  numberless  instances 
sent  presents  by  one  to  another,  and  invariably  found  that  they  had  been 
faithfully  delivered.  The  manner  in  which  their  various  implements  are 
frequently  left  outside  their  huts  is  a  proof,  indeed,  that  robbery  is  scarcely 
known  among  them.  It  is  true  that  there  is  not  an  article  in  the  possession 
of  one  of  them,  of  which  any  of  the  rest  will  not  readily  name  the  owner, 
and  the  detection  of  a  theft  would  therefore  be  certain  and  immediate. 


'inJI     l\      *vik 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


523 


Certainty  of  detection  however  among  a  lawless  and  ferocious  people, 
instead  of  preventing  robbery,  would  more  probably  add  violence  and 
murder  to  the  first  crime,  and  the  strongest  would  ultimately  gain  the  upper 
hand.  We  cannot  therefore  but  admire  the  undisturbed  security  in  which 
these  people  hold  their  property,  without  having  recourse  to  any  restraint 
beyond  that  which  is  incurred  by  the  tacitly-received  law  of  mutual  for- 
bearance. 

In  the  barter  of  their  various  commodities  their  dealings  with  us  were  fair 
and  upright,  though  latterly  they  were  by  no  means  backward  or  inexpert 
in  driving  a  bargain.     The  absurd  and  childish  exchanges*  which  they  at 
first  made  with  our  people,  induced  them  subsequently  to  complain  that  the 
Kabloonas  had  stolen  their  things,  though  the  profit  had  been  eventually  a 
hundred-fold  in  their  favour.     Many  such  complaints  were  made,  when  the 
only  fault  in  the  purchaser  had  been  excessive  liberality,  and  frequently 
also  as  a  retort,  by  way  of  warding  off  the  imputation  of  some  dishonesty  of 
their  own.     A  trick  not  uncommon  with  the  women  was,  to  endeavour  to 
excite  the  commiseration,  and  to  tax  the  bounty  of  one  person  by  relating 
some  cruel  theft  of  this  kind,  that  had,  as  they  said,  been  practised  upon 
them  by  another.     One  day,  after  I  had  bought  a  knife  of  Togolat,  she  told 
Captain  Lyon,  in  a  most  piteous  tone,  that  Parree  had  stolen  her  last  ooloo, 
that  she  did  not  know  what  to  do  without  one,  and  at  length  coming  to  the 
point  begged  him  to  give  her  one.    Presently  after  this,  her  husband  coming 
in  and  asking  for  something  to  eat,  she  handed  him  some  meat  accompa- 
nied by  a  very  fine  ooloo.     Her  son  being  thus  reminded  of  eating  made 
the  same  request,  upon  which  a  second  knife  Avas  produced  and,  imme- 
diately after,  a  third  of  the  same  kind  for  herself.     Captain  Lyon,  having 
amused  himself  in  watching  these  proceedings,  which  so  well  confirmed  the 
truth  of  the  proverb,  that  certain  people  ought  to  have  good  memories,  now 
took  the  knives,  one  by  one,  out  of  their  hands,  and  holding  them  up  to 
Togolat,  asked  her  if  Parree  had  not  stolen  her  last  ooloo.     A  hearty  laugh 
all  round  was  the  only  notice  taken  by  them  of  this  direct  detection  of  the 
deceit. 

The  confidence  which  they  really  placed  in  us  was  daily  and  hourly 
evinced  by  their  leaving  their  fishing  gear  stuck  in  the  snow  all  round  the 
ships;  and  not  a  single  instance  occurred,  to  my  knowledge,  of  any  theft 


!:|||#  ! ; 


iii.isil'IP'f! 


ijllHlM 


*  Crantz,  I.  173. 


3X2 


ggtf^»M»  A  «^^-  -^  m 


■ 


F1 

; 

H 

•*r'ii 

524 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


committed  on  their  property.  The  licking  of  the  articles  received  from 
us  was  not  so  common  with  them  as  with  Esquimaux  in  general,  and  this 
practice  was  latterly  almost  entirely  left  off  by  them. 

Among  the  unfavourable  traits  in  their  character  must  be  reckoned  an 
extreme  disposition  to  envy,  which  displayed  itself  on  various  occasions 
during  our  intercourse  with  them.     If  we  had  made  any  presents  in  one 
hut,  the  inmates  of  the  next  would  not  fail  to  tell  us  of  it,  accompanying 
their  remarks  with  some  satirical  observation,  too  unequivocally  expressed  to 
be  mistaken,  and  generally  by  some  stroke  of  irony*  directed  against  the 
favoured  person.     If  any  individual  with  whom  we  had  been  intimate  hap- 
pened to  be  implicated  in  a  theft,   the  circumstance  became  a  subject  of 
satisfaction  too  manifest  to  be  repressed,  and  we  were  told  of  it  with  ex- 
pressions of  the   most  triumphant  exultation  on  every  occasion.      It  was 
indeed  curious,  though  ridiculous,  to  observe  that,  even  among  these  simple 
people,  and  in  this  obscure  corner  of  the  globe,  that  little  gossip  and  scandal 
so  commonly  practised  in  small  societies  among  us   were  very  frequently 
displayed.     This  was  especially  the  case  with  the  women,  of  whom  it  was 
not  uncommon  to  see  a  group  sitting  in   a  hut  for  hours  together,  each 
relating   her    quota  of  information,  now  and  then  mimicking    the    persons 
of  whom  they  spoke,  and  interlarding  their  stories  with  jokes  evidently 
at  the  expense   of  their  absent  neighbours,   though   to  their  own  infinite 
amusement. 

In  extenuation,  however,  of  these  faults,  it  must  be  allowed  that  we  were 
ourselves  the  exciting  cause  which  called  them  into  action,  and  without 
which  they  would  be  comparatively  of  rare  occurrence  among  them.  Like 
every  other  child  of  Adam,  they  undoubtedly  possess  their  share  of  the 
seeds  of  these  human  frailties ;  but  even  in  this  respect  they  need  not  shrink 
from  a  comparison  with  ourselves,  for  who  among  us  can  venture  to  assure 
himself  that,  if  exposed  to  similar  temptations,    he  would  not  be  found 

wanting  ? 

To  another  failing,  to  which  they  are  addicted,  the  same  excuse  will  not  so 
forcibly  apply ;  as  in  this  respect  our  acquaintance  with  them  naturally  fur- 
nished an  opportunity  for  the  practice  of  a  virtue,  rather  than  for  the  deve- 
lopment of  its  opposite  vice.  I  have  already,  in  the  course  of  the  fore- 
going Narrative,  hinted  at  the  want  of  gratitude  evinced  by  these  people  in 

*  Crantz,  1. 170. 


II  IP 


»»fl»l 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


525- 


their  transactions  with  us.  Am6n£  themselves,  almost  the  only  case  in 
which  this  sentiment  can  have  any  field  for  exertion,  is  in  the  conduct  of  chil- 
dren toAvards  their  parents,  and  in  this  respect,  as  I  shall  presently  have 
occasion  to  notice,  their  gratitude  is  by  no  means  conspicuous.  Any  thin°- 
like  a  free  gift  is  very  little  if  at  all  known  among  them.  If  A  gives  B  a 
part  of  his  seal  to-day,  the  latter  soon  returns  an  equal  quantity  when  he  is 
the  successful  fisherman.  Uncertain  as  their  mode  of  living  is,  and  dependant 
as  they  are  upon  each  other's  exertions,  this  custom  is  the  evident  and 
unquestionable  interest  of  all.  The  regulation  does  credit  to  their  wis- 
dom, but  has  nothing  to  do  with  their  generosity.  This  being  the  case,  it 
might  be  supposed  that  our  numerous  presents,  for  which  no  return  was 
asked,  would  have  excited  in  them  something  like  thankfulness  combined 
with  admiration  ;  but  this  was  so  little  the  case,  that  the  coyenna  (thanks) 
which  did  now  and  then  escape  them,  expressed  much  less  than  even  the 
most  common-place  "  thank  ye"  of  civilized  society.  Some  exceptions,  for 
they  were  only  exceptions  and  rare  ones  to  this  rule,  have  been  mentioned  as 
they  occurred  ;  but  in  general,  however  considerable  the  benefit  conferred, 
it  was  forgotten  in  a  day ;  and  this  forgetfulness  was  not  unfrequently  aggra- 
vated by  their  giving  out  that  their  benefactor  had  been  so  shabby  as  to  make 
them  no  present  at  all.  Even  those  individuals  who,  either  from  good  beha- 
viour or  superior  intelligence,  had  been  most  noticed  by  us,  and  particularly 
such  as  had  slept  onboard  the  ships,  and  whether  in  health  or  sickness  had 
received  the  most  friendly  treatment  from  every  body,  were  in  general  just 
as  indifferent  as  the  rest ;  and  I  do  not  believe  that  any  one  amongst  them 
would  have  gone  half  a  mile  out  of  his  road,  or  have  sacrificed  the  most 
trivial  self-gratification  to  have  served  us.  Though  the  riches  lay  on  our 
side,  they  possessed  abundant  means  of  making  some  nominal  return  which, 
for  the  sake  of  the  principle  that  prompted  it,  would  of  course  have  been 
gratifying  to  us.  Okotook  and  Iligliuk,  whom  I  had  most  loaded  with  pre- 
sents, and  who  had  never  offered  me  a  single  free  gift  in  return,  put  into 
my  hand,  at  the  time  of  their  first  removal  from  Winter-Island,  a  dirty 
crooked  model  of, a  spear,  so  shabbily  constructed  that  it  had  probably 
been  already  refused  as  an  article  of  barter  by  many  of  the  ship's  company. 
On  my  accepting  this,  from  an  unwillingness  to  affront  them,  they  were 
uneasy  and  dissatisfied  till  I  had  given  them  something  in  return,  though 
their  hands  were  full  of  the  presents  which  I  had  just  made  them.  Selfish- 
ness is  in  fact  almost  without  exception  their  universal  characteristic,  and 


iiiij 


! ! 


fHi,i"!fj 


% 


u 


m.^~--^*-^y 


rsn 


526 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Mm 


* 


Mil 


the  main-spring  of  all  their  actions,  and  that  too  of  a  kind  the  most  direct 
and  unamiable  that  can  well  be  imagined. 

In  the  few  opportunities  we  had  of  putting  their  hospitality  to.  the  test, 
we  had  every  reason  to  be  pleased  with  them.  Both  as  to  food  and  accom- 
modation the  best  they  had  were  always  at  our  service  ;  and  their  attention, 
both  in  kind  and  degree,  was  every  thing  that  hospitality  and  even  good 
breeding  could  dictate.  The  kindly  offices  of  drying  and  mending  our 
clothes,  cooking  our  provision  and  thawing  snow  for  our  drink,  were  per- 
formed by  the  women  with  an  obliging  cheerfulness  which  we  shall  not 
easily  forget,  and  which  commanded  its  due  share  of  our  admiration  and 
esteem.  While  thus  their  guest,  I  have  passed  an  evening  not  only  with 
comfort,  but  with  extreme  gratification  ;  for  with  the  women  working  and 
singing,  their  husbands  quietly  mending  their  lines,  the  children  playing 
before  the  door,  and  the  pot  boiling  over  the  blaze  of  a  cheerful  lamp,  one 
might  well  forget  for  the  time  that  an  Esquimaux  hut  was  the  scene  of  this 
domestic  comfort  and  tranquillity  ;  and  I  can  safely  affirm  with  Cartwright* 
that,  while  thus  lodged  beneath  their  roof,  I  know  no  people  whom  I  would 
more  confidently  trust  as  respects  either  my  person  or  my  property,  than 
the  Esquimaux.  It  is  painful,  and  may  perhaps  be  considered  invidious 
after  this,  to  inquire  how  far  their  hospitality  would  in  all  probability  be 
extended  if  interest  were  wholly  separated  from  its  practice,  and  a  stranger 
were  destitute  and  unlikely  soon  to  repay  them.  But  truth  obliges  me  to 
confess  that,  from  the  extreme  selfishness  of  their  general  conduct,  as  well 
as  from  their  behaviour  in  some  instances  to  the  destitute  of  their  own  tribe, 
I  should  be  sorry  to  lie  under  the  necessity  of  thus  drawing  very  largely  on 
their  bounty. 

The  estimation  in  which  women  are  held  among  these  people  is,  I 
think,  somewhat  greater  than  is  usual  in  savage  life.  In  their  general  em- 
ployments they  are  by  no  means  the  drudges  that  the  wives  of  the  Green- 
landers  f  are  said  to  be  ;  being  occupied  only  in  those  cares  which  may  pro- 
perly be  called  domestic,  and  as  such  are  considered  the  peculiar  business  of 
the  women  among  the  lower  classes  in  civilized  society.  The  wife  of  one  of 
these  people,  for  instance,  makes  and  attends  the  fire,  cooks  the  victuals, 
looks  after  the  children,  and  is  sempstress  to  her  whole  family ;  while  her 
husband  is  labouring  abroad  for  their  subsistence.     In  this  respect  it  is  not 


*  Cartwright's  Labrador, 


III. 


f  Crantz,  I.  164,  165. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

even  necessary  to  except  their  task  of  cutting  up  the  small  seals,  which  is 
in  truth  one  of  the  greatest  luxuries  and  privileges  they  enjoy  ;  and  even  if 
it  were  esteemed  a  labour,  it  could  scarcely  be  considered  equivalent  to  that 
of  the  women  in  many  of  our  own  fishing-towns,  where  the  men's  business  is  at 
an  end  the  moment  the  boat  touches  the  beach.     The  most  laborious  of  their 
tasks  occurs  perhaps  in  making  their  various  journeys,  when  all  their  goods 
and  chattels  are  to  be  removed  at  once,  and  when  each  individual  must  un- 
doubtedly perform  a  full  share  of  the  general  labour.     The  women  are 
however  good  walkers  and  not  easily  fatigued  ;  for  we  have  several  times 
known  a   young  woman   of  two   and   twenty,    with   a  child  in   her   hood, 
walk  twelve  miles  to  the  ships  and  back  again  the  same  day,  for  the  sake  of 
a  little  bread-dust  and  a  tin  canister.     When  stationary  in  the  winter,  they 
have  really  almost  a  sinecure  of  it,  sitting  quietly  in  their  huts,   and  having 
little  or  no  employment  for  the  greater  part  of  the  day.     In  short,  there 
are  few,  if  any  people,  in  this  state  of  society  among  whom  the  women 
are  so  well  off.     They  always  sit  upon  the  beds  with  their  legs  doubled 
under  them*,  and  are   uneasy  in  the  posture  usual  with  us.      The  men 
som  etimes  sit  as  we  do,  but  more  generally  with  their  legs  crossed  before 
them. 

The  women  do  not  appear  to  be  in  general  very  prolific.  Illumea  indeed 
had  borne  seven  children,  but  no  second  instance  of  an  equal  number  in  one 
family  afterwards  came  to  our  knowledge  ;  three  or  four  is  about  the  usual 
number.  They  are,  according  to  their  own  account,  in  the  habit  of  suckling 
their  children  to  the  age  of  three  years ;  but  Ave  have  seen  a  child  of  five 
occasionally  at  the  breast,  though  they  are  dismissed  from  the  mother's  hood 
at  about  the  former  age.  The  time  of  weaning  them  must  of  course  in  some 
instances  depend  on  the  mother's  again  becoming  pregnant,  and  if  this  suc^ 
ceeds  quickly  it  must,  as  Crantz  relates  of  the  Greenlandersf ,  go  hard  with 
one  of  the  infants.  Nature,  however,  seems  to  be  kind  to  them  in  this  re- 
spect, for  we  did  not  witness  one  instance,  nor  hear  of  any,  in  which  a  woman 
was  put  to  this  inconvenience  and  distress.  It  is  not  uncommon  to  see  one 
woman  suckling  the  child  of  another,  while  the  latter  happens  to  be  em- 
ployed in  her  other  domestic  occupations.  They  are  in  the  habit  also  of 
feeding  their  younger  children  from  their  own  mouths,  softening  the  food 
by  mastication,  and  then  turning  their  heads  round  so  that  the  infant  in  the 


*  Crantz,  I.  140. 


^-  -^  M-sS.%  V^  W  A»^  ^  v 


f  Ibid.  I.  162. 


imp  mi 


".     ysa     .      'SL> 


528 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


liniil 


«■  . 


hood  may  put  its  lips  to  theirs.  The  chill  is  taken  from  water  for -them -in 
the  same  manner,  and  some  fathers  are  very  fond  of  taking  their  children  on 
their  knees  and  thus  feeding  them.  The  women  are  more  desirous  of  hav- 
ing sons  than  daughters,  as  on  the  former  must  principally  depend  their 
support  in  old  age. 

Twelve  of  the  men  had  each  two  wives,  and  some  of  the  younger  ones  had 
also  two  betrothed  ;  two  instances  occurred  of  the  father  and  son  being 
married  to  sisters.  The  custom  of  betrothing  children  in  their  infancy  is 
commonly  practised  here,  in  which  respect  these  people  differ  from  the 
natives  of  Greenland,  where  it  is  comparatively  rare*.  A  daughter  of 
Arnaneelia,  between  two  and  three  years  old,  had  long  been  thus  contracted 
to  Okotook's  son,  a  hero  of  six  or  seven,  and  the  latter  used  to  run  about  the 
hut  calling  his  intended  by  the  familiar  appellation  of  Noolle-a  (wife),  to  the 
great  amusement  of  the  parents.  When  a  man  has  two  wives  there  is  gene- 
rally a  difference  of  five  or  six  years  in  their  ages.  The  senior  takes  her 
station  next  the  principal  fire,  which  comes  entirely  under  her  manage- 
ment ;  and  she  is  certainly  considered  in  some  respects  superior  to  the 
other,  though  they  usually  live  together  in  the  utmost  harmony.  The  men 
sometimes  repudiate  their  wives  without  ceremony,  in  case  of  real  or 
supposed  bad  behaviour  as  in  Greenland  f,  but  this  does  not  often 
occur.  There  was  a  considerable  disparity  of  age  between  many  of  the 
men  and  their  wives,  the  husband  being  sometimes  the  oldest  by  twenty 
years  or  more,  and  this  also  when  he  had  never  married  any  former 
wife.  We  knew  no  instance  in  which  the  number  of  a  man's  wives  ex- 
ceeded two,  and  indeed  we  had  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  practice 
is  never  admitted  among  them.  We  met  with  a  singular  instance  of  two 
men  having  exchanged  wives,  in  consequence  merely  of  one  of  the  latter 
being  pregnant  at  the  time  when  her  husband  was  about  to  undertake  a  long 
journey. 

The  authority  of  the  husband  seems  to  be  sufficiently  absolute,  depending 
nevertheless  in  great  measure  on  the  dispositions  of  the  respective  parties. 
Iligliuk  was  one  of  those  women  who  seem  formed  to  manage  their  husbands ; 
and  Ave  one  day  saw  her  take  Okotook  to  task  in  a  very  masterly  style,  for 
having  bartered  away  a  good  jacket  for  an  old  useless  pistol,  without  powder 
or  shot.     He  attempted  at  first  to  bluster  in  his  turn,  and  with  most  women 


*  Crantz,  I.  159. 


f  Ibid.  160. 





OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE 


would  probably  have  gained  his  point.  But  with  Iligliuk  this  would  not  do  ; 
she  saw  at  once  the  absurdity  of  his  bargain,  and  insisted  on  his  immediately 
cancelling  it,  which  was  accordingly  done  and  no  more  said  about  it.  In 
general  indeed  the  husband  maintains  his  authority,  and  in  several  instances 
of  supposed  bad  behaviour  in  a  wife,  we  saw  obedience  enforced  in  a  pretty 
summary  manner.  It  is  very  rare,  however,  to  see  them  proceed  to  this 
extremity  ;  and  the  utmost  extent  of  a  husband's  want  of  tenderness  towards 
his  wife  consists  in  general  in  making  her  walk  or  lead  the  dogs,  while  he 
takes  his  own  seat  in  the  sledge  and  rides  in  comfort.  Widows,  as  might  be 
expected,  are  not  so  well  off  as  those  whose  husbands  are  living,  and  this 
difference  is  especially  apparent  in  their  clothes  which  are  usually  very  dirty, 
thin,  and  ragged  ;  when  indeed  they  happen  to  have  no  near  relatives  their 
fate,  as  we  have  already  seen,  is  still  worse  than  this. 

I  fear  we  cannot  give  a  very  favourable  account  of  the  chastity  of  the 
women,  nor  of  the  delicacy  of  their  husbands  in  this  respect.  As  for  the 
latter,  it  was  not  uncommon  for  them  to  offer  their  wives  as  freely  for  sale 
as  a  knife  or  a  jacket.  Some  of  the  young  men  informed  us  that,  when  two 
of  them  were  absent  together  on  a  sealing  excursion,  they  often  exchanged 
wives  for  the  time,  as  a  matter  of  friendly  convenience  ;  and  indeed,  without 
mentioning  any  other  instances  of  this  nature,  it  may  safely  be  affirmed,  that 
in  no  country  is  prostitution  carried  to  greater  lengths  than  among  these 
people.  The  behaviour  of  most  of  the  women,  when  their  husbands  were 
absent  from  the  huts,  plainly  evinced  their  indifference  towards  them,  and 
their  utter  disregard  of  connubial  fidelity.  The  departure  of  the  men  was 
usually  the  signal  for  throwing  aside  restraint,  which  was  invariably  resumed 
on  their  return.  For  this  event  they  take  care  to  be  prepared  by  the  report 
of  the  children,  one  of  whom  is  usually  posted  on  the  outside  for  the  purpose 
of  giving  due  notice. 

The  affection  of  parents  for  their  children  was  frequently  displayed  by 
these  people,  not  only  in  the  mere  passive  indulgence,  and  abstinence  from 
corporal  punishment,  for  which  Esquimaux  have  before  been  remarked,  but 
by  a  thousand  playful  endearments  also,  such  as  parents  and  nurses  practise 
in  our  own  country.  Nothing  indeed  can  well  exceed  the  kindness  with 
which  they  treat  their  children  ;  and  this  trait  in  their  character  deserves  to 
be  the  more  insisted  on,  because  it  is  in  reality  the  only  very  amiable  one 
which  they  possess.  It  must  be  confessed  indeed,  that  the  gentleness  and 
docility  of  the  children  are  such  as  to  occasion  their  parents  little  trouble,  and 


53 


ar* 


530 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


ilii«» 


to  render  seventy  towards  them  quite  unnecessary.  Even  from  their  earliest 
infancy,  they  possess  that  quiet  disposition,  gentleness  of  demeanour,  and 
uncommon  evenness  of  temper,  for  which  in  more  mature  age  they  are  for 
the  most  part  distinguished.  Disobedience  is  scarcely  ever  known,  a  word 
or  even  a  look  from  a  parent  is  enough  ;  and  I  never  saw  a  single  instance 
of  that  frowardness  and  disposition  to  mischief,  which,  with  our  youth,  so 
often  requires  the  whole  attention  of  a  parent  to  watch  over  and  to  correct. 
They  never  cry  from  trifling  accidents,  and  sometimes  not  even  from  very 
severe  hurts,  at  which  an  English  child  would  sob  for  an  hour.  It  is  indeed 
astonishing  to  see  the  indifference  with  which,  even  as  tender  infants,  they 
bear  the  numerous  blows  they  accidentally  receive,  when  carried  at  their 
mothers'  backs. 

They  are  just  as  fond  of  play  as  any  other  young  people  and  of  the  same 
kind  ;  only  that  while  an  English  child  draws  a  cart  of  Avood,  an  Esquimaux 
of  the  same  age  has  a  sledge  of  whalebone  ;  and  for  the  superb  baby -house 
of  the  former,  the  latter  builds  a  miniature  hut  of  snow,  and  begs  a  lighted 
wick  from  her  mother's  lamp  to  illuminate  the  little  dwelling.  Their  parents 
make  for  them,  as  dolls,  little  figures  of  men  and  women,  habited  in  the  true 
Esquimaux  costume,  as  well  as  a  variety  of  other  toys,  many  of  them  having 
some  reference  to  their  future  occupations  in  life,  such  as  canoes,  spears, 
and  bows  and  arrows.  The  drum  or  tambourine  mentioned  by  Crantz*  is 
common  among  them,  and  used  not  only  by  the  children,  but  by  the 
grown-up  people  at  some  of  their  games.  They  sometimes  serrate  the 
edges  of  two  strips  of  whalebone  and  whirl  them  round  their  heads,  just  as 
boys  do  in  England  to  make  the  same  peculiar  humming  sound.  They  will 
dispose  one  piece  of  wood  on  another,  as  an  axis,  in  such  a  manner  that 
the  wind  turns  it  round  like  the  arms  of  a  wind-mill ;  and  so  of  many  other 
toys  of  the  same  simple  ki  nd.  These  are  the  distinct  property  of  the  children, 
who  will  sometimes  sell  them  while  their  parents  look  on,  without  interfering 
or  expecting  to  be  consulted. 

When  not  more  than  eight  years  old,  the  boys  are  taken  by  their  fathers  on 
their  sealing  excursions,  where  they  begin  to  learn  their  future  business;  and 
even  at  that  early  age,  they  are  occasionally  intrusted  to  bring  home  a  sledge 
and  dogs  from  a  distance  of  several  miles  over  the  ice.  At  the  age  of  eleven 
we  see  a  boy  with  his  water-tight  boots  and  mocassins,  a  spear  in  his  hand, 

*  Crantz,  I.  176. 


fmZSKi&imttM!  ?*£ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


531 


and  a  small  coil  of  line  at  his  back,  accompanying  the  men  to  the  fishery, 
under  every  circumstance;  and  from  this  time  his  services  daily  increase 
in  value  to  the  whole  tribe.  On  our  first  intercourse  with  them  we  supposed, 
that  they  would  not  unwillingly  have  parted  with  their  children,  in  conside- 
ration of  some  valuable  present,  but  in  this  we  afterwards  found  that  we 
were  much  mistaken.  Happening  one  day  to  call  myself  Toolooak's 
attata  (father,)  and  pretend  that  he  was  to  remain  with  me  on  board  the 
ship,  I  received  from  the  old  man,  his  father,  no  other  answer  than  what 
seemed  to  be  very  strongly  and  even  satirically  implied,  by  his  taking 
one  of  our  gentlemen  by  the  arm  and  calling  him  his  son ;  thus  intimating 
that  the  adoption  which  he  proposed  was  as  feasible  and  as  natural  as  my 
own. 

The  custom  of  adoption  is  carried  to  very  great  lengths  among  these 
people,  and  served  to  explain  to  us  several  apparent  inconsistencies  with  re- 
spect to  their  relationships  The  adoption  of  a  child  in  civilized  countries  has 
usually  for  its  motive  either  a  tenderness  for  the  object  itself,  or  some  affec- 
tion or  pity  for  its  deceased,  helpless,  or  unknown  parents.  Among  the 
Esquimaux,  however,  with  whom  the  two  first  of  these  causes  would  prove 
but  little  excitement,  and  the  last  can  have  no  place,  the  custom  owes  its 
origin  entirely  to  the  obvious  advantage  of  thus  providing  for  a  man's  own 
subsistence  in  advanced  life ;  and  it  is  consequently  confined  almost  without 
exception  to  the  adoption  of  sons,  who  can  alone  contribute  materially  to 
the  support  of  an  aged  and  infirm  parent.  When  a  man  adopts  the  son  of 
another  as  his  own,  he  is  said  to  "  tego,"  or  take  him  ;  and  at  whatever  age 
this  is  done,  (though  it  generally  happens  in  infancy,)  the  child  then  lives 
with  his  new  parents,  calls  them  father  and  mother,  is  sometimes  even 
ignorant  of  any  such  transfer  having  been  made,  especially  if  his  real 
parents  should  be  dead ;  and  whether  he  knows  it  or  not,  is  not  always 
willing  to  acknowledge  any  but  those  with  whom  he  lives.  Without 
imputing  much  to  the  natural  affection  of  these  people  for  their  offspring, 
which  like  their  other  passions  is  certainly  not  remarkable  for  its  strength, 
there  would  seem,  on  the  score  of  disinterestedness,  a  degree  of  conside- 
ration in  a  man's  thus  giving  his  son  to  another,  which  is  scarcely  com- 
patible with  the  general  selfishness  of  the  Esquimaux  character  ;  but  there  is 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  expediency  of  this  measure  is  sometimes  sug- 
gested by  a  deficiency  of  the  mother's  milk,  and  not  unfrequently  perhaps 
by  the  premature  death  of  the  real  parent.     The  agreement  seems    to  be 

3  y  2 


jifi 


1  f 


1 1    i 


iN.k''  '' 


^^^yjawig^fi^^-^i^afTiifyf^i 


*Tl 


532 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


<              v 

s                         f 
If 

always  made  between  the  fathers,  and  to  differ  in  no  respect  from  the 
transfer  of  other  property,  except  that  none  can  equal  in  value  the  pro- 
perty thus  disposed  of.  The  good  sense,  good  fortune,  or  extensive  claims 
of  some  individuals  were  particularly  apparent  in  this  way,  from  the  num- 
ber of  sons  they  had  adopted.  Toolemak,  deriving  perhaps  some  advan- 
tage from  his  qualifications  as  Angetkook,  had  taken  care  to  negotiate  for 
the  adoption  of  some  of  the  finest  male  children  of  the  tribe  ;  a  provision 
which  now  appeared  the  more  necessary  from  his  having  lost  four  children 
of  his  own/besides  Noogloo,  who  was  one  of  his  tego'd  sons.  In  one  of  the 
two  instances  that  came  to  our  knowledge  of  the  adoption  of  a  female  child, 
both  its  OAvn  parents  were  still  living,  nor  could  we  ascertain  the  motive  for 
this  deviation  from  the  more  general  custom. 

In  their  behaviour  to  old  people,  whose  age  or  infirmities  render  them  use- 
less and  therefore  burdensome  to  the  community,  the  Esquimaux  betray  a 
degree  of  insensibility  bordering  on  inhumanity,  and  ill-repaying  the  kind- 
ness of  an  indulgent  parent.  The  old  man  Hikkeiera,  who  was  very  ill  during 
the  winter,  used  to  lie  day  after  day  little  regarded  by  his  wife,  son,  daugh- 
ter, and  other  relatives,  except  that  his  wretched  state  constituted,  as  they 
well  knew,  a  forcible  claim  upon  our  charity ;  and,  with  this  view,  it  was  sure 
to  excite  a  whine  of  sympathy  and  commiseration  whenever  we  visited  or 
spoke  of  him.  When,  however,  a  journey  of  ten  miles  was  to  be  performed 
over  the  ice,  they  left  him  to  find  his  way  with  a  stick  in  the  best  manner  he 
could,  while  the  young  and  robust  ones  were  many  of  them  drawn  on  sledges. 
There  is  indeed  no  doubt  that,  had  their  necessities  or  mode  of  life  required 
a  longer  journey  than  he  could  thus  have  accomplished,  they  would  have 
pushed  on  like  the  Indians,  and  left  a  fellow-creature  to  perish.  It  was 
certainly  considered  incumbent  on  his  son  to  support  him,  and  he  was  for- 
tunate in  that  son's  being  a  very  good  man  ;  but  a  few  more  such  journeys  to 
a  man  of  seventy  would  not  impose  this  incumbrance  upon  him  much  longer. 
Illumea,  the  mother  of  several  grown-up  children,  lived  also  in  the  same 
apartment  with  her  youngest  son,  and  in  the  same  hut  with  her  other  rela- 
tions. She  did  not  however  interfere,  as  in  Greenland*,  with  the  management 
of  her  son's  domestic  concerns,  though  his  wife  was  half  an  idiot.  She  was 
always  badly  clothed,  and  even  in  the  midst  of  plenty  not  particularly  well- 
fed,  receiving  every  thing  more  as  an  act  of  charity  than  otherwise  ;  and 

*  Crantz,  I.  164. 


rwnsKi 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


533 


she  will  probably  be  less  and  less  attended  to,  in  proportion  as  she  stands 
more  in  need  of  assistance. 

The  different  families  appear  always  to  live  on  good  terms  with  each  other, 
though  each  preserves  its  own  habitation  and  property  as  distinct  and  inde- 
pendent as  any  housekeeper  in  England.  The  persons  living  under  one 
roof,  who  are  generally  closely  related,  maintain  a  degree  of  harmony 
among  themselves  which  is  scarcely  ever  disturbed.  The  more  turbulent 
passions  which,  when  unrestrained  by  religious  principle  or  unchecked  by 
the  dread  of  human  punishment,  usually  create  so  much  havoc  in  the  world, 
seem  to  be  very  seldom  excited  in  the  breasts  of  these  people,  which  ren- 
ders personal  violence  or  immoderate  anger  extremely  rare  among  them ; 
and  one  may  sit  in  a  hut  for  a  whole  day,  and  never  witness  an  angry  word 
or  look  except  in  driving  out  the  dogs.  If  they  take  an  offence,  it  is  more 
common  for  them  to  shew  it  by  the  more  quiet  method  of  sulkiness,  and 
this  they  now  and  then  tried  as  a  matter  of  experiment  with  us.  Okotook,  who 
was  often  in  this  humour,  once  displayed  it  to  some  of  our  gentlemen  in  his 
own  hut,  by  turning  his  back  and  frequently  repeating  the  expression  "  good- 
bye," as  a  broad  hint  to  them  to  go  away.  Toolooak  was  also  a  little 
given  to  this  mood,  but  never  retained, it  long,  and  there  was  no  malice 
mixed  with  his  displeasure.  One  evening  that  he  slept  on  board  the  Fury, 
he  either  offended  Mr.  Skeoch,  or  thought  that  he  had  done  'so,  by  this 
kind  of  humour  ;  at  all  events  they  parted  for  the  night  without  any  formal 
reconciliation.  The  next  morning  Mr.  Skeoch  was  awakened  at  an  unusu- 
ally early  hour,  by  Toolooak's  entering  his  cabin  and  taking  hold  of  his  hand 
to  shake  it,  by  way  of  making  up  the  supposed  quarrel.  On  a  disposition 
thus  naturally  charitable,  what  might  not  Christian  education  and  Christian 
principles  effect !  Where  a  joke  is  evidently  intended,  I  never  knew  people 
more  ready  to  join  in  it  than  these  are.  If  ridiculed  for  any  particularity 
of  manner,  figure,  or  countenance,  they  are  sure  not  to  be  long  behind-hand 
in  returning  it,  and  that  very  often  with  interest.  If  we  were  the  aggressors 
in  this  way,  some  ironical  observation  respecting  the  Kabloonas  was  frequently 
the  consequence ;  and  no  small  portion  of  wit  as  well  as  irony  was  at  times 
mixed  with  their  raillery. 

In  point  of  intellect  as  well  as  disposition  great  variety  was  of  course 
perceptible  among  the  different  individuals  of  this  tribe  ;  but  few  of  them 
were  wanting  in  that  respect.  Some  indeed  possessed  a  degree  of  natural 
quickness  and  intelligence  which  perhaps  could  hardly  be  surpassed  in  the 


liiiHji  ' 


■'i.JVi    f  T 


i  '^". 


5 


534 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


i 
■ 

IHIIII 


«k 


natives  of  any  country.  Iligliuk,  though  one  of  the  least  amiable,  was 
particularly  thus  gifted.  When  she  really  wished  to  develop  our  meaning, 
she  would  desire  her  husband  and  all  the  rest  to  hold  their  tongues,  and 
would  generally  make  it  out  while  they  were  puzzling  their  heads  to 
no  purpose.  In  returning  her  answers  the  very  expression  of  her  coun- 
tenance, though  one  of  the  plainest  among  them,  was  almost  of  itself 
sufficient  to  convey  her  meaning ;  and  there  was,  in  these  cases,  a  pe- 
culiar decisive  energy  in  her  manner  of  speaking  which  was  extremely 
interesting.  This  woman  would  indeed  have  easily  learned  any  thing  to 
which  she  chose  to  direct  her  attention ;  and  had  her  lot  been  cast  in  a 
civilized  country  instead  of  this  dreary  region,  which  serves  alike  to  "  freeze 
the  genial  current  of  the  soul"  and  body,  she  would  probably  have  been  a  very 
clever  person.  For  want  of  a  sufficient  object,  however,  neither  she  nor 
any  of  her  companions  ever  learned  a  dozen  words  of  English,  except  our 
names,  with  which  it  was  their  interest  to  be  familiar,  and  which,  long 
before  we  left  them  any  child  could  repeat,  though  in  their  own  style  of 
pronunciation. 

Besides  the  natural  authority  of  parents  and  husbands,  these  people 
appear  to  admit  no  kind  of  superiority  among  one  another,  except  a  certain 
degree  of  superstitious  reverence  for  their  angetkooks,  and  their  tacitly  fol- 
lowing the  counsel  or  steps  of  the  most  active  seal-catcher  on  their  hunting 
excursions.  The  word  nallegak,  used  in  Greenland  to  express  "  master," 
and  "  lord"  in  the  Esquimaux  translations  of  the  Scriptures,  they  were  not 
acquainted  with.  One  of  the  young  men  at  Winter  Island  appeared  to  be 
considered  somewhat  in  the  light  of  a  servant  to  Okotook,  living  with  the 
latter  and  quietly  allowing  him  to  take  possession  of  all  the  most  valuable 
presents  which  he  received  from  us.  Being  a  sociable  people,  they  unite  in 
considerable  numbers  to  form  a  settlement  for  the  winter  ;  but  on  the  return 
of  spring  they  again  separate  into  several  parties,  each  appearing  to  choose  his 
own  route  without  regard  to  that  of  the  rest,  but  all  making  their  arrange- 
ments without  the  slightest  disagreement  or  difference  of  opinion  that  we 
could  ever  discover.  In  all  their  movements  they  seem  to  be  actuated  by 
one  simultaneous  feeling  that  is  truly  admirable. 

Superior  as  our  arts,  contrivances,  and  materials  must  unquestionably  have 
appeared  to  them,  and  eager  as  they  were  to  profit  by  this  superiority,  yet, 
contradictory  as  it  may  seem,  they  certainly  looked  upon  us  in  many  respects 
with  profound  contempt ;  maintaining  that  idea  of  self-sufficiency  which  has 


■fc.V^WfcH,' 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


ms 


induced  them,  in  common  with  the  rest  of  their  nation,  to  call  themselves,  by 
way  of  distinction  Imike,  or  mankind.  One  day  for  instance,  in  securing  some 
of  the  geer  of  a  sledge,  Okotook  broke  a  part  of  it  composed  of  a  piece  of 
our  white  line,  and  I  shall  never  forget  the  contemptuous  sneer  with  which 
he  muttered  in  soliloquy  the  word  "  Kabloona !"  in  token  of  the  inferiority 
of  our  materials  to  his  own.  It  is  happy,  perhaps,  when  people  possessing 
so  few  of  the  good  things  of  this  life  can  be  thus  contented  with  the  little 
allotted  them. 

The  men,  though  low  in  stature,  are  not  wanting  in  muscular  strength 
in  proportion  to  their  size,  or  in  activity  and  hardiness.  They  are  good 
and  even  quick  walkers,  and  occasionally  bear  much  bodily  fatigue,  wet' 
and  cold,  without  appearing  to  suffer"  by  it,  much  less  to  complain  of  it. 
Whatever  labour  they  have  gone  through  and  with  whatever  success  in  pro- 
curing game,  no  individual  ever  seems  to  arrogate  to  himself  the  credit  of 
having  done  more  than  his  neighbour  for  the  general  good.  Nor  do  I  con- 
ceive there  is  reason  to  doubt  their  personal  courage,  though  they  are  too 
good-natured  often  to  excite  others  to  put  that  quality  to  the  test.  It  is  true 
they  will  recoil  with  horror  at  the  tale  of  an  Indian  massacre,  and  probably 
cannot  conceive  what  should  induce  one  set  of  men  deliberately  and  with- 
out provocation  to  murder  another.  War  is  not  their  trade  ;  ferocity  forms 
no  part  of  the  disposition  of  the  Esquimaux.  Whatever  manly  qualities  they 
possess  are  exercised  in  a  different  way,  and  put  to  a  far  more  worthy  pur- 
pose. They  are  fishermen  and  not  warriors  ;  but  I  cannot  call  that  man  a 
coward  who,  at  the  age  of  one  and  twenty,  will  attack  a  polar  bear  single- 
handed,  or  fearlessly  commit  himself  to  floating  masses  of  ice  which  the  next 
puff  of  wind  may  drift  for  ever  from  the  shore. 

If  in  short  they  are  deficient  in  some  of  the  higher  virtues,  as  they  are 
called,  of  savage  life,  they  are  certainly  free  also  from  some  of  its  blackest 
vices ;  and  their  want  of  brilliant  qualities  is  fully  compensated  by  those 
which,  while  they  dazzle  less,  do  more  service  to  society  and  more  honour 
to  human  nature.  If,  for  instance,  they  have  not  the  magnanimity  which 
would  enable  them  to  endure  without  a  murmur  the  most  excruciating  tor- 
ture, neither  have  they  the  ferocious  cruelty  that  incites  a  man  to  inflict 
that  torture  on  a  helpless  fellow-creature.  If  their  gratitude  for  favours  be 
not  lively  nor  lasting,  neither  is  their  resentment  of  injuries  implacable  nor 
their  hatred  deadly.  I  do  not  say  there  are  not  exceptions  to  this  rule, 
though  we  have  never  witnessed  any,  but  it  is  assuredly  not  their  general 
character. 


>cs*%  p^r 


NHfl 


Irllj 


•Jl 

I 

s 

* 

f  1 

"• 

*'ll, 


III 


*  ' 

iilli 

»1 

i 

»»:; 

*4 

9. 

* 

H» 

5* 


536 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


When  viewed  more  nearly  in  their  domestic  relations,  the  comparison  will 
I  believe,  be  still  more  in  their  favour.  It  is  here  as  a  social  being,  as  a 
husband  and  the  father  of  a  family,  promoting  within  his  own  little  sphere 
the  benefit  of  that  community  in  which  Providence  has  cast  his  lot,  that  the 
moral  character  of  a  savage  is  truly  to  be  sought ;  and  who  can  turn  without 
horror  from  the  Esquimaux,  peaceably  seated  after  a  day  of  honest  labour 
with  his  wife  and  children  in  their  snow-built  hut,  to  the  self-willed  and 
vindictive  Indian,  wantonly  plunging  his  dagger  into  the  bosom  of  the  help- 
less woman,  whom  nature  bids  him  cherish  and  protect ! 

Of  the  few  arts  possessed  by  this  simple  people  some  account  has  already 
been  given  in  the  description  of  their  various  implements.  As  mechanics 
they  have  little  to  boast,  when  compared  with  other  savages  lying  under  equal 
disadvantages  as  to  scantiness  of  tools  and  materials.  As  carpenters  they  can 
scarf  two  pieces  of  wood  together,  secure  them  with  pins  of  whalebone 
or  ivory,  fashion  the  timbers  of  a  canoe,  shoe  a  paddle,  and  rivet  a  scrap  of 
iron  into  a  spear  or  arrow  head.  Their  principal  tool  is  the  knife  (panna,)  and 
considering  the  excellence  of  a  great  number  which  they  possessed  previous 
to  our  intercourse  with  them,  the  work  they  do  is  remarkably  coarse  and 
clumsy.  Their  very  manner  of  holding  and  handling  a  knife  is  the  most 
awkward  that  can  be  imagined.  For  the  purpose  of  boring  holes  they  have 
a  drill  and  bow  so  exactly  like  our  own  that  they  need  no  further  description, 
except  that  the  end  of  the  drill-handle,  which  our  artists  place  against  their 
breasts,  is  rested  by  these  people  against  a  piece  of  wood  or  bone  held  in  their 
mouths,  and  having  a  cavity  fitted  to  receive  it.  With  the  use  of  the  saw 
they  were  well  acquainted,  but  had  nothing  of  this  kind  in  their  possession 
better  than  a  notched  piece  of  iron.  One  or  two  small  European  axes  were 
lashed  to  handles  in  a  contrary  direction  to  ours,  that  is,  to  be  used  like  an 
adze  (3,)  a  form  which,  according  to  the  observation  of  a  traveller*  well 
qualified  to  judge,  savages  in  general  prefer.  It  was  said  that  these  people 
steamed  or  boiled  wood,  in  order  to  bend  it  for  fashioning  the  timbers  of  their 
canoes.  As  fishermen  or  seamen  they  can  put  on  a  woolding  or  seizing  with 
sufficient  strength  and  security,  and  are  acquainted  with  some  of  the  most 
simple  and  serviceable  knots  in  use  among  us.  In  all  the  arts,  however, 
practised  by  the  men  it  is  observable  that  the  ingenuity  lies  in  the  principle, 
not  in  the  execution.     The  experience  of  ages  has  led  them  to  adopt  the 

*  Ledyard.     Proceedings  of  the  African  Association.     Vol.  i.  p.  30. 


n«M»B»,l 


*lff-.«iHKi' 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


537 


most  efficacious  methods,  but  their  practice  as  handicrafts  has  gone  no 
further  than  absolute  necessity  requires  ;  they  bestow  little  labour  upon 
neatness  or  ornament. 

In  some  of  the  few  arts  practised  by  the  women  there  is  much  more  dex- 
terity displayed,  particularly  in  that  important  branch  of  a  housewife's  busi- 
ness, sewing,  which  even  with  their  own  clumsy  needles  of  bone  (11.)  they 
perform  with  extraordinary  neatness.   They  had  however  several  steel  needles 
of  a  three-cornered  shape,  which  they  kept  in  a  very  convenient  case  (25.) 
consisting  of  a  strip  of  leather  passed  through  a  hollow  bone  and  having  its 
ends  remaining  out,  so  that  the  needles  which  are  stuck  into  it  may  be  drawn 
in  and  out  at  pleasure.    These  cases  were  sometimes  ornamented  by  cutting; 
and  several  thimbles  of  leather,  one  of  which  in  sewing  is  worn  on  the  first 
finger,  are  usually  attached  to  it,  together  with  a  bunch  of  narrow  spoons  and 
other  small  articles  liable  to  be  lost.     The  thread  they  use  is  the  sinew  of 
the  rein-deer  (tooktoo  eioallob,)  or,  when  they  cannot  procure  this,  the  swal- 
low-pipe of  the  neitiek.     This  may  be  split  into  threads  of  different  sizes, 
according  to  the  nature  of  their  work,  and  is  certainly  a  most  admirable  ma- 
terial.    This,  together  Avith  any  other  articles  of  a  similar  kind,  they  keep  in 
little  bags,  which  are  sometimes  made  of  the  skin  of  birds'  feet,  disposed  with 
the  claAvs  downwards  in  a  very  neat  and  tasteful  manner.  (23.)     In  sewing, 
the  point  of  the  needle  is  entered  and  drawn  through  in  a  direction  towards 
the  body,  and  not  from  it  or  towards  one  side  as  with  our  sempstresses. 
They  sew  the  deer-skins  with  a  "  round  seam,"   and  the  water-tight  boots 
and  shoes  are  "stitched."     The  latter  is  performed  in  a  very  adroit  and 
efficacious  manner,  by  putting  the  needle  only  half  through  the  substance  of 
one  part  of  the  seal-skin,  so  as  to  leave  no  hole  for  admitting  the  water.     In 
cutting  out  the  clothes  the  women  do  it  after  one  regular  and  uniform  pat- 
tern, which  probably    descends  unaltered   from  generation  to  generation. 
The  skin  of  the  deer's  head  is  always  made  to  form  the  apex  of  the  hood, 
while  that  of  the  neck  and  shoulders  comes  down  the  back  of  the  jacket; 
and  so  of  every  other  part  of  the  animal  which  is  appropriated  to  its  par- 
ticular portion  of  the  dress.     To  soften  the  seal-skins  of  which  the  boots, 
shoes,  and  mittens  are  made,  the  women  chew  them  for  an  hour  or  two  toge- 
ther, and  the  young  girls  are  often  seen  employed  in  thus  preparing  the 
materials  for  their  mothers.     The  covering  of  the  canoes  is  a  part  of  the 
women's  business,  in  which  good  workmanship  is  especially  necessary  to 
render  the  whole  smooth  and  water-tight.     The  skins,  which  are  those  of 

3  Z 


B  ' 


m 


*  i 


yt'q'«afg*^TOTyg*? 


: 


I 


'I. 

V 


s 


jh#' 


1 


51 


538 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


the  ntitiek  only,  are  prepared  by  scraping  off  the  hair  and  the  fleshy  parts 
with  an  ooloo,  and  stretching  them  out  tight  on  a  frame,  in  which  state  they 
are  left  over  the  lamps  or  in  the  sun  for  several  days  to  dry ;  and  after  this  they 
are  well  chewed  by  the  Avomen  to  make  them  fit  for  working.  The  dressing 
of  leather  and  of  skins  in  the  hair,  is  an  art  which  the  women  have  brought 
to  no  inconsiderable  degree  of  perfection.  They  perform  this  by  first 
cleansing  the  skin  from  as  much  of  the  fat  and  fleshy  matter  as  the  ooloo 
will  take  off,  and  then  rubbing  it  hard  for  several  hours  with  a  blunt  scraper, 
called  sidkoot,  so  as  nearly  to  dry  it.  It  is  then  put  into  a  vessel  containing 
urine  and  left  to  steep  a  couple  of  days,  after  which  a  drying  completes  the 
process.  Skins  dressed  in  the  hair  are  however  not  always  thus  steeped  ; 
the  women,  instead  of  this,  chewing  them  for  hours  together  till  they  are 
quite  soft  and  clean.  Some  of  the  leather  thus  dressed  looked  nearly  as 
well  as  ours,  and  the  hair  was  as  firmly  fixed  to  the  pelt,  but  there  was  in 
this  respect  a  very  great  difference,  according  to  the  art  or  attention  of  the 
housewife.  Dyeing  is  an  art  wholly  unknown  to  them.  The  women  are 
very  expert  at  platting,  which  is  usually  done  with  three  threads  of  sinew ; 
if  greater  strength  is  required,  several  of  these  are  twisted  slackly  together 
as  in  the  bow-strings.  The  quickness  with  which  some  of  the  women  plat 
is  really  surprising  ;  and  it  is  well  that  they  do  so,  for  the  quantity  required 
for  the  bows  alone  would  otherwise  occupy  half  the  year  in  completing  it. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  among  so  cheerful  a  people  as  the  Esquimaux  there 
are  many  games  or  sports  practised  ;  indeed  it  was  rarely  that  we  visited  their 
habitations  without  seeing  some  engaged  in  them.  One  of  these  our  gentle- 
men saw  at  Winter  Island,  on  an  occasion  when  most  of  the  men  were  absent 
from  the  huts  on  a  sealing  excursion,  and  in  this  Iligliuk  was  the  chief  per- 
former. Being  requested  to  amuse  them  in  this  way,  she  suddenly  unbound 
her  hair,  platted  it,  tied  both  ends  together  to  keep  it  out  of  her  way,  and  then 
stepping  out  into  the  middle  of  the  hut,  began  to  make  the  most  hideous  faces 
that  can  be  conceived,  by  drawing  both  lips  into  her  mouth,  poking  forward 
her  chin,  squinting  frightfully,  occasionally  shutting  one  eye,  and  moving  her 
head  from  side  to  side  as  if  her  neck  had  been  dislocated.  This  exhibition, 
which  they  call  ayokit-tdlc-polce  *,  and  which  is  evidently  considered  an  ac- 
complishment that  few  of  them  possess  in  perfection,  distorts  every  feature 

*  This  name,  as  well  as  those  of  the  other  games  I  am  now  describing  is  given  in  the  third 
person  singular  of  the  verb  used  to  express  the  performance. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 

in  the  most  horrible  manner  imaginable,  and  would,  I  think,  put  our  most 
skilful  horse-collar  grinners  quite  out  of  countenance. 

The  next  performance  consists  in  looking  steadfastly  and  gravely  forward 
and  repeating  the  words  tabdk-tabak,  keibo-keibo,  kebcing-e-nu-td-thk,  kebangenutoeek, 
amatama,  amatama,  in  the  order  in  which  they  are  here  placed,  but  each  at 
least  four  times,  and  always  by  a  peculiar  modulation  of  the  voice  speaking 
them  in  pairs  as  they  are  coupled  above.  The  sound  is  made  to  proceed 
from  the  throat  in  a  way  much  resembling  ventriloquism,  to  which  art  it  is 
indeed  an  approach.  After  the  last  amatama  Iligliuk  always  pointed  with 
her  ringer  towards  her  body,  and  pronounced  the  word  angetkook,  steadily 
retaining  her  gravity  for  five  or  six  seconds,  and  then  bursting  into  a  loud 
laugh,  in  which  she  was  joined  by  all  the  rest.  The  women  sometimes  pro- 
duce a  much  more  guttural  and  unnatural  sound,  repeating  principally  the 
word  ikkeree-ik/ceree,  coupling  them  as  before,  and  staring  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  make  their  eyes  appear  ready  to  burst  out  of  their  sockets  with  the  exer- 
tion. Two  or  more  of  them  will  sometimes  stand  up  face  to  face,  and  with 
great  quickness  and  regularity  respond  to  each  other,  keeping  such  exact 
time  that  the  sound  appears  to  come  from  one  throat  instead  of  several. 
Very  few  of  the  females  are  possessed  of  this  accomplishment,  which  is 
called  pitkoo-she-rdk-poke,  and  it  is  not  uncommon  to  see  several  of  the  younger 
females  practising  it.  A  third  part  of  the  game,  distinguished  by  the  word 
keitik-poke,  consists  only  in  falling  on  each  knee  alternately,  a  piece  of 
agility  which  they  perform  with  tolerable  quickness,  considering  the  bulky 
and  awkward  nature  of  their  dress. 

The  last  kind  of  individual  exhibition  Avas  still  performed  by  Iligliuk,  to  whom 
in  this,  as  in  almost  every  thing  else,  the  other  women  tacitly  acknowledged 
their  inferiority,  by  quietly  giving  place  to  her  on  every  occasion.  She  now 
once  more  came  forward,  and  letting  her  arms  hang  down  loosely  and  bend- 
ing her  body  very  much  forward,  shook  herself  with  extreme  violence  as  if 
her  whole  frame  had  been  strongly  convulsed,  uttering  at  the  same  time,  in 
a  wild  tone  of  voice,  some  of  the  unnatural  sounds  before-mentioned. 

This  being  at  an  end,  a  new  exhibition  was  commenced  in  which  ten  or  twelve 
women  took  a  part,  and  which  our  gentlemen  compared  to  blind  man's  buff. 
A  circle  being  formed,  and  a  boy  despatched  to  look  out  at  the  door  of  the 
hut,  Iligliuk,  still  the  principal  actress,  placed  herself  in  the  centre,  and 
after  making  a  variety  of  guttural  noises  for  about  half  a  minute,  shut  her 
eyes,  and  ran  about  till  she  had  taken  hold  of  one  of  the  others,  whose 

3  Z   2 


SV^EifJ5Cg»^jr^ATC'5r?,I 


.».  j*r  *  a*  i*  v 


540 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


Ml 

1 

i 


<\ 


business  it  then  became  to  take  her  station  in  the  centre,  so  that  almost  every 
woman  in  her  turn  occupied  this  post,  and  in  her  own  peculiar  way,  either  by 
distortion  of  countenance  or  other  gestures,  performed  her  part  in  the  game. 
This  continued  three  quarters  of  an  hour  and,  from  the  precaution  of  placing 
a  look-out  who  was  withdrawn  when  it  was  over,  as  well  as  from  some  very 
expressive  signs  which  need  not  here  be  mentioned,  there  is  reason  to 
believe  that  it  is  usually  followed  by  certain  indecencies,  with  which  their 
husbands  are  not  to  be  acquainted.  Kaoongut  was  present  indeed  on  this 
occasion,  but  his  age  seemed  to  render  him  a  privileged  person ;  besides 
which  his  own  wife  did  not  join  in  the  game. 

The  most  common  amusement  however,  and  to  which  their  husbands  made 
no  objection,  they  performed  at  Winter  Island  expressly  for  our  gratifica- 
tion. The  females,  being  collected  to  the  number  of  ten  or  twelve,,  stood  in 
as  large  a  circle  as  the  hut  would  admit,  with  Okotook  in  the  centre.  He 
began  by  a  sort  of  half-howling,  half-singing  noise,  which  appeared  as  if 
designed  to  call  the  attention  of  the  women,  the  latter  soon  commencing  the 
Amna  Aya  song  hereafter  described.  This  they  continued  without  variety, 
remaining  quite  still  while  Okotook  walked  round  within  the  circle ;  his  body 
was  rather  bent  forward,  his  eyes  sometimes  closed,  his  arms  constantly 
moving  up  and  down,  and  now  and  then  hoarsely  vociferating  a  word  or  two 
as  if  to  increase  the  animation  of  the  singers,  who,  whenever  he  did  this, 
quitted  the  chorus  and  rose  into  the  words  of  the  song.  At  the  end  of  ten 
minutes  they  all  left  off  at  once,  and  after  one  minute's  interval  commenced 
a  second  act  precisely  similar  and  of  equal  duration,  Okotook  continuing  to 
invoke  their  muse  as  before.  A  third  act,  which  followed  this,  varied  only 
in  his  frequently  towards  the  close  throwing  his  feet  up  before  and  clapping 
his  hands  together,  by  which  exertion  he  was  thrown  into  a  violent  perspira- 
tion. He  then  retired,  desiring  a  young  man  (who  as  we  were  informed  was 
the  only  individual  of  several  then  present  thus  qualified)  to  take  his  place 
in  the  centre  as  master  of  the  ceremonies,  when  the  same  antics  as  before 
were  again  gone  through.  After  this  description  it  will  scarcely  be  necessary 
to  remark  that  nothing  can  be  poorer  in  its  way  than  this  tedious  singing 
recreation,  which,  as  well  as  every  thing  in  which  dancing  is  concerned,  they 
express  by  the  word  momek-poke.  They  seem,  however,  to  take  great  delight 
in  it ;  and  even  a  number  of  the  men  as  well  as  all  the  children  crept  into 
the  hut  by  degrees  to  peep  at  the  performance. 

The  Esquimaux  women  and  children  often  amuse  themselves  with  a  game 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


541 


not  unlike  our  "  skip-rope."  This  is  performed  by  two  women  holding  the 
ends  of  a  line  and  whirling  it  regularly  round  and  round,  while  a  third 
jumps  over  it  in  the  middle  according  to  the  following  order.  She  com- 
mences by  jumping  twice  on  both  feet,  then  alternately  with  the  right  and 
left,  and  next  four  times  with  the  feet  slipped  one  behind  the  other,  the  rope 
passing  once  round  at  each  jump.  After  this  she  performs  a  circle  on  the 
ground,  jumping  about  half-a-dozen  times  in  the  course  of  it,  which  bring- 
ing her  to  her  original  position,  the  same  thing  is  repeated  as  often  as  it  can 
be  done  without  entangling  the  line.  One  or  two  of  the  Avomen  performed 
this  with  considerable  agility  and  adroitness,  considering  the  clumsiness  of 
their  boots  and  jackets,  and  seemed  to  pride  themselves  in  some  degree  on 
the  qualification.  A  second  kind  of  this  game  consists  in  two  women  hold- 
ing a  long  rope  by  its  ends  and  whirling  it  round  in  such  a  manner,  over  the 
heads  of  two  others  standing  close  together  near  the  middle  of  the  bight, 
that  each  of  these  shall  jump  over  it  alternately.  The  art  therefore,  which 
is  indeed  considerable,  depends  more  on  those  whirling  the  rope  than  on  the 
jumpers,  who  are,  however,  obliged  to  keep  exact  time  in  order  to  be  ready 
for  the  rope  passing  under  their  feet. 

The  whole  of  these  people,  but  especially  the  women,  are  fond  of  music 
both  vocal  and  instrumental.  Some  of  them  might  be  said  to  be  passionately 
so,  removing  their  hair  from  off  their  ears  and  bending  their  heads  forward 
as  if  to  catch  the  sounds  more  distinctly,  whenever  we  amused  them  in  this 
manner.  Their  own  music  is  entirely  vocal,  unless  indeed  the  drum  or  tam- 
bourine before  mentioned  be  considered  an  exception. 

The  voices  of  the  women  are  soft  and  feminine,  and  when  singing  with 
the  men  are  pitched  an  octave  higher  than  theirs.  They  have  most  of  them 
so  far  good  ears,  that,  in  whatever  key  a  song  is  commenced  by  one  of 
them,  the  rest  will  always  join  in  perfect  unison.  After  singing  for  ten 
minutes  the  key  had  usually  fallen  a  full  semi-tone.  Only  two  of  them,  of 
whom  lligluik  was  one,  could  catch  the  tune  as  pitched  by  an  instrument ; 
which  made  it  difficult  with  most  of  them  to  complete  the  writing  of  the 
notes,  for  if  they  once  left  off  they  were  sure  to  re-commence  in  some 
other  key,  though  a  flute  or  violin  was  playing  at  the  time. 

There  is  not  in  any  of  their  songs  much  variety,  compass,  or  melody.  In 
the  following  specimens  therefore  which,  in  conjunction  with  Mr.  Hender- 
son, I  wrote  down  from  their  singing,  I  can  only  promise  that  the  notes 
are  correctly  given,  and  that  I  have  done  my  best  to  put  them  into  the  time 


:!    I 


m  ' 


yx^jrm^M^rur^z*^*™*^. 


2 '      wT>       ST.  Z1    .     -w  /<     *     '*     %» 


"ti 


lU 


0 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


in  which  they  are  sung.  Unharmonious  as  they  will  appear  to  musical 
ears,  we  thought  them  pleasing  when  sung  in  good  time  by  a  number  of 
female  voices. 

The  first  and  much  the  most  common  of  these  is  that  in  which  the  well 
known  Greenland  chorus,  "  Amna  aya,"  commences  the  performance,  and 
is  introduced  between  each  verse,  constituting  about  five-sixths  of  the  whole 
song.  When  the  words  of  the  song  are  introduced,  the  notes  rise  a  little  for 
three  or  four  bars,  and  then  relapse  again  into  the  same  hum-drum  chorus  as 
before,  which  to  do  it  justice  is  well  calculated  to  set  the  children  to  sleep. 
The  words  of  the  song  seem  to  be  as  interminable  as  those  of  "  Chevy 
Chace  ;"  for  the  women  will  go  on  singing  them  for  nearly  half  an  hour, 
and  then  leave  off  one  by  one,  not  with  their  story  but  their  breath  ex- 
hausted. 


:k 


m-  -gi-p-.-C 


Amna  Aya     Aya  Amna  ah  -  Amna  Aya     Aya  Amna   ah,  ah  &c.  &c.    - 


— W 1 W  1     ~  8 1 — — — — -  r 

zi—  "  •  ^r'~Ei  zEj*  """^^i M"L  JL^i-a^Jsfc^f 

Song     ..--_-------- 


\~ I— +- 


\DC 


They  have  a  second  song,  varying  from  the  preceding  one  very  slightly 
in  the  tune,  and  accompanied  by  the  same  chorus,  but  with  different 
words. 

The  third  and  last  is  the  most  tuneful  of  any  of  their  songs.  The  ter- 
mination, which  is  abrupt,  and  fanciful,  is  usually  accompanied  by  a  peculiar 
motion  of  the  head,  and  an  expression  of  archness  in  the  countenance 
which  cannot  be  described  by  words. 


o> 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


543 


There  is  only  one  verse  to  this  song,  and  that,  from  its  commencing  with 
the  word  "  pilletay,"  we  supposed  to  be  a  begging  one.     Of  the  words  of 
their  songs  in  general,  I  cannot,  from  my  imperfect  knowledge  of  their  lan- 
guage, pretend  to  speak  very  accurately.     From  the  occasional  introduction 
of  the  words  "  sledge,  canoe,  spear,"  and  others  of  that  kind  with  which 
we  were  acquainted,  it  is  probable  that  their  own  exploits  by  sea  and  land 
orm  the  principal  subjects.     The  last  song  is  not  so  often  sung  as  the  first, 
which  these  cheerful  creatures  unconsciously  strike  up  every  hour  in  the 
day,  and  which  seems  to  beguile  the  time  both  to  themselves  and  their 
children,  under  almost  any  circumstances  in  Avhich  they  can  be  placed.    The 
men  seldom  sing,  and  perhaps  consider  it  unmanly ;  for  we  never  heard  them 
but  at  our  request,  and   even   then  they  soon  left  the  women   to    finish 
the  ditty.     Their  province  rather  seems  to  be  to  invoke  the  muse  of  the 
women  at  the  games  before  described. 

During  the  season  passed  at  Winter  Island,  which  appears  to  have  been  a 
healthy  one  to  the  Esquimaux,  we  had  little  opportunity  of  becoming 
acquainted  with  the  diseases  to  which  they  are  subject.  Our  subsequent 
intercourse  with  a  greater  number  of  these  people  at'lgloolik,  having  unfor- 
tunately afforded  more  frequent  and  fatal  instances  of  sickness  among  them, 
I  here  insert  Mr.  Edwards's  remarks  on  this  subject. 

"  Exempted  as  these  people  are  from  a  host  of  diseases  usually  ascribed  to 
the  vitiated  habits  of  more  civilized  life,  as  well  as  from  those  equally  numer- 
ous and  more  destructive  ones  engendered  by  the  pestilential  effluvia  that 
float  in  the  atmosphere  of  more  favoured  climes,  the  diversity  of  their  mala- 
dies is,  as  might  a  priori  be  inferred,  very  limited.     But,  unfortunately,  that 
improvidence  which  is  so  remarkable  in  their  kindred  tribes  is  also  with  them 
proof  against  the  repeated  lessons  of  bitter  experience  they  are  doomed  to 
endure.     Alternate  excesses  and  privations  mark  their  progress  through  life, 
and  consequent  misery  in  one  or  another  shape  is  an  active  agent  in  effect- 
ing as  much  mischief  amongst  them  as  the  diseases  above   alluded  to  pro- 
duce in  other  countries.     The  mortality  arising  from  a  few  diseases  and 
wretchedness  combined  seems  sufficient  to  check  any  thing  like  a  progressive 
increase  of  their  numbers.     The  great  proportion  of  deaths  to  births  that 
occurred  during  the  period  of  our  intercourse  with  them  has  already  been 
noticed. 


.If! 


Pi! 


ivaa^gg^g^ n  c^r  ^*m^T«*m* 


r 

F          $ 

'Hi 

' 


:        ^ 


i 


>l 


5 

8>  t 


m 


544 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


"  It  is  doubtful  in  what  proportion  the  mortality  is  directly  occasioned  by 
disease.  Few  perhaps  die,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  a  natural  death. 
A  married  person  of  either  sex  rarely  dies  without  leaving  destitute  a  parent, 
a  widow,  or  a  helpless  female  infant.  To  be  deprived  of  near  relations  is  to 
be  deprived  of  every  thing  ;  such  unfortunates  are  usually  abandoned  to 
their  fate  and  too  generally  perish.  A  widow  and  two  or  three  children  left 
under  these  circumstances  were  known  to  have  died  of  inanition,  from  the 
neglect  and  apathy  of  their  neighbours,  who  jeered  at  the  commanders  of 
our  ships  on  the  failure  of  their  humane  endeavours  to  save  what  the  Esqui- 
maux considered  as  worthless. 

"  Our  first  communication  with  these  people  at  Winter  Island  gave  us  a 
more  favourable  impression  of  their  general  health  than  subsequent  experi- 
ence confirmed.  There  however  they  were  not  free  from  sickness.  A 
catarrhal  affection  in  the  month  of  February  became  generally  prevalent, 
from  which  they  readily  recovered  after  the  exciting  causes,  intemperance 
and  exposure  to  wet,  had  ceased  to  operate.  A  solitary  instance  of  pleurisy 
also  occurred,  which  probably  might  have  ended  fatally  but  for  timely  assist- 
ance. Our  intercourse  with  them  in  the  summer  was  more  interrupted  ;  but 
at  our  occasional  meetings  they  were  observed  to  be  enjoying  excellent 
health.  It  is  probable  that  their  certain  supplies  of  food,  and  the  nomade 
kind  of  life  they  lead  in  its  pursuit  during  that  season,  are  favourable  to 
health.  Nutrition  goes  on  actively,  and  an  astonishing  increase  of  strength 
and  fulness  is  acquired.  Active  diseases  might  now  be  looked  for,  but  that 
the  powers  of  nature  are  providentially  exerted  with  effect. 

"  The  unlimited  use  of  stimulating  animal  food,  on  which  they  are  from 
infancy  fed,  induces  at  an  early  age  a  highly  plethoric  state  of  the  vascular 
system.  The  weaker  over-distended  vessels  of  the  nose  quickly  yield  to  the 
increased  impetus  of  the  blood,  and  an  active  hemorrhage  relieves  the  subject. 
As  the  same  causes  continue  to  be  applied  in  excess  at  frequent  intervals, 
and  are  followed  by  similar  effects,  a  kind  of  vicarious  hemorrhage  at  length 
becomes  established  by  habit;  superseding  the  intervention  of  art,  and 
having  no  small  share  in  maintaining  a  balance  in  the  circulating  system. 
The  phenomenon  is  too  constant  to  have  escaped  the  observation  of  those 
who  have  visited  the  different  Esquimaux  people  ;  a  party  of  them  has 
indeed  rarely  been  seen  that  did  not  exhibit  two  or  three  instances  of  the 
fact. 

"  About  the  month  of  September,  the  approach  of  winter  induced  the  Es- 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


545 


quimaux  at  Igloolik  to  abandon  their  tents,  and  to  retire  into  their  more 
established  village.     The  majority  were  here  crowded  into  huts  of  a  perma- 
nent construction,  the  materials  composing  the  sides  being  stones  and  the 
bones  of  whales,  and  the  roofs  being  formed  of  skins,  turf,  and  snow  ;   the 
rest  of  the  people  were  lodged  in  snow-huts.     For  a  while  they  continued 
very  healthy  ;  in  fact  as  long  as  the  temperature  of  the  interior  did  not  exceed 
the  freezing  point,  the  vapours  of  the  atmosphere  congealed  upon  the  walls, 
and  the  air  remained  dry  and  tolerably  pure  ;   besides,  their  hard-frozen 
winter  stock  of  Avalrus  did  not  at  this  time  tempt  them  to  indulge  their 
appetites  immoderately.     In  January  the  temperature  suffered  an  unseason- 
able rise,  some  successful  captures  of  walrus  also  took  place,  and  these 
circumstances,  combined  perhaps  with  some  superstitious  customs  of  which 
we  were  ignorant,  seemed  the  signal  for  giving  way  to  sensuality.     The 
lamps  were  accumulated  and  the  kettles  more  frequently  replenished,  and 
gluttony  in  its  most  disgusting  form  became  for  a  while  the  order  of  the  day. 
The  Esquimaux  were  now  seen  wallowing  in  filth,  while  some  surfeited  lay 
stretched  upon  their  skins  enormously  distended,  and  with   their  friends 
employed  in  rolling  them  about  to  assist  the  operations  of  oppressed  nature. 
The  roofs  of  their  huts  were  no  longer  congealed,  but  dripping  with  wet  and 
threatening  speedy  dissolution.     The  air  was  in  the  bone-huts  damp,  hot, 
and  beyond  sufferance  offensive  with  putrid  exhalations  from  the  decomposing 
relics  of  offals,  or  other  animal  matter  permitted  to  remain  from  year  to  year, 
undisturbed  in  these  horrible  sinks. 

"  What  the  consequences  might  have  been  had  this  state  of  affairs  long 
continued  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  ;  but  fortunately  for  them  an  early 
and  gradual  dispersion  took  place,  so  that  by  the  end  of  January  few  indi- 
viduals were  left  in  the  village.  The  rest  in  divided  bodies  established 
themselves  in  snow-huts  upon  the  sea-ice  at  some  distance  from  the  land. 
Before  this  change  had  been  completed  disorders  of  an  inflammatory  charac- 
ter had  appeared.  A  few  went  away  sick,  some  were  unable  to  remove,  and 
others  taken  ill  upon  the  ice,  and  we  heard  of  the  death  of  several  about  this 
period. 

The  cold  snow-huts  into  which  they  had  moved,  though  infinitely  prefer- 
able to  those  abandoned,  were  ill  suited  to  the  reception  of  people  already 
sick  or  predisposed,  from  the  above-named  causes,  to  sickness ;  many  of 
them  were  also  deficient  in  clothing  to  meet  the  rigorous  weather  that  fol- 
lowed.    Nevertheless  after  this  violent  excitement  had  passed  away  a  com- 

4  A 


ii 


!  I 


!  m: 


•ii  I 


^jm^^TOr^^. 


546 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


i: 


Ft 


i 


paratively  good  condition  of  health  was  enjoyed  for  the  remainder  of  the 
winter  and  spring  months. 

"  Their  distance  from  the  ships  at  once  precluded  any  effectual  assistance 
being  rendered  them  at  their  huts,  and  their  removal  on  board  with  safety; 
the  complaints  of  those  who  died  at  the  huts  therefore  did  not  come  under 
observation.  It  appears  however  to  have  been  acute  inflammation  of  some  of 
the  abdominal  viscera,  very  rapid  in  its  career.  In  the  generality  the  disease 
assumed  a  more  insidious  and  sub-acute  form,  under  which  the  patient 
lingered  for  a  while,  and  was  then  either  carried  off  by  a  diarrhoea,  or  slowly 
recovered  by  the  powers  of  nature.  Three  or  four  individuals  who,  with 
some  risk  and  trouble,  were  brought  to  the  ships,  we  were  providentially 
instrumental  in  recovering ;  but  two  others  almost  hopeless  patients  were  so 
far  exhausted  before  their  arrival,  that  the  endeavours  used  were  unsuccess- 
ful, and  death  was  probably  hastened  by  their  removal. 

"  Abdominal  and  thoracic  inflammations  in  fact  seem  to  be  the  only  active 
diseases  they  have  to  encounter.  Where  a  spontaneous  recovery  does  not 
take  place  these  prove  fatal  in  a  short  time.  The  only  instance  among  them 
of  chronic  sequels  to  those  complaints  occurred  in  an  old  man  almost  in 
dotage,  whose  feeble  remains  of  life  were  Avasting  away  by  an  ulceration  of 
the  lungs. 

"  No  traces  of  the  exanthematous  disorders  met  our  observation.     A  soli- 
tary case  of  epilepsy  was  seen  in  a  deaf  and  dumb  boy,  who  eventually  died. 
Chronic  rheumatism  occurs,  but  it  is  rare  and  not  severe.     I  have  some 
doubt  in  saying  that  scurvy  exists  among  them.     A  disease  however  having 
a  close  affinity  to  it  was  witnessed,  but  as  in  the  only  case  that  came  fairly 
under  our  notice  it  was  complicated  with  the  symptoms  of  a  previous  debili- 
tating disease,  the  diagnosis  was  difficult.     During  the  patient's  recovery 
from  one  of  the  abdominal  attacks  above  mentioned,  the  gums  were  observed 
to  be  spongy,  separated  from  the  teeth  and  reverted,  bleeding,  and  in  vari- 
ous parts  presenting  the  livid  appearance  of  scorbutic  gums.     At  the  same 
period  arose  pains  of  an  anomalous  description,  and  of  considerable  severity, 
about  the  shoulders  and  thorax.     These  gradually  yielded  as  he  recovered 
strength,  but  were  succeeded  by  other  pains  and  tenderness  of  the  bones 
and  muscles  of  the  thighs  and  legs.     The  citric  acid  was  given  to  him  freely 
from  the  beginning  until  it  interfered  with  his  appetite  and  bowels,  when 
it  was  omitted.     Topical  applications  were  at  the  same  time  used,  and  after- 
wards continued.     Signs  of  amendment  appeared  before      became  necessary 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE.  547 

to  withhold  the  vegetable  acid,  and  it  was  not  recurred  to  while  he  remained 
on  board.  Urged  by  impatience  of  control  he  left  us  to  join  his  countrymen 
before  he  had  well  regained  his  strength,  but  we  saw  him  on  board  several 
times  afterwards  in  a  progressive  state  of  improvement,  and  though  yet  weak 
free  from  scorbutic  symptoms.  Another  instance  offered  in  a  woman,  whom 
I  saw  but  once.  Her  gums  were  spongy  and  reverted,  but  not  discoloured, 
her  countenance  sallow,  lips  pale,  and  she  suffered  under  general  debility, 
without  local  pain  or  rigidity  of  the  limbs.  She  remained  in  this  state  for  a 
long  time,  and  eventually  as  the  weather  improved  recovered  Avithout  assist- 
ance. 

"  That  affection  of  the  eyes,  known  by  the  name  of  snow-blindness,  is  ex- 
tremely frequent  among  these  people.  With  them  it  scarcely  ever  goes  beyond 
painful  irritation,  whilst  among  strangers  inflammation  is  sometimes  the  con- 
sequence. I  have  not  seen  them  use  any  other  remedy  besides  the  exclu- 
sion of  light ;  but,  as  a  preventive,  a  wooden  eye-screen  is  worn,  very 
simple  in  its  construction,  consisting  of  a  curved  piece  of  wood  six  or  seven 
inches  long,  and  ten  or  twelve  lines  broad,  (4.)  It  is  tied  over  the  eyes  like 
a  pair  of  spectacles,  being  adapted  to  the  forehead  and  nose,  and  hollowed 
out  to  favour  the  motion  of  the  eye-lids.  A  few  rays  of  light  only  are 
admitted  through  a  narrow  slit  an  inch  long,  cut  opposite  to  each  eye.  This 
contrivance  is  more  simple  and  quite  as  efficient  as  the  more  heavy  one  pos- 
sessed by  some  who  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  acquire  wood  for  the 
purpose.  This  is  merely  the  former  instrument,  complicated  by  the  addition 
of  a  horizontal  plate  projecting  three  or  four  inches  from  its  upper  rim  like 
the  peak  of  a  jockey's  cap.  In  Hudson's  Strait  the  latter  is  common,  and 
the  former  in  Greenland,  where  also  we  are  told  they  wear  with  advantage 
the  simple  horizontal  peak  alone. 

'  There  are  upon  the  whole  no  people  more  destitute  of  curative  means 
than  these.  With  the  exception  of  the  hemorrhage  already  mentioned,  which 
they  duly  appreciate,  and  have  been  observed  to  excite  artificially  to  cure 
head-ach,  they  are  ignorant  of  any  rational  method  of  procuring  relief.  It 
has  not  been  ascertained  that  they  use  a  single  herb  medicinally.  As  pro- 
phylactics they  wear  amulets,  which  are  usually  the  teeth,  bones,  or  hair  of 
some  animal,  the  more  rare  apparently  the  more  valuable.  In  absolute  sick- 
ness they  depend  entirely  upon  their  Angekoks,  who,  they  persuade  them- 
selves, have  influence  over  some  submarine  deities  who  govern  their  destiny. 
The  mummeries  of  these  impostors,  consisting  in  pretended  consultations 

4  A    2 


^^■Jfa^y^r.^^ri^^^TfiT^^V 


I  J 


'»**■ 


548 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


i     Kffl 

mat 


with  their  oracles,  are  looked  upon  with  confidence,  and  their  mandates, 
however  absurd,  superstitiously  submitted  to.  These  are  constituted  of 
unmeaning  ceremonies  and  prohibitions  generally  affecting  the  diet,  both  in 
kind  and  mode,  but  never  in  quantity.  Seal's  flesh  is  forbidden,  for  instance, 
in  one  disease,  that  of  the  walrus  in  the  other  ;  the  heart  is  denied  to  some 
and  the  liver  to  others.  A  poor  woman,  on  discovering  that  the  meat  she 
had  in  her  mouth  was  a  piece  of  fried  heart  instead  of  the  liver,  appeared 
horror-struck  ;  and  a  man  was  in  equal  tribulation  at  having  eaten,  by  mis- 
take, a  piece  of  meat  cooked  in  his  wife's  kettle. 

"  This  charlatanerie,  although  we  may  ridicule  the  imposition,  is  not,  how- 
ever, with  them,  as  it  is  with  us,  a  positive  evil.  In  the  total  absence  of  the 
medical  art,  it  proves  generally  innoxious  ;  while  in  many  instances  it  must 
be  a  source  of  real  benefit  and  comfort,  by  buoying  up  the  sick  spirit  with 
confident  hopes  of  recovery,  and  eventually  enabling  the  vital  powers  to  rise 
superior  to  the  malady,  when,  without  such  support,  the  sufferer  might  have 
sunk  under  its  weight.  It  was  attempted  to  ascertain  whether  climate  effected 
any  difference  in  animal  heat  between  them  and  ourselves,  by  frequently 
marking  the  temperature  of  the  mouth  ;  but  the  experiments  were  neces- 
sarily made,  as  occasion  offered,  under  such  various  states  of  vascular  excite- 
ment, as  to  afford  nothing  conclusive.  As  it  was,  their  temperature  varied 
from  97°  to  102°,  coinciding  pretty  nearly  with  our  own  under  similar  cir- 
cumstances.    The  pulse  offered  nothing  singular. 

"  I  may  here  remark  that  there  is  in  many  individuals  a  peculiarity  about 
the  eye  amounting,  in  some  instances,  to  deformity,  which  I  have  not  noticed 
elsewhere.  It  consists  in  the  inner  corner  of  the  eye  being  entirely  covered 
by  a  duplication  of  the  adjacent  loose  skin  of  the  eye-lids  and  nose.  This 
fold  is  lightly  stretched  over  the  edges  of  the  eye-lids,  and  forms  as  it  were 
a  third  palpebra  of  a  crescentic  shape.  The  aperture  is  in  consequence  ren- 
dered somewhat  pyriform,  the  inner  curvature  being  very  obtuse,  and  in 
some  individuals  distorted  by  an  angle  formed  where  the  fold  crosses  the 
border  of  the  lower  palpebra.  This  singularity  depends  upon  the  variable 
form  of  the  orbit  during  immature  age,  and  is  very  remarkable  in  childhood, 
less  so  towards  adult  age,  and  then,  it  would  seem,  frequently  disappearing 
altogether ;  for  the  proportion  in  which  it  exists  among  grown-up  persons 
bears  but  a  small  comparison  with  that  observed  among  the  young. 

"  Personal  deformity  from  mal- conformation  is  uncommon;  the  only 
instance  I  remember  being  that  of  a  young  woman,  whose  utterance  was 


ilT3TCaptr'IyorLHjr. 


ZondonJiiitishul  iyJohn.Mumgr.Ieb-! '1824. 


-tf^jfiii*a-s*^THipa»Si 


i 


V 


Hf 


I 


■ 


xummwu 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


549 


unintelligibly  nasal,  in  consequence  of  an    imperfect  development   of  the 
palatine  bones  leaving  a  gap  in  the  roof  of  the  mouth." 

The  imperfect  arithmetic  of  these  people,  which  resolves  every  number 
above  ten  into  one  comprehensive  word,  prevented  our  obtaining  any  very 
certain  information  respecting  the  population  of  this  part  of  North  America 
and  its  adjacent  islands.  The  principal  stations  of  these  people,  not  visited 
by  us,  are  Akkoohe,  Toonoonee-roochiuh,  Peelig,  and  Toonoonek,  of  whose 
situation  I  have  already  spoken.  The  first  of  these,  which  is  the  only  one 
situated  on  the  continent,  lies  in  an  indentation  of  considerable  depth,  on 
the  shores  of  the  Polar  Sea,  running  in  towards  Repulse  Bay  on  the  oppo- 
site coast,  and  forming  with  it  the  large  peninsula  situated  like  a  bastion  at 
the  north-east  angle  of  America,  which  I  have  named  Melville  Peninsula,. 
in  honour  of  Viscount  Melville,  the  First  Lord  Commissioner  of  the 
Admiralty.  From  what  we  know  of  the  habits  and  disposition  of  the  Esqui- 
maux, which  incline  them  always  to  associate  in  considerable  numbers,  Ave 
cannot  well  assign  a  smaller  population  than  fifty  souls  to  each  of  the  four 
principal  stations  above-mentioned;  and  including  these,  and  the  inhabitants 
of  several  minor  ones  that  were  occasionally  named  to  us,  there  may  per- 
haps be  three  or  four  hundred  people  belonging  to  this  tribe,  with  whom  we 
have  never  had  communication.  In  all  their  charts  of  this  neighbour- 
hood  they  also  delineate  a  tract  of  land  to  the  eastward,  and  somewhat  to 
the  northward,  of  Igloolik,  where  they  say  the  Seadlermeoo,  or  strangers* 
live,  with  whom,  as  with  the  Esquimaux  of  Southampton  Island,,  and  all 
others  coming  under  the  same  denomination,  they  have  seldom  or  never 
any  intercourse,  either  of  a  friendly  or  a  hostile  nature.  It  is  more  than 
probable  that  the  natives  of  the  inlet  called  the  River  Clyde,  on  the  western 
coast  of  Baffin's  Bay,  are  a  part  of  the  people  thus  designated  ;  and  indeed 
the  whole  of  the  numerous  bays  and  inlets  on  that  extensive  and  productive 
line  of  coast  may  be  the  residence  of  great  numbers  of  Esquimaux,  of  whom 
these  people  possess  no  accurate  information. 

Whatever  may  be  the  abundance  sometimes  enjoyed  by  these  people,  and 
whatever  the  maladies  occasioned  by  their  too  frequent  abuse  of  it,  it  is 
certain  that  they  occasionally  suffer  very  severely  from  the  opposite  ex- 
treme. A  remarkably  intelligent  woman  informed  Captain  Lyon,  that  two 
years  ago  some  Esquimaux  arrived  at  Igloolik  from  a  place  near  Ak/coolec- 


ai  q^ri  s^^gTtiiyg^ 


■  MM*.   ' 


W  '■ 


•• 


•• 


! 


♦  .iiij . 
inn 

si 


550 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


bringing  information  that,  during  a  very  grievous  famine,  one  party  of  men 
had  fallen  upon  another  and  killed  them  ;  and  that  they  afterwards  subsisted 
on  their  flesh,  while  in  a  frozen  state,  but  never  cooked  nor  even  thawed  it. 
This  horrible  account  was  soon  after  confirmed  by  Toolemak,  on  board  the 
Fury  ;  and  though  he  was  evidently  uneasy  at  our  having  heard  the  story, 
and  conversed  upon  it  with  reluctance,  yet  by  means  of  our  questions  he 
was  brought  to  name,  upon  his  fingers,  five  individuals  who  had  been  killed 
on  this  occasion.  Of  the  fact  therefore  there  can  be  doubt;  but  it  is  certain 
also  that  we  ourselves  scarcely  regarded  it  with  greater  horror  than  those 
who  related  it ;  and  the  occurrence  may  be  considered  similar  to  those 
dreadful  instances  on  record,  even  among  civilized  nations,  of  men  devour- 
ing one  another,  in  wrecks  or  boats,  when  rendered  desperate  by  the  suf- 
ferings of  actual  starvation. 

The  ceremony  of  crying,  which  has  before  been  mentioned  as  practised 
after  a  person's  death,  is  not  however  altogether  confined  to  those  melan- 
choly occasions,  but  is  occasionally  adopted  in  cases  of  illness,  and  that  of 
no  very  dangerous  kind.  The  father  of  a  sick  person  enters  the  apartment, 
and  after  looking  at  him  for  a  few  seconds  without  speaking,  announces  by 
a  kind  of  low  sob  his  preparation  for  the  coming  ceremony.  At  this  signal 
every  other  individual  present  composes  his  features  for  crying,  and  the 
leader  of  the  chorus  then  setting  up  a  loud  and  piteous  howl,  which  lasts 
about  a  minute,  is  joined  by  all  the  rest,  who  shed  abundant  tears  during 
the  process.  So  decidedly  is  this  a  matter  of  form,  unaccompanied  by 
any  feeling  of  sorrow,  that  those  who  are  not  relatives  shed  just  as  many 
tears  as  those  that  are  ;  to  which  may  be  added,  that  in  the  instances  which 
we  witnessed  there  was  no  real  occasion  for  crying  at  all.  It  must  therefore 
be  considered  in  the  light  of  a  ceremony  of  condolence,  which  it  would 
be  either  indecorous  or  unlucky  to  omit. 

I  have  already  in  the  course  of  the  foregoing  Narrative  given  several 
instances  of  the  little  care  these  people  take  in  the  interment  of  their  dead, 
especially  in  the  winter  season  ;  it  is  certain  however  that  this  arises  from 
some  superstitious  notion,  and  particularly  from  the  belief  that  any  heavy 
weight  upon  the  corpse  would  have  an  injurious  effect  upon  the  deceased  in 
a  future  state  of  existence  ;  for  even  in  the  summer,  when  it  would  be  an 
easy  matter  to  secure  a  body  from  the  depredations  of  wild  animals,  the 
mode  of  burial  is  not  essentially  different.     The  corpse  of  a  child  observed 


IP      I 


i 


v 


I 


i--y.*k-  m^MMt 


KWAIVJFj 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


551 


by  Lieutenant  Palmer,  he  describes  as  "  being  laid  in  a  regular  but  shallow 
grave,  with  its  head  to  the  north-east.  It  was  decently  dressed  in  a  good 
deer-skin  jacket,  and  a  seal-skin  prepared  without  the  hair  was  carefully 
placed  as  a  cover  to  the  whole  figure,  and  tucked  in  on  all  sides.  The  body 
was  covered  with  flat  pieces  of  limestone,  which  however  were  so  light  that 
a  fox  might  easily  have  removed  them.  Near  the  grave  were  four  little 
separate  piles  of  stones,  not  more  than  a  foot  in  height,  in  one  of  which 
we  noticed  a  piece  of  red  cloth  and  a  black  silk  handkerchief,  in  a  second  a 
pair  of  child's  boots  and  mittens,  and  in  each  of  the  others  a  whalebone 
pot.  The  face  of  the  child  looked  unusually  clean  and  fresh,  and  a  few 
days  only  could  have  elapsed  since  its  decease." 

These  Esquimaux  do  not  appear  to  have  any  idea  of  the  existence  of  One 
Supreme  Being,  nor  indeed  can  they  be  said  to  entertain  any  notions  on  this 
subject,  which  may  be  dignified  with  the  name  of  Religion.  Their  super- 
stitions, which  are  numerous,  have  all  some  reference  to  the  preternatural 
agency  of  a  number  of  toorngdw,  or  spirits,  with  whom,  on  certain  occasions, 
the  Angetkooks  pretend  to  hold  mysterious  intercourse,  and  who  in  various 
and  distinct  ways  are  supposed  to  preside  over  the  destinies  of  the  Esqui- 
maux. On  particular  occasions  of  sickness  or  want  of  food  the  Angetkooks 
contrive,  by  means  of  a  darkened  hut,  a  peculiar  modulation  of  the  voice, 
and  the  uttering  of  a  variety  of  unintelligible  sounds,  to  persuade  their 
countrymen  that  they  are  descending  to  the  lower  regions  for  this  purpose, 
where  they  force  the  spirits  to  communicate  the  desired  information.  The 
superstitious  reverence  in  which  these  wizards  are  held,  and  a  considerable 
degree  of  ingenuity  in  their  mode  of  performing  their  mummery,  prevent 
the  detection  of  the  imposture,  and  secure  implicit  confidence  in  these  absurd 
oracles.  My  friend  Captain  Lyon  having  particularly  directed  his  attention 
to  this  part  of  their  history  during  the  whole  of  our  intercourse  with  these 
people,  and  intending  to  publish  his  Journal  which  contains  much  interest- 
ing information  of  this  nature,  I  shall  not  here  enter  more  at  large  on  the 
subject.  Some  account  of  their  ideas  respecting  death,  and  of  their  belief 
in  a  future  state  of  existence,  have  already  been  introduced  in  the  course 
of  the  foregoing  pages,  in  the  order  of  those  occurrences  which  furnished 
us  with  opportunities  of  observing  them. 

The  language  of  the  Esquimaux  is  so  full  of  words,  and  so  varied  and 
peculiar  in  the  formation  of  its  sentences,  that  it  would  require  a  much 
longer  acquaintance  with  these  people,  as  well  as  far  greater  ability  than 


m 


rm-tf  *a  VH^ri  ^^aTi  iTrgr 


J 

\ 

] 

Si ' 

yd 

I'l 

•nil- 

It  J 


I 


% 


^illlillii 


552 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


mine,  to  give  a  satisfactory  account  of  its  grammatical  construction.  In  the 
few  remarks  which  follow,  I  have  taken  as  my  guide  Crantz's  Account  of  the 
language  of  Greenland,  and  have  endeavoured  to  trace  a  resemblance  or  to 
discover  a  difference  between  the  two,  as  far  as  our  knowledge  enables  us 
to  ascertain.  They  are  in  fact,  however,  so  nearly  allied  to  each  other,  that 
it  cannot  but  excite  surprise  to  observe  how  slight  a  change  time  and  distance 
have  been  able  to  effect  in  the  language,  as  well  as  in  the  habits,  of  this 
widely-scattered  nation. 

One  of  the  principal  difficulties  experienced  by  an  European  in  acquiring 
a  knowledge  of  this  language,  arises  from  the  constant  blending  of  the  several 
words  of  a  sentence  into  one,  not  simply  by  joining  them  loosely  together, 
but  by  a  regular  combination  of  the  whole,  according  to  fixed  yet  infinitely 
varied  rules.  Of  this  peculiarity  Crantz  *  has  given  an  instance  or  two, 
which,  though  extreme  cases,  serve  to  shew  the  kind  of  difficulty  which 
occurs  in  distinguishing  the  separate  words  of  which  such  a  sentence  is  com- 
pounded. 

Several  of  our  letters,  taken  according  to  the  English  mode  of  pronuncia- 
tion, are  not  in  use  among  these  people.  The  letter  c  may  at  all  times  be 
very  well  represened  by  k  ;  and  f,  j,  q,  v,  x  ;  and  %  never,  I  believe,  occur  at 
all.  Of  about  eight  hundred  words  contained  in  the  annexed  Vocabulary, 
I  can  find  none  beginning  with  the  letters  b,  d,  g,  I,  r,  or  uf.  D  occurs 
very  seldom  in  the  middle  of  a  word,  and  b  still  more  rarely  ;  and  in  most 
cases  these  letters  immediately  precede  the  liquids  /  or  r.  It  is  worthy  of 
remark,  that  the  only  exception  to  this  that  I  have  met  with  occurs  in  three 
of  the  words  used  in  the  games  already  described,  where  the  b  is  followed 
by  a  vowel,  as  if,  in  the  formation  of  these  probably  unmeaning  words,  as 
well  as  in  the  mode  of  uttering  them,  something  out  of  the  common  way 
had  been  intended  by  the  inventor.  The  letter/  being  quite  unknown  to 
them,  the  first  attempt  at  the  word  "  fife"  produced  "  pipe,"  and  it  was  not 
till  after  much  practice  that  they  could  pronounce  even  one  of  the  f's  with 
distinctness. 

I  have  remarked  above  that  /  is  not  used  at  the  beginning  of  a  word ;  for 
though  it  thus  occurs  in  the  conjunction  loo,  yet  as  this  is  invariably  placed  at 

*  II.  224,  225. 

•f  The  words  so  spelt  by  Crantz  are,  according  to  the  English  pronunciation,  more  accu- 
rately expressed  by  Oo,  as  in  6o-ang-a.  Nearly  the  same  remark  applies  to  the  v  of  the 
Missionaries,  for  which,  in  English,  w  must  be  substituted. 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


553 


the  end  of  the  noun  or  pronoun,  it  can  hardly  be  considered  an  exception  to 

the  rule.  The  Esquimaux  had  great  difficulty  in  pronouncing-  Captain  Lyon's 

name,  which  it  was  more  convenient  to  them  to  change  into  Nay  on.     The 

letter  /  occurs  perhaps  more  frequently  than  any  other  in  the  middle  of 

Esquimaux  words.      The  letters  r  and  s  are  never  pronounced  as  with  us,  but 

in  a  thick  guttural  manner,  the  former  approximating  to  the  Northumbrian 

dialect,  and  the  latter  to  the  Scotch  ch,  (as  in  the  word  "loch.")     The  mark 

+  over  either  of  those  letters  in  the  Vocabulary  is  intended  to    express 

that  sound.     The  r  at  the  beginning  of  a  Avord  is  perhaps  the  least  adapted 

of  any  to  their  organs  or  habits  of  speech,  and  the  combination  of  letters  in 

the  word  "  spring"  produced  from  them  nothing  nearer  than  "  sh-pudding." 

When  the  letter  g  is  preceded  by  n,  and  followed  by  a  vowel,  as  in  anga  and 

jmigahuke,  the  g  is  sounded  as  in  the  English  word  "  hanger,"  and  not  as 

in  "  anger." 

It  is  common  for  the  Esquimaux  to  vary  the  pronunciation  of  their  words 
at  different  times  without  altering  the  sense.  The  women,  in  particular, 
seem  frequently  to  make  such  alterations  as  conduce  to  the  softness  of  the 
words,  as,  for  instance,  by  dropping  the  harsh  final  k  which  occurs  so  com- 
monly, as  Imiialoo  for  Innialook  ;  by  changing  it  into  a  vowel,  as  Ne-a-ko-a 
for  Neakoke,  or  by  altering  Oo-ee-ga  into  Oo-ing-a  or  Oo-ee-ma,  and  Hee-u- 
tecga  into  Hce-u-ting-a.  Other  examples  of  the  same  kind  occur  in  the 
Vocabulary. 

The  nouns  substantive  have  three  numbers,  singular,  dual,  and  plural. 
The  dual  generally  terminates  with  a  k,  and  the  plural  with  a  t  or  an  n  ;  to 
these,  however,  there  are  some  exceptions  among  the  following  words, 
obtained  by  repeatedly  using  the  words  Attowseuk  (one),  Madkroke  (two),  and 
Oonooktoot  (a  great  many)  respectively. 


Singular. 

Dual. 

Plural. 

Keiyak 

Kei-nia 

Keinian 

Igloo 

Iglook 

Igloot 

Ang-oot 

Angootik 

Angootit 

Pan-na 

Pan-nak 

Pannan 

Innuke 

In-nuke 

Innueet 

Ka-bloo-na 

Kabloonak 

Kabloonan 

Took-too 

Took-took 

Tooktoot 

Oo-ming-muk 

Oomingmak 

Oomingmei. 

In  the  construction  of  a  sentence  the  nominative  case  usually  precedes  the 
verb,  except  it  be  a  personal  pronoun,  which  appears  always  to  follow  the 


i.ii 


4  B 


^s^^smw^^Afr^^^^sriF^^^^ 


!*' 


i 


% 


554 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


verb,  as  "  tamooa  ooanga"  (I  eat),  and  indeed,  in  some  instances,  is  so  con- 
nected with  it  as  to  form  a  single  word.  The  accusative  case  often  precedes 
the  verb,  as  "  Omut  tamooa  ooanga"  (I  am  eating  heart).  The  adjectives 
which  1  have  been  able  to  discover  are  so  few  that  they  are  probably  in  this 
language,  as  in  that  of  Greenland,  of  rare  occurrence.  Articles,  I  believe, 
they  have  none.  The  personal  pronouns  are  as  follow,  nor  could  we  distin- 
guish any  difference  of  pronunciation  between  these  and  the  possessive  pro- 
nouns.    The  latter  always  follow  the  substantive  to  which  they  belong. 

I,  Oo-ang-a  He,  Oma  Ye,  Ulipsee 

rlg-weet  We,  Oo-a-goot  They,  Okkoa. 

-weet 


You 


The  language  of  the  Esquimaux  abounds  in  verbs,  there  being  a  different 
one  for  each  of  several  expressions  which,  in  other  languages,  are  either 
comprehended  under  one  general  term,  or  require  a  number  of  words  to  con- 
vey the  meaning.  To  the  instance  quoted  by  Crantz  (II.  218.)  of  those 
used  to  express  what  we  call  *'  to  fish,"  I  may  add  two  others ;  namely, 
the  variety  of  words  they  use  for  throwing  a  spear,  or  for  putting  on 
their  clothes,  the  verb  being  formed  of  the  noun  denoting  the  particular 
kind  of  spear  thrown,  or  the  article  of  dress  put  on.  This  copiousness  ren- 
ders it  the  more  difficult  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  moods  and  tenses, 
especially  when  the  words  of  a  sentence  are  so  closely  blended  as  in  this  lan- 
guage. The  following  are  the  six  persons  of  the  present  tense  of  the  verb 
"  to  be  well." 


>  well,  or  in  health. 


The  third  person  singular  generally  terminates  in  oke,  and  most  of  the  verbs 
in  the  Vocabulary  are  inserted  in  this  person,  which  the  Esquimaux  more 
commonly  gave  than  any  other.  There  appear  to  be,  as  in  Greenland,  two 
imperative  moods,  one  expressing  a  desire  and  the  other  a  summary  and 
positive  command.  This  last  ends  in  it,  as  "  Eiliarit  igloomoot"  (Go  away  to 
the  huts),  and,  when  spoken  with  seriousness  by  a  man  to  his  wife  or  child, 
ensures  immediate  attention. 

The  only  prepositions  that  I  have  noticed  (if  indeed  parts  of  speech  can 


Nappa-woong-a 

i"  am 

Nappa-wootik 

Thou  art 

Nappa-woke 

He  is 

Nappa-woot 

We  are 

Nappa-wootit 

Ye  are 

Nappa-wook 

They  are 

-VT  3r±lV&i9^mP7±\m1m^ 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


555 


be  so  called  which  always  follow  the  noun)  are  three  ;  namely,  mile  (at),  as 
"  Igloomikpoke,"  he  is  at  the  huts ;  mee  (in,  upon,  or,  sometimes,  at),  as 
"  Oomia-mee,"  in  the  ship ;  "  Sikkoomee,"  upon  the  ice ;  "  Amitio-mee," 
at  Amitioke ;  and  moot  (to),  as  "  Ooagna-moot,"  to  the  westward.  These 
are  always  tacked  on  at  the  end  of  the  noun,  like  que  in  Latin  ;  and  so  is  the 
conjunction  loo  (and),  being  pronounced  with  it,  as  if  one  word.  A  com- 
mon interjection,  expressing  surprise  and  admiration,  is  Hei !  or  Hei-yd!  but 
a  superlative  degree  of  astonishment,  mixed  with  pleasure,  is  expressed  by 
the  Avords  A-tamna-tranee  ! 

The  Esquimaux  make  much  use  of  winks  and  nods  in  conversing.     The 
former,  which  are  always  intended  to  convey  a  negative  meaning,  are  fre- 
quently the  only  reply  made  to  a  question,  which  a  bystander  might  therefore 
suppose  to  be  still  unanswered.     A  nod,  as  with  us,  implies  the  affirmative. 
A  peculiarity  in  the  idiom  of  this  language  which  may  here  be  noticed,  is 
the  affirmation  of  a  question  put  in  the  negative,  in  order  to  convey  a  nega- 
tive reply,  as  "  Have  you  not  been  out  fishing  to-day?"  to  which  if  a  nega- 
tive answer  be  intended  the  person  says  "  Yes,"  or  returns  a  nod,  implying 
I  have  not."     I  may  also  mention  as  another  peculiarity  in  their  mode  of 
expressing  themselves,  a  common  custom  of  speaking  of  a  third  person,  not 
by  his  own  name  but  as  "  the  father,  husband,  brother,  #-c.,  of  such  a  one," 
and  this  even  when  the  individual  so  spoken  of  is  brother  to  the  person 
speaking.     Thus  Iligliuk  would  often  call  her  brother  Toolooak  "  the  son  of 
Ka-oong-ut."     In  mentioning  names  it  is  not  uncommon  for  them  to  adopt  a 
mode  of  pronunciation  differing  from  the  correct  one,  and  which  (if  the  term 
can  at  all  be  applied  to  an  unwritten  language,)  may  be  called  colloquial : 
this  consists  in  a  change  of  the  termination,  as  "  Toolooaghioo"  for  Toolooak, 
*■«  Oongalaghioo"  for  Oong-a-luk,  <R,  and  appears  equivalent  to  the  familiar 
diminutives  of  Christian  names  common  among  us.      The  proper  names 
in  common  use  among  these  people  are  borrowed  from  the  most  familiar 
objects  in  nature,  and  have  no  reference  to  the  qualities  of  the  possessor, 
as  among  other  savages  of  the  North  American  continent.     The  names  are 
common  to  both  sexes  (so  at  least  we  found  them  in  various  instances)  and 
are  usually  given  after  some  of  the  relatives  of  the  parents,  but  only  on  one 
occasion  that  we  knew  of,  after  the  child's  own  parent.     That  they  consider 
the   sun  as  feminine  and  the  moon  masculine  (as,  indeed,  do  the  Green- 
landers,)  may  be  implied  from  the  words  "  neiya"  and  "  anninga,"  by  which 
those  objects  are  respectively  called,  but  which  literally  mean   "  sister': 

4  B  2 


tv 


556 


SECOND  VOYAGE  FOR  THE  DISCOVERY 


I 

I 


* 


and  "  brother."     But  the  name  of  "  tatkuk,"  by  which  the  moon  is  likewise 
distinguished,  belonged  to  a  female  in  the  only  instance  we  knew  of  its  being 

in  use. 

These  Esquimaux  are  no  great  proficients  in  the  science  of  arithmetic, 
their  numerals  extending  in  general  only  to  five,  and  then  commencing  again 

thus : 

Attuw-seuk 
Mddleroke,  or  Ardlek 
Pingahuke    . 
Sittamat 
Ted-lee-ma 


One,  or  Six. 
Two    ,,  Seven. 
Three  „  Eight. 
Four   ,,  Nine. 
Five     „  Ten. 


Six  and  seven  are  however  sometimes  expressed  by  Argwenrak  and  Argwenrak- 
tow-a,  respectively  ;  and  some  of  the  more  knowing  individuals  go  so  far  as 
ten,  thus  : 


Kittuklee-moot 

Mikkeelukka-moot 

Eerkit-koke 


Eight. 

Nine. 

Ten. 


But  with  these  last,  which  have  an  evident  reference  to  the  fingers  held  up 
to  represent  them,  very  few  were  acquainted.  In  counting  even  as  far  as 
three  they  must  use  their  fingers  as  auxiliaries,  and  before  they  arrive  at 
seven  generally  make  some  mistake.  Beyond  nine  they  hold  up  both  hands, 
and  if  fifteen  or  twenty  be  required  they  make  another  person  do  the  same, 
but  never  use  their  toes  in  this  way  as  in  Greenland*.  It  distresses  the 
most  intelligent  person  among  them  to  exceed  ten  in  numeration,  and  they 
are  always  glad  to  get  off  by  calling  it  ooriaoktoot;  which  may  therefore  imply 
any  number  from  a  dozen  to  a  million.  For  this  reason  their  account  of  a 
number  beyond  ten,  unless  it  be  of  men  or  dogs,  whose  names  they  remem- 
ber, and  which  may  thus  be  set  down  as  they  repeat  them,  is  never  to  be 

depended  on. 

They  reckon  their  days  by  "  sleeps"  (seenik),  and  their  years  by  summers 
or  winters,  according  as  the  event  of  which  they  speak  occurred  about  either 
of  those  seasons.  The  spring  they  call  open-rak,  but  like  ourselves  cannot 
very  exactly  define  the  limits  of  that  welcome  season.  They  began  however 
about  the  latter  end  of  March,  to  talk  of  what  had  happened  "  in  the  win- 
ter."    They  have  probably  some  corresponding  term  to  express  the  autumn, 

*  Crantz,  II.  225. 


WVJ»m*!ffll   M '     III 


OF  A  NORTH-WEST  PASSAGE. 


557 


but  we  had  no  opportunity  of  learning  it.  In  one  instance  I  heard  a  time 
described  by  the  number  of  moons  that  had  since  elapsed,  and  with  tolerable 
precision  ;  but  this  mode  of  computation  is  not  in  common  use,  and  was  only 
resorted  to  from  the  question  being  put  in  that  way.  We  were  not  aware  of 
their  making  use  of  any  other  epochs,  or  large  divisions  of  time,  with  one 
of  which,  however,  our  own  arrival  among  them  is  not  unlikely  to  furnish 
them.  It  is  perhaps  owing  to  their  deficiency  in  numeration  that  their 
mode  of  expressing  any  short  interval  of  time  beyond  a  single  day  is 
extremely  dubious  and  indefinite.  For  instance  ikpokkee-dnee  is  used  indif- 
ferently to  express  yesterday,  and  several  days,  or  even  weeks  ago,  and 
al-rd-nee  any  past  period  beyond  a  single  year.  If  several  years  be  spoken  of 
they  either  express  it  by  repeating  "  alranee,  alranee,  alranee,"  or  more 
simply  by  the  usual  resource  of  "  oonooktoot"  (a  great  many,)  and  always 
seem  teazed  and  perplexed  by  more  minute  inquiry. 

In  expressing  colours  the  same  kind  of  uncertainty  exists,  except  with 
red,  white,  black,  and  grey.  For  blue  and  yellow  the  terms  given  by  differ- 
ent persons,  or  by  the  same  person  at  different  times,  are  seldom  twice  alike  ; 
and  the  confession  of  "  nelloo-ooanga"  (I  don't  know)  generally  follows  a 
closer  inquiry.  Dark  blue  they  at  once  call  black,  and  light  blue  or  yellow, 
white  ;  as  to  green  they  scarcely  ever  pretend  to  give  it  a  name,  which,  little 
as  they  are  accustomed  to  see  that  colour,  is  perhaps  not  much  to  be  won- 
dered at. 

The  foregoing  remarks  on  the  language  of  these  people  comprise  all  the 
certain  information  I  have  been  enabled  to  collect  on  this  subject,  during 
the  time  of  our  residence  with  them,  both  at  Winter  Island  and  Igloolik.  I 
shall  close  this  brief  sketch  by  the  annexed  vocabulary  of  words  and  sen- 
tences *,  in  which  great  care  has  been  taken  not  to  insert  any  of  which  the 
meaning  is  doubtful.  That  considerable  caution  is  requisite  in  this  respect 
repeated  experience  has  taught  us,  as  well  on  account  of  the  uncertainty 
which  must  always  attend  a  first  communication  with  any  people  whose 
language  is  imperfectly  known,  as  from  the  habit  which  the  Esquimaux 
have  of  repeating  any  word  you  say,  as  if  for  the  purpose  of  affirming  it* 


\\l: 


*  In  acquiring  information  of  this  nature,  at  the  time  of  our  first  communication  with  the 
Esquimaux,  we  were  much  assisted  hy  a  list  of  words  and  sentences  in  the  Greenland  lan- 
guage, for  which  I  am  indebted  to  the  unsolicited  kindness  of  the  Reverend  C.  I.  Latrobe,  a 
gentleman  well  known  and  deservedly  esteemed  in  the  Christian  and  literary  world. 


y.-i^ri^^aTfiT^i 


^-'  jy/Ai 


Ill     ■      - 

lb  I 


i       r 

<    I  IlIRi' 


i    ll 


»« 


J 


fl 


*■'  ^ 


558 


SECOND  VOYAGE  OF  DISCOVERY. 


whereas  their  intention  perhaps  is  only  to  get  rid  of  the  inquiry.  It  is  very 
common  also  for  them  when  asked  what  a  thing  is,  to  give  the  name  of  the 
material  of  which  it  is  composed,  or  of  the  animal  that  furnished  it,  instead 
of  the  name  of  the  article  in  its  present  state.  If  for  instance,  a  stranger 
should  shew  a  pair  of  seal-skin  mittens,  and  desire  to  know  their  name,  an 
Esquimaux  would  in  all  probability  answer  "  neitiek,"  (seal,)  or  "  amia," 
(skin,)  and  not  mention  "  poo-a-look,"  till  more  closely  questioned. 

In  the  following  collection  of  words,  the  mode  of  spelling  adopted  has 
been  such  as  to  render  the  pronunciation  intelligible  to  an  English  person, 
by   attending    to    the    following   examples    of   particular    combinations  of 

letters : — 

a  to  be  pronounced  as  in  father. 

a  terminal         .  .  China. 

e  or  ee         .         «  impede,  feed. 

ei  ...  eider,  eye. 

oke     .         «.       •         •  smoke. 

oo  root. 

ow  or  ou  .         .         .  cow,  foul. 

uk         .         .         .         .  luck. 

uke         .  •  •  duke. 

ut  cut. 

It  is  of  some  importance  that  the  stress  should  be  laid  on  the  right 
syllable,  to  ensure  which  the  marks  used  in  Latin  prosody  have  been 
adopted ;  namely  -  long,  and  ^  short,  the  latter  being  usually  understood 
where  no  mark  is  applied  ;  the  mark  *  as  already  obsarved,  denotes  a  guttural 
pronunciation. 


VOCABULARY 


ESQUIMAUX  WORDS   AND   SENTENCES. 


Air,  or  weather.    Also 
or  heaven  . 

In  the  open  air 
Afraid      ...       . 

,,       he  is  . 

Alive,  he  is     . 
Alone,  or  by  one's  self 
And,  or  also    . 
Andromeda    tetragona 

(plant) 
Angry,  he  is    . 
Arm,  below  the  elbow 

„     above  the  elbow    . 
Arrived,  or  come  he  is 
Arrow      .... 
Asbestos     .     .       .  .     . 
Auk,  little       .       ..,  v  .  „ 
Aunt         .... 
Aurora  Borealis     .       . 
Awaken,  he  does  . 
Away,  or  far  off    . 

„         „         he  is    . 
Axe 


sky, 

+ 

See-la. 

Seela-mee. 

Eerk-see. 

Eerk-see-woke. 
.     Imulo-woke. 

Ke-see-mee. 
.     Loo. 

Ikke-u-tik,  or 

Ik-see-oo-tit. 
.     Erk-sissee-yak-poke 
.     Tei-yak-a-nalc 

Akkei-atkoa. 

Tikkeet-poke. 
.     Kakleoke. 
.     Mltkd6-sha. 
.     Ak-palli-arioo. 
.     Atta. 
.     Arksak. 
.     Toopak-poke. 
.     0\v-a-nee. 
.     Ow-a-neet-poke. 
.     Oolee-niow. 


Back  of  a  man 


Kee-a-teeka 


^^^gs^s^^a^^jr^r^^ 


-'    ..kl 


*  1*r. 


560 


VOCABULARY  OF  ESQUIMAUX 


HRli 


3  T 


%        IBJl 


Bleed  it  does 


Black,  or  dark-coloured,  it  is  Kef-niuk-toke. 

A-oo-nak-poke. 
A-obk-poke. 

Blood A-bb-nak. 

Blow,  he  does  ....     Su-blbb-ak-toke-poke 
„     it  does  (as  a  whale)  .     Pbb-ee-woke. 


Blue,  it  is 
Boatswain  (bird) 

Boil,  it  does 


Bone 

Book 

Boot 


„     he  puts  on  his     . 

„     ankle  boots 
Bore,  or  drill,  he  does 
Bow,  for  shooting 

„     he  shoots  with  a  .     . 

„     for  drilling  . 
Bow-case        .... 
Bowl  of  wood,  like   a  but 

cher's  tray    .... 
Box,  .         ... 

Braces  for  children's  clothes    Hwee-te-u-ta. 


Kow  -  look-poke . 

Is-su-nak. 
r  Kal-lak-poke. 
1  Ikk6-a-lak-poke. 

Heow-nik. 

Titterow-yak. 
r  Allek-teega. 
}  Mitko-leega. 
(_  Kamee-ga. 

Ka-meeg-poke. 

Plnnee- fa-fa. 

Ikkoo-tok-poke. 

Pit-tee-kee. 

Pitteek-seak-poke. 

Kei-woot. 

Pitteek-siek-tak. 

Poo-oo-tuk. 
Ulee-we-ak. 


Bracelet 
Brains  . 
Brass 

Break    .     .    . 

Bread 
Bread-dust 
Breast  of  a  woman 
Breast-bone    . 

Breeches 


he  puts  on  his 


Seap-pang-a. 

Karfetak. 

Ka-ko-blek. 
r  Now-Ik-poke. 
1  Keek-to-ak-poke. 

She-ga-lak. 

Ka-nlb-foot. 

Oo-ee-ag-nig. 

Toonek-u-a. 
r  Kaklee-ga. 
I  Kakleek. 
.    Kakleek-poke. 


Brother 


Brent-goose,  or  barnacle     .     Nuf-gluk. 

Bristles Oomia. 

r  Kattangobtee  aneega 
I      (or  anninga.) 
Brown,  it  is      .       .     .       .     Kei-yoke-toke. 
Buoy  (made  of  an  inflated 

seal-skin)    .       .       .    How-wut-tak. 
Burn,  it  does  ,       .       .     6-6-nak-poke. 

Button Iche-ree-yuk. 

Butterfly,  a     .       .       .       .     Takkee-llkkee-ta. 


Calcareous  spar     . 
Calm,  it  is 
Canoe         .  •    . 

,,     he  paddles  a 
Cap,  or  hood     .     . 


Oku-ree-yuk. 
Illee-img-nak-poke. 
Kei-yak. 
Kei-yak-to-poke. 

Nei-seak. 


Charm,  a  skin  strap  worn  as  a,  Oo-ya-mee-ga. 

r  Oolniak. 
l  Oo-lob-a-ga. 


Cheek 


Chew,  he  does 

Chin         .       .  '    .       . 

Clay-slate 

Clench  his  fist,  he  does 

Climb,  he  does 

Cloud       .... 

Coal  .... 

Cold         .... 

Comb       .... 

Come  here      .       .       ,' 

„         (more  commanding)  Keiliarit. 

,,    he  does        .       .       .     Kei-wa. 

„    down  .       .       .     Ka-noong-a. 

„    or  go  in       .       .       .     Ittiek. 

„     shall  I?       .      .       .     Ittiek-lang-a  ? 

„  out,itdoes(as  an  arrow)  Kat-tak-poke. 
Ang-et-kook. 
Conjuror,  or  Sorcerer .     .     <  Annat-ko-a. 

Annatko. 


Ang-oo-la-woke. 

Kablooga. 

Ow-wee-wiuk. 

Eef-keet-poke. 

Ma-yu-ak-poke. 

Noo-wob-e-a. 

Agga-e-a. 

Ik-kee. 

Ilia-u-tik. 

Kei-lee.     Karfee. 


Copper      .       . 

Cough,  he  does 

Crane  (bird)-    .     . 

Cry,  he  does     . 

Cup,  or  bowl  of  musk-ox  horn  Kei-yii-tuk. 

Sowe-ak-poke. 


WORDS  AND 

Ka-ndo-yak. 
Ko-akto-poke. 
Tattee-lee-afuok. 
Kei-a-woke. 


Cut,  he  does 


Dance,  he  does 
Dark    ,    .       . 

„     it  is 
Dart  for  birds 
Daughter 
Dead,  he  is     . 
Dirt 

Dirty,  he  is     . 
Dive,  he  does  . 


«j  Sowe-roke-poke. 
L  Pilliuk-toke-poke. 


Momek-poke. 

Tak. 

Tak-poke. 

No6-gd6-ee. 

Panneeya.  Pannee 

Tokoo-woke. 

Ippuk. 

Ippuk-poke. 

Oo-ln-ya. 
r  Atka-moke. 
I  At-kak-poke. 


it  does,  as  a  seal  into 
a  hole  . 


Dog 


Draba  alpina  (plant)     . 

Dream,  he  does 

Dress  victuals,  he  does 


.     Aglook-poke. 

f  Mikkee. 

I  Kei-meg. 
.     Nap-poo-yat. 
.     Seenik-toomowoke 
■     Koo-llp-siuk-poke. 


irv        /-    -^     ,    ,     n  ,     ,        f  An-no-ak-poke 
Dress  (with  clothes)  he  does  1  _ 

I  Kap-peet-poke. 


Drill,  a     .       . 

„   bow  of    .       . 

„  he  does    . 
Drink,  he  does 
Drinking- cup 
Drop,  it  does,  as  water 
Drown,  he  does 
Drum,  or  tambourine   . 


Ik-koo-tak. 

Kei-woot. 

Ik-koo-tok-poke. 

Immiek-moke. 

Im-moo-chiuk. 

Koo-tdo-ak-poke. 

Ippee-woke. 

Keilia-oAv-tik. 


^^T*sm^jFM<*Msa*m***s 


562 


VOCABULARY  OF  ESQUIMAUX 


w 


<    Hill* 

III** 


I 


% 


(11 


l*. 


Fawn,  a          ... 

Noke-wa. 

Pilletay.     . 

Feather           .... 

r  Shoolook.  Plur.Shoo- 
1      looa. 

Gloves      .       .       ..       ... 

Go  away  (very  commanding" 

Adee-eidiet. 
Ei-liarit. 

Female,  of  any  animal 

.     Arhg-na. 

,,       to  the  huts 

• 

Eiliarit  igloo-moot. 

.     Oo-ee-beit. 

Go     ...       . 

Annee.     Attee. 

File,  a      .       .       .       . 

.     Arree-yak. 

„     shall  I  ? 

•■ 

Anneel-yanga  ? 

Finger,  a 

Tik-kiek. 

Gone  far  away,  he  ' 

is    . 

Ow-dlak-poke. 

,,       the  first 
,,       middle 

Tik-kee-e-rak. 
Kei-tuk-lie-rak. 

Good,  it  or  he  is 

'  Mamuk-poke. 
.  Mamuk-mut. 

„       third    .       .       ... 

Mikkee-lie-rak. 

Grandmother 

• 

In-ru-ta. 

„       little    .... 

Irkitkoa. 

Ee-week. 

Fire          .... 

Ikkooma. 

Graze,  it  does  (as  a 

deer) 

Neeree-lek-poke. 

Fish          

r  Ekkalook. 
1  Ekkaloo. 

Great  many 

'  Oonook-toot. 
.  Oonook-poot. 

Fish-hook       .... 

Kakliokia. 

Green 

Toong-ook. 

Five 

Ted-lee-ma.                  \ 

Grey 

• 

Kei-er-fa. 

Flesh  of  any  animal 

Neefkee. 

Grow,  it  does  (as  a 

plant) 

Now-oke. 

Flipper  of  a  seal,  fore 

Talla-foo-ee. 

Growl  he  does 

• 

Kattee-mak-poke. 

„              „         hind  . 

Slkkd6-ee.. 

Gull,  glaucous 

• 

Now-idioke. 

Foetus  of  a  seal,  or  walrus 

Ib-lee-ow. 

„     silvery     .     . 

■• 

Now-ya. 

Foggy,  it  is            . 

.     Tuk-siuk-poke. 

„     Sabine     .     . 

• 

Erkeet-yuggee-arioo 

Food         .       .       .       . 

Ta-moo-a. 

Gums  of  a  man 

. 

It-keet-ka. 

r  Itti-keik. 

Hee-ek-koke-lee-gu 

Foot  of  man,  or  other  animal^  Itti-kut-ka. 

Foot-print 

L  Itti-gei. 
Too -ma. 

Hair,  human     . 

'  Nu-ti-ak-ka. 
.  Nu-yak-ka. 

Forehead 

Ka-6w-ga. 

„     of  fur       .     . 

• 

Mitko. 

Fork,  a     .       .       .... 

Kap-poo-loot. 

+ 
Sitta-mat. 

■■\ 

r  I-yute-ka. 
.  Addee-yut-ka. 

Fox     .      .       .       .       .       . 

Terree-anee-anol5. 

Hare     -      .       .     • 

•■      • 

Oo-ka-lik. 

Fresh  (not  salt)     . 

.     T6i-seuk. 

Harness  for  dogs 

• 

An-noo. 

Frost-bite        .... 

Kif-kee. 

'  Oma. 

Frost-bitten,  it  is 

Kif-keet-poke. 

v 

.  Oo-na. 

Frozen,  it  is  (as  meat) 
Full,  he  is 

.     Kir-kee-woke. 
Akeio-toke-poke. 

Head        .       .       • 

•  Ns-a-koke. 
.  Ne-a-ko-a. 

Hear,  he  does 

• 

To-chia-M'at. 

Garters  for  boots  . 

.     Nabloo-lee-ta. 

Omut. 

^*ri 


j      *■■■        ■.,.-■    - 


wahra 


WORDS  AND  SENTENCES. 


Heavy,  it  is 
Heel 


Here 


Oko-ma-it-poke. 
Kim-mee-ga. 
r  Manee. 
Mei-ya. 
Mowng-a. 
■  Oo-a. 
High,  tall,  or  large,  he  or  it  is,  Ang-eVwoke. 

„       the  land  is      .       .       Nodn-ang-e-woke. 
High,  it  is  (applied  to  inani-  r  King-eet-poke. 
mate  objects  only      .     .     [  Pook-to6-woke. 
High  (as  the  sun)         .       .     Po\v-na. 
Hole,  a     .       .       ....     Poo-too-a. 

„    the  circular,  in  a  canoe  Pa-kiut. 


Hood  of  a  jacket,  or  a  cap    < 


f  Nei-seak. 


„     he  puts  on  his 
„     he  puts  off  his 

Hop,  he  does 

Horns  of  rein-deer 

Hot,  or  warn 

House -mate     . 

How  ?      .       .      -. 


How  many  ? 


How  do  you  do  ?    . 

Answer  always  made  to 

the  above  (literal  sense 

uncertain)         .       .     . 

Hummock  of  ice     . 

Hungry,  be  is 


I  Nei-ke-a-ga. 

Nei-seak-poke. 

Nei-se-ek-poke. 

Nannee-yak^poke. 

Nag-ge-o. 

Ok-ko. 

Iglog-a-teega. 

Kanno  ? 
r  Kap-see  ? 
L  Kap-see-nee  ? 

Kanno-ik-pissee  ? 


Husband 


Hut,  or  house 


he  is  at  the 


Jacket,  upper 


Kanno-ing-ilia-goot. 
Ma-nee-lia. 
Nee-lik-poke. 
Ka-lek-poke. 
[  Oo-ee-ga. 
Oo-Ing-a. 
Oo-ee-ma. 
Igloo. 

Igloo-mik-poke. 
Cappee-tegga. 


Jacket,  under        .       .     . 

„       „     he  puts  on  his 

Ice     . 
„  upon  the 

Ice-berg  . 

Indians     . 

Inlet,  a     .  . 

Instrument  of  bone  for  dis- 
covering seals  under  ice  . 

Instrument  used  by  women 
for  making  holes     .      . '   , 

Intestines  of  any  animal 

Joint  of  ditto     .... 
Iron     .       .       .     . 
Iron-stone  .     . 

Ivory  

Just   now    (used   for    past 

and  future,  also  for 

"  wait") 


Just  so 


Kidney     .       .     -  . 

Kill,  he  does   . 

Knee 

Knife,  an  Esquimaux 

,,     other 

,,     a  clasp 

,,     a  woman's    . 
Knot,  a,  he  ties 

„     he  unties 

Know,  I  do  not     . 
Lamp  of  stone 


man  s 


^Tjrjr-a-ce.^^^'^s»y3!^. 


'  Atteega. 
Attee-ge-ga. 
Attee-ge-wok 
Sikkoo. 
Sikkoo-mee. 
Picca-ldo-yak. 
Eert-kei-lee. 
Kang-ek-loo. 

Keip-kut-tuk. 

Ee-11-le-u. 

Innia-look. 

Innia-loo. 

Nab-go6-ang-a 

+ 

Sow-ik- 

Kal-loog-nuk. 

Too-wa.     . 


Oo-It-tia. 

A-meel-ya. 

It-ko-me^. 

Tak-to 

To-k5o-poke. 

Slt-ko-a. 

Panna. 

Pillia-wow-yak. 

Okdo-tak-toke. 

Oo-loo. 

Kei-luk-poke. 

E -yu-nug-poke. 

Nelloo-ooanga. 

Nelloo-ooanga  na-o 


*  -.     .  •    .     •  \ 


lll>tf 


'■■ 


f  'J  till 


ILPf^ 


564 

Lamp-trimmer    (sometimes 
of  asbestos)  .... 

Lamp-black      .... 

Land,  or  country  (also  a 
plant)     . 

Lapland  finch 

Laugh,  he  does 

Lay  a  thing  down,  he  does 

Lead  (metal) 

Leather,  dressed    . 

Leg  of  a  man,  below  the 
knee         ."    . 
„         „       above  ditto 
or  thigh 

Leg  of  a  quadruped,  below 
the  knee 

Lend,  he  does 

Lie    . 

„     you  tell  a 

Lick,  he  does 

Lick  it  (imper.) 

Lichen,  of  three  kinds    .     . 

Light  (not  dark)  it  is  .     . 

Light  (not  heavy)  it  is 
Lightning        .... 
Lights  of  an  animal 

Like  this,  or  in  this  manner 

,,       it  is      . 
Lime-stone     .... 

Line  of  thong         .       .     . 

Line  platted,  of  sinew 
Lip,  upper       . 


VOCABULARY  OF  ESQUIMAUX 


Tat-ko. 
Pa-56. 

Noona. 

Kefniuk-tafioo. 

Igla-poke. 

E-lee-wa. 

Ak-kll-le-fook. 

Kee-uk-tok. 

Kan-na-fa, 

Koke-to-kak. 

Nee-yoong-a. 

Atoke-poke. 

Shag-loo. 

Shag-loo-ik-puotik. 

Allodk-toke. 

Alloo-pa. 

Ko-a-yow-tit. 

Tee-row-yat. 

Oka-yute. 

Ka-6-mo-woke. 

Ka-o-mak-poke. 

Okit-tu-nak. 

Kadloome  -Ikkooma . 

Akkeia-goa. 

Immun-na. 

Im-mun-nay. 

Immun-ittioke. 

Kakote-tung-o-a. 

Aliek. 

Aklunak. 

Pellefa. 

Kakkee-we-a-ga. 


Lip,  lower 

Listen,  he  does 
Little 

„         he  or  it  is 
Liver  of  an  animal 
Long  time  ago 
Look,  he  does 
Looking-glass 
Louse 


Make  faces,  he  does 
Male  of  any  animal 
Mark,  a    .       .       . 

Marmot,  a 


Marrow    . 
Marrow-spoon 
Melt,  it  does    .    ■   . 
Mica         .       .       . 
Milk         .       .       . 
Mitten      . 
Moon,  the 

„       her  name    . 

„       is  full  . 

,,       is  in  her  quarter 

„       shines  . 


Morning 


Moss      ... 
Mother     . 

„       (as  spoken  by 
Mountain 
Mouse       .  •     . 
Mouth 
Musk-ox 

Nail  of  finger,  or  toe 


Ka-kloo-ga. 

Ka-kloo-ak. 
.     Na-liik-poke. 
.     Mikkee. 

Mikkeet-poke. 
.     Tlng-o-a. 
.     Al-fa-nee. 

Kei-niuk-poke. 

Tak-hak-toot. 
.     Koo-muk. 


Ikko-yuk-poke. 

Ahg-oot. 

In-nik. 
r  Ikkiek. 
1  Sik-sik. 


Pattek. 
Pattek-neuk. 
Koossiuk-poke. 
Kei-blia-ke-a. 
Im-mook. 
Pob-a-lcJ&k. 
An-nlnga. 
Tat-kuk. 
Nak-koke-poke. 
Kood-le-roke-poke. 
Kow-mal-luk-poke 
Oo-blak. 
Man-nek. 
A -ma-ma. 
infants)  A-na-na. 
King-nak. 
Ow-In-yuk. 
Kan-nee-fa. 
Oomingmuk. 

Kookee. 


**j"<i*m\jK?±w 


WORDS 

Nail  of  ivory,  for  stojjping 

the  wounds  in  seals,  fyc.  .  Too-pob-ta. 

Name Atka.     Dual,  Attik. 

„     what  is  your  ?     .       .  Kee-wit  ? 

„     what  is  his  ?       .       .  Kee-wow-na  ? 

Narwhal         ....  Keina-loo-a. 

Neck,  or  Throat    .       .   .   .  Toke-lob-ga. 

Needle     .       .       .       ...  Mitkote. 

Needle-case    .       .       ...  Atterak. 

Nephew,  or  Niece        .       .  Oyu-oga. 

Nest,  a  bird's         .       .       .  Oo-blob-it. 

Net  over  the  lamp         .  .    .  Innetat. 

Night Oo-noo-ak. 

+ 
f  Sitta-mat. 
Nine J 

I  Mlkkee-luk-ka-moot 

f  Nak-ka. 
No     ......    J 

I  Na-o. 

Negative,  used  with  verbs       Ilia. 

__  r  Tug-wa. 

iNomore ^ 

L  Tei-wah. 

r  Poong-ak-poke. 
Nod,  he  does  .     .       .       .    -j 

I  Ang-ek-poke. 

North       .       .       ...     Kan-nung-nak. 

„     to  the      .     .       .       .     Kan-nflng-na-mee. 

„     the  wind  blows  from  the  Kan-nung-nak-poke. 

North-east      ....     Akkood-loonawSok. 

-T  fKei-nak. 

Nose <| 

I  King-ara. 
Nostril     •       •       .       ...     Pang-a. 
Now        •       •      •       ...     Mang-a. 

Oil,  or  blubber       .       :       .     O-ku-a. 

°ld'heis        •       •       •       •     It-to5t-koo-ak-poke. 

°ne At-tow-^euk. 

Open  the  door,  he  does       .     Mak-pek-poke. 
Ornamental  band  for  the  head 

of  Esquimaux  men     .     .     Muk-keed-yij-tik. 


'     ''.      "   -'■,    J 


AND  SENTENCES. 

if- 
Ornainent  of  brass  or  copper, 

worn  on  the  forehead  by 

Esquimaux  women      .     .     Kow-woot. 
Overset,  it  does      .       .       .     King-noo-woke. 
Owl Ook-pee-guak. 

Paddle,  a 

„       a  canoe,  he  does 
Pimple 
Pin,  a 

Plant,  a    .       . 
Plat,  I  do 
Plover,  golden 
Pluck  off,  he  does 
Plug,  cork,  or  stopper 

used  for  islands  lying  in 

the  middle  of  channels) 
Plug,  or  Stop  up,  he  does    . 
Pocket,  or  Bag 
Poppy  (Papaver  Nudicaulc) 
Pot  for  cooking      . 
Pot-stone 


Pull,  he  does 

„    one's  hair,  he  does 
Push,  he  does 
Pyrites,  iron    . 


Quartz,  or  any  stone  like  it     Too-noo-yak 


Rain,  it  does 
Raven 

Raw  (as  meat) 
Red,  it  is 
Rib,  small 


hgjpgvi^g  2fr**a'Tfin»a*\ 


I  I  Hi' 


5>K 


It' 


VOCABULARY  OF  ESQUIMAUX 


Rib,  large       .       . 
Right,  that  is 
Ring,  for  the  finger 
Ring,  it  does  (as  metal) 

Rise,  it  does  (as  the  tide) 

River,  or  Stream 

Roll,  it  does    . 

Rough,  it  is    . 

Round,  it  is    . 

Rub,  he  does 

Ruff  for  the  neck 

Run,  he  does 

Run,  it  does  (water) 
5,         ,,         ,,     last 
„         „         „     slowly 

Rust,  it  does 


Toolemak. 

Ti-mun-na. 

Ti-mun. 

Ikkut-komeo-tarfa. 

Hu-a-nuk-pa-took- 

poke. 
Oo-ling-d"6-oke. 
Koo. 

Aksea-ka-a-woke. 
Manneeliut. 
Ang-ma-16-ik-poke. 
Al-lar-tilk-poke. 
Nak-see-anga. 
Akpa-yuke-poke. 
Koo-ook-poke. 
Suka-woke. 
Su-kelt-poke. 
Okoctk-poke. 


Salt,  or  Salt-water,  also  the 

Sea 
Sand 
Sand-piper 

„         Swiss  . 
Saw,  a 

„  he  does    . 
Saxifraga    Oppositifoli 

(plant) 
Scissars,  a  pair  of 


Tarreoke. 

+ 

Seokat. 

Slggee-afee-irioo. 

Toolee-afioo. 

Kibloo. 

Oo-loo-ak-poke. 

Kakeed-lang-nut. 
Kiblee-6w-tik. 


Scraper,  for  cleaning  skins  Seak-koot. 

Scratch,  he  does     .       .       .  Koo-mlk-poke. 

Seal,  large  (Phoca  Barbata)  Oguke. 

„       small  (     ,,  Hispida)  Neitiek. 

,,       middle-sized     .       .     Kairolik. 

„       young  of  the     .       .     Ibl&eow. 

Sealing  excursion,  he  is  gone  r  Neitiek-poke. 

on   .  ,       .       .     •  I  Ma-ote-poke. 


Seal-hole 


wen 


Sew,  she  does 

Shade  for  the  eyes 
Shave,  he  does 
Shell  of  a  snail 


Agloo. 
f  Argwenrak-towa. 
J  Madleroke. 
I  Tlkkeemoot. 
f  Mlk-tiek-poke. 


f.  Mei-k-siek-poke. 

Ittee-yaga. 

Oo-mi-ak-poke. 

+ 

Seu-te-rook. 


Shine,  it  does  (as  the  moon)    Kow-mal-luk-poke. 
Ship,  or  Boat         .       .       .     Oomiak. 

„     at,  or  on  board  the     .     Oomiamee. 
Shoe Ittee-ge-ga. 

Too-ee-ga. 

Ne-ga-blo-a. 
Shrimp     .       .       .       .       .     Pamee-oo-lee. 


Shoulder 


Shut  the  door,  he  does 

Sick,  he  is 

Sigh  he  does 

Silver,  or  Tin 

Sinew 

Sit  down 

Sister     . 

„     in-law 
Six     .       . 
Sinof,  he  does 


Skin 


„  of  walrus 
„  of oguke 
„  of  whale 


Slkkee-woke. 
Annee-ak-poke. 
Annek-seak-poke. 
Im-root. 
E-wal-loo. 
Ingit-poot. 
Kattang-ooteeNelya. 
Oko&-arra. 
,     Argwenfak. 
Imniek-poke. 
f  Ameg. 
1  Amia. 
Ka-ow. 
Kei-seek. 
Mak-tuk. 


Skin-vessel,  placed  under  a 

lamp  Af-nag-we-u. 

Skin-vessels,  small  bucket-  f  Kei-ning-fak. 

shaped I  Kat-tak. 

Skins  of  deer,  made  into  a 

blanket        ....     Keipik. 


em 


WORDS  AND  SENTENCES. 


Skip  a  rope,  he  does 


Sky 


Sledge,  a 

„     he  draws  a  . 
Sleep,  he  does 
Slide  down,  it  does 
Sling  for  stones     . 
Small        .       .       . 


Smell,  he  does 
Smoke.     Also  Fog 
„       it  does  . 


Smooth    . 
Snare  for  birds 
Sneeze,  you  do 
Snore,  he  does 
Snow 

„     it  does  . 
Snow-drift 

„  there 

Snow-goose    . 
Snow-bunting 


is  some 


Son    .       .       . 

„  she  bears  a 
Sore,  it  is 


Sorrel 
Soup 

South  .       . 
„  to  the 
South-west 
Spade  for  snow 
Spear  for  small  seal 


f  Kallee-wuk-tak-toke 
I  Afnow-yak-toke. 
r  Keiluk. 
L  See-la. 

Ka-mob-tik. 

Kamook.see-erra-poke 

Seenik-poke. 

Slttoo-woke, 

Mew. 

Mikkee. 
r  Nei-woke. 
I  Nei-wa. 

Issiek. 

Issiek-poke. 

Pe-u-6ke-poke. 

Manneefa. 

Nee-yak. 

Tageo-pootik. 

Kamou-e-woke. 

Appoo. 

Kan-ne-uk-poke. 

Nattee-roo-ik. 

Nattee-roo-ik-poke. 

Kang-ook. 

Kopenno-acca-u. 

Eefning-a. 

Eef-nee-fa. 

Eefnee-woke. 

A-ang-mut. 

A-u-poke. 

Kong-o-lek. 

Kayo. 

Ping-ung-nak. 

Ping-ung-na-mee. 

Oo-agnarit. 

Poo-alle-ray. 

Oo-nak. 


^&mJX:<mie^*Mfm^^Wm*3WZ 


-    -* ,.     *r.  *  v        . 


<•■ 


ill 


">lLi 


m: 


I 


% 


«    ■till 


!i\ 


-568 

Swim,  lie  does 
Surprised,  he  is 


VOCABULARY  OF  ESQUIMAUX 


r  Immaroke-poke. 
I  Nalloke-poke. 
Nannerak-poke. 


Tall,  he  is       i  '    j "      .       .     Ang-e-woke. 

r  Okad-liik-poke. 

Talk,  he  does         .       .     .    <   _,    ,        , 

L  Okak-poke. 

Tail  of  a  quadruped      .     .  Pamee-yoong-a. 

Tail  of  a  whale,  seal,  fyc.  Seak-peek. 

Take,  (also  used  for  adopt)  Teego. 

Tattooing         ....  Ka-kee-na. 

Tear,  he  does         .       .       .  Allik-poke. 

Ten     .     .       .  '    .       .       .  Eerkit-koke. 

Tent    ...       .       .       .  Too-pek. 

Tent-pole        .       .       .       .  Kan-na. 

Thanks Koyenna. 

f  Oo-na. 

That ) 

I  Tam-na. 

r  Ta-ma-nee. 
There       .....{ 

I  Ta-mei-ya. 

r  Okkoa. 

They J 

L  Kat-ko-a. 

Thief Tigliktoke. 

Thimble    .       .       .       .       .     Tikkiek. 


Thin,  he  is 


r  Koo-Innee-woke. 
<  Sead-poke. 
L  Sead-mut. 


Those Mak-ko-a. 

Thread  a  needle,  she  does  .  Noo-wee-woke. 

Throat      .       .       .       .       .  Toop-koo-ee-Id-yuk. 

Throw  a  spear,  he  does       .  Akle-ak-poke. 

„       a  stone         „     .       .  Me-lo-ei-ak-poke. 

Throwing-stick     .        .        .  Noke-shak. 

Three Ping-a-huke. 

Third Ping-a-hu-at. 

Thumb Koo-bloo-ga. 

Thunder,  it  does     .       .       .  Kad-luk-poke. 


Too,  And,  or  Also 
To-day     . 
Toe,  great 

„  second 

„  third 

„  fourth 

„  little 
To-morrow 


The  day  after  to-morrow 


Loo. 

Oo-bloo-mee. 

Put-oo-go. 

Tikkee-e-rak       "1 

\1 
Kei-tuk-klierak  I  » ,: 
_  >gl 

Mikkee-lierak      i  f« 

Ir-klt-ko-a. 

Ak-ka-go*6. 

Akkagoo-oong-a-lee- 

a-gu6. 

Akkagoo-5ong-a-lee- 


Tongue     .....  Okkafa. 

Tooth Ke-u-teet-ka. 

Touch,  he  does       .       .       .  Ak-t6ke-pa. 

Tickle,  he  does      .       .       .  Koo-ee-nugge-wak. 

Trap,  a Pood-lut. 

Tremble,  he  does  .        .        .  Pang-a-lik-poke. 

Tree,  a     .        .        .        .        .  Na-pak-to. 

Triangular,  it  is     .       .       .  NooloS-afrik-poke. 

Trim  a  lamp,  she  does         .  Tatkiuk-poke. 

Turnstone  (bird)    .       .       .  Tallig-wee-afioo. 

f  Madleroke. 
Two         .       .       .       .      .    <   - 

LArdlek. 

Uncle Ang-a. 

Unclench  his  fist,  he  does    .     Issee-weet-poke. 

r  Makta-pootik. 

LTndress,  you  do     .       .     .'  <  ,, 

J  [  Marta-pootik. 

Mattak-poke. 

Teide-oke-poke. 

Noo-shook-pa. 

Kood-yiing-a-woke. 


he  does 


Unplug,  he  does     . 
Upside  down,  it  is 


Vaccinum  Uliginosum  (plant)  Okow-yet. 
Valley,  or  Low-land  .  .  Nak-seak. 
Very,  or  Extremely      .       .     Lu-kow-nee. 


n».w  wi*:  •  r. 


SBraHETC 


WORDS  AND  SENTENCES. 


Wait.     (See  "  Just  now")      Oo-it-tia. 
Walk,  he  does        .       .       .     Pe-huke-poke. 

„         „       fast  .       .       .  Otuk-tak-poke. 

„  „       slowly      .       .  Pe-hu-ei-ak-poke. 

Walrus Ei-u-ek. 

,,       lie  is  gone  to  kill     .  Ei-u-ek-poke. 

Warm 6ke-ko. 

Wart,  a Oong-noo-a. 

Wash,  he  does       .       .       .  Eermlk-poke. 

Water Immek. 

,,       in  or  on  the    .  .       .  Im-mek-mee. 

Water-fall      ....  Kog-16-nuk. 

We,  or  Our     ....  Oo-a-goot. 

Weed,  sea  (tangle)       .       .  Kitko-a. 

„       „       another  kind    .  Min-nu. 

Well,  he  is Nappa-woke. 

West Oo-ag-nuk. 

r  Oo-ag-na-mee. 
„     to  the      .     .       .     .    J 

i  Oo-ag-na-moot. 

,,  wind  blows  from  the  Oo-ag-mik-poke. 
"Wet,  it  is  ....  Kow-ee-uk-poke. 
Whale Agga-wek. 

»       Done    ....     Heoke-kuk. 

„       blubber,  or  oil  .       .     Ok-u-a. 
+ 

{Su-na. 
Su-mee. 
Su-mig. 
What  is  that  ?  Suna  Oona  ? 

ixn       »  f  Kakkogo  ? 

When?  ....    J  5 

[  Kang-a  ? 

Where? Nem-moot  ? 

„      speaking  of  a  distant 

place  •      •       c  Nem-moo-mee? 

Whet  a  knife,  he  does         .     Af-fe-ak-poke. 
Whine,  or  Cry,  he  does      .     Kei-ya-woke. 
Whip,  a    .       .       .       .       .     fppgg-ra-o-tuk. 

„     he  does    ....     Ippee-ra-e-Ske-poke. 
Whisper,  he  does         .       .     Issee-be-yuke-poke. 


Wliistle,  he  does      .     .       .     Oo-in-ya-to-pbke. 
White,  or   any  light  colour, 

it  is   .       .       .       .  Kow-dlook-poke. 
Ke-na  ? 


Who? 


Who  is  that  ?  Kena  Oona  ? 

Whose? Ke-a? 


Wife 

Willow,  flower  of,  used  as 

tinder 
Wind        .       .       . 

„       blows  fresh 

„       blows  hard 
Wind-pipe 
Window 
Wink,  he  does 
Winter 

Wolf        .       . 
Wolverene  ?    . 
Woman  ;  or  Female  gene- 
rally .       .       .       , 
Wood 

„  grows      .... 
Woold,  he  does 


f  Nool-lee-a. 

I  Nool-lee-ang-a.. 


Wrist 


■»'  *5r^urg!«ggg^J& 


Hu-poo-tik. 

A-no-ee. 

Pek-siek-poke. 

Anno-kluk-poke. 

+ 
Toch-loo-a. 

Ig-gul-lak. 

Sikkoo-niuk-poke, 

Okeoke. 

Amaroke. 

Kablee-afioo. 


Write,  or  Draw,  he  does    . 

Yawn,  he  does 

Yellow,  it  is      .     . 

Yes    .       .       .       . 

Yesterday       .... 

„     The  day  before  (used 

also  for  some  time  ago)  Tk-pok-kee-a-nee 

flg-weet. 
i  ou,  ^singular)      .       .       .  J 

lll-weet. 

„  (plural)  ....     Illlp-see. 
Young,  he  is     .     .       .       .     Mak-koke-pokc 


ElKJUJgPX 


5  "'I'll 


V 


M 


570 


ESQUIMAUX 


NAMES    OF    PLACES. 


lM 


Southampton  Island 

Chesterfield  Inlet 

Land  to  the  southward  of  ditto 

Wager  River 

Beach  Point 

Repulse  Bay,  and  the  land  about  it 

Haviland  Bay 

Island  off  ditto 

Buslman  Island 

Vansittart  Island 

Georgina  Island 

Gore  Bay 

Cape  Martineau,  and  land  about  it 

Lyon  Inlet,  and  all  the  country  about  it 

Hoppner  Inlet 

Norman  Creek 

Sherer  Creek,  and  the  land  about  it 

Ross  Bay 

Winter  Island 

Crawford  Island 

The  Island  off  Cape  Wilson       . 

Barrow  River 

Coxe  Islands,  the  largest  of  them 

Ormond  Island 


"  The  land  of  Sead-ler-medo. 

Ikkee-rei-seuk. 

Noo-wook. 

Oot-koo-seek-sa-lik. 

Tei-yag-nak. 

Ei-wll-lik. 

How-wilt-  tak-pat-te-uk. 

Oo-glee-ru-ok: 

Ikkaloo-liguok.' 

Na-guke-to. 

Ow-littee-week 

Ittee-re-ook; 

Noo-ood-u-ok. 

Malluke-se-ta. 

Tal-loot: 

Neeb-wa-wik. 

King-miduok. 

Karfeak, 

Ne-yu-ning  Eit-du-a 

Too-nood-luk. 

Ow-littee-week. 

Seag-gasse-6-wik 

Khe-mig. 

Khe-mig. 


H*i»fc«MW! 


ESQUIMAUX  NAMES  OF  PLACES. 


Qoilliam  Creek 

The  Land  about  Cape  Matthew  Smith 

Bouverie  Islands 


Tern  Island 
Amherst  Island 
Liddon  Island 


Kangek-lo"o\ 
Khiad-laghioo. 
Oolodksiarnen. 
Ss-o-v/ak- 


both  called      .       Seag-glur-ru-ok 


Cockburn  Island.     Also  some  others 

Whyte  Inlet 

Islands  off  Autridge  Bay 


Keiyuk-tarruoke. 

E  wee- ta-oke- take. 
Appee-tier-U"g-leek 


THE    END. 


i)^JP.VmKXksM*WS2****K 


4  d  2 


I 


ERRATA. 


Page 

143 

157 

177 

232 

402 

430 

434 

488 

492 

49S 

543 

544 

546 


for  "  difference,"  read  "  diffidence." 
14     for  "  bay  but;  the,"  read  "  bay;  but  the." 
9     for  "  pa  v,"  read  "pair." 

omit  "  the." 

for  "  this  her,"  read  "  her  and." 

from  bottom,  omit  one  "  that." 

do.  after  "  on  which,"  insert 

for  "  late,"  read  "  lately." 

from  bottom,  before  "  the,"  add  "  off." 
note  f,  for  "  nations,"  read  "  natives." 
7     for  "  orm,"  read  "  form." 

10     from  bottom,  for  "  hermorrage,"  read  "  hemorrhage." 
last  line,  between  "  before,"  and  "  because,"  insert, 


LONDON: 
PRINTED  BY  W.  CLOWES, 

Northumberland-court. 


f. 


* 


\ 


a    s 


\ 


Co 


\ 


\ 


/ 


/ 


«cr 


/ 


/ 


^ 


^ 


V\ 


/ 


\ 


/ 


S 


-t- 


Q 


(5meral  (Hikrt 


,0  Jhenwy  the  trad;   ~ 
\V  of 

H.M.  SHIPS 


\ 


JH. 


:=*    A -^    't-V. 


A 


'-Owl   i  i    § 


f~ 


■<?• 


Wf 


kK* 


V 


liscovery^  of  a 


\ 


.1  V.    1^-:»        9 


/\ 


^. 


/ 


tf  * 


^ 


-^_^^  'diwnrie,  of  this  andjZ.l 


,Jirf 


exf 


f&> 


8 


\ 


\. 


^i^ 


fc 


^ 


/ 


/ 


Wo* 


s, 


*****£&**■  7 


W 


/ 


> 


<MV 


;1': 


,l«' 


<£: 


O 


/      f 


k 

J'onei\r  Jav/Jw/ 


,i"11 


So^\ 


\ 


<Vc 


■:  v 


n£ 


\ 


,^ 


,M 


;*1 


cs 


-£ 


"^ 


K 


V 


iJ* 


IS 


■Af^' 


, .  J 


I 


C.aea^fi 


iCsir***^ 


> 


^ 


\ 


\ 


,tPS 


'\ 


•polo.  /  -  -    __^,.     crnvtlT  \  \  ,ini1'  \ 


i<^r£> 


v^K^ 


^^J 


^ 


0, 


4T 


G 


if  a/|  %  i  ^ 


tCLoX 


^^ 


\ 


fUjnfW^W''^ 


^ 


^  ■■-.-;     .    ,' 


% 


V 


\ 


^<? 


^ 


f<<ird.eo/t<r#    "f.  ~^^ 


\. 


X 


B 


\      t*i 


^^•^ 


s4m 


■ly 


r>< 


fftfaotiXW-** 


lit 


■$ 


\ 


,l      c 


^ 


V^b 


\ 


\ 


/  /  \ 


Sv/^^r 


^ 


y* 


i  G<* 


,„1 


j. 


l-NHSrSULA-lA 


■j>qir/>,i/" 


J*l 


wegri 


I 
i 

FerlProy^^      j 


/ 


130/ 


120/° 


77^/" 


Westo*1 


/       ( 

0 


/ 


A 


\ 


v>v 


5** 


r^xr 


*^     ^ 


-\farwickl.     \ 


J<ickniaii?3oiDli- 


,r 


/^j\ 

'  ^xSfeeV1- 


^  ^7 


^ 


\. 


/     V 


\ 


T  J*  ^4    Z    T     ' "j&S 


\ 


^ 


I. orui itudc   We.it  from    Grcenwicfv 


rf 


\ 


\ 


<#?x 


Tublutherf as  the  act  directs  J*zn'?j<924.  by  John  JfurrayAlbemarlc  J'iivet London 


JWalker*Sati 


*lll 


ll 


I  It 

I 

1 


. 


.,J*«"~^. 


I 


tf 


to 

K 


HP 

i 


J   •••■Li 


ft" 


I 


>ui 


JT  i  i'i  ii  ki  m  h  fl  tl  mh  M  in  Kj  n  |'i  b  ;.;  ;i  i  i  n  b  ;:i  i.l  rrn  l.i  irrfTTTT 


/HWArr./ruJf)' 


! 


ft 

i 

j 

f 
1 

Hi: 

Hi 

1 

i 

• 

' 

1 

♦       [Mi, 


j 

.■ 

88 


j5 


4:. 


69 


as 


817  45 

W  Hti  t,i  B  t)  H  II  M  l»  II 


Jo 


4-> 


68 


4r, 


\ 


g  a  g  H^mip  g  g-w^ 


818 


79 


-** 


n  jj  in  1 j  j  11  Li  u  y-  w~i:\  \i  m  fci  hi  ti  In  fei  lei  u 


70 


69 


v.; 


68 


^5 


ia  a  p  n  pM  p  w»  v\  a  -w  p  w  ^  *a  h  p  a  ■  ■  g  g  ■  ■  hh  g  g  fej  g  a  g  g  g  g  w  g  g  |  a  a  g  ■  ■  m  b  p  a  BTrErprrn-pa  »  g  g  ^  m  ■  p  ■  ^  H  a  p  a  b|  g  m  p  ■  g  h  a  g  m  m  ■■»  u  pi  ■  ^  *  «  pi  ■-g-iri 


7|9 


I'ublMnl  •"  ">■•  •/.  •/  <fi,v,U  Jan*  i0-zi  totJ»h*  3f:uniii.1/h.7iu,/<:<'ivelZt>/fh>i 


•Sculpt 


■+T 


'*■ 

i 

t 

• ! 
Is 

i 

1" 

™ 

.1  ii 

M 

! 

'  !"|i. 

*  •» » ■ 

?  .iii 

V 

J] 

J 

* 

*. 


MM 


.  Krya!'*  vr^^^gygfl*  a*rNg^ti»*^y 


QfcOYSfc    :  —■'*•■ 


TW~ 


Middle  Sar&gc  Islands *Aw  nu&w  ,//wW  .//,..<■< 


Saddle  |.*k  Island 


■    ■ :    ■ 


Northern  Shore  ^'Hudson  Snail    /..//  64     ,  \.  J  '"7,/.  ;/.  .,,■'■!' 


Appearance  of tht  North  Short  ''/Hudson  Su-ait  Lot  .t;;y\tt>  -V  Ion 
distant  4  ors  loo! 


Salisbury   Island 


Ai/uWo/M--  n.V.A/..  .//»/■»  „v.f/Ar«.«/-    /■ 


-«^«Ti.-»aa»-»»^r-ra.^-aa>J».     iiin-*iifi  '■«  * — * 


» 


t 


I 


<  .1"  It.  I .1 


1  i,lr,ti .      ■     \  >.iK.  t  i.i  k   \,.i\ 


\    I   .1   ^  1   •*  1  A  II  <l  S 


Cape  Deas  Thomson 


North  sh.m-  oftht  en 


I'uK,  m  IfotkBi 


Si«i    I. I- 

'•'-•"'  "I'""  Wk<     ■  li.il.  Baj   whahatAndivritahin.it. 


I     i|-    u.  Kl.,,.1 


Sontl 


Southampton  Island  to&m  <<.■/.,    A.   frozen  Strait  near  taisapeMatul. 

■  ■ 


^ 


■  I"   '  rigid         ■    ,,..  distant 


M.^^fi^Wi.-^^-.y^^^jf^%^^»j^^i^^     •  »l 


Ill 

Hill 


m< 


t 


ii 


<  ■ 

I 


m 


JV.'J. 


Cape  WilsonlFio"  W.  distant  2  miles 


Island  of  Owlitteeweeh: 


Remarkable  Hills  at  the  entrance^  of  Culdruff  Creek. 

o 


Cape  Penrhyn  distant 10  miles. 


N.6f£. 


North  Cape  of  the-  entrance'  to  Barrow  River 

S.  3  ?W.  distant  i  '4  mile 


=^'.'JVpiMf  miles 


The  Islands  of  Ooglit  N.f.W.z  miles  by  G.F.Lyon. 


C  ape   Brown 


^--- rir^WV " 


Moixnt  Sabine  N.67W. 
The  Bonverie  Islands 


N.48°.W. 


Yellow I.N.4o?W. 


J.Bu  slmaa  ddt 


Yellow  l?S.6^Kio  miles. 


The  Bouverie  Islands. 


Vuw  of  the  South  Shore  of  the  entra/ice-to  the  Strait  ofthelvay  ojidsReelet.  Mount  Sabine  bearing  S.30?E.5  or  6miles  distant. 


Isthmus 


J.Wetiker sculp. 


fablis/iea1  as  t/ie  act  directs  Jan?  1834  By  Johnjlfurriclt/u/2l/*e/riarl&St7y>e£2Jondon 


I 


i  ti,  eail 
•fppeanuur  oftfu  stum  ,..'/.,  lui\  taut  II, .i-,  r(/v 


'nwi  the.  Eastward 


'    ..,..     \,„,|,   I     131 


IW,„rt,  We.tm>  „„„„„,  ,„w  stmt  ./■«.  1W  and  H«la  rate,  ,;,„„  &W  /„&.  ' '"'"'  """ "     "  **"*" 


Appear*™  ofa^nof  Sondunnptai.  [.fan*  tota  ,;„,„  /;,;  a,,/, 


4 


f 

9 


*v 

B  1 

i! 

"ni 

y* v m»b  ■.■■a^v*  ^KSirar 


o-^t.^4 


T 


•»» 


Hi 


I'M 


p-w 


^^7^f!AfeI 


^«E 


> 

HiB- 1 

\ 

% 

>  ' 

* 

H 

9 

I 

' 

* 

? 
