Main Currents in American Thought, Vol. 2: The Romantic Revolution (Vernon Louis Parrington, 1927)
==========================================================
Emerson to Whitman: the romantic revolution in American thought. Public domain. Internet Archive full text (bwb_P8-ANR-079).

in ily


| il MANIAC


8 1735 006 920 205 .. Sg


UNIVERSITY
OF PITTSBURGH


LIBRARIES


No Sponsor


THE ROMANTIC REVOLUTION
IN AMERICA


MAIN CURRENTS IN AMERICAN THOUGHT


AN INTERPRETATION OF AMERICAN LITERATURE


FROM THE BEGINNINGS TO 1920


BY


VERNON LOUIS PARRINGTON


PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON


VOLUME I *% 1620-1800
THE COLONIAL MIND
VOLUME II * 1800-1860
THE ROMANTIC REVOLUTION IN AMERICA


VOLUME III 1860-1920
THE BEGINNINGS OF CRITICAL REALISM IN AMERICA


THE
ROMANTIC REVOLUTION
IN AMERICA


1800-1860


BY


VERNON LOUIS HEREIN G TOs


PROFESSOR OF ENGLISH IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON


Phe dex Aes
hb


NEW YORK %
HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY
1927


HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY, INC,


SET UP AND ELECTROTYPED BY T. MOREY & SON


PRINTED IN THE U.S. A,


FOREWORD


In justification of the choice of writers and allotment of space in
the following pages, let it be said frankly that I have been guided
by what I conceived to be the historical significance of the several
documents. With aesthetic judgments I have not been greatly
concerned. I have Not igisial 1 evalligte reoutations or weigh
literary merits, but rather to understand what our fathers thought,
and why they wrote as they did. This will serve to explain the con-
siderable number of pages devoted to southern letters, as well as
to certain well-nigh forgotten figures. For the purpose I had in
view such a method was inevitable. Lost causes have a way of
shrinking in importance in the memory of later generations, and
the historian must go back to the days before their overthrow,
and view them in the light of their hopes. Time is not always a
just winnower; it is partial to success and its verdict too often in-
clines to the side of the biggest cannon or the noisiest claque. The
exhuming of buried reputations and the revivifying of dead causes
is the familiar business of the historian, in whose eyes forgotten
men may assume as great significance as others with whom poster-
ity has dealt more generously. Communing with ghosts is not un-
profitable to one who listens to their tales. To our fathers John
Taylor and Beverley Tucker and Fisher Ames were living figures;
they spoke for their generation, and they may have something
still to say to a later generation. For dealing at length with such
men as Hugh Legaré and Gilmore Simms and John P. Kennedy
and Herman Melville, no apologies need be offered. They have too
long been slighted. Walt Whitman I have chosen to regard as the
forerunner of a later school, and have reserved the consideration
of his work for another study. Certain other men I have omitted
regretfully out of regard to space—diverse figures such as Orestes
Brownson, Albert Brisbane, and John Esten Cooke, together with
a group of poets and essayists, who though they have long been
reckoned ghosts are nevertheless well worth knowing. Even
echoes imply substance somewhere.


Nac ol ek
Seatile, February 22, 1926.


INTRODUCTION


THE present volume is the second in a proposed study of the main
tendencies of American thought as expressed in our literature.
In the preceding volume I have considered the incoming into Amer-
ica of certain old-world ideals and institutions, and the subjection
of those ideals and institutions to the pressure of a new environ-
_ ment, from which resulted the overthrow of the principles of mon-
archy and aristocracy, and the setting up of the principle of re-
publicanism. In the present study I purpose considering certain
new growths that sprang up in the land thus cleared—what par-
ticular forms they assumed and why they assumed such forms.
The delimitations of the period to be treated of are fixed by two
wars that disturbed the normal unfolding of national experience:
the War of 1812 that hastened the development of nineteenth-
century ideals, and the Civil War that uprooted certain of the
crasser growths of those vigorous years. The half century that
lay between these dramatic episodes was a period of extravagant
youth, given over to a cult of romanticism that wrought as many
marvels as Aaron’s rod. Inthe South, in New England, and on the
western frontier, it laid hold of men’s minds, consuming the stubble
of eighteenth-century harvests, sweeping away the drab realisms
of a cautious past, and offering in their stead more alluring ideals.
Revolutions, greater and lesser, trod on each other’s heels; the
common adventure led into unexplored paths; and the final out-
come for which it was all preparing was the emergence of a new mid-
dle class that in the succeeding half century was to subdue America
to middle-class ends.

Such drastic overturnings of the customary and familiar, such
swift ruptures with the past, quite evidently do not come from
trivial causes. Men do not put off the old before the new is ready;
and if in those credulous years they turned romantic and refused
to heed the counsels of experience, it was because the soil had been
new-plowed for the growing of such crops as their fathers had
not known. The grapes from which the wine of romance is vinted,
it must not be forgotten, are rooted in the common earth. The


11


iv INTRODUCTION


loveliest romantic dreams spring from a parentage that is humbly
rosaic. There is no more fruitful source of romantic hope than a
Aruia economics that overflows all narrow preémptions and sweeps
away the restrictions that hamper free endeavor. With fresh
! economic realms to conquer, the dullest plodder discovers a stim-
| ulus in anticipation that sets him upon creating a Utopia. The
breaking up of the static, the bold adventuring upon new worlds,
is the fertile soil in which romance springs most luxuriantly. It
_ needs no uncommon eyes, surely, to discover in the swift changes
that came to America in the wake of the second English war, the
seed-bed of those ebullient romanticisms which in politics and
economics, in theology and literature, turned away so contemp-
tuously from the homespun past. Of a sudden America was be-
coming a new world with potentialities before undreamed of; and
this new America was no longer content with the narrow ways of a
more cautious generation. The older America of colonial days had
been static, rationalistic, inclined to pessimism, fearful of in-
novation, tenacious of the customary. It conceived of human na-
ture as evil, and accounting men incurably wicked, it opened no
doors to Utopian dreams of a golden future. The round of daily
life was confined within a narrow domestic economy, with few and ©
rare changes in social status. Growth in population came mainly
from natural increase. Exploitation was laborious, and such
wealth as was laid by was gained in shop and field, in fisheries and
shipping. With its expectations cramped by a drab agrarianism,
it was content to remain primitively self-sufficient, not given to
seeking riches by speculative short-cuts, clinging to the habitual,
distrustful of change.

During the thirty-odd years between the Peace of Paris and
the end of the War of 1812 that older America was dying. The
America that succeeded was a shifting, restless world, youth-
fully optimistic, eager to better itself, bent on finding easier roads
to wealth than the plodding path of natural increase. It con-
ceived of human nature as acquisitive, and accounting acquisi-
tiveness a cardinal virtue, it set out to inquire what oppor-
tunities awaited it in the unexploited resources of the continent.
The cautious ways of earlier generations were become as much out
of date as last year’s almanac. New commonwealths were rising
in the wilderness; immigration from war-torn Europe was pouring
in; wild lands were daily coming on the market.. Money was to


v


INTRODUCTION v


be made by the enterprising, and the multitude of the enterpris-
ing was augmenting with the expansion of the settlements. The
ideal of a static society having been put away, progress was as-
sumed to be the first law of nature, and innovation was accepted
as the sign and seal of progress. It was our first great period of
exploitation, and from it emerged, as naturally as the cock from the
mother egg, the spirit of romance, gross and tawdry in vulgar minds,
dainty and refined in the more cultivated. But always romance.
The days of realism were past, and it was quietly laid away with the
wig and smallclothes of an outgrown generation.

Unfortunately economic romance is more imperious in its de-
_mands than literary romance. Its dreams follow objective desires,
and in America of those days of new beginnings the desires of
diverse economic groups conducted straight to antagonistic im-
perialisms. The major interests of the three great sections of
the country differentiated more and more sharply. The East was
discovering its Utopia in an industrial capitalistic order. With
the flocking of immigrants to the factories began the extraordinary
expansion of the cities and the movement of centralization that was
eventually to transform America from a rural to an urban society,
supplanting the farmer by the business man and disintegrating
the traditional psychology. The new manufacturing and the
new finance were subjecting an agrarian people to the dislocations
and readjustments implied in the industrial revolution, the out-
come of which no man could foresee. The reaction of this new in-
dustrialism upon the South was immediate. With the improve-
ments in textile manufacturing came greater demands upon the
new southern staple, and an agriculture that had long been static
with its traditional crops of indigo, rice, and tobacco, began to
look forward confidently to a Utopia founded on cotton, and con-
ceived an imperialistic dream of expanding fields of white bolls and
black slaves, reaching into Mexico and embracing the West Indies.
The new South left off apologizing for slavery and hoping for its
ultimate extinction. Slavery had become enormously profitable
and it proposed to exploit the negro as frankly as New England was
exploiting the Irish immigrant, but more humanely if possible, in
something of the patriarchal spirit.

Meanwhile in the Inland Empire was arising an economics that
looked with little favor on the imperialisms of eastern capitalism
or southern slavery; an economics equalitarian in temper, decen-


vi INTRODUCTION


tralizing in impulse; nourished on the idealism of the Declaration
of Independence, but interpreting it to mean the natural right of
every free citizen to satisfy his acquisitive instinct by exploiting
the national resources in the measure of his shrewdness. Demo-
cratic in professions, it was middle-class in spirit and purpose.
Discovering the inflowing tide of immigration to be favorable
to speculation, it sought its Utopia in county-seat towns where
land holdings mounted in value with every new wave. No narrow
horizons bounded a realm that stretched to the Pacific and into
the remote Northwest, and no stodgy ways of money-getting could
satisfy men whose imaginations ranged through such spaces. This
country was theirs to do with as they chose, and if eastern capital-
ism or southern slavery interfered with their inalienable rights,
their Sharp’s rifles were at hand for defense. In the vast territory
drained by the Mississippi—the ‘‘ Valley of Democracy,” a recent
writer has chosen to call it—was conceived what may be accounted
the most romantic dream that ever visited the native mind of
America. It impressed de Tocqueville, who discovered the poetry
of America in this romance of a moving frontier, in the vision that
led the pioneer on his conquering way westward, hewing at an
interminable wilderness that was matched only by his ambitions.

Y Such swift expansions, such mounting romanticisms of temper,
must inevitably provide themselves with correspondent philoso-
phies to phrase the new aspirations. The nineteenth century
was not content to think in the narrower terms of the eighteenth,
but must refashion its thought to suit the romantic style. The
modes which it came to accept were for the most part of European
origin, adapted to new-world needs. From France and England,
and later from Germany, came variant schools of romantic theory
that at bottom were a common glorification of the ideal of indi-
vidualism; and this very diversity of interpretation made possible
in America an appeal to different classes and diverse interests,
the sum total of which was a many-sided contribution to social
theory, but a contribution which carried within it the seeds of
later conflict.

The first stage in the romanticization of American thought re-
sulted from the naturalization of French revolutionary theory. Its
devious progress through the country can be traced fairly ac-
curately. Landing first in Virginia in the early seventeen-seventies,
it met with a hospitable reception from the generous planter society


INTRODUCTION Vil


and spread widely there the fashion of Physiocratic agrarianism.
Traveling thence westward into the Inland Empire it domesticated
itself in frontier log cabins under the guise of an assertive indi-
vidualism, to issue later as the coon-skin democracy of the Jack-
sonian revolution. Eventually reaching New England, the last
haven and refuge of eighteenth-century realism, it disarmed Yankee
antagonism by assuming the dress of Unitarianism and preached
the doctrine of human perfectibility with such conviction as to
arouse the conscience of New England to an extraordinary enthu-
siasm for reforming man and society. And coming finally to New
York it inoculated the mind of the emerging proletariat with its
doctrine of the rights of man, with Fourieristic and other Utopias,
and turmoiled contemporary politics with equalitarian Locofoco
programs. No other philosophy assumed so many and such at- ~
tractive disguises, or wrought such changes in American ideals,
as this French romanticism with its generous humanitarian impul-
ses. The ground was ready for the seed it was to sow, and if in the
judgment of a hostile philosophy the crop turned out to be tares,
increasing thousands believed it to be excellent wheat, to the grow-
ing of which America was to be dedicated henceforth.

The rival philosophy, which came to view with increasing dislike
the doctrines of French romanticism, was of English middle class
origin and sprang from the long struggle of that class to loose the
handsof the landed gentry from control of the state. Phrased per-
suasively by Adam Smith, it embodied the principle of liberalism
as that principle was understood by men of affairs. It conceived
of a social Utopia that must result if economic forces were given
free play; if governmental restrictions on trade were done away
with and individual enterprise were free to buy and sell in the open
market. Springing from the same root of individualism that brought
forth French romanticism, it flowered in an economics that denied
the aspirations of the French school. Assuming as its determining
principle the common instinct of acquisitiveness, it set up the
economic man as the criterion of conduct and proposed to reorder
society to the single end of trade. Thus sanctioned and given free
rein, the principle of acquisitiveness set forth on its triumphant
march through western civilization. Accepted by the English
middle class as the ultimate social philosophy sufficient to all
needs, it presented to willing eyes the ideal of exploitation as the
goal of social progress.


Vili INTRODUCTION


But transported to America, the new philosophy soon discovered
unforeseen obstacles in its path. The acquisitive instinct was here
enormously strengthened by the vast unpreémpted resources ly-
ing all about, but unfortunately those resources were too great
or too speculative to be exploited by individual effort. Capital
was wanting, and unless collective funds were available, exploita-
tion must be slow and inadequate. There was need of the state to
further the opening up of western lands and to throw its guardian-
ship about an infant industrialism. Roads and canals could not
wait on individual enterprise; tariffs and subsidies could flow only
from the government. Hence arose a modification of laissez
faire, from which resulted the theory that a democratic state stands
in loco parentis to the economic interests of its citizens, and should
guarantee the progressive well-being of strategic groups on whose
prosperity depended the common well-being. It was this modi-
fication of the English philosophy that the Whig party came to
embody in its platform, and which by pooling the interests of
western speculators, eastern financiers and New England indus-
trialists, sponsored the “American Plan,” a curiously ingenious
scheme to milk the cow and divide the milk among those who su-
perintended the milking.

Meanwhile in the imperialistic South was arising a distinctive
philosophy, native to the special conditions imposed by slavery,
that was to set it apart from both eastern and western economics
and draw it inevitably into a narrowing isolation. Frankly de-
fensive in purpose, rejecting alike French equalitarianism and
English individualism, it sought to justify the institution of slavery
by an appeal to realism and square it to the theory of democracy
by analogy with northern industrialism. The conception of a
Greek democracy, which was the last citadel of the southern mind,
was a skillful compromise between the antagonistic principles of
aristocracy and democracy, the most romantic ideal brought forth
by our golden age of romance. Assuming the middle-class princi-
ple of exploitation as the creative source of every civilization,
it proposed to erect a free state on the basis of a slave proletariat
after the model of ancient Athens. A democracy, it argued, is
possible only among equals. In every society hitherto the inevita-
ble inequality between economic classes has nullified every demo-
cratic program. Master and man, exploiter and exploited, are
necessarily opposed in vital economic interests; and this potential


INTRODUCTION ix


clash, this fundamental antagonism of classes, has been intensi-
fied by the rise of industrialism. Exploitation has been brutalized
by the impersonal wage-system, and the proletariat has been re-
duced to sodden and embittered beasts. If now as honest realists
we recognize frankly that equality cannot exist between inferior
and superior races, if we accept the inevitable proletarian status
of the negro, if finally we concede the truism that the lifelong
relations between master and slave are more humane than the tem-
porary relations between wage-giver and wage-earner, we shall
concern ourselves less with a romantic equalitarianism and more
with a rational conception of a democracy of equals that may
conceivably erect a civilization worthy of the name.

It was an ingenious theory, but unfortunately it left out of
account the ambitions of the middle class, and it was this class
that in the end destroyed it. Whether they will it or not, imperial-
isms have a way of clashing with rival imperialisms. Reality
persists though romance may deny it, and in their several programs
the three diverse sections of America were driving blindly to a
collision. In that bitter collision the dream of the South was de-
stroyed. With the overthrow of the aristocratic principle in its
final refuge the ground was cleared of the last vestiges of the eight-
eenth century. Thenceforth America was to become wholly mid-
dle class, and such romance as it might bring forth was to be of
another sort.

The literature of this extraordinarily vigorous period we are now
to deal with, not in the narrow field of belles lettres alone but in
the outlying fields of social and political philosophies. The diff-
culties in the way are many. To endeavor to penetrate critically
to the intellectual core of a period, to weigh this romance in realistic
scales, to take off the outer wrappings and lay bare the inner truth,
is no May-day undertaking. The critic finds himself at every
turn confronted by reputations distorted by contemporary praise
or censure. In the formal biographies written in that golden age
of myth-making, criticism too often gave way to eulogy. Our
fathers wrote like gentlemen, but unfortunately too often they
believed that in preparing a biography a gentleman was under
obligation to speak well of the dead. No blemishes were to be
recognized, no disagreeable truths to find a place in their immacu-
late pages. In consequence scarcely a single commentary of the
times is to be trusted, and the critic is reduced to patching together


x INTRODUCTION


his account out of scanty odds and ends, or else settling down to
do a series of full-length portraits, in which work, quite evidently,
he will not get far. The inadequacies of the present study I am
painfully conscious of: its omissions, its doubtful interpretations,
its hasty generalizations, its downright guesses; but in the present
lack of exact knowledge of the history of American letters, I do
not see how such inadequacies can be avoided.


CONTENTS


Intropuction: Delimitations of period; romance and economic
change; differentiating imperialisms of East, South, West; roman-
tic philosophies: Physiocratic agrarianism, French equalitarian-
ism, English laissez faire; a counter-philosophy—slavery and a
Greek democracy


BOOK I: THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


The mind of the South old-fashioned. Two germinal sources: Vir-
ginia, from which derived Kentucky and Tennessee; South Caro-
lina, from which derived the Black Belt


Part I
The Virginia Renaissance


I. Tue Otp Dominion: The mother of the agrarian West.
Transition from middle-class to plantation ideals.
Increasingly libertarian

II. Tue Herirace or JEFFERSONTANISM

1. Jeffersonianism an expression of native conditions.
Interpreted in terms of Physiocratic agrarianism,
natural rights. Terminable nature of compact the
source of states-rights doctrine. Struggle between
capitalistic and agrarian economics. Virginia the
leader of the latter movement

u. John Taylor—Agrarian Economist: Leader oar the
young Republicans. His works. Theory founded
in Physiocratic doctrine. Aristocratic origins of the
political state. Examination of the principles of John
Adams, Hamilton—social classes derive from exploita-
tion. Danger of a paper aristocracy. His philosophy
summarized Pie,

III. Joun Marsuatt—Last of re pan Peleplices
His strategic position. Middle-class sympathies;
intellectual qualities. A politician on the bench.
Two fixed ideas: sovereignty of the federal state;
sanctity of private property. His decisions Federal-
istic. Two main groups: sovereignty of the judiciary;
irrevocable nature of contract. The Yazoo Fraud
case. An arch conservative

X1


PAGE


ill


Io


14


20


xi


CONTENTS


IV. Tue Oxtper Prantation Minp


I.


Plantation backgrounds: The literary renaissance
followed English romantic movement. Kennedy’s
Swallow Barn and the rise of the plantation tradi-
tion .


. William Wirt: The man-cembadinent ios Geleenth-


century culture. The British Spy—characteristics.
Life of Patrick Henry—solution of the problem.
Later shift in political sympathies

Nathaniel Beverley Tucker—A Virginia ‘Fire-eater.
His parochialism; his pessimism. The Partisan
Leader—a dramatization of Calhoun’s philosophy;
the note of romantic extravagance. Hatred of democ-
racy—appeal to South Carolina .


V. ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE


I.


William Alexander Caruthers and the transition to
romance. The Kentuckian in New York, a contribu-
tion to intersectional good will. An appreciation of
northern qualities; a criticism of slavery. The Cava-
liers of Virginia, the new spirit of romance. His slight
reputation. .

John Pendleton Kennedy—A southern Whig: The
man—Jeffersonian backgrounds; influence of Edward
Gray. Turned protectionist, accepted the doctrine
of progress. A romantic; an amateur. Swallow
Barn—an idyl of plantation life—slavery. Horse-Shoe
Robinson; Rob of the Bowl—cavalier romance. Quod-
libet-—a Whig satire of Meret tn, His later
career :
Edgar Allan Poe: Relations to southern € environment—
his prejudices against New England. Aloofness from
Virginia ideals. A problem a abnormal psychology
and belletristic criticism. An artist and a critic


Part II


The Renaissance of Slavery


I. SourHern Impertarism: Shift in attitude towards slavery


—consequences to Jeffersonian democracy. The Black
Belt—reasons why cotton became king. Reaction of
the South to imperialism. Jefferson Davis—his
character


TI. Winps or Pourticat Doctrine


I.


Three streams of thought: Virginia humanitarianism,
western individualism, Carolina imperialism. In-
creasing dominance of the third. Rise of a defensive
strategy; appeal to the Constitution


. . °


PAGE


28


30


35


4l


46


oy,


61


67


CONTENTS xii


PAGE
mt. John C. Calhoun—Realist. His influence—destroyed
Jeffersonianism for the new South. A southern Puri-
tan. His early career—a nationalist. The year 1828
a turning-point—recognition of the danger of democ-
racy to slavery. Two lines of defense: states rights,
constitutional checks. Amplification of the second by
extension of the principle of the veto. Failure of
existing checks to protect minorities. Fallacy in the
conception of democratic majorities—an obscuring
of the economic basis of politics. Doctrine of the
concurrent majority. Conception of democracy—an
attack on theory of natural rights. His Ljgpian a
Greek democracy. Likenessto John Adams . . 69
mi. Alexander H. Stephens—Constitutionalist: The man—
passion for freedom under law. His localism expressed
in states rights. A confirmed liberal—fear of extra-
legal powers. His Constitutional View of the War
between the States. Theory of the terminable nature of
compact—doctrine of good will. A political thinker,
rather thaneconomic. Positiononslavery. . 82
Francis Lieber—A New-Modeled Federalism: A Ger-
man liberal influenced by English constitutional
practice and the common law. His doctrine of histor-
ical evolution. Liberty founded in institutional self-
government. A laissez-faire conception of the polit-
icabstate. cin PLCs | in ee
III. THe Dream oF a Gursk Democracy
1. Difficulty of the southern position. A reply to north-
ern industrialism—civilization and labor exploitation.
Contrast between wage-slavery and black slavery—
certain advantages of the latter. Southern aon to
Uncle Tom’s Cabin. . . 99
mu. William J. Grayson: The iiine aia WASae as a
southern document. A contrast: the wretchedness
of the wage-slave in industrial centers; the content-
ment of the black slave on the plantation. His attack
on Abolitionists . . Reiaa ae eG mite) y's ire 2 103
IV. ApvVENTURES IN Bellen Learas
1. Old Charleston: The capital of the planters—aristo-
cratic, Puritan, Victorian. Traditional home of Fed-
eralism. Culture old-fashioned. A distinguished
society . | 109
u. William Crafes=-Charleston Wit: A southern Robert
Treat Paine, seeking to domesticate Boston culture
in Charleston. His work ; Mt. LEZ
m. Hugh Swinton Legaré—Intellectual: A southern
Puritan. His career. A legal scholar, interpreting


4


XIV


CONTENTS


politics in terms of the common law. A lexolater,
contemptuous of political philosophers. A juridical
romantic. Accepted the economics of Jatssez faire
and capitalism. Pessimistic in regard to the South.
Hostile to Nullification and Calhoun. The weakness
ofslavery . .


. William Gilmore Simms: A plebeian snubbed by


Charleston, yet loyal to the Charleston parochial-
isms. A realist hampered by the current romanti-
cisms. The most virile figure of the old South. A rich
and generous nature—likeness to Fielding. The
picaresque note in his work. Reasons for his exploi-
tation of “blood-pudding.” Lieutenant Porgy. His
two major themes: his special frontier compared with
Cooper’s; his revolutionary tales. His treatment of
the Indian. The Yemassee, compared with Cooper.
Laterilifes 20 ee


Part III
The Romance of the West


I. New Wor tps
1. The Inland Empire and Jeffersonianism. Romance and


social change. Rise of the middle class, and clash of
philosophies. Economic origins of western Whiggery


mm. Henry Clay: The embodiment of Whiggery. Reason


for his shift from Jeffersonianism. His theory of
paternalism


II. Two SpokEsMEN OF THE Weer
1. Andrew Jackson—Agrarian Liberal: The rise of west-


ern equalitarianism. Federalist contempt for a Demo-
crat. Jackson our first great popular leader. Char-
acteristics. Early drift towards middle-class position;
reaction to agrarianism. Repudiation of Whiggery.
Hatred of aristocracy. His attitude toward the Bank
a return to the economics of John Taylor. His attitude
towards the state a modified Jeffersonianism. His
influence on American democracy. Effect on later
Whig strategy


K Lincolncetrecsoul Tberal: Likeraicm and ine Dees


laration of Independence. A Jeffersonian who came to
the defense of natural rights. Equalitarianism and
laissez faire. The problem of free soil—a realist
seeking to reconcile them. His “divided house”
position an appeal to political realism. Good will
versus coercive sovereignty. The prose of his speeches.
Lincoln and the myth-makers_.


ae Vann


PAGE


114


125


137


I4L


145


152


CONTENTS XV


PAGE
III. Tue Frontier rn Letrers: Romance and the Inland
Empire. Two main conceptions: Boone and the
Dark and Bloody Ground; Crockett and frontier
humor . . : oy 161
1. The Romantic Frontier yay As ee eK
u. The Realistic Frontier
(1) Augustus Longstreet and the Georgia Frontier:
The native realism of Georgia life. A frontier
plebeian who developed middle-class qualities.
A follower of Calhoun, but at bottom a Jefferson-
ian agrarian. With the rise of Abolitionism aban-
doned natural-rights philosophy. Georgia Scenes—
the note ofrealism 166
(2) The Davy Crockett Myth: The ‘popular appeal of
the Narrative and the rise of the Crockett myth.
Origin at Washington. Three stages: frontier
waggery; anti-Jackson spleen; the Alamo adven-
ture. A Whig attempt to catch the coonskin
vote—a by-product of Jacksonian methods. The
beginnings in Sketches and Eccentricities. Effect
on Davy. The Tour and the Life of Martin
Van Buren. Conjectural authorship. How Davy
was made a Whig. The Exploits and Adventures.
The Narrative—the real Davyawastrel . . . 172


BOOK II: THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


A product of two centers: eee New York. Lack of intel-
lectualbackgrounds . .. . SLY Se i 8 Ma aN Pome
I. Tue Otp CapitaL
1. Philadelphia the capital of the older American culture.
Its contributions to the Revolutionary debates. Its
economic prospects curtailed by topography. Its
decline with the removal of the national capital . . 185
ut. Brockden Brown and French liberalisms—influence
of Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft. Explanation
of their appeal. Alcuin; A Dialogue. Arthur Mervyn,
a study in Godwinianism. Wieland and the “blood-
pudding” school. Influence on later fiction in America 188
m. Robert Montgomery Bird: His contributions to the
romantic drama. Nick of the Woods—a realistic
treatment of the Indian. A contribution to the myth
ME MOcterruiisinon erie slit ike eas , 3 E90
Il. Tae New Capitar
1. New York an economic rather than a cultural capital.
Reasons for its rise. The older Knickerbocker world


XV1


Il.


II.


IV.


CONTENTS


disintegrating. Stephen Van Rensselaer and John
Jacob Astor he
Intellectual backerounds: lace Brcreativences: Polit-
ical divisions. Emergence of the boss—Martin Van
Buren and Thurlow Weed

James Kent: The last of the old Federalist school.
His political theory—a disciple of Fisher Ames. His
Commentaries on American Law .

Beginnings of the renaissance: Saaqennds The lorie
Papers. Fitz-Greene Halleck. His views—attitude
towards the proletariat. Connecticut; Fanny. The
last of the Wits


Ill. Two KwnickERBOCKER Ravn


De


Washington Irving: His detachment. A fla@neur. His
years abroad. Reaction to the Reform Bill. An
incipient liberal. Rediscovery of America. The
mission to Madrid. Contrast with Cooper. Political
principles—drift towards the middle class. 4 Tour
of the Prairies, Astoria, Life of W es His early
and late work contrasted


. James Kirke Paulding: His oes son Se the


people, distrustful of the middle class. Defense of
America against the English critics. His idealism.
The Backwoodsman; The Puritan and his Daughter.
His rejection of English “blood-pudding” romantic.
A Jeffersonian: Letters from the South an echo of John
Taylor’s agrarianism; opposed Clay’s American Plan;
satirized Clay in Koningsmarke. Westward Ho!; The
Dutchman’s Fireside. An amateur in letters


IV. James FentmoreE Cooper—Critic: The problem a


Cooper. A barometer of his generation. Troubled by
the transition from an aristocratic to a capitalistic
order—lingered between worlds. His Tory origins—
Judge William Cooper. Abandoned Federalism yet
ill content with Democracy. Effect of his European
travels. Likeness to John Adams—hated all cant.
Two phases of his criticism: the older Federalist
theories; the fallacies of capitalism. The Monikins—
an attack on the stake-in-society theory. The Red-
skins—an attack on capitalistic exploitation. A
romanticized eighteenth century his refuge against
the vulgarities of Jacksonianism and capitalism.
Home as Found and The Redskins as studies in social
criticism. His love of the wilderness and hatred of
the frontier. The anti-rent trilogy. Picture of the
squatter. His growing realism—Wyandotté. His
later political philosophy—an ethical interpretation


PAGE


193


195


197


199


203


212


CONTENTS XVii


PAGE
of sovereignty. Failure of the critics to understand
Cooper ahi. ‘ iis e222


V. Some Goumuwarions OF RNase Aileen
1. William Cullen Bryant—Puritan Liberal: Injustice
done him by neglect of his journalistic work. An
original mind. Transition from Federalist to Demo-
crat. Influence of the English economists—an
English liberal. Never a Jeffersonian, but anti-Whig.
Influence of William Leggett and Parke Godwin.
Attitude towards the labor movement. Defense of
free speech. Accriticoftherising capitalism . . 238
u. Horace Greeley—Yankee Radical: A practical man
seeking a way out of the confusions of the times. His
early life; defense of protectionism. His working
back to Jeffersonianism. Interest in Fourierism.
Champion of the farmer and the wage-earner. His
“Vote Yourself a Farm” policy. Interest in the pro-
letariat—interpretation of a be aa
An idealist sells 247
mm. Herman Melville—Pessimist: The source of his pes-
simism in life itself—effect of frustrations. His ances-
try: the Gansevoort strain; the Melville strain. Con-
trast between mother and son; effect of his marriage.
Stages toward pessimism marked by Typee, Mardt,
Moby Dick, Pierre. Transcendentalism and reality.
His democracy. A critic of America. Spiritual dis-
satisfactions—Clarel OME coi. acer SES


BOOK III: THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


The New England renaissance the last expression in America of
eighteenth-century revolutionary thought. Given a native eth-
ical bias. Twin tendencies of earlier New England. Static condi-
tions of life—the renaissance a movement of liberalism, shaped
UNSER LSCEL SOCAN ea aa le ial Oh ie i ale a 7 2 |


Part I
The Twilight of Federalism


I. Tue Passinc or THE T1E-Wic ScHooL

1. Old Boston: Conservatism of temper—a reaction from
the revolutionary enthusiasm of 776. Emphasized by
refusal to entertain French romantic theories. The
renaissance delayed a generation. The home of the
stake-in-society principle; opposition to democracy . 275

u. Fisher Ames and the Tie-Wig School: The spokesman
of Boston Federalism. A conservative, given to pessi-
mism. His political philosophy an adaptation of


XViil CONTENTS


PAGE
English Whiggery to the Calvinistic conception of
stewardship; based on an absolute morality. Prosper-
ity and the Saints—the end of government to protect
property; hence it must be strong and coercive. Fear
of faction. A repository of aristocratic prejudice . . 279
mi. Robert Treat Paine, Jr.—Wit: The last of the eight-
eenth-century Wits. His verse. A Tory—attitude
towards the French Revolution. His prose. Con-
temptior jacob doctrine, (ans) uaiaa ees 3) 255


II. Winps oF Potrticat Doctrine
1. Changing economics after 1812—rIise of industrialism.
A new spirit of nationalism. Danger of agrarianism,
particularism. Rise of the Whig party—middle-class
capitalistic. Menace of the new southern school of
states rights. Need of a new nationalistic theory of
the Constitution . 296
u. Work begun by Joseph Story: A NMaceachuseeen! Re
publican. Characteristics of New England Repub-
licanism. His shift to Whiggery. His Commentaries
on the Constitution: derived from the common law and
The Federalist. His view of the compact—interpreta-
tion of “Wethe people” . . 299
mi. Daniel Webster—Realist and Constitueionalist Con-
trasted with Emerson—English in temperament.
Two periods of intellectual development: an eight-
eenth-century realist before 1825; a legalist after-
wards. A disciple of Harrington. Two early speeches:
The Basis of the Senate, The First Settlement of New
England—an elaboration of the economic basis of
politics. His economic theory—laissez faire. Shift
to protectionism due to changing economics of his con-
stituents. His reply to Hayne. His constitutional
theory in The Constitution not a Compact—his debt to
Story. His position on slavery—The Seventh of
March Speech. Effect on his reputation. Comment
of liberals. The Dartmouth College case. His failure. 304


Part II
The Rise of Liberalism


I. Tue Renaissance: The movement of liberalism more
pronounced in New England because long restrained.
Ethical rather than economic; German rather than
French. Many-sided but rebellious. . . . . . 317

II. Liseratism AND CALVINISM

1. The stir in the church. French romanticism and
Unitarianism. The conservative reaction. The


CONTENTS


dilemma of Calvinism—efforts to escape the horns of
dogma. The growth of rationalism. The philosophy
of Unitarianism—a recovery of the principle of prim-
itive Congregationalism. Elements of conservatism


. William Ellery Channing: A spiritual nature, con-


cerned with two cardinal ideas: God’s love, man’s ex-
cellence. Slow clarification of his thought. Major
tenets derived from Rousseau and the English Arians.
Attitude toward slavery. Theory of the political
state—approximation to the position of Jefferson. On
freedom of speech—the vital principle of Unitarian-
ism ;


III. Liperatism AND THE SocIAL CONSCIENCE


I.


A


IV.


The Social Mind: The Puritan conscience individual
rather than social. Influence of Unitarianism in
awakening a sense of social responsibility. Beginnings
of reform :

Perfectionism: An extreme expression ior ‘ethical
radicalism. John Humphrey Noyes, a Yankee Fifth
Monarchy man. His cl a aaa ge in Con-
ventions


. Brook Farm: An actenipt at an economic solution of


social maladjustments. Influence of transcendental-
ism. Attitude of certain transcendentalists. Hostility
to Fourierism

Abolitionism: The Beet aine of the New England
conscience to the evil of slavery. The Abolitionists a
remnant in Israel—their characteristics


IV. Certain Miitants


I.


William Lloyd Garrison: A flinty character. His early
life. The Liberator. A primitive Hebraist—his antag-
onisms. His political theory founded on the Declara-
tion of Independence. A Perfectionist. Nullified the
Constitution. The strength and weakness of his
methods . .

John G. Whittier—Puritan-Quaker: The ‘religion of
the Inner Light. A primitive Christian—a Come-
outer. Significance of Leaves from Margaret Smith’s
Journal. The politician amongst the Abolitionists.
Reasons for his break with Garrison. Not a political
thinker. His Abolitionist verse. His later verse. An
anachronism in industrial New England.


. Harriet Beecher Stowe—A Daughter of Puritanism:


Her Calvinist heredity. A sympathetic student of
New England psychology. Intellectual antecedents.
Old-Town Folks; Poganuc People. The Minister’s


xix


PAGE


321


328


339


342


346


350


352


361


XX CONTENTS


PAGE
Wooing a defense of the Calvinist clergy. Her contact
with slavery—Uncle Tom’s Cabin; Dred  . . « « 371


Part III
. The Transcendental Mind


I. Tue GENEsIs oF TRANSCENDENTALISM: An expression
of metaphysical Utopianism. Idealism long starved in
New England. Derived from Unitarian doctrine of
the open mind. German idealism and native im-
pulses. A_ glorification of conscience and will—
romantic. The note of mysticism. The outcome a
movement of criticism. . . . é 2-379


II. Rate Watpo Preskeok “ah anseeddoneal Cane iH
theory of transcendental criticism. The early Emer-
son—an ascetic. Influence of first trip abroad—
Nature. The gist of Emersonianism. Reasons for the
contrast between the real and ideal. Estimate of
democracy; theory of the political state—the ethical
absolute—a transcendental Jeffersonianism. Theory
of economics—bias towards Physiocratic conception.

A critic of contemporary America—its materialisms.
Attitude towards reform . . . cee :. 386


III. Henry Tooreau—Transcendental Reonence He Lifes
business to explore the meaning of wealth. His life an
experiment in values. A Concord man who “signed
off.” A Hellenist interpreting spiritual values. The
problem of economics stated. Significance of Walden—
suggestions of William Morris. The challenge of
slavery: Civil Disobedience. Compared with Godwin’s
Political Justice—doctrine of individual syndicalism.
Admiration for John Brown. The extremest expres-
sion of eighteenth-century individualism . . . 400


IV. TuHeopore ParKER—Transcendental Minister: His Pan
acteristics: a fighting man, a revolutionary. Sermon
on The Transient and Permanent in Christianity—
marks the second stage of Unitarianism. His studies
in higher criticism; his doctrine. His conception of
human _perfectibility—evolutionary. A_ primitive
democrat; a political critic. Attack on current materi-
alisms—criticism of Webster. Amodern . . . . 414


yy V. Marcaret FuLtter—Rebel: An embodiment of tran-
scendental rebellions. The contradictions in her
character as explained by Freudian psychology. Her
training—a victim of sex. Contemporary analysis of
her character An intellectual child of eighteenth-


CONTENTS XXi


PAGE
century romanticisms—influence of Goethe. Tran-
scendentalism—Brook Farm. Woman in the Nine-
teenth Century and feminism. Work as a critic.
Career in Europe. Influence of Jean Jacques. The
price of her rebellions eon ats <x 4g6


Part IV
Other Aspects of the New England Mind


I. Tue REIGN oF THE GENTEEL
1. Brahminism and the genteel in letters—a_ refined
ethicism. Dislike of realistic methods. Lowell’s
position. 435
um. Brahminism and hitenn The New England school:
Ticknor, Jared Sparks—methods of the latter. Ban-
croft’s History of the United States—an attempt at a
democratic interpretation. Prescott, Motley, Park-
man—followers of the romantic school. Parkman
considered. 437
mr. Longfellow: Influence of Germany. A poet of the
library—his aloofness—his translations. The “avis
poems. Characteristics . . 7) £39
II. NaTHANIEL Hiricter enue. A erseeene de-
tached, rationalistic, unhopeful, skeptical about
Utopias. Neither transcendental nor Unitarian in
philosophy, but curious concerning evil. Intellectually
unlocalized—his aloofness from romantic Salem. Like
Jonathan Edwards in probing the psychology of sin.
Tendency to symbolism and allegory. His intellec-
tual poverty—revealed in American Notes. Brook
Farm and The Blithedale Romance—reasons for his
interpretation of Hollingsworth and Margaret Fuller.
Wherstenlityiof his lateryears 7 Gs sw RD
III. Tue Autuentic BraHMIN
1. Oliver Wendell Holmes—Beacon Street Wit: Decline
of his reputation. Holmes and Paine as wits. A child
of the eighteenth century turned romantic. A ration-
alist—hatred of Calvinism. Defense of Boston—a
Brahmin rebel defending free thought. Attack on
equalitarianism—dislike of the plutocracy—indiffer-
ent to proletarian problems. His heroes respectable.
Anamateur—a minorfigure . . pee |.) AoE
u. James Russell Lowell—Cambridge Brahmin: Of
the true Brahmin line. His intellectual confusions.
Influence of his Tory heritage—the Lowells. His
course determined by environment and certain dom-


XXil


CONTENTS


inant personalities. Three periods of his intellectual
life: the Maria White period and his immersion in cur-
rent radicalisms—reflections in his verse and prose;
the professorial period—immersion in scholarship—
his shortcomings as a critic—as a political writer; the
ambassadorial period—influence of Godkin—resur-
gence of Brahmin conservatism—fear of democracy—
of agrarian and proletarian movements—concern at
political corruption—failure to understand its causes—
faith in civil service reform. His escape to London—
the final Lowellan English liberal . . . .


Conc.uston: Effects of the Civil War on earlier romanticisms—
destruction of the slave economy; strengthening of the rival
agrarian and capitalistic economies. Certain anachronisms—
eighteenth-century liberalism—local home rule—submerged by
movement of consolidation. Romantic literary schools became


obsolete.


The sovereignty of the middle class and the emergence


of realistic criticism


BIBLIOGRAPHY .


INDEX


PAGE


460


473
475
483


BOOK ONE: THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


er Wy

ee Te
(ey ks

UTTAR ese


BOOK ONE
THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


To those who follow the main-traveled road of American experi-
ence, as we know it today, the mind of the old South seems
curiously remote. It is so archaic, so wholly apart from all present-
day ambitions, as to appear singular. Yet the continental highways
we now travel so familiarly, it must be remembered, were not
the highways of an earlier America. It is the North that has
changed, and not the South, and the nationality that sits so easily
upon us would have seemed ominous to the simpler world that
determined the ideals of the Old Dominion. The southern mind
has grown old-fashioned, but it is native and of long and honor-
able descent. It derived its singularity from the eighteenth cen-
tury in which it took shape; and it retained the clear impress of
its origins long after the eighteenth century had become an an-
achronism in America. It was primarily political, of the French
rather than the English school; but it was economic also, out of
Quesnay and Du Pont de Nemours rather than Adam Smith,
with a frank bias towards the Physiocratic agrarianism that was
so congenial to the needs and temper of a plantation society;
and this political agrarianism, parochial in its outlook rather than
national, suffices to explain the singularity of the southern mind
in the eyes of a later industrialized America.

Simple and homogeneous in the early years of the nineteenth
century, it nevertheless carried the seeds of disruption within it.
Beneath the surface of this common political agrarianism disinte-
grating forces were at work, that were to produce broad cleavages
of thought and lead to sharp differences of outlook and polity.
An old South and a new South dwelt side by side, and to the West
lay a frontier that took particular form as it came under the de-
termining influence of one or the other. Virginia and South Caro-
lina were the germinal centers of southern culture, from which
issued the creative ideas that gave special forms to the brood of
frontier states. Kentucky and Tennessee were the intellectual
heirs of Virginia; Alabama and Mississippi were the intellectual

3


4 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


heirs of South Carolina. Of these two schools of thought that
looked in different directions and sought different ends, Jefferson
and Calhoun were the intellectual leaders; and the contrasts in
their philosophies—the rejection by the latter of equalitarian
idealism, and the substitution of economic realism—mark the di-
verse tendencies which in the end disrupted the South. Jackson
and Lincoln were followers of the Jeffersonian school; Jefferson
Davis finally went with Calhoun; and Henry Clay, lacking an
adequate philosophy, wavered between them. The differences
between these men were open and patent, and any analysis of
the mind of the South, any attempt to understand the conflict
of tendencies that marked the development of southern’ thought
between 1800 and 1860, must give due weight to such differences.
The problem, therefore, instead of being single is threefold, and
involves an examination of the mind of Virginia, the mind of
South Carolina, and the mind of the new West from the Ohio River
to the Gulf.


PART ONE: THE VIRGINIA RENAISSANCE


CHAPTER I
THE OLD DOMINION


THE history of the Old Dominion is an easy chapter in the text-
‘book of economic determinism. It is a modern instance that
exemplifies the law of land distribution and political control as laid
down by James Harrington; it is another Oceana seated by the
James River, that would not suffer a king to rule because gentlemen
held the land and acknowledged no feudal dues or royal preroga-
tives. On the surface its history seems little more than a bundle of
paradoxes. From the raw materials of English middle-class stock
it created a distinguished and capable aristocracy, that was re-
strained from feudal tyranny by a vigorous yeomanry that held
its land in fee simple and stoutly maintained its rights. Established
on a slave economy, it adopted an agrarian economy, espoused a
republic, and accepted the doctrine of democratic equalitarianism.
It was generous, humanitarian, independent; parochial in its
jealousies, yet farsighted in outlook; tenacious of its authority
and quick to defend it, yet never mean or grasping. During the
_ noonday of its power its influence was always on the side of local
democratic freedom and the common well-being. It opposed the
encroachments of the centralizing state and the spirit of capitalistic
exploitation; yet its domestic economy rested on the most primitive
of all exploitation.
_ But these paradoxes disappear when the history of Virginia is
interpreted in the light of its land economy. By force of cir-
cumstances the Old Dominion became broadly American in its
social philosophy, the interpreter of America to herself. Native
| conditions created there a native psychology, and this native
psychology spread widely through the frontier states where a like
economics provided suitable breeding places. Virginia was the
mother of the agrarian West, as New York, Philadelphia, and
Boston were the progenitors of the mercantile and industrial
5


6 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


East; and in the frequent clashes between country and town,
between agrarianism and capitalism, the ideas of Virginia have
commonly opposed the ideas of the northern cities. Between the
older colonial America and later industrial America, stand the
ideals of the Old Dominion, more humane and generous than
either, disseminating the principles of French romantic philosophy,
and instilling into the provincial American mind, static and stag-
nant in the grip of English colonialism, the ideal of democratic
equalitarianism and the hope of humane progress. The nineteenth
century first entered America by way of the James River.

The renaissance in Virginia began with the transition from
middle-class to plantation ideals that marked the last half of the
eighteenth century; and it was given intellectual stimulus by the
libertarian natural-rights philosophy that in England and France

/ was undermining the old order. There were no cities either mer-
eantile or social, in the Old Dominion, and no industrialism. Life
\everywhere centered in the plantation. The navigable rivers
of the tide-water region were favorable to the development of a
decentralized economics, and in spite of royal commands to create
adequate seaports, and heavy taxes by the commonwealth, trading
towns did not prosper. For two hundred years Virginia refused to
create a native middleman group to handle its staples, but pre-
ferred to deal through British factors and ship directly, preferably
in Dutch bottoms. Each planter insisted on putting his hogsheads
of tobacco aboard ship at his own wharf, and receiving his mer-
chandise direct from London. The system was wasteful, and
Madison was active in an attempt to limit by law the ports of
entry to two, in order to build up a middleman machinery; but
the plan broke on the fixed prejudices of plantation masters who
had come to share the old English dislike of tradesmen. Virginia
stubbornly refused to adopt middle-class methods, even though re-
fusal cost her dear. She preferred to be exploited by British
factors rather than create a domestic class to devour her resources.

The system had grown up in earlier times when the merchant
spirit was strong in Virginia. It is often assumed that the Virginia
aristocracy was descended from emigrant Cavaliers who fled from
England during the commonwealth period; but the facts of
history do not bear out such a theory. It was descended largely
from vigorous middle-class stock—from men who had been mer-
chants in England and in turning planters brought to the business


THE OLD DOMINION 7


qualities that had been developed in mercantile pursuits. In the
seventeenth century Virginia society exhibited few of the usual
characteristics of the Cavalier. It was frankly bourgeois, pushing,
avaricious, keen in driving hard bargains, with no high sense of
honor, canny rather than impulsive, preferring the law to the
duel, hating war and only half-hearted in defense against the
Indians—a little world of London burgesses new seated on the
banks of the James and the Rappahannock. ‘Beyond doubt,”
concludes a recent student, “‘the most numerous section of the
Virginia aristocracy was derived from the English merchant
class”? (Thomas J. Wertenbaker, Patrician and Plebeian in Vir-
ginia, p. 28), pretty much the same class that settled Boston and
Philadelphia. For a hundred and fifty years these merchant
ideals characterized Virginia society. Speculation in land was
universal; exploitation was open and shameless; the highest
officials took advantage of their positions to loot the public domain,
resorting to divers sharp practices from tax dodging to outright
theft. One gentleman added a cipher to a grant for two thousand
acres, and although the fraud was commonly known, so great was
his influence that no one disputed his title to twenty thousand
acres. While governor, Alexander Spotswood issued patents for
sixty thousand acres to dummy holders, who deeded the land to
him after he had retired from office.!

In the third quarter of the eighteenth century such practices
came to anend. The merchant spirit died out among the Virginia
planters, and the Cavalier spirit took its place. A high sense of
personal and civic honor became the hall-mark of the landed
aristocracy, and for upwards of a hundred years this common code
gave to Virginia an enviable distinction. Both in national and
commonwealth politics her representatives were clean-handed and
jealous to deserve the public faith reposed in them. Among the
planters were good business men, of course, notably Washington,
who under his stately manners concealed a capable mind for
speculative affairs. He engaged in various enterprises; speculated
heavily in western lands; was president of the Potomac Company,
organized to improve navigation and connect his holdings with
salt water; and at his death was one of the wealthiest men in
America. But such a career was very unusual in Virginia after


1 For these and other facts, see Wertenbaker’s book (mentioned above), pp. 95-
99.


8 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


the Revolutionary War. Washington, indeed, may properly be
regarded as the last of the eighteenth-century gentlemen, who like
Colonel William Byrd was interested in accumulating vast holdings
as well as cultivating his plantation. Even more characteristic
of an earlier day was John Marshall, the last of the great Virginia
Federalists, who was nearer akin to Robert Morris, with whom he
had business dealings, than with Jefferson or John Randolph of
Roanoke.

The opportunity for such careers in Virginia was passing.
Population was draining off into the West and few immigrants
came to settle. With no rapidly growing cities the incentive to
speculate in unearned increment was lacking and liquid capital was
inadequate. The economics of plantation life developed agrarian
rather than capitalistic interests. In the midst of a rapidly chang-
ing America, a world given over to exploitation, increasingly mid-
dle class and contemptuous of the older aristocratic order, the
Old Dominion remained static and unchanging. The plantation
aristocracy was marooned by the rising tide. It repudiated the
ways of trade and industry and sharply criticised the North for
its plebeian spirit. ‘‘Commerce is certainly beneficial to society
in a secondary degree,” said Governor Tyler in 1810, addressing
the Virginia legislature, “but it produces also what is called citi-
zens of the world—the worst citizens in the world” (quoted in
Wertenbaker, Patrician and Plebeian in Virginia, p. 102). Enter-
prising young men who a generation before would have been strong
Federalists and supported the new capitalism, found such an
atmosphere stifling and migrated to the new South—to Kentucky,
Tennessee, Mississippi, or farther West still, where greater oppor-
tunity awaited them. Virginia produced no more Washingtons
or Marshalls, but turned whole-heartedly to the school of Jefferson,
providing the leaders of states-rights agrarianism. She broke off
all intellectual alliances with the mercantile and industrial North,
and withdrew within her own plantation world.

Purged thus of its Federalist remnant Virginia became increas-
ingly libertarian in its social and political philosophy. Its mind had
taken form at the time when French humanitarianism was in the
air, and it discovered much in the new philosophy that appealed
to its romantic spirit. A quick and jealous concern for personal
liberty and the rights of man was a common passion. The gentle-
men of the Old Dominion were bound together by caste solidarity,


THE OLD DOMINION 9


but they remained strikingly individual, never amenable to group
coercion, expressing their convictions freely and ready to uphold
their views by the code of the duel. ‘No people ever lived,” said
Alexander H. Stephens in 1867, “more devoted to the principles
of liberty, secured by free democratic institutions, than the people
of the South” (Constitutional View, etc., Vol. I, p. 539). The right
of dissent from majority opinion was the imprescriptible right of
every gentleman. In no other part of America could the career
of John Randolph be paralleled—a free-lance critic of politicians
and political measures, who turned his caustic wit against whom he
would, an arch individualist in opinions as other Americans were
in acquisitiveness. Politics was an absorbing game in Virginia.
Debarred from commercial pursuits, ambitious young Virginians
went in for law and politics, with an eye upon a congenial career
at Washington. This serves to explain the long predominance
of southern leadership in the national government. For two
generations the South provided a surprising number of first-class
men whose influence was commanding. Until the problem of
slavery became acute, and leadership passed from moderate
Virginians to Fire Eaters from further south, the influence of
Virginia at Washington was thrown on the side of republican
simplicity, low taxes and the decentralization of power. The
armed clash over slavery very probably might have been averted
if the spirit of the Old Dominion had prevailed.


CHAPTER II


THE HERITAGE OF JEFFERSONIANISM
Ive
To the young Virginia Republicans of the year 1800, Jeffersonian-
ism seemed to be a comprehensive social philosophy peculiarly
adapted to their needs. It offered a practical and humane pro-
gram of national development in harmony with existing fact
and native genius. It had not yet been distorted by the caprice
of circumstance into a somewhat nebulous idealism, nor confined
within the narrower limits of political equalitarianism and states-
rights theory. By later generations Jefferson has been interpreted
too exclusively in terms of the Declaration of Independence, the
glowing idealism of which has proved curiously elastic and has
been stretched by later libertarian movements to meet their
special and particular ends: by the Jacksonian democracy in
their struggle for manhood suffrage; by the Abolitionists in their
attack upon a slave-sanctioning Constitution; by other idealists
in their various crusades. The great name of Jefferson, in conse-
quence, has come to be commonly associated with the conception
of democracy and the ideal of social justice. But to his young
Virginia followers in the morning of the Republican movement,
the perennial suggestiveness of their leader lay in the fact that
he embodied for them the many-sided liberalism of French rev-
olutionary thought, its economic and social idealisms equally
with political. They interpreted him more adequately, for they
understood, as later interpreters frequently have not, how deeply
the roots of his natural-rights philosophy went down into current
economics. Of the different French writers who gave shape
and substance to his thinking, the strongest creative influence
on the mature Jefferson came from the Physiocratic group, from
Quesnay, Condorcet, Mirabeau, Du Pont de Nemours, the bril-
liant founders of an economy that was primarily social rather than
narrowly industrial or financial. Historically the Physiocratic
school is as sharply aligned with idealistic agrarianism as the
Manchester school is aligned with capitalistic industrialism. The
10


JEFFERSONIANISM 11


conception that agriculture is the single productive form of labor,
that from it alone comes the produit net or ultimate net labor
increment, and that bankers, manufacturers and middlemen be-
long to the class of sterile workers, profoundly impressed the Vir-
ginia mind, bred up in a plantation economy and concerned for
the welfare and dignity of agriculture.

Franklin had first given currency to the Physiocratic theory in
America a generation earlier, but it was Jefferson who spread it
widely among the Virginia planters. He did more; he provided
the new agrarianism with a politics and a sociology. From the
wealth of French writers he formulated a complete libertarian
philosophy. His receptive mind was saturated with romantic
idealism which assumed native, congenial form in precipitation.
From Rousseau, Godwin and Paine, as well as from Quesnay and
Condorcet, came the idea of political justice and the conception of
a minimized political state, assuming slightly different forms from
filtering through different minds. The early doctrine of laissez
faire, laissez passer—a phrase given currency by Gournay, the
godfather of the Physiocratic school—proved to be curiously fruit-
ful in the field of political speculation, as in economic. From it
issued a sanction for natural rights, the theory of progress, the law
of justice, and the principle of freedom. The right of coercion was
restricted by it to the narrowest limits, and the political state was
shorn of all arbitrary power. “Authority,” the Physiocratic
thinkers concluded, “should only employ the force of the commu-
nity to compel madmen and depraved men to make their conduct
conform to the principles of justice.”’

So far Jefferson went gladly with the Physiocrats, but in their
acceptance of a benevolent despotism he discovered a denial of
their first principles, and turned to the more congenial demo-
cratic group. With the political principles of Godwin and Paine he
was in hearty accord. With them he accepted as an historical
fact the principle that government is everywhere and always at
war with natural freedom, and from this he deduced the character-
istic doctrine that the lover of freedom will be jealous of delegated
power, and will seek to hold the political state to strict account.
From this same principle, following Paine, he deduced the doc-
trine of the terminable nature of compact, which he set over
against the legal doctrine of inviolability. In this matter French
liberalism and English legalism were at opposite poles. Replying


12 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


to Burke’s doctrine of irrevocable compact, Paine had written
The Rights of Man, which Jefferson did much to popularize in
America, and with the broad principles of which he was in complete
accord. “The earth belongs in usufruct to the living,” Paine
had argued, and the dead possess no rights over it. Government
from the grave is a negation of the inalienable rights of the new-
born; hence social justice demands that a time limit should auto-
matically revoke all compacts. Since no generation can rightly
deed away the heritage of the unborn, the natural limit of every
compact is the lifetime of the generation ratifying it. “‘No so-
ciety,” Jefferson said, “can make a perpetual Constitution, or
even a perpetual law.”

In this suggestive theory of the terminable nature of compact
is to be found the philosophical origin of the later doctrine of states
rights. However deeply it might be covered over by constitutional
lawyers and historians who defended the right of secession, the
doctrine was there implicitly, and the southern cause would have
been more effectively served if legal refinements had been subor-
dinated to philosophical justification of this fundamental doctrine.
With a frank contempt for all legalists Jefferson believed that
social well-being was not to be bounded by constitutional limi-
tations or statutory enactments; that political action should be
governed by reason rather than by historical precedent. He had
discovered that the political state does not remain static, but gath-
ers power by the law of physical attraction; with increasing power
it becomes increasingly dangerous to natural freedom; hence a
long-established and venerable constitution may become, by rea-
son of its hold upon the popular affection, the most useful of agen-
cies to cloak aggressions on the rights of the people. The love of
profits is always seeking to overthrow the rule of justice. Human
selfishness persistently distorts civic conduct, warping it from
ideal ends. But the shortcomings of existing political states
cannot abrogate the law of justice or destroy the love of freedom.
To safeguard freedom from encroachment by the political state, and
to establish the rule of justice, were always the great and difficult
ends that Jefferson aimed at, and as a follower of the Physiocratic
school and a Virginia planter he turned naturally to a laissez faire
agrarianism in opposition to a centralizing capitalism.

But he was much too sound a political thinker and too sagacious
a party leader to rest his case upon abstract theory. In all his later


JEFFERSONIANISM 13


writings and counsels he kept his mind close to economic fact, and
the Jeffersonian movement was a long and effective training school
in the economic basis of politics. It habituated the motley rank
and file of the electorate to think in economic terms and to regard
political parties as the instruments of economic groups. This was
in keeping with the soundest eighteenth-century tradition, before
romantic dogma had divorced politics and realism; and in so far
Jefferson agreed with his Federalist opponents, Hamilton and John
Adams. A decade of acrimonious debate had made it plain to
the common voter that the real struggle in America lay between
_ the rival capitalist and agrarian interests, of which the Federalist
and Republican parties were the political instruments. The
Congressional enactments of the first twelve years had further
clarified the issue. The funding plan had visibly increased the
number and wealth of the rising capitalist group. The first banks
were being erected and the complex machinery of modern credit—
the hated ‘“‘paper system” that had driven out the traditional me-
tallic currency—was being rapidly built up. A small financial
group in the northern cities was growing powerful from discount-
ing and money-brokerage. The truth was slowly coming home to
the farmers and small men that war is profitable to the few at the
cost of the many; that from the egg of war-financing was hatched
a brood of middlemen who exploited the post-war hardships and
grew rich from the debts that impoverished the producing farmers.
This ambitious class, hitherto negligible in America, was provided
with the means to make a vigorous fight; it invoked the political
state as an ally, and under Hamilton’s leadership used the admin-
istration to serve its financial interests. It looked with open hos-
tility upon every agrarian program, was cynical towards French
romantic theories, and was restrained by no scruples. To loose the
hands of this capable class from the helm of government, to keep
America agricultural, and the Federal state secondary in all but
necessary police powers to the several commonwealths, was the
avowed and logical purpose of the Jeffersonian Republicans.!
The leaders of the movement were men who in capacity and
training were worthy opponents of the capable Federalists. In
surprising number they were from the Old Dominion, gentlemen
of the best Virginia stock, who in the last decades of the eighteenth


1 See Charles A. Beard, The Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy, Chap
ter XIII.


14 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


century engrafted upon a generous plantation tradition the Phys-
iocratic doctrines of France. A finer race of gentlemen America
has never produced, and it was fortunate for the Jacksonian move-
ment, which produced no notable thinkers and contributed little
to political and economic theory, that the preceding generation had
given adequate form to the philosophy of ag arianism. That theory
took definite shape between 1800 and 1820. In the days of Hamil-
ton’s control of the Treasury Department, the agrarian opposi-
tion was weakened by the lack of such a theory; but the necessi-
ties of the situation were a prod to the young Republicans, and
the philosophy of agrarianism rapidly crystallized. In its final form
it was an extraordinarily interesting and native expression of two
hundred years’ experience of a society founded on agriculture—
a reasoned defense of an older America against the ambitions of
a younger and more vigorous.


II


JOHN TAYLOR
An Agrarian Economist


The intellectual leader of the young Republicans in the great
attack on the economics of Federalism was a thinker too little
recognized by later Americans. His just fame has been obscured
with the cause for which he labored, and his reputation lies
buried with the old agrarian régime. Nevertheless John Taylor of
Caroline County, Virginia, “the philosopher and statesman of
agrarianism,” was the most penetrating critic of Hamiltonian
finance and the most original economist of his generation. Un-
ambitious, simple, honest, calm and dignified in bearing, he em-
bodied the heroic virtues of the great age of Virginia. In his
Thirty Years’ View, Thomas H. Benton describes him thus:


I can hardly figure to myself the ideal of a republican statesman more
perfect and complete than he was in reality:—plain and solid, a wise
counsellor, a ready and vigorous debater, acute and comprehensive, ripe
in all historical and political knowledge, innately republican—modest,
courteous, benevolent, hospitable,—a skilful, practical farmer, giving
his time to his farm and his books, when not called by an emergency to
the public service—and returning to his books and his farm when the
emergency was over. . . . He belonged to that constellation of great men
which shone so brightly in Virginia in his day, and the light of which was
not limited to Virginia, or our America, but spread through the bounds


of the civilized world. (Chapter XVIII.)


JEFFERSONIANISM 15


Taylor was a member of Congress at the time of the funding
operations and contributed two notable pamphlets to the public
discussion: the first, issued in 1793, entitled 4n Examination of the
Late Proceedings in Congress Respecting the Official Conduct of the
Secretary of the Treasury; the second, issued the following year,
entitled 4n Inquiry into the Principles and Tendencies of Certain
Public Measures. Twenty years later, in 1814, he embodied his
matured convictions in a stout volume, printed at Fredericksburg,
entitled 4n Inquiry into the Principles and Policy of the Govern-
ment of the United States. The work is tediously prolix—dressed,

according to Benton, “in a quaint Sir Edward Coke style”—even
more tediously moralistic; but in spite of very evident stylistic
shortcomings, it deserves, in the opinion of Professor Beard, ‘‘to
rank among the two or three really historic contributions to
political science which have been produced in the United States”
<4Economic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy, p. 323). It was the
last of the eighteenth-century works, solidly reasoned, keeping a
ain eye upon economics and refusing to wander off into the bog

f constitutionalism, concerned rather with the springs and
ources of political action and the objectives of political parties.

It summed up adequately the agrarian argument against capital-

“dism, analyzed the current tendencies, and provided a convenient

andbook for the Jacksonian movement, from which the latter
BEY freely in the dispute over the Bank.

Like Jefferson’s, the agrarianism of Taylor was founded in the
Physiocratic economy. {He was convinced that the tiller of the
soil was the only true economist, and that if republican America
were to retain its republican virtues it must guard against every
system of exploitation, for in exploitation lay the origin of social
caste. | America had rid itself of the feudal principle of a landed
aristocracy, which in the past had* provided the machinery of
exploitation, by the abolition of the law of primogeniture and
entail, only to be confronted by a graver danger, the new aristoc-
racy of liquid wealth. His main purpose, therefore, was an
examination of-the sources of power of the capitalistic order, and
the successive steps by which it had risen to power. His analysis
is acute and reveals a mind concerned with the realities that lie
beneath outward appearances. It is the economics of history
that concern him most, for as fully as John Adams he was convinced
that economics determine the form of the political state. In his


16 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


analysis of the origins of government, he discovers in every society
a master class that becomes the beneficiary of sovereign power:
the political state is first erected and thereafter used to safeguard
the past acquisitions and to further the present ambitions of a
dominant economic group which calls itself an aristocracy; and
such an aristocracy imposes its will upon the exploited mass,
crudely by the sword and purse, and subtly by the skillful use of
psychology. Once in control of the political state it intrenches
itself behind certain fictions which profess to carry moral sanction.
This political jugglery plays many tricks to catch the gullible;
arrayed in the garb of patriotism, loyalty, obedience to authority,
law and order, divine right, it carries a weighty appeal. When
these moral fictions fail, the fictions of the law step in, and such
doctrines as the sacredness of contract translate the stealings of
the master class into vested interests which the state is bound to
protect. There is a fine irony in Taylor’s implied references to
Burke’s doctrine of a changeless constitution based on a non-
revocable compact, and Hamilton’s doctrine of the public faith,
which, he argues, were clearly designed to sacrifice the common
good to the interests of a class:


Law enacted for the benefit of a nation, is repealable; but law enacted
for the benefit of individuals, though oppressive to a nation, is a charter,
and irrepealable. . . . Posterity, being bound by the contracts of its
ancestry, in every case which diminishes its rights, man is daily growing
less free by a doctrine which never increases them. A government in-
trusted with the administration of publick affairs for the good of a nation,
has a right to deed away that nation for the good of itself or its partisans,
by law charters for monopolies or sinecures; and posterity is bound by
these deeds. But although an existing generation can never reassume
the liberty or property held by its ancestors, it may recompense itself
by abridging, or abolishing the right of its descendants. (Page 61.)


The two theories to which he devotes chief attention are the
natural aristocracy theory of John Adams, and the capitalistic
aristocracy theory of Hamilton. The first of these takes its bias
from stressing the inequality inherent in the nature of men;
individuals are biologically unequal; and from this fact Adams
deduces that the thrifty rise to opulence and the thriftless sink
into poverty by reason of individual qualities. Society can neither
keep a strong man down nor thrust a weak man up. Between the
rich and the poor, the capable and incapable, a state of war exists,


JEFFERSONIANISM 17


held in check by the strong hand in feudal and monarchical soci-
eties, but necessarily open and bitter in a democracy. Hence the
inevitable failure of democracy wherever it is tried, and the neces-
sity of nicely calculated checks in a republic to prevent the equal
tyranny of an aristocracy and a mob. The second theory, the
Hamiltonian, justifies itself by the same theory of human nature.
It accepts the fact of social inequality as inherent in men, but it
sees no reason to pursue Utopian dreams. Recognizing the univer-
sal fact of economic control, it erects the state upon exploitation
as preferable to anarchy. This capitalistic state it defends before
a gullible public by eloquent appeals to the national faith, the
security of property, the fear of lawlessness.

Having thus analyzed the two theories Taylor seeks to cut the
ground from under both by arguing that social classes cannot be
historically explained by the fact of biological inequality amongst
individuals, but rather by accidental opportunity, unscrupulous-
ness, and brute force. All aristocracies, whether feudal, natural,
or capitalistic, take their origin and uphold their dominion, not
from superior excellence or capacity, but from exploitation, that
beginning in a small way grows by what it feeds on till it assumes
the proportions of a colossus. Exploitation breeds a continually
augmenting exploitation that conducts inevitably to caste reg-
imentation. All aristocracies are founded in social theft. They
are not established in the morality of nature, but exist as parasites
on the social wealth; they levy upon the producer; and the only
preventive is to destroy the foundations on which they rest by
taking from them the means of exploitation.

In conjuring up phantom dangers of feudal aristocracies, Taylor
pointed out, John Adams was fighting dead issues. No feudal
aristocracy could arise in America; land was too plentiful and the
quick jealousy of the people would strike it down. The danger to
republican institutions was closer at hand; it was the poison of the
new capitalism that was spreading its virus through all the veins
of the national life. And in order that the American people might
know something of the history of this innovating force which they
must reckon with, John Taylor proceeded to open to them a page
in the economics of capitalism. The aristocracy of credit, founded
on “monopoly and incorporation,” he pointed out, had arisen
first in England with the growing power of the middle class; it
had gone forward swiftly in consequence of the Napoleonic wars,


18 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


and through the agencies of the Bank of England and the Con-
solidated Debt, it had secured control of the public credit. It had
arisen first in America in consequence of the financial disturbance
resulting from the Revolutionary War, and had further strength-
ened its position by the War of 1812. Ambitious men had taken
advantage of the national necessities to create an artificial paper
system identical with that of England. They had profited im-
mensely from the funding operations and the National Bank;
they were setting up their private banks in every city and town,
and through the manipulation of credit were taking heavy toll
of the national production. A money monopoly was the most
dangerous of all monopolies, and the master of all.

Taylor had grown up under the traditional domestic economy.
He was habituated to think of production in terms of consumption,
and of money as a stable measure of exchange. He could not
adjust his mind to the theory of production for profit, of middle-
man speculation, as socially legitimate; and when that speculation
extended to the national currency, and exacted its profits from
the medium of exchange, he took alarm. Gold and silver are
fairly stable commodities that allow of no sudden increase or
diminution, and in consequence a specie currency does not readily
lend itself to speculative juggling. But a paper system has no
natural limitations. Expanded and contracted at the will of
speculators, it subjects the business of the country to the exploita-
tion of money brokers. Vast sums had thus been taken from the
people by the funding operations. Gold and silver had been driven
out of circulation, and with their disappearance a riot of specula-
tion had begun by which only the brokers had profited. Such
was the origin of the new money aristocracy that had already
taken possession of the state and was using it for the sole end of
exploitation. America must make choice between agrarianism
and capitalism; the two were incompatible, John Taylor was con-
vinced, and unless the ambitions of the paper-money aristocracy
were held in check, the American producer would come under the
heel of middle-class exploitation.

So suggestive was the reasoning of Taylor, so interesting for
the light it throws on the agrarian mind of the Virginia Repub-
licans, that it will be well to set down his theses in compact form.
As summarized admirably by Professor Beard, his argument runs
thus:


JEFFERSONIANISM 19


1. The masses have always been exploited by ruling classes, royal,
ecclesiastical, or feudal, which have been genuine economic castes sus-
taining their power by psychological devices such as “loyalty to the throne
and altar.”

2. Within recent times a new class, capitalistic in character, has sprung
up, based on exploitation through inflated public paper, bank stock, and
a protective tariff, likewise with its psychological devices, “public faith,
national integrity, and sacred credit.”

3. In the United States, this class was built up by Hamilton’s fiscal
system, the bank, and protective tariff, all of which are schemes designed
to filch wealth from productive labor, particularly labor upon the land.

4. Thus was created a fundamental conflict between the capitalistic
_and agrarian interests which was the origin of parties in the United States.

5. Having no political principles, capitalism could fraternize with any
party that promised protection, and in fact after the victory of the Re-
publicans successfully entrenched itself in power under the new cover.

6. The only remedy is to follow the confiscatory examples of other
classes and destroy special privilege without compensation. (Economic
Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy, p. 351.)


In the great battle of ideas that followed the conflict of interests,
the Virginia agrarians armed themselves with trenchant weapons.
In intellectual equipment they were a match for the ablest of
the Federalists; in social idealism, in generous concern for the
res publica, or common public business, in sober and practical
humanitarianism, they were far superior. Between John Taylor
of Virginia, spokesman of planter agrarianism, and Fisher Ames of
Massachusetts, spokesman of Boston Federalism, the contrast
could scarcely be greater. It is a contrast in social culture, in
humane ideals, in interpretations of the native genius of America;
and in the comparison it is not the Virginia Republican who suffers.


CHAPTER III
JOHN MARSHALL
Last of the Virginia Federalists


UNLIKE John Taylor of Caroline, whose fame lies buried with his
cause, the reputation of John Marshall has taken on immense
proportions with the later triumph of his principles. There is
abundant reason for the veneration in which he has come to be
held by present-day disciples of Hamilton. More than any other
man he saved the future for Federalism. During the critical
years of the Jeffersonian and Jacksonian assaults upon the out-
works of nationalism, he held the inner keep of the law, and
prepared for the larger victories that came long after he was in his
grave. His strategic judicial decisions served as a causeway over
which passed the eighteenth-century doctrine of the sovereignty
of the law, to unite with the new philosophy of capitalistic exploita-
tion. The turbid waters of frontier leveling and states-rights
democracy washed fiercely about him, but he went on quietly
with his self-appointed work. He was one man who would not
bow his neck to the majority yoke, would not worship the dem-
ocratic Baal. He profoundly distrusted the principle of confedera-
tion. Convinced that the “continental belt”? must be buckled
tightly, he gave unstinted service to the cause of consolidation.
The imperative need of a sovereign political state to curb the
disintegrating forces of America was axiomatic in his thinking.
Looking upon all democratic aspirations as calculated to destroy
federal sovereignty, and convinced that the principle of equalita-
rianism was a bow strung to wield against society, he stoutly upheld
the principle of minority rule as the only practical agency of stable
and orderly government. Holding such views it was a matter of
high and patriotic duty with Marshall to use his official position
to prevent the majority will from endangering interests which
were far more sacred in his eyes than any natural rights propagated
in the hothouse of French philosophy. ‘He was the last of the old
school of Federalists and the first of the new.

That John Marshall should have come out of Virginia is perhaps

20


JOHN MARSHALL 21


the most ironical fact in the political history of the Old Dominion.
Quite unrepresentative of the dominant planter group that had
gone over to Jefferson, bitterly hostile to the agrarian interests
that spoke through John Taylor, he was the leader of a small
remnant of Virginians who followed Washington through the
fierce extremes of party conflict. He was the last and ablest rep-
resentative of that older middle-class Virginia, given to specula-
tion and intent on money-making, that was being superseded by a
cavalier Virginia concerned about quite other things than financial
interests. He belonged rather to Boston than to Richmond. His
intense prejudices were primarily property prejudices. He was
the Fisher Ames of the South, embodying every principle of the
dogmatic tie-wig school of New England Federalists. Profoundly
influenced by Hamilton and Robert Morris, he seems to have
found the Boston group more congenial in temper and outlook.
The explanation of his strong property-consciousness is to be
discovered both in his material ambitions and his professional inter-
ests. He was a business man rather than a planter. He was
heavily involved in land speculation and held stock in numerous
corporations launched to exploit the resources of the state. Robert
Morris, whose daughter married Marshall’s younger brother, was
his financial adviser and advanced money with which to purchase
the Fairfax estate, an investment that cost the buyers the very
considerable sum of fourteen thousand pounds and numerous
lawsuits. He was a director in banks and a legal adviser in
important cases involving property rights. His financial interests
overran state boundaries and his political principles followed
easily in their train, washing away all local and sectional loyalties.

Like his kinsman Jefferson, Marshall was bred on the Virginia
frontier, and to the end of his life he retained the easy and careless
democracy of dress and manners that marked his early environ-
‘ment. In his deportment he was far removed from the prim
respectability of the Boston Federalists. A friendly, likable man,
fond of pitching horseshoes and sitting in a game of cards, he
was outwardly a genial member of the crude little Richmond
world where politics and law and speculation engrossed the common
attention. An easy-going nature, he was wholly wanting in intel-
lectual interests. Strangely ill-read in the law, he was even more
ignorant of history and economics and political theory. His
mind took an early set, and hardened into rigidity during the


22 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


reactionary years that lay between Shays’s Rebellion and the rise
of Napoleon. Of social and humanitarian interests he was utterly
devoid. One might as well look for the sap of idealism in a last
year’s stump as in John Marshall. French romantic philosophy
he regarded as the mother of all vicious leveling. There is no
indication that he had ever heard of the Physiocratic school of
economics, or had looked into the writings of Rousseau or Godwin
or Paine. The blind sides of his mind were many; his intellectual
contacts were few; yet what he saw and understood he grasped
firmly. The narrowness of his outlook intensified the rigidity with
which he held to his fixed opinions; and his extraordinary courage
coupled with a dominant personality clothed his strategic position
as Chief Justice with fateful influence on the later institutional
development of America.

Although Marshall’s later fame is the fame of a lawyer, he was
in reality a politician whom fate in the person of John Adams
placed on the Supreme Court bench at a critical moment, where his
political opinions translated themselves into the organic law of the
land, and shaped the constitution to special and particular ends.
Masterful, tenacious, manipulating his fellow judges like putty,
he was a judicial sovereign who for thirty-five years molded the
plastic constitution to such form as pleased him, and when he died
the work was so thoroughly done that later generations have not
been able to undo it. His political opinions, therefore, become a
matter of very great importance to the historian, for they help
to explain the peculiar direction taken by our constitutional
development. Materials for a just estimate of his remarkable
career were long wanting, but with the appearance of Beveridge’s
able and explicit Life of John Marshall it is now possible to view
him in exact historical perspective. Carefully documented, the
work is a genial and readable interpretation that will go far to
revivify the fame of the great Federalist. And yet in spite of its
abundant documentation—drawn perhaps somewhat overmuch
from Federalist sources—it is essentially a biographie a thése that
is careful to magnify the nationalism of its hero and to minify the
property consciousness. It provides a picturesque setting, but
it is a bit careless in its evaluation of the rival philosophies then
struggling for supremacy. Concerning the economics of the great
contest between Federalism and Republicanism it offers very
inadequate information, with the result that Jefferson is reduced


JOHN MARSHALL 23


to the status of a master politician set over against the constructive
statesman. The intellectual limitations of the lawyer have reacted
in these pages upon his political enemy. Certain of the old Feder-
alist prejudices have come to life again in these entertaining pages.

The two fixed conceptions which dominated Marshall through-
out his long career on the bench were the sovereignty of the
federal state and the sanctity of private property; and these
found their justification in the virulence of his hatred of democracy.
No man in America was less democratic in his political convic-
tions. Underneath the free and easy exterior of the Chief Justice
‘was as stalwart a reactionary as ever sat on the Supreme Court
bench. He was utterly indifferent to popular views, and he calmly
overturned the electoral verdicts of his fellow Americans with the
deliberateness of a born autocrat. Not only were his important
decisions political opinions, but they were Federalist opinions.
America had made definite choice between the Federalist and
Republican theories of government. It had repudiated the rule of
“gentlemen of principle and property ” and set up a very different
rule. But to this mandate of the supposedly sovereign people
Marshall declined to yield. Defeated at the polls, no longer in
control of the executive and legislative branches of the govern-
ment, Federalism found itself reintrenched in the prejudices of
John Marshall. He boldly threw down the gage to the majority
will, and when the long fierce struggle was over, he had effectively
written into the fundamental law of the land the major tenets
of the repudiated philosophy. “Judicial statesmanship,” Mr.
Beveridge calls these political decisions, and bids us admire states-
manship on the bench; yet the phrase runs so far as to merge the
judge in the politician—an honest but somewhat indiscreet ad-
mission that the law may be twisted to partisan ends. The frankly
political nature of Marshall’s decisions was universally recognized
at the time, and this explains the intense partisanship they evoked,
the fury of the Republicans and the extravagant praise of the
Federalists. The so-called Jeffersonian assault on the judiciary,
of which so much has been made by the orthodox historians, and
which came near ‘to wrecking the system, was not primarily an
attack upon the courts but upon political judges who used their
places to serve party ends. It is a dangerous thing for the bench
to twist the law to partisan or class purposes, yet to this very
thing John Marshall was notoriously given.


24 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


As a judicial statesman, then, rather than a lawyer, Marshall is
to be judged, and to such a business the political historian is
more competent than the legalist. His important decisions fall
into two main groups: those like Marbury vs. Madison that assert
the supremacy of the judiciary over the legislature—that is, the
power of the Supreme Court to nullify an act of Congress; and
those like the Yazoo Fraud case and the Dartmouth College
case, that assert the irrevocable nature of contracts. The first was
an official pronouncement of the principle that Hamilton had
elaborated in The Federalist, namely, that the constitution is a
law and as such lies within the field of judicial interpretation.
This was sound Federalist doctrine, and Marshall welcomed the
opportunity to engraft it upon the fundamental law of the land,
going far out of his way to bring it within the judicial purview.!
It was a bold and skillful move, and as Beveridge remarks, it
announced a principle that “is wholly and exclusively American.
It is America’s contribution to the science of the law’ (Beveridge,
Life of John Marshall, p. 142). A contribution, it should be
added, which with the multiplying of republican constitutions in
the later nineteenth century was pretty generally rejected.

Even more partisanly Federalist were the decisions touching
the nature of contract. These reached to the heart of the bitter
opposition of the commercial and financial interests to the legisla-
tive acts of populistic majorities. Suffering heavily from the post-
war confusions, those majorities had struck blindly at the profiteers
whose well-feathered nests were securely protected by the law.
The revolt was natural and human; a rough sense of social justice
lay behind it; but because it struck at the most prosperous and
capable members of society, who held the professional classes in
retainer and dominated the agencies of publicity, it aroused an
extraordinarily vindictive opposition. Dip into the literature of
the seventeen-eighties and nineties anywhere, in the Anarchiad
and the Echo of the Hartford Wits, or the private letters of indig-
nant gentlemen, and the animus of the respectable classes is
clamorously revealed. At bottom it was no other than this, that
the law of business must be made the law of the land, and that
any populistic tampering with such law was wicked and anarchistic.
How determining was this spirit in the matter of the Constitutional


1For an excellent discussion see Beveridge, Life of John Marshall, Vol. II,
Chap. III.


JOHN MARSHALL 25


Convention is sufficiently well known. In the new constitution
certain practices of populistic majorities were estopped—the
emission of bills of credit and paper money, and laws impairing
the obligation of contracts; but such provisions, strictly inter-
preted, did not reach to all cases. There were still gaps in the law
of business through which populistic majorities might force their
bills. To stop those gaps and complete the great work of rendering
business secure was the problem to which Marshall addressed
himself; and in the Yazoo Fraud case and the Dartmouth College
case, he brought the long Federalistic struggle to a triumphant
F issue.

An examination of the first of these two celebrated cases will
suffice to reveal the spirit of his judicial statesmanship. The state
of Georgia, through its Legislature, had contracted to sell thirty-
five millions acres of land—the great part of the territory now com-
prising the states of Alabama and Mississippi—to certain specula-
tive companies “‘at less than one and one-half cents an acre.”
The passage of the bill was marked by more than the usual jobbery,
so common with a generation fond of looting the public domain.
The fraud was so gross that the state of Georgia was thrown into
a fury that visited itself upon the corrupt legislators. A new leg-
islature repealed the law and rescinded the contract; but some of
the land had already been resold to investors in Boston and Phila-
delphia, who brought their claims before the Supreme Court.
The state of mind in which the chief justice heard the argument
is thus suggested by Beveridge: “Marshall was profoundly in-
terested in the stability of contractual obligations. The repudia-
tion of these by the legislature of Virginia had powerfully and per-
manently influenced his views upon this subject. Also Marshall’s
own title to part of the Fairfax estate had more than once been in
jeopardy. At that very moment a suit affecting the title of his
brother’s to certain Fairfax lands was pending in Virginia courts”
(Vol. III, p. 584). To suggest that a nicer judicial honor would
have inhibited Marshall from sitting in the case is perhaps going
too far if one accepts the principle of judicial statesmanship.
Certainly Marshall discovered none of the scruples that must have
troubled George Wythe. In awarding claims for compensation
to the investors he held that the act of the Georgia legislature
was a contract and as such was inviolable. The crux of the deci-
sion, however, lay in the pronouncement that the courts cannot


26 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


examine the motives that induce legislators to enact a law, that
the people are bound by their agents and must suffer the penal-
ties of choosing unwise or corrupt agents. The upshot of the
verdict, in plain language, was that a legislative contract is sacred
no matter how corruptly got. A curious decision, surely, for one
who professed to venerate the common law. A Virginian of the
type of John Randolph would never have reasoned thus to a con-
clusion that laid open the public domain to the deals of clever
lobbyists and encouraged the betrayal of official stewardship.
He would scarcely have sacrificed the public interests to the law
of business.

The bitter hostility which Marshall’s decisions aroused in his
native commonwealth reveals how far the Virginia of Jefferson had
traveled from the Federalism of the commercial North. The states-
rights philosophy and the philosophy of consolidation were at
swords’ points; the agrarian and capitalistic economies were en-
gaged in a mortal duel; that it should have been a Virginian who
saved the day for the Hamiltonians, erecting the old Federalism
into the law of the land, and conducting by his decisions straight
to an augmented, consolidated state, under the shadow of whose
power the development of corporate finance might go forward
without agrarian let or hindrance, was a bitter brew for the Jef-
fersonian planters to drink. As Marshall grew old he drew farther
away from his fellow Virginians. In his last years he was perhaps
the most reactionary man in America. “Should Jackson be
elected,” he wrote in 1828, “I shall look upon the government as
virtually dissolved” (Beveridge, Vol. IV, p. 463). His last hatreds
he divided between Old Hickory and the rising democratic move-
ment. He bitterly resisted the spread of manhood suffrage; he
would make no change even in the antiquated judicial system of
Virginia; he would have no overturning of anything established.
A stubborn autocrat he remained to the end, and there was a cer-
tain ironic fitness in his last encounter with the executive power.
The autocratic lawyer met his match in the autocratic soldier who
grimly remarked, “John Marshall has made his decision, now let
him enforce it.”


Nearly a century has passed since these happenings [concludes Bev-
eridge] and Marshall’s attitude now appears to have been that of cold
reaction; but he was as honest as he was outspoken in his resistance to
democratic reforms. He wanted good government, safe government.


JOHN MARSHALL 27


He was not in the least concerned ‘in the rule of the people as such. In-
deed, he believed that the more they directly controlled public affairs the
worse the business of government would be conducted. He feared that
sheer majorities would be unjust, intolerant, tyrannical, and he was
certain that they would be untrustworthy and freakishly changeable.
(Vol. IV, p. 507.)


A strong, resourceful, honest, capable man was John Marshall.
In so far there is pretty common agreement. Beyond this, comes
in the sundering blade of political theory. Concerning the wisdom
of his judicial statesmanship it is idle to expect Federalist and
_ Democrat to agree.


CHAPTER IV
THE OLDER PLANTATION MIND


I


PLANTATION BACKGROUNDS


Tue literary renaissance of Virginia began in the late twenties
when the English romantic movement reached the quiet planta-
tions. Till then the Virginia mind had lingered pleasantly in the
twilight of the liberal eighteenth century, following ways of thought
it had learned of revolutionary France, and writing with a leisurely
finish it had learned of Augustan England. In that older Virginia
dignified sentiment was accepted as the hall-mark of breeding—
a sentiment somewhat ornate and consciously elegant, that rec-
ognized its obligations to a strict morality, and laid its nosegay
at the feet of the pure and beautiful and good. When the Vir-
ginian essayed somewhat infrequently to commit his thoughts to
paper, he wrote as an old-fashioned gentleman, conscious of his
social responsibility, consulting classic standards of taste, and
embellishing his sentences with bits of choice Latin. But after the
year 1830 sentiment gave place to romance, and dignity to exu-
berance of fancy. A new generation, trained in the school of Sir
Walter Scott, fell to the pleasant task of portraying the familiar
plantation life in glowing colors and investing it with romantic
charm.

The plantation tradition, it will be remembered, first took shape
in the Old Dominion and assumed its salient features at the hands
of Virginia romantics. Its development was contemporary with
the New England transcendental movement, and in origin and
spirit it was as native to Virginia as the philosophy of idealism was
native to Massachusetts. Inspired by an over-seas romanticism,
it accepted the materials it found at hand and transmuted the
easy-going plantation life into enduring romance. The work was
begun by Kennedy in his idyllic Swallow Barn. The picture
thus slightly sketched was given stronger colors by Caruthers,
and received completer form from John Esten Cooke. From their
hands Thomas Nelson Page took his materials to refashion to

28


THE OLDER PLANTATION MIND 29


suit the taste of a later day. No realism added its sobering touches
to the romantic picture thus early drawn, and none has since been
added. A golden light still lingers upon the old plantation. Memo-
ries are still too dear to the Virginian to suffer any lessening of the
reputed splendors of ante bellum days. The tragedy of a lost
cause has woven itself into the older romance and endowed the
tradition with an added sanction. It has long since spread beyond
the confines of Virginia and become a national possession. North
as well as South is so firmly convinced of its authenticity that
realism has never had the temerity to meddle with it.!

It was a romanticizing age, and in Virginia congenial materials
were ready to hand. The distinction of a plantation aristocracy
set in the midst of a bucolic republican society, with its genial
hospitality, its individuality, its sharp contrasts of whites and
blacks, its clutter,of cabins for background to the pillared mansion,
its wide neighborhood interests, its outdoor life, its patriarchal
spirit, was. a distinction that no romantic could overlook, the
most individual and native picturesque in all America. Life on
the plantation was uncramped by the drab routine and skimpy
meanness of the New England farm; it was unsoiled by the coarse-
ness and vulgarity of the frontier; it had none.of the sordidness of
the middle-class town. It might be wasteful, but it was good
material for literature; and hence the Virginia romantic had no
need to seek the picturesque in England and Spain, as Irving had
done. He had only to pick and choose from the familiar stuff
lying all about him, emphasizing the agreeable, overlooking the
unpleasant, fashioning his figures and action to suit the ideal of a
golden age of plantation society. Yet the result, it must be con-
fessed, is not wholly adequate. Virginia has suffered gravely from
the want of a sober realism. It is not so much that the worst
did not get into the romantic tradition—shortcomings in Virginia
life which even Wirt hints at—as that the best did not get in. The
plantation master of the romantics falls grossly short of the real-
ity that Virginia provided. The simple dignity of John Taylor,
the ingrained Puritanism of Lee and Jackson, the catholic culture
and fine integrity of George Wythe, have been left out of the tradi-
tion. The Virginian created by the romantics is absurdly inferior
to such men, who by any standard were as admirable a group of


1 For an excellent study, see Francis Pendleton Gaines, The Southern Plantation,
1925.


30 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


gentlemen as America has ever bred. A little honest realism would
have corrected the picture, to the advantage of the Old Dominion.

At the time when the romantics were beginning their work of
constructing the plantation tradition the intellectual renaissance
of Virginia was passing. With the fading of the French influence
after 1820 came increasing isolation and a conscious sectional-
ism. Intellectual discipline and catholic tastes became rarer. Vir-
ginia had no share in the revolutionary enthusiasms of the Utopian
thirties and forties, when New England expected the Promised
Land to appear at the next turn in the road; it received no stimulus
from the expansive systems of thought that were setting all Europe
in ferment. The new Germany seems to have made no impres-
sion on the Virginia mind, neither its philosophical idealism nor
its provocative higher criticism. The new interest in social specu-
lation and experiment that arose in Massachusetts with the begin-
nings of industrialism awakened no response in Virginia. Plan-
tation society was static, and social speculation was unwelcome.
The theories of Comte, of Fourier, of Owen were unknown;
Utopian experiments were untried. If Virginia escaped the curse
of industrialism it lacked the intellectual stimulus that came to
New England with the rise of the textile mills. Social unrest bred
no protests against the plantation order. The revolutionary mood
was gone, and after 1820 the stimulus to intellectual life grew
weaker. English romanticism as exemplified in the work of
Scott and Tom Moore was the single foreign influence that spread
amongst the plantations, and the new literature accepted the cult
of the picturesque romantic. With the passing of the great age of
Virginia the tradition of her greatness remained to be gathered up
and preserved.


II
WILLIAM WIRT


To Virginia gentlemen of the old school it must have seemed a
bit ironical that William Wirt should have come to be accepted as
the literary representative of the Old Dominion in the days of
John Randolph of Roanoke. Born in Maryland in 1772 of Swiss
parentage, Wirt belonged to Virginia only by adoption, and al-
though on terms of intimacy with the plantation gentry he embod-
ied few of the traits that went to the making of the plantation
tradition. In temperament he was far removed from the easy-


THE OLDER PLANTATION MIND 31


going planter. A certain canny thrift marked him, a pronounced
desire to rise in the world and cut a distinguished figure. He was
careful to make a good investment of his talents, attentive to prof-
itable undertakings, whether in law or eloquence or speculation.
His mature life ran a singularly prosperous and dignified course.
He gathered property and reputation and office, and in every
position he acquitted himself honorably. To do less than well
in any undertaking he would have accounted a stain upon his
reputation. In every company he made himself liked. There was
none of the aggressive individualism of John Randolph, in wait
_ for an opportunity to send home a shaft of rankling wit, but always
a studious concern to please. He was troubled that anyone should
think his criticism severe in The British Spy, and he hesitated
long before publishing his Patrick Henry for fear offense would be
taken at the few blemishes he discovered in his hero. An honest
man and a capable, sterling after his kind but not notably intel-
lectual, not creative, he owed his advancement to very practical
qualities: an engaging personality and genial wit, a knack at for-
mal oratory, a graceful pen, a persevering pursuit of his profession,
the cultivation of desirable friendships. An excellent lawyer, he
never turned aside from the law to meddle with politics; yet he
was on good terms with the politicians, and he reached the top of
his ambition by appointment to the Attorney-Generalship of the
United States, a post which he held for upwards of twelve years.

In training and culture Wirt was of the sound eighteenth-cen-
tury tradition. He was bred in the classics, English literature,
and the common law. When he set up in his profession his library
consisted of Blackstone, Don Quixote, and Tristram Shandy. His
literary taste was formed by the later writers of the eighteenth
century, by Gray, Hervey, Young, Ossian, Burke, Sterne, rather
than by Pope and Dryden. In The British Spy he praises Bacon
highly and lavishes commendation upon Addison, regretting that
the Spectator “should be thrown by, and almost entirely forgotten,
while the gilded blasphemies of infidels, and the ‘noontide trances’
of pernicious theorists, are hailed with rapture, and echoed around
the world” (Letter X). Yet the determining influence in his own
writings, it is clear, came from the sentimentalists and from Burke.
From the former he caught the note of polite emotion, and from
the latter the strain of sonorous eloquence. His well-bred sensi-
bilities were constantly in the service of his pen or tongue, to lend


32 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


pathos to an affecting bit of description or to transport his hearers
by a melting appeal. A look, a gesture, a pose, was nicely calcu-
lated to bring sympathetic tears to the eyes of his auditors. To
touch the emotions he considered the triumph of art, and to
conduct through the emotions to a sound morality, its sole
justification.

As a member of the Virginia bar Wirt took pride in the tradi-
tion of sober culture that had grown up amongst its distinguished
practitioners. The members of that bar were gentlemen as well as
lawyers, who would rather go wrong in their legal authorities than
in their classical embellishments; they were orators as well, careful
of their diction and meticulous in rounding a period. In these
excellent qualities Wirt early distinguished himself. He had read
more than most, and apposite quotations from the classics came
easily to his pen to grace the pellucid flow of his English. One of
the signal triumphs of his life was when in an elaborate legal argu-
ment before the Supreme Court at Washington, he retorted a
passage of the 4encid upon his opponent, to provide a text for a
burst of the exuberant rhetoric that so delighted his generation
(The British Spy, 1855, pp. 88-90). His love of ornate speech
seems to us curiously old-fashioned, yet it was the manner of the
times, and he gave himself to it with enthusiasm—v1v0 gurgite exun-
dans, as he would have chosen to say. The chief interest of his life
was oratory, and how skillful a practitioner he was adjudged by his
own generation is revealed in the comment of a contemporary
who often admired “‘the blaze of his reasoning and declamation”’:


The march of his mind is direct to its object, the evolutions by which
he attains it, are so new and beautiful, and apparently necessary to the
occasion, that your admiration is kept alive, your fancy delighted, and.
your judgment convinced, through every stage of the process. . . . There
is no weak point in his array, no chink in the whole line of his extended
works. Then the sweet melody of voice, the beautiful decorations of
fancy, the easy play of a powerful reason, by which all this is accomplished,
amaze and delight. His pathos is natural and impressive; there is a
pastoral simplicity and tenderness in his pictures of distress, when he
describes female innocence, helplessness, and beauty, which the husband
on whom she smiled should have guarded from even the winds of heaven
which might visit it too roughly, “shivering at midnight on the winter
banks of the Ohio, and mingling her tears with the torrent, which froze
as they fell; ” itis not a theatrical trick, to move a fleeting pity, but a deep
and oe ae appeal to the dignified charities of our nature. (Jbid.,
pp. 84-85.


THE OLDER PLANTATION MIND 33


Wirt’s literary reputation rests chiefly upon The British Spy

and Sketches of the Life and Character of Patrick Henry, both of
which may be characterized in the admirable phrase above quoted,
as studies in “the dignified charities of our nature.” The former
was done hastily at the age of thirty, the latter was toiled over for
years and appeared when he was forty-five. They were received
with vast approval and set him quite in the front rank of American
literary fame. Yet the contemporary popularity of The British Spy
is inexplicable to us today. It is astonishing that so slight a thing
should have achieved so great a reputation, and it suggests the
depths of literary poverty in which the Virginia of 1803 was sunk.
The work is a miscellany—hodgepodge perhaps is a juster term—
of character sketches, geology, description, rhapsody, moralizing,
with the faintest suggestion of criticism. The sketch which
achieved the greatest celebrity, the description of the blind preacher
(Letter VII, pp. 195-202), is elaborately artificial and sentimental,
done from Sterne. The sketches of contemporary politicians, and
in particular that of Jefferson, contributed much to current appeal,
and the casual criticism aroused a mild remonstrance. There is
a certain grace of style after the late eighteenth-century manner,
abundant sentiment and little wit. Perhaps the happiest touch
is the title; only a British spy could discover material for criti-
cism in the excellent life and ideal institutions of Virginia, or in-
sinuate that the commonwealth was lacking in public spirit—
that its roads were as bad as its schools, and that the ‘“‘one object
throughout the state” was “‘to grow rich.”’ But it was a very moral
spy who was troubled that “the noxious weed of infidelity had
struck a deep, a fatal root, and spread its pestilential branches far
around”’; and who lamented that ‘‘our eccentric and fanciful
countryman, Godwin, had contributed not a little to water and
cherish this pernicious exotic” (Letter VII, p. 203).

The demands made upon the dignified charities of our nature
Wirt found more insistent when he came to write the life of Pat-
rick Henry. He was troubled by his materials, as well as by the
want of them. He complains repeatedly in his letters of the dif-
ficulties of the task. There were blemishes in the character of his
god, spots that marred his divinity; yet how to clean them away
and not spoil the natural appearance was a problem. He could not
tell Virginians that Patrick Henry in his old age was grasping and
vain, that he changed his politics as he grew rich. The idea was


34 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


too repugnant to his own good nature, and to the taste of the
times. The age was sentimental and romantic even in its eulogy.
It took seriously the motto, de mortuis nil nist bonum; it was pa-
triotically engaged in making a myth out of the figures and events
of the Revolution; and sober truth is not to be expected from the
stately biographies that emerged from this period of excessive
patriotism. The writers were too much in awe of their subjects,
too much concerned to present them in full dress with wig and
cloak and sword, and see to it that they acted a proper part. It
was in this attitude that Wirt first approached his theme, but fail-
ing to achieve the desired result, he turned the work into eulogy
of Henry’s oratory. This was the most congenial of tasks to one
so deeply interested in the art of the orator. The fragmentary
records that had come down were a challenge to his inventiveness,
and he set himself to recreate the lost speeches, from scanty
notes. How admirably he succeeded is shown in the celebrated
“sive me liberty, or give me death” speech, that became at once
an American classic. One could forgive him much for such a
masterpiece.

The leaders of that older Virginia society were lawyers rather
than planters, and Wirt’s excursions into the field of belles lettres
were only pleasant outings from the court-room. His intellectual
interests were narrow. Though bred in an atmosphere of politics,
he cared nothing for political theory, was wholly unread in the
political classics, and untouched by the flood of social specu-
lation that came with the French Revolution. He drifted polit-
ically with the stream of his generation, taking color from the
changing waters. Brought up a Jeffersonian Republican, he
remained curiously ignorant of the economic and political philoso-
phy of agrarianism. He was little given to abstract speculation
on the rights of man, and was never partisan to a cause. He was
a genial embodiment of those colorless times when the enthu-
siasms of eighteenth-century liberalism were dead and the roman-
ticisms of nineteenth-century exploitation were not yet risen,
known in the history books as the era of good feeling. Fundamen- |
tally conservative and somewhat conventional, he would not look
with approval upon the new men and new ways that came in with
the western democracy. Upon the accession of Jackson he went
over to the Whig party. He supported Clay, yet for some reason,
perhaps a harmless vanity, he accepted a nomination for the presi-


THE OLDER PLANTATION MIND 35


dency by the Anti-Masons in 1832 and went down before the hosts
of the Jacksonians. Two years later his blameless life was brought
to a close. A kindly and honorable gentleman of old-fashioned
tastes, with a culture founded in Blackstone, embellished by Ad-
dison and Sterne, and given a classic dignity by Livy, he filled the
measure of the excellencies as they were understood in the Old
Dominion in the days before romance had created the plantation
tradition.


Ill
NATHANIEL BEVERLEY TUCKER
A Virginia Fire Eater


In striking contrast to the amiable Attorney-General was another
Virginia lawyer and judge who ventured into literature and whose
one important novel created a mighty stir in its day. Beverley
Tucker was twelve years younger than Wirt. Half brother of
John Randolph of Roanoke, for some years on the bench in Mis-
souri, and long professor of law at William and Mary College, he
was a well-known figure in the Old Dominion, and his vigorous
speech was much applauded at conventions where southern gentle-
men met to talk over their grievances. In him were richly em-
bodied all the picturesque parochialisms that plantation life en-
couraged. He wasso completely and exclusively Virginian as to
deserve the epithet “‘ Virginianissimus.” He never traveled, never
compared diverse civilizations, never questioned the excellence of
that in which he had been bred. His loyalty to his native common-
wealth was a consuming jealousy for its honor, and he tucked the
horizons of Virginia about him like a Hudson Bay blanket and
defied the cold winds of the North. Beyond Mason and Dixon’s
line lay a foreign country, and he judged all foreign countries by
their size and color on his wallmap. He was the arch-romantic of
his generation and his Partisan Leader is the repository of the cu-
rious political and economic romanticisms of the ardent southern
mind.

Over his after-dinner bottle of Madeira, Beverley Tucker may
well have been the raciest and most delightful of companions.
Like Samuel Johnson, he found his pleasure in a mind well stocked
with robust prejudices and a wit to phrase them tellingly. He
never spared his epithets nor hesitated to damn an opponent.


36 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


Like Fisher Ames, he coddled an aggravated case of political spleen
and luxuriated in a picturesque pessimism. The clouds hung low
over his mind, and the future of Virginia appeared as black to him
as the future of Massachusetts appeared desperate to the Boston
Federalist. His pessimism no doubt was a solace to his old age
and provided a sauce for his dinner. Temperamently he was
curiously like the New England Jeremiah. He followed Cal-
houn with the unreasoning and passionate conviction with which
Fisher Ames followed Hamilton. He foresaw a future laid waste
by the ravenings of democracy, and like Ames he took pleasure in
sketching the dark picture. It would be no fault of his if the easy-
going planters remained indifferent to the political monster that
in the guise of Jacksonian democracy had made his den at Washing-
ton and was preparing to devour the liberties of sovereign common-
wealths. He would make haste, while the shadows of those liber-
ties remained, to arouse Virginia to its peril before the jaws closed
upon it.

It was to this end that he wrote The Partisan Leader, an obvious
attempt to dramatize the political philosophy of Calhoun and
breathe into it a war psychology. Its single purpose was to pop-
ularize the doctrine of secession and encourage Virginia to act upon
it. The book was printed at Washington by the notorious Duff
Green, who had quitted Jackson and gone over to Calhoun, and ap-
peared under the pen name of Edward William Sidney. Written in
the last years of Jackson’s second term, it prophesied Van Buren’s
succession and his setting up a dictatorship. The beginning of the
action is projected thirteen years into the future. Van Buren is
assumed to be in his third term and is seeking election a fourth
time. He is in secure and insolent possession of “the presidential
throne.” He has surrounded himself with a horde of democratic
sycophants; his political machine is well oiled and the army and
navy are at his bidding. Virginia has been split asunder by
actions. Mercenaries in Van Buren’s pay occupy the public
stations, and supported by Federal bayonets they carry things with
a high hand. The lower South, under the leadership of South
Carolina, has already seceded, and freed from the exploitation
of northern tariffs is economically rejuvenated. The Virginia
patriots are biding their time, working under cover and making
detailed plans to carry the commonwealth over to the new Confed-
eracy when the hour shall strike. The hand of fate is no other than


THE OLDER PLANTATION MIND 3


economic pressure. The free South has provided an eloquent ob-
ject lesson to Virginia planters. By reason of a trade treaty with
England, by the terms of which each country exports to the other
its natural wares unvexed by artificial restrictions—an industrial
economy and an agricultural mutually benefiting by the exchange
—the cotton and tobacco growers to the south of Virginia are en-
joying a prosperity unshared by the exploited planters of the Old
Dominion. When economic depression shall have finally opened
the eyes of Virginians to the folly of a federal union that sacrifices
southern interests to fatten northern manufacturers, the common-
-wealth must drop into the lap of the Confederacy like a ripe per-
simmon. In the meantime a mysterious Mr. B.—presumably
Calhoun—moves adroitly behind the scenes, shaping matters for
the great event—a super-statesman, a man of godlike sagacity
and divine benevolence, a heroic embodiment of all the magnani-
mous southern virtues, compared with whom Webster and Clay
are common political mercenaries and Jackson a paltry charlatan.
It is a romantically extravagant book, quite the absurdest in
the library of the old South. It possesses no savor of humor or
pleasantry of satire. Tucker was too deadly in earnest to play with
his theme. He had so long and bitterly brooded over the supposed
wrongs of Virginia that he had lost all sense of proportion. He
lacks a cool skill in dissection; he has not learned the gentlemanly
art of flaying his victim; he defends Virginia with a matchlock
instead of a rapier. Gilmore Simms credited him with one of
the most finished prose styles of the day, and a very recent critic
remarks that ‘‘no other American of the time wrote with such
classical restraint and pride as Tucker” (Cambridge History of
American Literature, Vol. I, p. 312). But there is little evidence of
such mastery in The Partisan Leader. It is the work of an un-
practiced writer, with a command of rhetoric to furnish forth a
southern stump-speaker, but quite inadequate to the needs of
a competent novelist. Compared with Simms or Kennedy he is
amere bungler. His characters are as wooden as Cooper’s females,
and his plot is grossly distorted by his polemics. The drama sags
under the weight of the sacred cause. There is inadvertent comedy
in the picture of Van Buren as the man on horseback—the sleek,
well-groomed politician of history rises somewhat inadequately
to the rdle. In comparison with Kennedy’s Quodlibet his attack
upon Jackson is only caricature. Beverley Tucker was a patriotic


38 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


Virginian whose craftsmanship proved inadequate to the serious
business in hand.

The backgrounds of his thought are clearly Jeffersonian. His
prejudices run strongly for eighteenth-century Jaissez faire. He
is a confirmed agrarian and his hatred of industrialism amounts
to an obsession. He will have nothing to do with protective tariffs
that lay a tax upon the planter to aid the manufacturer. In his
advocacy of political decentralization he is a disciple of Calhoun,
but more pessimistic than his master. Southern interests can be
adequately protected, he is convinced, only by a jealous insist-
ence on the sovereign powers of Virginia, and so long as Virginia
remains within the centralizing federal Union those sovereign pow-
ers will suffer a subtle diminution. The simple-minded and mag-
nanimous southern planter was no match in the political game with
unscrupulous and ambitious Northerners. But in certain signifi-
cant aspects of his political philosophy, Beverley Tucker broke
with the Jeffersonian tradition. Two current developments had
quite destroyed his faith in the democracy of Jefferson. The rise
of Jacksonianism had seated the rabble in power, and the spread of
Abolitionism was threatening to infect that triumphant rabble with
its poison. The very life of Virginia was at the mercy of a hostile
democracy, and to protect themselves and their slaves from the en-
croachments of a democratized federal government seemed to him
the urgent business of the southern planters. Unless a move were
made speedily it would be too late, for the power of the northern
democracy was fast outstripping the confederate power of the
South.

Tucker’s intense prejudices color every judgment, and in conse-
quence his misunderstanding of the North was colossal. He
imagined a profit-mongering clown whom he dubbed Yankee, and
solemnly assured himself that it was an authentic likeness. The
Abolitionist was a Yankee with an added Puritan malignancy. In
his defense of slavery Tucker has corrected the sentimental mistake
of Jefferson in assuming the extinction of slavery to be desirable,
but he professes an equally humanitarian spirit. His benevolence
toward the negro is so warmly generous that one is ready to weep
at the sad fate of the faithful slave who is in danger of being turned
out into the cold world by the wicked Abolitionists. The loyal
attachment between master and servant, he argues, is too finely
generous to be understood by the mercenary North. The Yankees


THE OLDER PLANTATION MIND 39


“have not the qualities which would enable them to comprehend
the negro character. Their calculating selfishness can never under-
stand his disinterested devotion. Their artificial benevolence is no
interpreter of the unsophisticated heart. . . . They know no more
of the feelings of our slaves, than their fathers could comprehend
of the loyalty of the gallant cavaliers from whom we spring; and
for the same reason. The generous and self-renouncing must ever
be a riddle to the selfish” (p. 205, edition of 1861). Hence it is the
clear duty of the magnanimous planter to keep his generous and
self-renouncing slaves out of the clutches of the selfish Abolitionists.
_ Something of the ardency of Beverley Tucker’s convictions is

revealed in certain fragments of his letters to Gilmore Simms, to
whom he poured out his heart in uncensored words, and whose
magazine, The Southern Quarterly Review, he made use of to further
the cause. In those letters he writes himself down a frank and
whole-hearted Tory. There is an inveterate and ingrained aristoc-
racy of temperament that will not mince words when it comes to
dealing with democracy. In his comment on the growing demo-
cratic spirit he is virulent. He has lost all hope for Virginia in the
year of grace 1851. “She is sunk in the slough of democracy,
which has no sense of honor, no foresight, and is never valiant but
against its own instruments” (W. P. Trent, William Gilmore Simms,
p. 186). Georgia is in an even worse way. His spleen at the
commonwealth of Stephens and Toombs—“‘filled as that State is
with Yankee traders’’—spits out venom: “She has been bought,
and her price is in the pockets of those she trusted.” He quotes
sardonically the comment of a Georgia senator: ‘‘The State of
Georgia is a damned rascal. I bought and sold her, and will buy
her and sell her again when I please” (ibid., p. 182). His only hope
is in South Carolina, and he pleads with Simms for decisive action.
Calhoun’s kingdom is singularly blessed, for no base democracy
there sullies the purity of manly councils. As early as 1820 Tucker
had come to realize that the Union was a curse to the South. “I
vowed then, and I have repeated the vow, de die in diem, that I will
never give rest to my eyes nor slumber to my eyelids until it is shat-
tered into fragments. . . . Time was when I might have been less
desperate, because I could have sought refuge under some emperor
or king. But all such refuges are broken up, and there is now no
escape from the many-headed despotism of numbers, but by a
strong and bold stand on the banks of the Potomac. . . . If we will


40 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


not have slaves, we must be slaves.” He then makes his great
appeal:


And what are our democracies but mobs? South Carolina alone can
act, because she is the only State in which the gentleman retains his place
and influence, and in which the statesman has not been degraded from
his post. You are fast coming to that hopeless and irreclaimable condi-
tion; and then all hope of action is gone. Work now. . . . The twilight
is already upon you, and hence I fear you will not act even now. And
if not now—never, never, never! (Jbid., p. 187.)


It was not granted to Beverley Tucker to know what harvests
were to be gathered from his sowings. He did not live to see the
fields of his beloved commonwealth drenched in the blood that he
had done more than his share to let. In that bitter struggle it is
certain that he would have borne his part valiantly. He had sown
to the wind, and he would have welcomed the whirlwind. But the
outcome must have broken his proud heart, and it is well that he
was not spared to see his hopes turn to ashes in his mouth.


”


Clee


CHAPTER V
ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE
I
WILLIAM ALEXANDER CARUTHERS
A Virginia Liberal


In the early thirties came the transition in Virginia from the essay-
sketch that had prevailed since the appearance of The British Spy,
to the full blown romance of love and adventure. The older type
had been a blend of nature description, social observation, character
sketches, with somewhat injudicious portions of sentiment and
moralizing, and with frequent resort to the old letter-form of
fiction that lingered out a surprising old age. Not only is the
transition revealed in the work of John P. Kennedy, whose Swallow
Barn, written in 1832, was followed in 1835 by Horseshoe Robinson,
but quite as strikingly in the work of Dr. William Alexander
Caruthers, whose Kentuckian in New York, or, the Adventures of
Three Southerns, published in 1834, was followed at once by The
Cavaliers of Virginia, 1834-35.

Dr. Caruthers was a genial and cultivated Virginian from the
Piedmont region, with a ready wit and a clever pen, who had pretty
well rid himself of the intense and narrow parochialisms that
restricted the sympathies of Beverley Tucker. He was a Virginia
liberal of the older school, before the renaissance of the slave cause
transferred southern leadership to the South Carolina group, and
he shared none of Tucker’s partisanship for Calhoun. He had
traveled widely both south and north, and had discovered that
human nature was much the same on both sides of Mason and
Dixon’s line. This experience qualified him to become a shrewd
and kindly interpreter of both sections of the country, and his
Kentuckian in New York was an excellent contribution to the cause
of intersectional good-will. He sends two young South Carolinians
just out of college on a trip north, who fall in with a Kentuckian on
the way, and together they enjoy life in New York City, lose their
hearts and meet with divers romantic and amusing adventures.
A fourth character, a young Virginian, he sends to South Carolina,

41


42 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


likewise to lose his heart and encounter adventures; and the copious
letters that travel between them are filled with intelligent comment
on unfamiliar ways. The writers are generous-minded young
liberals with keen eyes, and their observations still make excellent
reading after nearly a hundred years.

The South Carolinian who falls romantically in love with a New
York girl is far from a Calhoun Fire Eater. He can see good even
in the Yankee, whom he defends against the common southern
prejudice by arguing that Yankee chicanery has resulted from a
niggardly environment and the competition that comes with over-
population, a competition that Virginia has been spared by the
draining off of her population west; and as for the Yankee “canting
and sniveling,” “tell me,” he remarks, “if you have not, in the very
bosom of your great valley, as genuine Presbyterians and Round-
heads as ever graced the Rump Parliament, or sung a psalm on
horseback? And to give the devil his due, these same Presbyterians
are no bad citizens of a popular government” (Vol. I, p. 72).
Virginia has judged the North out of her prejudices rather than
knowledge, and the advice Caruthers gives his Virginia neighbors,
as an antidote to the suspicions of Beverley Tucker, is to travel
beyond the boundaries of the Old Dominion.

Every southern should visit New-York. It would allay provincial
prejudices, and calm his excitement against his northern countrymen.
The people here are warm-hearted, generous, and enthusiastic, in a degree
scarcely inferior to our own southerns. . . . Many of these Yorkers are
above local prejudices, and truly consider this as the commercial metrop-
olis of the Union, and all the people of the land as their customers, friends,
patrons, and countrymen. Nor is trade the only thing that flourishes.
The arts of polished and refined life, refined literature, and the profounder
studies of the schoolmen, all have here their distinguished votaries,—I
say distinguished, with reference to the standard of science in our country.


(Vol. I, p. 181.)


The material prosperity of the North contrasts painfully in his
mind with the condition of his native Carolina, and there is a note
of apprehension in his comment:


The more I see of these northern states, the more I am convinced that
some great revolution awaits our own cherished communities. Revolu-
tions, whether sudden or gradual, are fearful things; we learn to feel at-
tachments to those things which they tear up, as a poor cripple feels at-
tached to the mortified limb, that must be amputated to save his life.
A line of demarkation in such a case is distinctly drawn between the dis-
eased and the healthy flesh. Such a line is now drawing between the


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 43


slave and free states, I fear. God send that the disease may be cured
without amputation, and before mortification takes place. I know that
this latter is your own belief. What think you now, since you have seen
the greater extent of the disease? (Vol. I, p. 165.)


The question is addressed to another young man on his travels,
a young Virginian who has gone south, and who is even more
troubled at what he finds. He cannot bring himself to think well
of the sacred institution as he sees it in South Carolina. There it
is laid bare in all its naked exploitation. The humaner relations
between the races that he has known in Virginia have been de-
stroyed by the absentee system with its drivers and overseers—
“to these animals,” he says, “‘I have always had an utter aversion.”
The evils of the large-scale system have carried farther; slavery in
the Carolinas has destroyed the middle class of yeomen, unduly
exalted the aristocracy and utterly debased the poor white. The
single spot he heartily approves in the two commonwealths is
Salem, a Moravian settlement where no slavery exists, where all
work, and where education is thought so well of that the daughters
of the first southern families go there for their schooling. In Salem
he found an answer to the southern problem far more competent
than Nullification.


Here, then, is a triumphant answer—an answer in deeds, instead of
words—in the happiness, and the substantial wealth of these simple and
primitive Moravians. Here... is an industrious, intelligent, and
healthy community, in the very heart of all the misery I have described.
Let us then improve by the lesson, seek out the sources of their prosperity,
find the point where their plans diverge from ours, and, my word for it
. . . we become a great, a flourishing, and a happy people. (Vol. I, p. 80.)


To the problem of slavery he returns constantly, and his views
may perhaps be sufficiently understood from the following passages:


The poor of a slave-country are the most miserable and the most
wretched of all the human family. The grades of society in this state are
even farther apart than in Virginia. Here, there is one immense chasm
from the rich to the abject poor. In the valley of Virginia, or in the
country where you are, there are regular gradations. The very happiest,
most useful, and most industrious class of a well-regulated community, is
here wanting. Their place is filled up by negroes; in consequence of which,
your aristocrats are more aristocratic, and your poor still poorer. The
slaves create an immeasurable distance between these two classes, which
can never be brought together until this separating cause be removed.
You know I am no abolitionist, in the incendiary meaning of the term;


44 : THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


yet I cannot deny from you and myself, that they are an incubus upon
our prosperity. This we would boldly deny, if a Yankee uttered it in our
hearing; but to ourselves, we must e’en confess it. If I am, therefore, an
abolitionist, it is not for conscience-sake, but from policy and patriot-
ism. (Vol. I, pp. 76-77.)

With us [in Virginia] slavery is tolerable, and has something soothing
about it to the heart of the philanthropist; the slaves are more in the
condition of tenants to their landlords—they are viewed as rational
creatures, and with more kindly feelings. . . . Here slavery is intolerable;
a single individual owning a hundred or more, and often not knowing them
when he sees them. . . . The slaves here are plantation live-stock; not
domestic and attached family servants, who have served around the
person of the master from the childhood of both. . . . Here, besides your
white overseers, you have your black drivers;—an odious animal, almost
peculiar to the far south. It is horrible to see one slave following another
at his work, with a cow-skin dangling at his arm, and occasionally tying
him up and flogging him when he does not get through his two tasks a
day. . . . Ido not observe much difference between the North and South
Carolinians, except in the case of those who inhabit the most southern
portions of the latter state. There your rich are more princely and
aristocratic, and your poor more wretched and degraded; but to tell you
the plain truth, many of your little slaveholders are miserably poor and
ignorant; and what must be the condition of that negro who is a slave to
one of these miserable wretches? (Vol. II, pp. 115-119.)


To the solution of the difficult problem Caruthers offers no easy
plan. He cannot go with the northern “enthusiasts” who propose
immediate emancipation. They do not comprehend the com-
plexity of the problem. “We cannot set slaves free among us.
Such a course would dissolve the social compact. It would set at
defiance all laws for the protection of life, liberty, and property,
either among them or the whites.” He foresaw clearly what
happened during the unhappy days of reconstruction. ‘‘Would it
be any reparation of an hereditary wrong, to plunge the subjects
of that wrong, with ourselves, into irretrievable ruin, to attain
nominal justice?’’ The free negroes would constitute a menace
more serious than the northern city mobs, which latter Caruthers
had no liking for. ‘These city mobocracies, composed as they are,
principally of wild Irish, are terrible things”; how much worse
would be a negro mobocracy? A confirmed agrarian, he finds his
chief hope in a vigorous yeomanry, and until the South shall develop
that, matters must go ill with it. In the midst of the Carolina
system his thoughts return fondly to his native state. He is under
no illusion in regard to the tide-water region of Virginia. It has


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 45


lived a generous life, but spendthrift and wasteful, and has come to
evil days. But in the West, beyond the mountains, a newer and
more vigorous age is rising that “will sweep away the melancholy
vestiges of a former and more chivalrous and generous age.”


Poor, exhausted eastern Virginia! she is in her dotage. Her impassable
roads protect her alike from the pity and contempt of foreign travellers;
but with all her weakness, with all the imbecilities of premature age upon
her, I love her still. (Vol. II, p. 194.)


Of this more vigorous age the prototype is the title-hero of the
volume, the stalwart Kentuckian whose native intelligence and
racy speech delight the Carolinian. This free son of the untamed
West is portrayed with bold strokes, and if his talk leans somewhat
heavily on the current convention of frontier humor, if Mont-
gomery Damon in his picturesque exaggerations suggests Davy
Crockett, the result is none the less salty. Caruthers does not
descend to caricature, but writes with gusto, and the Kentuckian’s
single letter is a little masterpiece in the vein of the free
frontier humor that was competing with the cavalier romantic
for popular approval. His whimsicalities, Caruthers tells us, he
hopes will encourage “‘a smile of good-humor” so that this maiden
product of the author’s pen may find its way into the good graces
of the reader—a course reckoned “‘the more necessary by a southern
aspirant, as there is evidently a current in American literature, the
fountainhead of which lies north of the Potomac, and in which a
southern is compelled to navigate up the stream if he jumps in too
far south ” (Vol. II, p. 218.)

The Cavaliers of Virginia, or the Recluse of Jamestown, announced
in the postscript to the Kentuckian in New York, and published
soon afterwards, is a full-fledged historical romance, with Bacon’s
Rebellion for a background and a somewhat melodramatic figure
of a recluse warrior for its romantic hero. There is brisk action,
dramatic Indian fights, much ruffling of young cavaliers, and a
fine aristocratic swagger, but Caruthers’ sympathies seem to
incline to the more democratic elements and in the end his rebel-
lious hero proves himself a match for the brisk young blades.
There is excellent reading in it, as there is in his last work, The
Knights of the Horse-Shoe; a Traditionary Tale of the Cocked Hat
Gentry in the Old Dominion, published in 1845, and reissued as
late as 1909; a genial story of Governor Spotswood’s time. Caruth-


46 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


ers deserved a better fate than fell to his lot. In spite of his excellent
work surprisingly little is known about him; even the spelling of
his name and the date of his death are matters about which there
is disagreement. From a slight sketch contributed to The Kntcker-
bocker Magazine for July, 1838, Climbing the Natural Bridge, it is
known that he was a student at Washington College, now Wash-
ington and Lee, at Lexington, Virginia, in the year 1818, and the
signature affixed carries only one “r.”” He seems to have removed
later to Savannah, Georgia, an enthusiastic description of which
he gives in the Kentuckian in New York. No doubt he there
practiced medicine and died in his prime, perhaps in the year 1846.
Virginia historians have inconsiderately neglected a cultivated
and open-minded writer who embodied the finer spirit of the Old
Dominion and whose stories have contributed their portion to the
plantation tradition.
I


JOHN PENDLETON KENNEDY
A Southern Whig


A far more prosperous course was run by John P. Kennedy,
whose sympathies drew him north rather than south, and who
early learned that it is better to serve a rising than a decaying
order. Very like Caruthers in temperament and gifts, a liberal in
all his sympathies, he found the ties that bound him to the Old
Dominion more fragile, and the drift of circumstance carrying him
with the stronger current. It was a kindly fate that took him in
charge, bringing him abundant prosperity and contemporary
fame.

One of the most attractive figures of his generation was this son
of a Maryland father and a Virginia mother. A gentleman of
much personal distinction, high-minded and of wide culture,
endowed with a pleasant wit, easy manners and generous nature,
he is an agreeable representative of the ante bellum Southerns, an
American Victorian of the Cobden-Bright school, standing mid-
way between the northern radical and the southern Fire Eater.
Like Henry Clay, he was a Whig engrafted on a Jeffersonian root.
Born and educated in Baltimore, he was a son of the borderland,
with strong ties of kinship and love that drew him to the Old
Dominion, and even stronger ties of intellectual, social and finan-
cial interests that drew him towards Philadelphia and New York,


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 47


Saratoga and Newport. As a young man he found his inspiration
in the life of William Wirt, whose biography he afterwards wrote.
Like Wirt, he dreamed of combining law and letters and adopting
the life of a southern gentleman; but he discovered little that was
congenial in the exactions of the law, and in spite of considerable
success as attorney for certain Baltimore interests, he largely
abandoned the profession. He loved his Chaucer and Shakespeare
more than his Coke and Blackstone: he was more interested in
Dickens and Thackeray and Carlyle and Irving and Scott than in
John Marshall’s decisions, and he followed the more congenial
path. He tried his hand likewise at politics. He was a member
of Congress for six years, was Secretary of the Navy during the last
months of President Fillmore’s administration, and was of service
to the Whig party as spokesman on dignified occasions. But he
was never a practical politician, and the rough and tumble of
political life he found utterly distasteful. As he grew older he
unconsciously drew further away from his southern antecedents.
In his later years there was little to distinguish him from Irving and
Robert C. Winthrop and other northern friends. He had left the
world of Beverley Tucker far behind him. He had severed all
ties with Virginia and South Carolina, and during the Civil War
he was a militant Unionist, though it cost him much grief and the
loss of old friendships.

Kennedy’s life ran an usually placid and prosperous course,
greatly unlike that of Gilmore Simms. His father was a Scotch-
Irish merchant of Baltimore who married Nancy Pendleton,
daughter of an excellent Virginia family with many honorable
connections. His early years were not unlike Irving’s—a little
Latin and Greek and much outdoor life, with a desultory educa-
tion got from vagrant books. The course of study at the local
college afforded far less intellectual stimulus than Tristram Shandy,
over which he pored of evenings, dissecting the prose style to
discover the secret of its charm, and filling his notebooks with
elaborately colloquial sentences, highly seasoned with dashes and
exclamation points. Graduating at eighteen, he enlisted in a
Baltimore regiment to fight the British, who were preparing
their raid on Washington. He went through the campaign as a
summer lark, emerging unscathed from the single skirmish. The
field was lost, but whether the honor of the crack Fifth was left
on the battle ground may be judged from Kennedy’s humorous


48 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


comment. ‘Soon we had the famous ‘trial of souls’—the battle
of Bladensburg. The drafted militia ran away at the first fire, and
the Fifth Regiment was driven off the field with the bayonet. We
made a fine scamper of it. I lost my musket in the mélée while
bearing off a comrade” (Tuckerman, Life of Kennedy, p. 79).

Throughout his twenties Kennedy was a studious dilettante in
letters and politics and law. He married but lost his wife and son
within the year; with his friend Peter Hoffman Cruse he published
a series of Baltimore sketches in two volumes entitled The Red
Book; and at the age of thirty-four married again. His second
wife was the daughter of Edward Gray, a wealthy Baltimore
cotton-spinner who at the age of eighteen had emigrated from
northern Ireland to Philadelphia, became a bank clerk and a
Federalist simultaneously, adopted Washington and Hamilton—
whom he occasionally met in a professional way—as his particular
heroes, prospered greatly, purchased the Ellicott Mills a few miles
out of Baltimore, and set up a half feudal estate vastly attractive
to discriminating visitors like Irving.

Kennedy’s marriage to Elizabeth Gray in 1829 seems to have
been the turning-point of his life. Before this he had been a
disinterested liberal in his views, concerning himself in a political
way with such humanitarian issues as the repeal of the brutal
debtor laws. He had never been an avowed Jeffersonian like
William Wirt and many of his Virginia connections, but the Jeffer-
sonian idealism must have appealed to the generous sympathies
of the young man. Immediately upon being taken into the Gray
family he adopted its ample scale of living, its genial hospitality,
its social and political philosophy. The influence of che masterful
Edward Gray was thenceforth a dominant creative factor in
Kennedy’s life, and he followed faithfully in the footsteps of his
father-in-law. The profits of the Ellicott Mills had been greatly
increased by the tariff act of 1824. Naturally Edward Gray was
an ardent protectionist, and Kennedy frankly espoused the same
policy. He accepted Henry Clay as his political leader, was sent
to Congress on a protectionist platform, lectured before Working-
men’s Institutes on the advantages of industrial development, and
gained a very considerable reputation as an expounder of the
American Plan. After the war he became a Republican, voted
for Grant, and adopted extreme nationalist views. That the
family income was dependent on tariff favors is a detail which


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 49


only a more realistic generation would suggest in explanation of
his political course; the fact remains, nevertheless, that the youth-
ful disciple of William Wirt adopted the new philosophy of prosper-
ity, became president of the board of directors of the Baltimore
and Ohio Railway, invested in West Virginia coal lands, and was
by way of becoming a captain of industry. The break with his
southern antecedents was complete and‘ final; he went with his
native city in preferring the industrial to the plantation economy.

Baltimore in Kennedy’s day was a thriving port with a growing
trade to the West Indies and Europe. It had long been a con-
_venient market for the tobacco of Virginia, and with the develop-
ment of the clipper service its over-sea commerce expanded
greatly. Unlike Charleston, the mercantile interests predominated
over the planter. Middle-class ideals, to be sure, were still tem-
pered by the dignified decorum that lingered on from the eighteenth
century. Merchants still emulated the gentry and strove for
personal distinction. They professed benevolent ideals and ¢heir
talk was much of public spirit and the progress of the town..-they
adopted the romantic faith of their class in the beneficent processes
of trade and industry in furthering social well-being, and ,they
endowed Mechanics Institutes and founded public libraries and
museums with all the ardor of converts. In this agreeable work
of expounding the gospel of progress, Kennedy joined heartily:
It satisfied the latent idealism of his nature and recompensed him
for the loss of his Virginia heritage. Intellectually he was too
honest to pervert the gospel of progress to selfish class interest and
seek to hide the perversion behind sonorous platitudes,-as his
friend Robert C. Winthrop of Boston was guilty of doing. -Fle
had too much love for the English language to misuse it: even ,in
defense of the family income. He could not contract his mind te
the compass of a Whig politician’s. His defense of industrialism,
in consequence, embodies the spirit of the best English. liberalism
as that liberalism was interpreted by Victorian Englishmen. He
seems to have been honestly convinced that the future yell-being
of America was dependent upon the development of an inaustrial-
ism to provide an economic balance between manufactures and
agriculture.

Like his friend Irving, Kennedy was a devout romantic, with a
love of the old-time picturesque; but as a consistent Whig he would
spin and weave his romance out of domestic materials, refusing to


50 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


import. He was a child of the effervescent days following 1812,
when the static eighteenth century was breaking up and an ebullient
romanticism was permeating the land. Of this youthful period his
thought reveals the clear impress. Washington Irving from long
pottering over the old-world picturesque had become English
romantic, with an inveterate dislike of all innovation. The vulgar
nineteenth century was destroying for him the charm of the
eighteenth; he would have had the world remain as it was before
the American and French revolutions had despoiled life of pic-
turesque feudal ways. Whereas Kennedy, sharing in a roman-
ticism that was economic and social—that was creating a won-
derful America of the future out of the raw materials of life—was
content to remain native, at home in the land of his birth. He
might turn to the past for the figures and scenes of his stories,
but: he discovered in the activities of the present materials for
romance quite as fascinating. He was wholly Victorian in his
genial’ dptimism. He was receptive to new ideas and promising
“ventures. He listened sympathetically to inventors and scientists
and - -promoters. He was instrumental in securing Congressional
: aid te.erect Morse’s telegraph line between Washington and his
- native’ city. As Secretary of the Navy he provided for Commodore
-* Perry’ a expedition to Japan, and the expedition to search for Dr.
: Kané° in. the Arctic regions. But unfortunately his economic
: . fomanticism gradually undermined his literary romanticism; he
outgrew, his earlier literary ambitions, and the romances of his
‘Tater life never got written. In the end the gospel of progress was
his undoing.

:*That che generous comfort in which he lived afforded him lei-
sure, méans of travel, contact with distinguished people, goes with-
“out saying; but that it was favorable to letters is far from clear.
‘Divided.i mterests consumed his energies and kept him an amateur
to the last. His literary development was an evolution from a
sketchy and humorous Addisonian, with its echoes of the eighteenth
century, to the full Victorian romantic. The foreign elements from
an earlier time slowly settled to the bottom of the vat and left
the pure wine of romance. But it took time. Like other amateurs
he was influenced by current literary successes, and was much
given to following the changing fashions. His three best-known
books, written between the ages of thirty-six and forty-five, are un-
like enough to have been written by different men. Swallow Barn,


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 51


like the youthful sketches of The Red Book, is Irvingesque, and
the Irving influence crops out again in a late book Quodlibet;
but Horseshoe Robinson is substantial Revolutionary romance,
done in sober narrative with touches of realism; and Rob of the
Bowl is light and whimsical cavalier romance, all atmosphere and
small talk, utterly unlike Irving. It is in this latter book, perhaps,
written in 1838 at the age of forty-two, that Kennedy really found
himself; he seems to move through the scenes more easily and with
greater delight than in any other of his pages.

That the leisurely sketches of Swallow Barn belong to the school
of Irving is a fact as obvious as Kennedy’s love for the idling
plantation life. Quite too much, however, has been made of this
imitativeness—it is an imitativeness rather of method than of
theme or style. If it was not quite a pioneer work in the field of
local description, it was amongst the earliest. Paulding had
dealt with Dutch colonial life, and Timothy Flint and James Hall
had begun the descriptive literature of the West; but little else
had been done at the time Swallow Barn appeared. Longstreet’s
Georgia Scenes came out two years later. Intrinsically as well as
historically the work is curiously suggestive. Nowhere else does
the plantation life of the Old Dominion in the days before its de-
cline appear so vividly as in these discursive pages: “‘the mellow,
bland, and sunny luxuriance of her old-time society—its good fel-
lowship, its hearty and constitutional companionableness, the thrift-
less gaiety of the people, their dogged but amiable invincibility of
opinion, and that overflowing hospitality which knows no ebb.”

Like Irving, Kennedy went back to the old home, but that old
home was Virginia and not England; and there he found still
lingering on the great plantations charmingly romantic anach-
ronisms that had disappeared elsewhere—a spontaneous roman-
ticism of temperament that gave color and zest to the daily routine.
The aloofness of plantation life had bred in the Virginia gentry a
piquant individuality, a distinction as of old morocco or calfskin.
Philly Wart, the shrewdly humorous fox-hunting lawyer; old Mr.
Tracy of The Brakes, “turning a little sour with age” and resem-
bling “that waterish, gravelly soil that you see sometimes around
a spring, where nothing grows but sheep-sorrel,” who cherishes
a hereditary boundary dispute, pursuing his hypothetical rights
through all the law courts and discovering, when the matter has
been amicably settled by arbitration, that much of the zest has


52 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH. .


gone out of his life; the heroine Bel Tracy, a frank wholesome girl
with a dash of Di Vernon in her romantic affectations that lead
her to play at hawking: such figures fit as naturally into the back-
ground as the pampered house servants, the horseback riding, the
constant visiting, the abundant dinners. Especially the dinners,
when the neighborhood is invited in. The table spread with
opulent hospitality and careless profusion—the baked ham at
one end and the saddle of roast mutton at the other, with fried
chicken, oysters, crabs, sweet potatoes, jellies, custards—a prodi-
gal feast that only outdoor stomachs could manage, and all by
way of preliminary to the dusty wine-bottles and easy stories
that hold the men long after the ladies have withdrawn. Surely
the romance of Old Virginia, preserved in these light-hearted
discursive pages, is worth remembering by later generations who
have forgotten how to live so genially.

In 1832 when Swallow Barn was written, the southern mind was
just at the turn in its attitude towards slavery, and Frank Meri-
wether, a Virginian Sir Roger de Coverley, bred in the humanita-
rianism of the older liberals, accepts the institution as a present
evil that is in a way of natural extinction. Slavery in Swallow
Barn is kept in the background. There are slaves, of course, on
the plantation, many of them; but they are in the tobacco fields
or the quarters, far from the mansion; and not till near the end of
the book does Kennedy’s curiosity induce him to visit the cabins
and draw out Frank Meriwether in talk on slavery. The result is
what one could have foreseen. The plantation master was the
victim of a benevolent romanticism that vaguely looks for a solu-
tion to colonization schemes that will return the negro to Africa;
but like other southern gentlemen he is somewhat testy at the sug-
gestion of outside interference. Slavery he regards as an exclusive.
southern problem, to be solved by those who understand its com-
plex domestic implications. It would be better for everybody if
Abolition busybodies would mind their own affairs and cease
stirring up feelings where no good can come of it. To prove that
Virginia gentlemen are aware of their responsibility, Meriwether
offers a half humorous suggestion that negro emancipation might
well follow the example of English villeinage, with a slow break-up
of the system, the emancipated negro to remain in a protective
feudal relation to his master. It was an amiable notion to play
with, and it fitted the feudal psychology of the plantation.


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 53


In these early sketches Kennedy revealed an easy knack at
writing that gave promise of excellent work later. He has lightness,
grace, refinement, an eye sensitive to picturesque effects, delight
in line and texture and color, an agreeable wit and playful senti-
ment, a relish for English idiom and the literary colloquial. In
Horseshoe Robinson, written three years later, he abandoned the
essay-sketch and turned to the school of historical romance then
in full swing. The story is done in the orthodox manner of the
thirties; it is compounded of equal parts gentry and commoners,
the former providing respectability and the latter dramatic in-
_terest, the whole garnished with a few historical figures. There is
quite obvious concern for authentic reality. The title-hero, a
shrewd homespun scout, is carefully drawn from life; the back-
ground of bushwhackings and forays and onsets, and the numerous
company of blackguards and honest folk, are painted in skillfully;
and the whole conducts to a dramatic finale in the battle of King’s
Mountain. It is an excellent tale, quite worth reading today, but
scarcely comparable in vividness and brisk action—in picaresque
realism which any true war story must embody—with The Partisan
of Gilmore Simms, written in the same year of 1835. Realism was
not Kennedy’s forte and after Horseshoe Robinson he abandoned
the field of the Revolution which offered so rich an opportunity
for the robuster genius of the Charleston romancer.

In Rob of the Bowl Kennedy opened a promising vein that he
never adequately explored—the vein of the cavalier romantic.
Temperamentally he was ill fitted to deal with rollicking action
or picaresque adventure; he preferred the leisurely, discursive
romantic, subdued to gentle raillery or humorous tenderness. One
trembles to think what Simms would have made of the materials
that Kennedy brought together in this tale of old St. Mary’s in
the days of Charles II. Here is the raw stuff of a true bloody-
bones thriller: a gentlemanly blackguard with the stumps of his
legs bound in a huge rocking trencher and moving about with the.
help of crutches, who is deep in the contraband trade; a swaggering
young pirate, a Brother of the Bloody Coast, who falls in love with
the daughter of the Collector of the Port and kidnaps her from her
father’s house; a romantic lover, slender and clerkly, but skillful
with the rapier, who turns out to be the son of Rob; a haunted
house that covers the smuggling operations of Rob and Captain
Cocklescraft; and all this set against a background of partisan


54 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


struggle between Roundhead and Cavalier, Protestant and Catho-
lic, in the early days of the Maryland settlement.

But in the handling the story is far removed from a bloody-bones
tale. The action is deliberately subdued to the humoresque;
atmosphere is studiously created; adventure is held in strict sub-
jection to the whimsical; and a mellow old-time flavor is im-
prisoned in the leisurely pages. Kennedy had an appreciative eye
for picturesque characters, and in Rob of the Bowl he has gathered
a choice group, limned—as he would choose to say—with a partial
hand. Garret Weasel, the garrulous pot-valiant innkeeper, and
Dorothy his termagant spouse; Captain Jasper Dauntless, the
cogging, wheedling swordsman who twists Dame Dorothy about
his fingers and inveigles his host into undue commerce with his
cups—these to be sure are stock characters, but they are done with
excellent vivacity. Their abundant talk is well seasoned, and if
the action sometimes drags, the company is good and the drinking
is a sufficient end in itself. All the while he is writing Kennedy
keeps half an eye on Elizabethan literature to assure himself of the
exact turn of phrase. His vocabulary is saturated with the homely
old speech, and his characters talk as if they had culled all the
simples of English cottage gardens to garnish the staple of their
wit. He has a keener delight than Simms in the picturesque
archaic. He far surpasses Irving in easy mastery of the old-fash-
ioned colloquial, as indeed he surpasses all our early novelists. He
delights in the courtly wit of the Cavalier equally with the hu-
mors of Dogberry and Falstaff and Captain Bobadil, and he quite
evidently is seeking to cross the sparkle of Congreve with the ro-
bustness of the Elizabethans. The result may sometimes appear
a bit self-conscious; his phrases too often seem to be on dress
parade; but he can plead his precedents in justification. In its
fondness for the literary colloquial his prose style almost suggests
Thackeray, and it is this suggestion, perhaps, that gave rise to the
tradition that Kennedy wrote for the former a certain chapter of
The Virginians. That he supplied Thackeray with materials for
his Virginia backgrounds may be accepted as true, but the in-
debtedness probably went no further.

Rob of the Bowl is certainly Kennedy’s best work, as it is one of
the most finished and delightful of our earlier romances. Although
it ran to six editions, the latest in 1907, it has scarcely received the
recognition its lightness of touch deserves. But instead of opening


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 55


the vein further he turned away to venture in new fields. Quodlibet,
written in 1840,! is a surprising successor to Rob—a satire on
Jacksonian democracy, done with a light touch and great good
humor. In those acrimonious days when Old Hickory’s attack
on the Bank so embittered its Whig partisans, Kennedy kept his
temper, tipped his shafts with laughter and sent them neatly
between the joints of the Democratic armor. Against such amus-
ing satire fustian is helpless. The book is keen, vivacious, spark-
ling. The supposed follies of Jacksonianism—its deification of the
majority vote, its cant of the sovereign people, its hatred of all
_aristocrats, its demagoguery and bluster and sheer buncombe—are
hit off with exuberant raillery. The story professes to be an account
of the rise to prosperity of the Borough of Quodlibet, under the
beneficent smile of Democratic finance. Mean and insignificant
before the coming of Jackson, with the removal of the “ Deposites,”
“like Jeshurun, it waxed fat,” with its rows of brick shops built on
speculation and its Patriotic Copper-Plate Bank that issued an
unlimited supply of beautifully engraved notes as a stimulus to
enterprise. To be sure the bank broke and the cashier absconded
with his family to Europe, but its untoward end was attributed by
all Jacksonian New Lights to the vile machinations of the Whigs.
It was certainly Nick Biddle and the Barings, with their hatred
of Old Bullion Benton’s democratic gold coinage, that were the
devil in the pot to spill the people’s porridge.

Yet even in its laughter Kennedy’s political bias is sharply and
narrowly partisan. The satire is a capitalistic counter to the agra-
rian attack on the rising money power, and it is colored by the
chagrin of gentlemen who find themselves displaced by plebeians.
Something of the old aristocratic contempt for the plain man
functioning as a political animal lingers in its pages, which the
bubbling humor does not wholly conceal. In Jackson’s onslaught
on the Bank, Kennedy discovers only an impudent demagoguery;
it is selfish and stupid, turmoiling the country for partisan ends and
seeking to cover its petty spite with the mantle of patriotism. The
Old Hero cuts a sorry figure in these brisk pages, and Van Buren a


1The characteristic title is Quodlibet: Containing some Annals thereof, with an
Authentic Account of the Origin and Growth of the Borough and the Sayings and
Doings of Sundry Townspeople: Interspersed with Sketches of the Most Remarkable
and Distinguished Characters of that Place and its Vicinity. Edited by Solomon
Secondthoughts, Schoolmaster, from original MSS. Indited by him, and now made
Public at the Request and under the Patronage of the Great New Light Democratic


Central Committee of Quodlibet.


56 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


still sorrier one. The satire sparkles amusingly, but it is drawn from
the old Federalist vintage and it preserves the flavor of a time
when gentlemen frankly resented the rule of the unwashed ma-
jority. For that very reason Quodlibet is an unusually interesting
document. It is the most vivacious criticism of Jacksonianism in
our political library, one of our few distinguished political satires,
and it deserves a better fate than to gather dust on old shelves.

After Quodlibet Kennedy did little else. The last twenty years
of his life were largely wasted. His dignified life of William Wirt,
published in 1849, seems to have met with approval, for it ran to
six editions. Our grandfathers liked stately narrative that por-
trayed their subjects in full dress; and Kennedy gave them an
impeccably respectable work in which all the rugosities of character
were ironed out neatly and a fine starchy effect achieved. It is hard
to understand how a writer so keen to detect the whimsical should
have drawn so lifeless a picture of the genial Attorney-General.
Perhaps the memory of Wirt’s reputed greatness rested too heavily
upon him; or it may have been that a lawyer in old Virginia lived
as colorless a life as the narrative suggests; at any rate the novelist
who never had failed to breathe life into the characters of his
fiction, somehow failed in depicting this excellent gentleman of the
old school. During the Civil War Kennedy contributed to the
northern cause his Letters of Mr. Paul Ambrose on the Great Re-
bellion in the United States, in which he again showed that he could
keep his temper and argue calmly. It was a difficult theme for
which he was inadequately equipped. His constitutional argument
is not impressive and it makes an ill showing when set over against
Alexander H. Stephens’ Constitutional View of the War between the
States. He was a man of letters rather than a lawyer, and if he had
eschewed politics and law and stuck to his pen our literature would
have been greatly in his debt. Few Americans of his day were so
generously gifted; none possessed a lighter touch. He has been
somewhat carelessly forgotten even by our literary historians who
can plead no excuse for so grave a blunder.


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 57
II
EDGAR ALLAN POE


Romantic


It is from this slovenly background of aristocratic Virginia,
with its liberalisms and conservatisms running at cross purposes,
that the enigmatical figure of Poe emerged to vex the northern
critics. In so far as any particular environment determined his
highly individual and creative nature, it was the indolent life of
the planter gentry, shot through with a pugnacious pride of lo-
cality, with a strong dislike of alien ways, with haughtiness, dis-
sipation, wastefulness, chivalry. In his proud, irascible individual-
ism that went out of its way to pick a quarrel, there is something
of the spirit of John Randolph of Roanoke, but pied and streaked
with unfortunate qualities that to many observers seemed the
marks of the mere charlatan. As a southern gentleman he im-
bibed the common dislike of New England, and this dislike was
aggravated by its diverse conception of the functions of art, and
by the misfortunes that attended his literary career. An aesthete
and a craftsman, the first American writer to be concerned with
beauty alone, his ideals ran counter to every major interest of the
New England renaissance: the mystical, optimistic element in
transcendentalism; the social conscience that would make the world
over in accordance with French idealism, and that meddled with its
neighbor’s affairs in applying its equalitarianism to the negro; the
pervasive moralism that would accept no other criteria by which
to judge life and letters—these things could not fail to irritate a
nature too easily rufed. The Yankee parochialisms rubbed across
his Virginia parochialisms; and when to these was added a Yankee
preémption of the field of literary criticism, when a little clique
engaged in the business of mutual admiration puffed New England
mediocrities at his expense, the provocation was enough to arouse
in a sensitive southern mind an antagonism that rivaled Bever-
ley Tucker’s. In his unhappy pilgrimage through life Poe was his
own worst enemy, but he took comfort in charging his ill fortune
upon the malignancy of others.

Southern though he was in the deep prejudices of a suspicious
nature, his aloofness from his own Virginia world was complete.
Aside from his art he had no philosophy and no programs and
no causes. He got from Virginia what was bad rather than good,


58 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


and his alienation from the more generous southern ideals did
him harm. It was perhaps harder to be an artist in that slack
southern society than in New England—harder to be a romantic
concerned only with twilight melancholy. It would have been
hard enough anywhere in Jacksonian America. His romanticisms
were of quite another kind than those his countrymen were pur-
suing; and the planter sympathized with them no more than did
the New York literati, or the western men of letters. In a world
given over to bumptious middle-class enthusiasms, there would be
scant sympathy for the craftsman and dreamer. There was no
unearned increment to be got from investments in “the misty
mid-region of Weir,” which Poe threw on the market. The tech-
nician concerned with the values of long and short syllables would
find few congenial spirits in a world of more substantial things;
and the purveyors of shoddy tales would not take it kindly if
their shortcomings were pointed out and a more competent crafts-
manship insisted upon. And so, like Herman Melville, Poe came
to shipwreck on the reef of American materialisms. The day of
the artist had not dawned in America.

So much only need be said. The problem of Poe, fascinating as
it is, lies quite outside the main current of American thought, and
it may be left with the psychologist and the belletrist with whom it
belongs. It is for abnormal psychology to explain his “neural
instability amounting almost to a dissociated or split personality,”
his irritable pride, his quarrelsomeness, his unhappy persecution
complex, his absurd pretentions to a learning he did not possess,
his deliberate fabrications about his life and methods of work, his
oscillations between abstinence and dissipation, between the mor-
bidly grotesque and the lucidly rational, his haunting fear of in-
sanity that drove him to demonstrate his sanity by pursuing com-
plex problems of ratiocination. Such problems are personal to
Poe and do not concern us here. And it is for the belletrist to
evaluate his theory and practice of art: his debt to Coleridge and
Schlegel; the influence of the contemporary magazine on his
conception of the length of a work of the imagination; the value of
his theory of the tyrannizing unity of mood in the poem and short
story; the provocation to the craftsman of the pretentiousness of
contemporary American literature, joined to a flabby and crude
technique; the grossness of the popular taste and the validity of
his critical judgments. Whatever may be the final verdict it is


ADVENTURES IN ROMANCE 59


clear that as an aesthete and a craftsman he made a stir in the
world that has not lessened in the years since his death, but has
steadily widened. Others of greater repute in his day have fared
less prosperously in later reputation. He was the first of our artists
and the first of our critics; and the surprising thing is that such a
man should have made his appearance in an America given over to
hostile ideals. He suffered much from his aloofness, but he gained
much also. In the midst of gross and tawdry romanticisms he
refused to be swallowed up, but went his own way, a rebel in the
cause of beauty, discovering in consequence a finer romanticism
than was before known in America.


Wir pay i) ght


a x +: pe . Pn cee ak | saity' 5 alae
: ee i dehy ier steam

a ane 7
ly. ‘usa
On il 7
- ag

re | as avai

| ted tale Sale hee

- wiles Ww oy 61


coer, =e) Cesta


PART TWO: THE RENAISSANCE OF SLAVERY


CHAPTER I


SOUTHERN IMPERIALISM
I


By the year 1824 a change was becoming evident in the South
that was to affect profoundly the course of southern thought in
regard to her peculiar institution. The passing of the long Vir-
ginia hegemony was a sign that southern opinion was undergoing
a revolutionary overturn, and that leadership henceforth would
rest with men of a different philosophy. The humanitarian spirit
that marked the thought of the preceding generation was dying
out, to be replaced by a frank recognition of local economic inter-
ests. Expectation that slavery was on the way to natural extinc-
tion was yielding to the conviction that the system was too prof-
itable to the South to permit its extinction, and this in turn bred
an imperious desire to spread it westward to the Pacific. With
this significant shift from apology to imperialism, it became clear
to ardent pro-slavery men that lukewarm Virginians of the old
tradition were not the spokesmen to entrust with the fortunes
of the South, and leadership passed to the South Carolina school.
In that momentous shift much was implied. It was more than
a shift from Jefferson to Calhoun, from humanitarian idealism to
economic realism. It marked the complete ascendancy of a small
minority of gentleman planters over the inarticulate mass of
southern yeomanry, and the assertion of the aristocratic ideal as

‘ the goal of southern society. It denied the principle of democracy

as that principle was understood in the North and West, and it

rejected the new humanitarian spirit of western civilization. It

abandoned the Jeffersonian equalitarianism that was so deeply

rooted in the southern mind from Kentucky to Georgia; it cast

aside the agrarianism of John Taylor and the older Virginians;

and it set up in place of these congenial conceptions the alien ideal

of a Greek democracy. More momentous still, it threw down the
61


62 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


gauntlet to the ideals of the middle class, then in the first flush of
a triumphant career, and in the armed clash that eventually re-
sulted, it was destroyed by that class.

The intellectual capital of southern imperialism was Charleston,
but its numerical strength lay in the Black Belt, with South Caro-
lina to the east and Texas to the west, a compact territory the
heart of which was Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi and Louisiana.
In this new South that was rapidly passing through its frontier
development, the patriarchal system of Virginia gave way to a
system of negro exploitation, more naked as it passed further
westward. It was here that the proportion of slaves to whites was
greatest; it was here that slave labor was most profitable; and it
was here in consequence that the slave economy was most mili-
tant. The Black Belt became the native habitat of the southern
Fire Eater. In the late twenties and early thirties South Caro-
lina provided the outstanding leaders of the new school; but the
philosophy of imperialism spread rapidly and western men came
more and more to the front. George McDufhe and Bob Toombs,
perhaps the boldest of the loquacious tribe of Fire Eaters, came
from Georgia; Alexander H. Stephens was bred in the same tur-
bulent state; L. Q. C. Lamar and Jefferson Davis were from Mis-
sissippi. For the most part self-made, products of a frontier envi-
ronment, these western extremists had got from Jefferson little
more than an assertive individualism that easily espoused the
states-rights philosophy and prompted them to defend their
immediate interests. It was this vigorous group that largely
created the new southern psychology and prodded the southern
mind along the path marked out for it to travel. Democratic in
their attitude towards the white voter, middle class in their love of
exploitation, they retained little of the spirit of the Virginia school.

The expansion of the South to the Gulf region came a genera-
tion later than the settlement of the Ohio valley. The Creek In-
dians who clung tenaciously to the rich lands of Mississippi were
long an obstacle to the white advance, and the settlers filtered in
slowly. Moreover the slave economy was ill fitted to the business
of pioneering. It was difficult to transport negroes and establish
great plantations in a wilderness; there was too little security in
a region that offered every temptation to the slave to run away.
The plantation system could prosper only after a considerable
degree of development had been effected and sufficient negroes


SOUTHERN IMPERIALISM 63


provided. On the other hand, the rich soil, virgin and productive,
offered every inducement for large-scale production of cotton, to-
bacco and sugar. Here the economics of slavery could be fairly
tested, and if the system were found to be profitable it would
spread of its own impulse beyond the Mississippi, becoming more
imperialistic with every extension, ambitious to seize Texas with
its filibusters, looking as far as California and the Oregon terri-
tory for future expansion. But while planning for such expansion
it must secure its strategic front at Washington, making certain
that no rival economy should control the central government to
_ its disadvantage. It was an ambitious program, but it was all
implicit in the evident fact that slavery in the Black Belt proved
to be profitable.

The explanation of this sudden prosperity of the Black Belt
is a matter of familiar knowledge. Coincident with the first west-
ward expansion of slavery came a revolution in the technique of
the English cotton industry that brought about corresponding
changes in southern agriculture. The production of cotton tex-
tiles in England had long been held back by the difficulty of spin-
ning a fine and even thread. When this problem was solved at the
beginning of the century by the invention of new machines, the
cotton industry at once developed amazingly, making heavy de-
mands upon the supply of American raw materials. This supply
in turn was greatly increased by the invention of the cotton gin,
and the combined result of these inventions was an upheaval in
southern agriculture. In the eighteenth century the southern
staples were tobacco, rice and indigo; by 1825 the staples had
become cotton, tobacco and sugar. Almost in a decade cotton had
become king. In 1791, three years after Andrew Jackson settled
in Nashville, the total export of cotton was only 200,000 pounds.
In 1803 it had risen to 40,000,000 pounds, and by 1860 the ex-
port for the year was of the value of nearly two hundred mil-
lions of dollars. Such figures provide a sufficient explanation of
the militant spirit of the slave economy after 1820. Here was an
enormous vested interest, the economic life of the South, that
could not suffer its present or future profits to be put in jeopardy
by any political party on any pretext. Its well-being and its pres-
tige were both at stake. The peculiar institution, which a genera-
tion before was commonly believed to be in the way of natural
extinction, had the South by the throat.


64 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


It was the strategic weakness of the South that the spirit of
exploitation, which following the peace of 1783 had spread through
America like the itch, should there have assumed its most hateful
form, far more revolting to the humanitarian sense and far less
justifiable to uneasy consciences than wage slavery. With every
extension the system became necessarily more brutal in exploita-
tion. As new plantations were opened the natural increase of
negroes was inadequate to meet the pressing demands for slaves.
Since the abolition of the traffic with Africa the occasional smug-
gling by venturesome runners—many of whom were respectable
New England church members—had provided a totally inadequate
supply of raw material; the price of slaves rose steadily, and this
in turn led to increasing speculation in negroes. Buying and sell-
ing by middlemen went on briskly, to the horror of northern
humanitarians and the concern of southern. So brutal and open
was the exploitation that Alexander H. Stephens—the kindest-
hearted of men—went so far as to advocate the reopening of the
slave trade with Africa, as the lesser of the two evils. The better
South hated what it could not help. Although the slave trader re-
mained a social pariah with whom no gentleman would associate,
his business was a necessary evil of the system and could not be
eradicated.

The reaction of the slave system upon the southern people,
both plantation masters and poor whites, was wholly evil. The
generous culture of Virginia failed to take root in the Black Belt.
The development of the plantation system under hired overseers
infected the masters, few in numbers and absolute in power, with
an exaggerated sense of their own greatness. The aristocratic
spirit of the Old Dominion had been tempered by a feeling of
patriarchal responsibility that humanized the relations between
master and slave, and more generous social contacts had created
an admirable republican squirarchy. But in the frontier Gulf
states the rapid expansion of the plantation system created an
aristocracy given to swaggering, bourgeois in spirit, arrogant in
manners. Republican simplicity was losing vogue and there was
much loose talk about the superiority of the classes. It is said
that when Alexander H. Stephens was appointed a delegate to the
Confederate Convention at Montgomery, he refused to attend till
he was assured that the jingoes would make no attempt to set up
a monarchy. Gideon Welles is authority for the story that when


SOUTHERN IMPERIALISM 65


news came to Washington of the secession of South Carolina, Mrs.
Jefferson Davis was all aflutter: “She said she wanted to get rid
of the old government; that they would have a monarchy South,
and gentlemen to fill official positions” (Diary, Vol. II, p. 256).
Such stories were probably the result of war hysteria; nevertheless
they suggest a bias in the southern temper that reveals how far
the new South had drifted from its Jeffersonian moorings.

Of this new South with its grandiose dreams of slave imperialism,
fate selected Jefferson Davis to be the political leader and spokes-
man. The choice may have proved unfortunate, but it was logical.
Much calumny has been heaped upon his name, but that is the
common fate of partisans of lost causes. The real Jefferson Davis
is to be sought in some mean between the extravagant adulation of
his friends and the slanders of his enemies. Not a great man
certainly; in no sense comparable to Lee or Stonewall Jackson or
Alexander H. Stephens; he was very far from a petty or time-
serving nature. As time softens the old animosities it reveals the
features of a high-minded southern gentleman who possessed the
virtues and the weaknesses of his race. Simple and austere in
tastes, he was the product of a crossing of the southern Puritan
with the aristocratic tradition of the Old Dominion. If he was not
of the old cavalier stock he was a gentleman by instinct and
training. His father was half Welsh, half English; his mother
Scotch-Irish. He came of Revolutionary stock. After the war his
father settled in Georgia and later removed to Kentucky, where
the son was born in Todd County in 1808. While still a small child
he was taken to Wilkinson County, Mississippi, where he was
brought up on a plantation. Educated at Lexington, Kentucky,
and at West Point, he proved a serious, capable student, who
loved reading but possessed little intellectual curiosity. His ideas
were few, but those he embraced he clung to with the tenacity of a
strong nature. Resigning from the army after a few years of
honorable service, he settled down as a plantation master. He
was summoned from his isolation by the call for troops to serve in
the Mexican campaign, went through several battles with unusual
distinction, and proved himself an extremely able officer. With
his military fame the path to political preferment was open and he
demonstrated his ability in Congress. At the outbreak of the
secession movement he was eager to receive the appointment as
commander of the southern armies, but fate called him to the


66 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


presidency of the Confederacy and he devoted his best strength
unselfishly to the cause, only to find the accumulated bitterness
of the North heaped upon his single head. It was an unhappy
lot, but there was iron in him, and he bore it like a man.

Jefferson Davis was cut out of the same tough oak that fashioned
John C. Calhoun. Hard and unyielding, tenacious of opinion,
dictatorial, somewhat inclined to arrogance, he might break, but he
would not bend. The Scotch-Irish stock was rarely genial or
tolerant, and Davis possessed none of the seeming pliability of
Lincoln that yielded the non-essentials to secure the essentials.
Utterly lacking in humor and easy-going good nature, he offended
by his very virtues. Profoundly Puritan, he was narrow and rigid,
a legalist in temperament, proud and jealous of authority. Metic-
ulously honest, he could not get on well with men; he quarreled
with his generals and wore himself out trying to do everything
himself. Politically he was a strict constructionist of the most
rigid views. He refused to follow Calhoun into the camp of
Nullification. His patriotism was extreme, and only a greater loy-
alty to his state made him an advocate of secession. At bottom
he was a Jeffersonian and to the end of his life he was faithful to
the principles of his party. Kindly and humane, he treated his
dependents with singular consideration. He set up a curious little
democracy amongst the slaves of his plantation, and his negroes
were devoted to him with rare loyalty. There was in his nature
not the slightest trace of the exploiter; he was a patriarchal master
after the old Virginia ideal, with no hint of the speculator or
middleman. The background of his thought was agrarian and he
shared with Jefferson a dislike for capitalistic industrialism. The
President of the Confederacy may have been an unfortunate
civil leader, but the slanders that so long clung to his name are
only worthy of the gutter. The sin that he was led into was not
counted a sin in his southern decalogue; it was the sin, not of
secession, but of imperialism—a sin common to all America in
those drunken times when the great West invited exploitation.


CHAPTER II


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE
I


AN economic revolution so widespread and profound could not
fail to impress its ideals on current political thought. In the year
1825 three streams of tendency were flowing through the southern
mind, rising from different sources, incompatible in spirit and pur-
pose, strong in their diverse appeals; and in the end the major
current was certain to engulf the lesser. The humanitarianism of
Virginia, the individualism of the new West, and the imperialism
of the Black Belt might seem to mingle their waters for a time,
but there would be confusions of thought and diversity of counsels
until one or another had worn a deeper channel through which
the dominant opinion might run. There could be no more fascinat-
ing study in the economics of political theory than the changing
mind of the South during the critical decades from 1820 to 1850,
as it followed the course determined by its peculiar institution.
Political thought passed under the jurisdiction of slavery, and
every southern writer took his daily bearings from that polar
fact. It is unintelligent to charge upon southern politicians a lack
of consistency—to point out that after 1820 Calhoun reversed
himself on every major political principle. It was true of Calhoun,
as it was true of Webster and true of Clay. In a rapidly changing
America, with economics in a state of flux, men were no longer
free political agents, guiding themselves by the fixed stars of
accepted theory; they were borne like corks on the current of the
times, and their inconsistency is the surest evidence that they
spoke for their constituents. The North and the South were
at the parting of the ways, and if southern imperialism created for
its needs a philosophy of particularism, it was met by a coun-
ter philosophy of nationalism created for its needs by northern
capitalism, which likewise was following the path of its mani-
fest destiny. The charge of innovation, indeed, lies more justly
against northern theory than southern; it was Webster rather
than Calhoun who ignored the teachings of the fathers.

Of these three streams of tendency it was the new imperialism

67


68 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


of the Black Belt that wore the deepest channel, gathering its
tributaries till it was swollen to an overwhelming flood that drew
in every lesser current. Every other interest was eventually
sacrificed to slavery, every ambition was laid upon that consuming
altar. Southern political thought, in consequence, came to be an
ingenious study in the strategy of defense. From the somewhat
vague doctrine of states rights as struck off by the Virginia school
was elaborated a complete philosophy of particularism with its
principle of a protective state veto. Tremendous as was the stir
created by the doctrine of Nullification, that doctrine was little
more than a warning gesture, a militant expression of the southern
temper. The time was not ripe for the critical issue, the philos-
ophy of the new South was not yet clarified; the objective was
clearly seen, but the defenses were incomplete, the line of campaign
not yet laid down. That great work was in the skillful hands of
Calhoun, and much was yet to be done. The deeper purpose that
lay behind the gesture of Nullification was the purpose of erecting
in the slave states a civilization founded on a landed aristocracy
that should serve as a sufficient counterweight to the mercantile
and industrial civilization of the North; and in the event that
the institution of slavery were not assured of peaceful extension
through the new West, to secede and establish a southern Con-
federacy wherein a generous civilization might develop, modeled
after the Greek democracy. Such at least was the dream of the
noblest minds of the South.

Thrown early upon the defensive, southern political thought
found too little time to examine fundamental principles. The
necessities of the situation entailed a meticulous constitutional
debate, in which the terms of the Constitution were examined with
microscopic care, and interpreted in the light of their historical
origin. Something of the sterility of the lawyer’s mind marked
the long debate; and little of the suggestiveness of the philos-
opher’s. Acute as was Calhoun’s reasoning, it reveals the weak-
ness of contemporary political thought, northern as well as south-
ern. It concerned itself too exclusively with government under
the Constitution—its origin, the just interpretation of the terms
of the fundamental law, the potentialities of consolidation inherent
in the principle of loose construction. To the broader problems
of the nature and functions of the political state—questions that
had so deeply interested the speculative minds of the French


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 69


school—quite inadequate consideration was given. The drift of
circumstance was in the way of creating a leviathan state. South-
ern orators railed at consolidation in abundant and florid language,
but they concerned themselves little with the deeper problem of
the relation of the political state to the well-being of the citizen.
This common weakness is strikingly evident in the work of Cal-
houn’s successor, Alexander H. Stephens, whose interest was so
exclusively historical and constitutional as almost to exclude him
from a place among political philosophers.


II


JOHN C. CALHOUN.
Realist


The greatest figure in that long controversy was certainly John
C. Calhoun, a man who set his face like flint against every northern
middle-class ambition, and with his dream of a Greek democracy
steered his beloved South upon the rocks. A truly notable figure
was this ascetic Carolinian. In the passionate debates over slavery
he daily matched powers with Webster and Clay and proved him-
self intellectually the greatest of the three. He is the one out-
standing political thinker in a period singularly barren and un-
creative. His influence was commanding. Tall, lean, eager, with
no humor, no playfulness, lacking the magnetic personality of
Clay and the ornate rhetoric of Webster, speaking plainly and
following his logic tenaciously, this gaunt Scotch-Irishman became
by virtue of intellect and character, driven by an apostolic zeal,


_ the master political mind of the South, an uncrowned king who


carried his native Carolina in his pocket like a rotten borough.
Long before his death he had expanded a political philosophy


into a school of thought. What he planned a hundred disciples
_ hastened to execute. Like Jefferson he was a pervasive influence
_ in shaping men’s opinions. It was impossible to ignore him or to
_ escape the admonitory finger that pointed at every weak and shuff-
ling compromiser.


Whatever road one travels one comes at last upon the austere
figure of Calhoun, commanding every highway of the southern
mind. He subjected the philosophy of the fathers to critical


- analysis; pointed out wherein he conceived it to be faulty; cast


aside some of its most sacred doctrines; provided another founda-


70 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


tion for the democratic faith which he professed. And when he had
finished the great work of reconstruction, the old Jeffersonianism
that had satisfied the mind of Virginia was reduced to a thing of
shreds and patches, acknowledged by his followers to have been
a mistaken philosophy, blinded by romantic idealism and led
astray by French humanitarianism. To substitute realism for
idealism, to set class economics above abstract humanitarianism,
was the mission to which Calhoun devoted himself. He undid for
the plantation South the work of his old master. Speaking in the
name of democracy, he attacked the foundations on which the
democratic movement in America had rested, substituting for
its libertarian and equalitarian doctrines conceptions wholly alien
and antagonistic to western democracy, wholly Greek in their
underlying spirit.

Calhoun’s career was linked indissolubly with slavery. He was
the advocate and philosopher of southern imperialism, and in
defense of that imperialism he elaborated those particularist
theories which prepared the way for the movement of secession.
Born and bred in South Carolina, he was enveloped from infancy
in the mesh of southern provincialisms. Except for two years at
Yale, where he graduated in the class of 1804, and eighteen months
reading law in Connecticut, his life was spent between Washington
and his plantation. He was in temperament a Puritan, of that
Scotch-Irish strain which, scattered along the wide American
frontier, greatly modified the American character and gave to the
South such different leaders as Stonewall Jackson and Jefferson
Davis. It was a hard, stern race—that Scotch-Irish—little re-
sponsive to humanitarian appeal; and Calhoun was harder and
sterner than most. He held his emotions in strict subjection to
his reason. Intent on thinking every problem through from
premise to conclusion, concerned always with fundamental prin-
ciples, he would have become, in an environment congenial to
humanistic thought, a distinguished intellectual. His mind would
have lost its rigidity and become pliable from contact with diverse
streams of theory, and his speculations would have found new
horizons from more generous intellectual acquisitions. But unhap-
pily there was nothing either at Washington or in South Carolina
that tended to liberalize his thinking.’ He had not gone to school,
as Jefferson had done, to the great thinkers of Europe; he had not
found an intellectual stimulus in revolutionary systems of philos-


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 71


ophy. He dwelt all his life in the arid world of politicians. His two
years at Yale may even be accounted a calamity. Timothy Dwight
and Calhoun were cut out of the same cloth. The South Carolina
Puritan would only be confirmed in his dogmatisms by the most
dogmatic of Yankee Puritans; and in consequence his career, like
Jonathan Edwards’, suffered from a narrow, ingrowing intellec-
tualism. He was a potential intellectual whose mind was un-
fertilized by contact with a generous social culture.

Calhoun’s public life covered the forty years from 1810 to 1850,
from the first administration of Madison to that of Zachary Taylor.
For nearly half of the total period, up to the year 1828, he was a
politician of ability but without distinction. He entered Congress
at a time when the young men from the South and West were be-
coming impatient with the cautious policy of the old Republicans
led by Jefferson and Madison. The war psychology was mounting
under British pin-pricks, and the young nationalists, forgetful that
bayonets and cannon and ships are not easily defeated by rhetoric,
were eager to teach the Mistress of the Seas some much-needed
international manners. In those early years Calhoun joined with
Clay in driving through Congress a war policy. In this he seems
to have represented his constituents, whose patriotism was always
somewhat bellicose. During the shameful war experience, the cool
analytical Calhoun came near to exhibiting the tawdry marks of the
jingo; and thereafter for years there was little to distinguish him
from a Hamiltonian Federalist. He was a throughgoing national-
ist of the school of loose construction. He advocated a protective
tariff on the ground that “it would form a new and most powerful
cement, far outweighing any political objections that might be
urged against the system” (Gaillard Hunt, John C. Calhoun, p.
29). As yet he had discovered no constitutional scruples against
the exercise of this or other implied powers. He was, he said, “no
advocate for refined arguments on the Constitution. The instru-
ment is not intended as a thesis for the logician to exercise his
ingenuity on. It ought to be construed with plain, good sense; and
what can be more express than the Constitution on this point?”
(ibid., p. 30). As Secretary for War in Monroe’s cabinet he was
an advocate of internal improvements, and he submitted to Con-
gress an elaborate report on a proposed system of roads and canals.
Until the critical year 1828 there was little in Calhoun’s career to
distinguish him from Clay. The tide of national expansion was


72 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


running strong; the growth of exploitation was creating a middle-
class psychology; and Calhoun in these earlier years was as un-
consciously middle class as afterwards he became consciously
aristocratic. He sprang from an acquisitive race, and to the end
of his life some remnants of the old instincts clung to him despite
his repudiation of the middle-class political philosophy.

The year 1828, marked by a fierce discussion in South Carolina
of the Tariff of Abominations, proved the turning-point of his
career. As Vice President he had been little more than a spectator
of the growing discontent in his native state at the contrast be-
tween the industrial prosperity of New England and the agri-
cultural depression of the South. But he could no longer remain
an idle spectator. Pamphlets and newspaper articles were appear-
ing that sharply challenged his position. Capitalistic Federalism
and democratic equalitarianism were equally under fire. The
celebrated Dr. Cooper, an Englishman long resident in South
Carolina, who had suffered under the Alien and Sedition law, had
vigorously attacked the natural-rights dogma, and was active in
arousing the public mind against Calhoun’s consolidationist
tendencies.! The publication in 1821 of Yates’s Minutes of
Debates of the Constitutional Convention had awakened widespread
interest in an historical interpretation of the Constitution, and the
time was ripe for a new period of constitutional debate. The tariff
act of 1828 provided the immediate occasion. It opened the flood
gates, and the waters of states-rights doctrine that had long been
gathering rushed forth in a torrent. Calhoun hesitated no longer.
The problem and the solution had both clarified themselves in his
mind, and he at once took the lead in directing the unrest to
achieve a definite end.

Calhoun’s contribution to political theory—a contribution that
elevates him to a distinguished place among American political
thinkers—was the child of necessity, and received its particularist
bias from the exigencies of sectional partisanship. With the rapid
expansion of the nation westward, and the consequent augmenting
of a potentially hostile free-soil power, the South was doomed to
become increasingly a minority voice in the councils of govern-
ment; and if it were to preserve its peculiar institution it must find
more adequate means of self-protection than it had enjoyed hitherto.


1See Merriam, American Political Theories, p. 231; Gaillard Hunt, John C.
Calhoun, p. 64.


i


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 73


The tendencies most to be feared, in his judgment, were the spon-
taneous drift towards consolidation, and an uncritical faith in
numerical majorities. He was convinced that America had too
thoughtlessly accepted the principle of political democracy as a
sufficient safeguard against the danger of arbitrary government.
Soon or late it must discover, what the South already was discover-
ing, that numerical democracy, unrestrained by constitutional
limitations on its will, is no friend to political justice. The critical
test of every government is the measure of protection afforded its
weakest citizen; and judged by this test a democratic state, when
power has come to be centralized in few hands, may prove to be no
other than a tyrant. Irresponsible in its unrestraint, the majority
vote may easily outdo an Oriental despot in arbitrary rule, and the
more power it wields the more ruthless will be its disregard of
minority opinion. The political philosopher who proposes to
formulate an ideal democratic system of government, therefore,
must deal critically with this fundamental problem of political
justice, for upon the solution will turn the excellence and perma-
nence of every democracy. It was to this baffling problem that
Calhoun addressed himself.

In seeking a constitutional defense for the threatened southern
interests, he drew from the two great reservoirs of American con-
stitutional theory. From the Jeffersonian Republicans he derived
his familiar doctrine of states rights in opposition to the consoli-
dating principle; from the Federalists of the Montesquieu school
he drew his theory of static government, resulting from exactly


“balanced powers; and from the amalgamation of these diverse
theories he formulated a new principle. Both schools of earlier


thought, he had come to believe, had been sound in their major
premises, but both had gone astray in certain important deductions.
The experience of forty years, with the democracy constantly
augmenting its powers, had demonstrated to Calhoun’s satisfac-
tion both the grave danger that lay in the principle of consolida-
tion, and the insufficiency of existing checks on the Federal govern-
ment. The prime mistake of the Jeffersonians, he conceived, was
their belief that the democratic majority will necessarily serve the
cause of political justice; and the miscalculation of the Federalists
resulted from the belief that the division of powers provided in
the Constitution was adequate to prevent arbitrary government.
He now proposed to correct these two mistakes by providing an


74 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


additional check through the simple expedient—as logical as it
was efficacious, granted his premises—of recognizing the veto
power of the individual commonwealth upon an act of the Federal
government. Stripped of its states-rights limitation, this was in
germ the principle of the referendum, modified, however, by certain
suggestive provisions.

The veto-power as a protective principle Calhoun regarded
as the hallmark of constitutional government. Granted that
sovereignty under the Constitution inheres in the people, and
that all authority is delegated, it follows that government is
no more than an agent with strictly defined fiduciary powers, all
the acts of which are subject to review by the principal. Whether
such review shall be immediate and plenary, or at more or less
remove and limited, becomes therefore a fundamental question
of constitutional polity. Unfortunately much confusion has re-
sulted from an intentional vagueness, contributed by interested
groups to further particular ends, in the common understanding
of the terms, the people and government. The former is rarely,
as is usually assumed, a homogeneous body with common interests,
but a congeries of individuals and groups and classes with diverse
and often antagonistic interests; and the latter—in a republic—
is never a sacred entity, the residuary legatee of sovereignty, to
criticize which is to commit the crime of Jése-majesté, but a group
of officials invested with temporary authority and actuated by
motives common to all men. A necessary preliminary, therefore,
to an intelligent understanding of the principle of veto is a criti-
cal analysis of these much misunderstood terms.

Calhoun was far too honest a realist to be under any hallucina-
tions in regard to political government. He estimated at its full sig-
nificance “the never-ending audacity of elected persons.” / Power
he knew to be the most insidious of poisons; every government is

Wee to the disease of auto-intoxication./ Seated securely in office
the agent assumes all the prerogatives of the principal and clothes
his acts with the sanctity of sovereignty. Armed with the taxing
power, he distributes penalties and benefits with partial hand, and
unless an adequate defense protects the weaker interests they will
suffer a legal exploitation. Every government justly rests under
suspicion, and only the most critical scrutiny of its conduct can
keep it decently honest. Popular government, from which the
Republicans hoped too much, ch changes only the outward form of_


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 75


the selfish struggle for power by substituting party rule for class_
rule. With its disciplined party machine the lure of political spoil
encourages the most shameless exploitation of the weaker groups,
who have no recourse.” Hence, the more popular the government,
the more ruthless becomes the majority rule; and any system
of checks and balances that does not adequately restrain this in-
herent tendency of party rule must prove a failure. However
carefully the political philosopher may provide for a division of
powers among executive, legislature and judiciary, he must fail
of his object, for a regnant majority will control all three branches
_ of government, and thus intrenched will defy the protests of the
minority. The Montesquieu theory had proved a failure in prac-
tice.

An even greater danger, in Calhoun’s judgment, lay in the cur-
rent misinterpretation of the term “the people,” the result of which
was the obscuring of the economic basis of society and the befud-
dling of the whole problem of government. To this disastrous re-
sult, he believed, both schools of political thought had contributed.
The early Republicans had oversimplified the political problem by
assuming a clear division between ruler and subject. The con-
ception was a heritage from European experience, where it had
taken form as a strategic move to align the unthinking mass against
a despotic monarchy. The Jeffersonians had used it to like pur-
pose in their struggle against consolidation, appealing to a common
democracy against the aristocracy. The early Federalists were
even more blameworthy, for, understanding clearly the economic
origins of political power and the economic ends served by the
political state, they made their knowledge serve their interests and
concealed their designs by deceptive appeals to patriotism. Every
realist knows that “the people” is a political fiction. Society is
made up of individuals, each with his particular interest. The total
interests of the subject-citizens are necessarily complex. Group
and classify them as he may, the political philosopher can never
merge the parts in a coalescing whole, but must recognize that the
problem remains one of adjustments and compromises. It fol-
lows therefore that any facile assumption that government repre-
sents the people or rests on the will of the people is a disastrous
fallacy. Popular government rests on the will of the majority;
aristocratic government rests on the will of the aristocracy; and


2See “A Disquisition on Government” in Calhoun’s Works, Vol. I, pp. 41-42.


76 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


despotic government rests on the will of the despot. It is an axiom
that the political state is partisan to those who administer it. The
stakes of rulership are high; the game of politics never lacks its
devotees; the business of deceiving the people in order to pluck the
goose has long been one of the respectable professions.

The perennial problem of constitutional government, then, in
Calhoun’s philosophy, remains what it was seen to be by the
Federalist followers of Montesquieu—the problem of restraining
government by constitutional checks to the end that it be kept
just. Existing machinery having demonstrated its inadequacy,
it remained to provide more effective. Freedom Calhoun regarded
as the crown jewel of civilization, hardly won, easily lost. But free-
dom was not to be measured by habeas corpus acts and similar
legal restraints on tyranny; it was freedom from legal exploita-
tion and statutory dictatorship. “The abuse of delegated power,
and_the tyranny of the stronger over the weaker interests, are
the two dangers, and the only two to “be guarded against; and
if this be done effectually;-liberty must be eternal. Of the
two, the latter is the greater and most difficult to resist”
(Works, Vol. VI, p. 32). In more definite terms the problem is
thus stated:


Two powers are necessary to the existence and preservation of free
States: a power on the part of the ruled to prevent rulers from abusing
their authority, by compelling them to be faithful to their constituents,
and which is effected through the right of suffrage; and a power to compel
the parts of society to be just to one another, by compelling them to
consult the interest of each other—which can only be effected . . . by
requiring the concurring assent of all the great and distinct interests of
the community to the measures of the Government. This result is the
sum-total of all the contrivances adopted by free States to preserve their
liberty, by preventing the conflicts between the several classes or parts
of the community. (Jbid., Vol. VI, pp. 189-190.)


In elaboration of the second phase of the problem Calhoun
contributed the principle on which his reputation as a political
thinker must rest—the doctrine of a concurrent majority. He
found his solution in an expansion of the e principle of democracy—
recovering the true principle, he was fond of insisting—by super-
imposing upon the consolidated, indiscriminate numerical majority
the will of a geographical majority; or in other words, by a special
form of sectional referendum.


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 77


It results, from what has been said, that there are two different modes
in which the sense of the community may be taken: one, simply, by the
right of suffrage, unaided; the other, by the right through a proper or-
ganism. Each collects the sense of the majority. But one regards num-
bers only, and considers the whole community one unit, having but one
common interest throughout; and collects the sense of the greater number
of the whole, as that of the community. The other, on the contrary, re-
gards interests as well as numbers;—considering the community as made
up of different and conflicting interests as far as the action of the govern-
ment is concerned; and takes the sense of each, through its majority or
appropriate organ, and the united sense of all, as the sense of the entire
community. The former of these I call the numerical, or absolute ma-

jority; and the latter, the concurrent, or constitutional majority. (“A
Disquisition on Government,” in Works, Vol. I, p. 28.)


In such speculation on the possibility of achieving political justice
by the machinery of representation, Calhoun was face to face with
a revolutionary conception—the conception of proportional. eco-
nomic representation. The idea was implicit in his assumption
of an existing economic sectionalism that must find adequate
expression through political agencies. He had come to under-
stand the futility of a miscellaneous numerical majority; he had
only to go back to eighteenth-century philosophy and substitute
economic classes for economic sectionalism, finding his social
cleavages in economic groups instead of geographical divisions, to
have recast the whole theory of representation. Clearly, he had
made enormous strides in his thinking. He had long since put
behind him the philosophy of Jefferson. He had subjected the
principle of democracy to critical scrutiny. But instead of reject-
ing it as an unworkable hypothesis, as the Hamiltonian Federal-
ists had done, he proposed to establish it on a sound and permanent
basis. The ideal of democracy he conceived to be the noblest in
the whole field of political thought, but misunderstood and mis-
applied as it had been in America, it had become the mother of
every mischief. This betrayal of democracy he laid at the door of

e Jeffersonians. They had accepted too carelessly the romantic
dogmas of the French school, and had come to believe that democ-
racy was synonymous with political equalitarianism.

It was this false notion that had debased the noble ideal, and de-
livered it over to the hands of the mob. To assert that men are
created free and equal is to fly in the face of every biological and
social fact. The first business of the true democrat, therefore, was


78 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


to reéxamine the nature of democracy and strip away the false
assumptions and vicious conclusions that had done it incalculable
injury. The Greeks, he pointed out, understood its essential
nature better than the moderns. Democracy assumes a co-
partnership. among equals. Its only rational foundation i is good
will, and it can function only through compromise. From this it
follows that in a society “composed of high and low, capable and
weak, worthy and unworthy—as every historical society has been
composed—a universal democracy i is impractical. The numerous
body of social incompetents will suffer one of two fates: they will
be exploited by the capable minority under the guise of free labor,
or they will be accepted as the wards of society and protected by
the free citizens—they must inevitably become either wage : slaves

r bond slaves, in either case incapable of maintaining the rights


of free members of the commonwealth. Democracy is possible


only i in a society that recognizes inequality as a law of nature, but
in which the virtuous and Capable enter into a voluntary co-part-
nership for the common good, accepting wardship of the incompe-
tent in the i interests « of society. This was the Greek ideal and this
ideal had created Greek civilization.

Calhoun was thus brought face to face with the natural-rights
theory, which the glowing rhetoric of the Declaration of Independ-
ence had disseminated throughout America, and which lay as a
virus at the heart of Jacksonianism. To destroy that theory, he
believed, was a necessary preliminary to any rational theory of
democracy, and he turned to the business with characteristic
frankness. Upon the venerable dogmas he threw the light of his
realism, subjecting them to critical analysis. The origin of govern-
ment in compact was only a myth. The amiable being known as
man in a state of nature, whose portrait had been drawn by the
French romantics, he discovered in neither social nor biological

eae The true origin of government, he asserted in common
ith John Adams, is to be found in practical necessity; government
arises, as Hobbes had pointed out, from the universal fact of human
selfishness. It has always been found necessary to lodge coercive
|powers in certain hands as a social protection against individual
aggression; and since all men are impelled by self-interest, political
systems are determined in form and scope by this universal in-
Uétinct. Without government there is anarchy; with government
there is potential tyranny. The crucial problem to be solved by


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 79


the political philosopher, hence, is to determine the just delimita-
tion between sovereign power and individual liberty; the one pro-
tecting the rights of the whole, the other keeping open fresh op-
portunity to advance.

Having thus established government on the firm basis of social
necessity, he proceeded to examine the romantic dogmas of liberty
and equality.


It follows, from what has been stated, that it is a great and dangerous
error to suppose that all people are equally entitled to liberty. It is a
reward to be earned, not a blessing to be gratuitously lavished on all

- alike;—a reward reserved for the intelligent, the patriotic, the virtuous
and deserving;—and not a boon to be bestowed on a people too ignorant,
degraded and vicious, to be capable either of appreciating or of enjoying
it. Nor is it any disparagement to liberty, that such is, and ought to be
the case. On the contrary its greatest praise,—its proudest distinction is,
that an all-wise Providence has reserved it, as the noblest and highest
reward for the development of our faculties, moral and intellectual. A
reward more appropriate than liberty could not be conferred on the
deserving;—nor a punishment inflicted on the undeserving more just, than
to be subject to lawless and despotic rule. This dispensation seems to be
the result of some fixed law;—and every effort to disturb or defeat it, by
attempting to elevate a people in the scale of liberty, above the point to
which they are entitled to rise, must ever prove abortive, and end in
disappointment. .. .

There is another error, not less great and dangerous, usually associated
with the one which has just been considered. I refer to the opinion, that
liberty and equality are so intimately united, that liberty cannot be perfect
without perfect equality. That they are united to a certain extent,—
and that equality of citizens, in the eyes of the law, is essential to liberty
in a popular government, is conceded. But to go further, and make
equality of condition essential to liberty, would be to destroy both liberty
and progress. The reason is, that inequality of condition, while it is a
necessary consequence of liberty, is, at the same time, indispensable to
progress. . . . It is, indeed, this inequality of condition between the
front and rear ranks, in the march of progress, which gives so strong an

pe Puse to the former to maintain their position, and to the latter to press
forward into their files. This gives to progress its greatest impulse. To

force the front rank back to the rear, or attempt to push forward the rear
into line with the front, by the interposition of the government, would
put an end to the impulse, and effectually arrest the march of progress.

(“A Disquisition on Government,” in Works, Vol. I, pp. 55-56)


It was the persuasive ideal of a Greek democracy in the planta-
tion states that lay back of Calhoun’s defense of slavery—a defense
that thrusts into sharp relief the change of southern attitude in the


80 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


decade of the thirties. The earlier Jeffersonian attitude had been
fairly expressed by a Georgia representative in the debate on the
Missouri question:


Believe me, sir, I am not a panegyrist of slavery. It is an unnatural
state; a dark cloud which obscures half the lustre of our free institutions!
. . . Would it be fair; would it be manly; would it be generous; would it
be just, to offer contumely and contempt to the unfortunate man who
wears a cancer in his bosom, because he will not submit to cautery at the
hazard of his existence? (Quoted in Hunt, John C. Calhoun, p. 53.)


But with slavery put upon its defense, the southern spokesmen
passed from apology to praise. From the first, Calhoun accepted
the system implicitly, but now he subjected it to critical analysis
in the light of his theory of a Greek democracy. Over against it
he set the northern system of wage labor, and he came to the
conclusion that the latter was more brutal and inhumane than the
former. He was convinced that heretofore the South had made
a serious mistake in apologizing for its peculiar institution, and
in expecting its eventual extinction. In this matter the fathers
had been wrong. No serious-minded Southerner any longer be-
lieved that slavery was on the way to natural extinction. It was
spreading daily and must be permitted to spread. The hopes of
southern civilization were bound up with it. The North must be
brought to recognize it as a beneficent institution, necessary to a
free, cultivated democracy, the only alternative to those fierce
conflicts between wage labor and capital which already in the
manufacturing states were threatening the permanence of American
institutions. In a speech delivered in 1838, Calhoun thus sketched
the new southern conception:


Many in the South once believed that it [slavery] was a moral and
political evil. That folly and delusion are gone. We see it now in its
true light, and regard it as the most safe and stable basis for free institu-
tions in the world. It is impossible with us that the conflict can take place
between labor and capital, which makes it so difficult to establish and
maintain free institutions in all wealthy and highly civilized nations where
such institutions as ours do not exist. The Southern States are an ag-
gregate, in fact, of communities, not of individuals. Every plantation
is a little community, with the master at its head, who concentrates in
himself the united interests of capital and labor, of which he is the common
representative. These small communities aggregated make the State in
all, whose action, labor, and capital is equally represented and perfectly
harmonized. Hence the harmony, the union, the stability of that section,


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 81


which is rarely disturbed, except through the action of this Government.
The blessing of this state of things extends beyond the limits of the South.
It makes that section the balance of the system; the great conservative
power, which prevents other portions, less fortunately constituted, from
rushing into conflict. . . . Such are the institutions which these deluded
madmen are stirring heaven and earth to destroy, and which we are called
on to defend by the highest and most solemn obligations that can be
imposed on us as men and patriots. (“Remarks on the State Rights
Resolutions in Regard to Abolition. January 12, 1838,” in Works, Vol.
III, p. 180.)


Thus in the end the political philosopher turns partisan to a
cause. His fruitful speculations on the theory of representation,
his inquiry into the economic basis of politics, remained incom-
plete, the larger reaches only half explored. Espousing the ideal
of democracy, he yielded to the seductions of a Greek republic.
Beginning as a Jeffersonian, he ended as the philosopher of a slave
aristocracy, from whose principles men like Governor McDuffie
of South Carolina deduced the dictum that ‘the laboring popula-
tion of no nation on earth are entitled to liberty, or capable of
enjoying it.”” It was a curious dream, yet no more curious than
his faith in an obsolete article in the Constitution to withstand the
advance of a hostile economy. There is something almost tragic
in the self-deception of this clear-minded realist in his appeal to a
paper defense against economic forces. “‘The Constitution—no
interference—no discrimination,” he cried passionately in repu-
diating the right of Abolition petition. “These are the grounds
on which the battle may be safely fought. . . . You must tell
these deluded fanatics, you have no right to intermeddle in any
form or shape. . . . Expediency, justice, plighted faith, and the
Constitution: these, and these only, can be relied on to avert
conflict” (Works, Vol. III, p. 190).

Lost faiths and repudiated prophets go down to a common grave.
The living have little inclination to learn from the dead. The
political principles of Calhoun have had scant justice done them by
later generations who incline to accept the easy opinion that the
cause which triumphs is altogether the better cause. What Calhoun
so greatly feared has since come about. He erected a last barrier
against the progress of middle-class ideals—consolidation in politics
and standardization in society; against a universal cash-register
evaluation of life: and the barrier was blown to pieces by the guns
of the Civil War. Historically he was the last spokesman of the


THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


reat school of the eighteenth century, the intellectual descendant
x John Adams. The two men were much alike in the broad
principles of their political philosophy, | and identical necessities
brought them to identical conclusions. They ‘agreed i in the funda-
mental principle that property will rule » by reason of its inherent
power, and that political justice is attainable only by a nicely
calculated system_of.checks and balances, which provides each
important group with a defensive veto. But in the social experience
on which Adams founded his doctrine, political antagonism was
potential in rival classes, and justified a division of powers on the
model of the British constitution. In the intervening years, how-
ever, the economic alignment had become sectional, the rise of
party government had created a new problem, and the earlier
division of powers seemed to demand a supplementary veto if the
nice balance contemplated in the Constitiition wéré to be main-
tained. This was the kernel of the states-rights doctrine which
Calhoun elaborated with such skill. That he should have associated
the principle with a cause that was doomed was disastrous to the
just fame of Calhoun. More, it was disastrous to the vital dem-
ocratic principle of decentralized powers. In championing a
Greek democracy Calhoun affronted the latent idealism of America,
and the harm he did to agrarian democracy was incalculable.


Ill
ALEXANDER H. STEPHENS


Constitutionalist


Southern scholars are pretty well agreed that the ablest defender
of the doctrine of secession was Alexander H. Stephens, the Georgia
commoner. He was sprung from the plain people. Brought up
in severe poverty, self-taught, the friend of the poor, he was no
child of an exclusive planter aristocracy, and was never quite
trusted by them. The victim of a slight, ramshackly physique,
never weighing a hundred pounds, never knowing a well day, fear-
fully handicapped in the everyday matter of living, it is amazing
that soul and body held together for seventy-one years and more
amazing that he accomplished what he did. “Throughout life,”
says one of his biographers, ‘‘he was practically a brain without a
body.” Temperamentally despondent, he was driven into restless


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 83


activity to forget self. His will was fine-tempered steel and ill
health never broke his courage even when it laid him on his back.
He feared nothing, but took a position and argued a cause without
regard to personal consequences. He never flinched from the
personal encounters which the lawless code of Georgia politics
invited. A morbid consciousness of his feeble physique sometimes
drove him into truculence, and on one occasion he was stabbed
eighteen times by a certain ornament of the Georgia bench, and
saved his life only by grasping the blade that was driven at his
throat. But such encounters can be explained on the ground of
overcorrection; the real Stephens was gentle, peace-loving, hating
_ all swaggerers military or civilian, “‘a man of generous sympathies,
of broad humanity, a democrat of democrats, a friend of all the
world” (Pendleton, Alexander H. Stephens, p. 253). The words
Non sibi sed aliis, cut in his tombstone at Crawfordville, come
nearer the truth than epitaphs usually do. He was never selfishly
ambitious and he could justly say after the fall of the Confederacy,
“T am old and weak in bodily infirmity, but I have done my duty
to God and my country, and I am ready for whatever fate may be
assigned me” (ib7d., p. 393).

Stephens was a lifelong student of politics, regarding it as “‘one
of the most intricate, as well as interesting subjects that can engage
the attention of reflecting minds.” He was not a political philos-
opher like Calhoun, concerned with principle and theory, but a
constitutional historian concerned to trace the genesis and develop-
ment of the fundamental law of the land. He was probably more
widely read in the early literature of the Constitution than any
other man of his generation. He had thumbed and dog-eared
Elliot’s Debates, and could cite dates and explain circumstances
for the elucidation of doubtful points or the correcting of an un-
historical interpretation. He knew the genesis of every article, of
almost every word in the Constitution, and the reasons which
determined the special form which each assumed; and this exact
knowledge equipped him for the task of critical commentator on
earlier commentators. Unfortunate was the theorizer who fell
into his hands. Federalist expositors like Story and Motley, given
to rash generalization from inadequate data, suffered disaster
under his critical inspection. With his fund of historical knowledge
he was amply prepared for the labor of love to which he turned
after the war, and in his Constitutional View of the War between the


84 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


States he produced one of the most notable studies in the origin of
the Constitution that we have.

Certain deep personal needs, taking form in passionate convic-
tion, determined the bias of Stephens’ political philosophy, which
was quite simple, consistent and inflexible, from his first entry into
public life until his death. There was no subtlety in his intellectual
processes, no balancing uncertainly between diverse appeals, but
a clear faith which he expounded to the common voter in confident
expectation that it would awaken sympathetic response. His
extensive reading was not so much a disinterested search for light
on the ideal relations of men in society, as for confirmation of
certain prepossessions. That those prepossessions were shared by
his fellow Georgians, that they were the natural product of existing
social conditions, gave to them an added sanction. The creative
source of his philosophy was a passionate love of freedom; and his
meditations convinced him that the only freedom worth a tuppence
is civil liberty under civil law—that the test of any civilization is
the concern it manifests for the safeguarding of such liberty by
exact and adequate constitutional provisions. His reverence for
law was a religion with him, and his love of the Constitution as the
fostering mother of the law was only this side idolatry. ‘“‘No
stronger or more ardent Union man ever lived than I was,” he
asserted late in life. Intense loyalty was almost commonplace
amongst the people from whom he sprang. Love of the Union, and
of the Constitution as a guarantee of that Union, was far stronger
in the South before the Civil War than in the North. But it was
the Constitution of the fathers, not a newfangled consolidating
instrument that drew all power to Washington, that they loved.
Pride of locality—naive though it might be and provincial—the
spontaneous pride of a simple untraveled people—was rooted in
the southern heart. It was nourished by a deep love of home-
stead and neighborhood, natural to an agrarian society; and it
came to political expression in the doctrine that the commonwealth
must be free to manage its own affairs in its own way. The theory
of states rights, amongst such a people, was not an abstract prin-
ciple but an expression of the psychology . of localism. created by
everyday habit. This explains the intensity ‘of conviction which
colors the thought of Stephens. The principle of local sovereignty
was inbred. He rarely deigns to argue the question. He never
concerned himself with abstract argument—as Jefferson had done


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 85


—to prove the superior excellence of local home rule. This failure,
indeed, may perhaps be accounted his greatest weakness as a polit-
ical thinker. Rather he was concerned to prove that state sov-
ereignty existed prior to the Union, that it was jealously guarded
at the making of the Constitution, that it had never been surren-
dered, and hence was the constitutional order until destroyed by
the Civil War. But if he refrained from abstract argument touch-
ing the desirability of localizing political power, he exhibited a
Jeffersonian fear of unregulated power which consolidation makes
possible.

This passionate love of freedom he exemplified in his own career.
He followed his convictions and spoke his own mind, regardless
of occasion or circumstance. He was no man’s tool. He hated
a demagogue and never curried favor with his constituents or
calculated popular response. In his public life he considered him-
self a representative of the people of Georgia, and the one object
of his labors was the preservation of that constitutional liberty
in which they had grown up. In furtherance of this policy he found
himself not infrequently at odds with other southern leaders. He
vigorously opposed his party in its Mexican war policy, looking
upon it as no other than imperialistic vandalism aimed at a weaker
neighbor for the purpose of extending slave territory. There was
no glamor for him in military victories; he would not concede that
a republic might plead manifest destiny in extenuation of armed
aggression, or that the ends of civilization may be furthered by
war. Ina speech opposing the policy of his fellow Whigs, he thus
expressed his conception of national progress:


I am no enemy to the extension of our domain, or the enlargement of
the boundaries of the republic. I trust the day is coming, and not far
distant, when the whole continent will be ours; when our institutions
shall be diffused and cherished, and republican government enjoyed,
throughout the length and breadth of this land. . . . That this is our
ultimate destiny, if wise counsels prevail, I confidently believe. But it
is not to be accomplished by the sword. . . . Republics never spread by
arms. We can properly enlarge only by voluntary accessions. .. .

There is much said in this country of the party of progress. I profess
to be of that party; but I am far from advocating that kind of progress
which many of those who seem anxious to appropriate the term exclusively
to themselves are using their exertions to push forward. Theirs, in my
opinion, is a downward progress. It is a progress of party, of excitement,
of lust of power; a spirit of war, aggression, violence and licentiousness.
It is a progress which, if indulged in, would soon sweep over all law, all


86 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


order, and the Constitution itself. . . . It is to progress in these essential
attributes of national greatness that I would look: the improvement of
mind, the “increase and diffusion of knowledge among men,” the erection
of schools, colleges and temples of learning; the progress of intellect over
matter; the triumph of mind over the animal propensities; the advance-
ment of kind feeling and good will among the nations of the earth; the
cultivation of virtue and the pursuits of industry; the bringing into sub-
jection and subservience to the use of man of all the elements of nature
around us; in a word, the progress of civilization, and everything that
elevates and ennobles man. This . . . is not to be done by wars, whether
foreign or domestic. Fields of blood and carnage may make men brave
and‘ heroic, but seldom tend to make nations either virtuous or great.
(Quoted in Pendleton, Alexander H. Stephens, pp. 79-80.)


A man of peace, Stephens was greatly agitated over the move-
ment of secession. He fought the Fire Eaters to the bitter end
in his native state, but like other high-minded Southerners he
went out with his commonwealth. Loyalty to Georgia was stronger
than loyalty to the nation. But in the new order he preserved his
old principles. The Jeffersonian democrat could not forget his
teachings. When the Confederacy was discussing its proposed
Constitution, he took alarm at some loose talk about the desir-
ability of setting up a monarchy. His old friend Bob Toombs, one
of the ablest of the southern leaders, quite frankly preferred the
English system to the American.* There seems to have been con-
siderable comment to like effect amongst the Tory hot-heads; but
the wind was not blowing in that direction and such straws were
only the stirrings of vagrant eddies. The Constitution as adopted
was more democratic than the older instrument—an outcome to
which Stephens contributed greatly.

As Vice President of the Confederacy he constituted himself the
special guardian of constitutional liberty, and his jealous concern
at what he regarded as administrative usurpations of power
brought on grave differences with President Davis. Even in the
urgent crises of war he would not sanction the use of extra-con-
stitutional powers. He knew better than most that power grows
by what it feeds on, that too often war destroys the liberty it
professes to be serving. To win the war and lose the peace, to
secede in defense of constitutional rights and then tamely yield
them up, seemed to him a pitiful ending, and when President
Davis suspended the right of habeas corpus and his generals


3 See Pendleton, Alexander H. Stephens, p. 231, note.


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 87


proclaimed martial law, he took alarm. “All such orders,” he
said, “are palpable and dangerous usurpations, and if permitted to
continue will end in military despotism. . . . Better in my judg-
ment that Richmond should fall, and that the enemy’s armies
should sweep our whole country from the Potomac to the Gulf
than that our people should submissively yield obedience to one
of these edicts of our own generals” (Pendleton, Alexander H.
Stephens, p. 292). Freedom of speech he would not have interfered
with under any excuse. The suspension of civil law he considered a
threat aimed at every citizen of the South. He had heard, he said,
that one purpose of the act was “to control certain elections and
certain expected assemblages in North Carolina”—where there
was a good deal of disaffection—‘“‘to put a muzzle upon certain
presses, and a bit in the mouth of certain speakers of that State.
If this be so, I regard it as the more dangerous to public liberty”
(ibid., p. 313). To the question, “Can you not trust the Presi-
dent?” he replied in words that deserve to be remembered:

To the question of whether I would not or cannot trust him with these
high powers not conferred by the Constitution, my answer is: I am utterly
opposed to everything looking to or tending toward dictatorship in this
country. There is no man living and not one of the illustrious dead,
whom, if now living, I would so trust. . . . I would not turn on my heel
to choose between masters. I was not born to acknowledge a master
from either the North or the South. I shall never choose between candi-
dates for that office. I have no wish or desire to live after the degradation


of my country, and have no intention to survive its liberties, if life be the
necessary sacrifice of their maintenance to the utmost of my abilities.


(Ibid., pp. 313-314.)

No argument of expediency, no appeal to military necessity ever
moved him from the belief that the sole justification of govern-
ment is the maintenance of liberty, and that the sole guarantee of
such liberty is the orderly process of civil law. He was harassed
by the encroachment upon individual freedom demanded by war,
north as well as south. “The North to-day,” he said, “presents
the spectacle of a free people having gone to war to make freemen
of slaves, while all they have as yet attained is to make slaves of
themselves” (ibid., p. 293). Perhaps no other public man in
America kept his head amidst the passions of the time so com-
pletély as Stephens. He was utterly beyond reach of jingo appeal,
and he suffered what the individual must expect to suffer who
pits his single conscience against the mass will. He was branded


88 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


as a traitor, and only his extraordinary hold on the affections of the
plain people of Georgia saved him from the bitterest experience.
During the black period following the southern collapse, when
he was disfranchised, broken in health past mending, and hated
by the followers of President Davis, Stephens sought distraction
in writing American history. Three and a half years, from 1867 to
1870, he devoted to his Constitutional View of the Late War between
the States. The case for states rights has never been more con-
vincingly put than in this monumental study. The first volume in
particular, which deals with the history of the Constitution, is an
acute and able work. The thesis on which it rests is the doctrine
which Paine and Jefferson derived from the French school, namely,
that a constitutional compact is terminable. Elaborated by
tephens and applied to the case in question, ‘the doctrine becomes
this: that the right of secession is a civil as well as a revolutionary
right; that it is implied in the compact originally entered into by
the several states; that any state may rightfully take back what
it had peacefully granted, when such action shall seem to it desir-
able. The sovereign commonwealth has never abrogated its
sovereignty; the Constitution is a Federal compact amongst
equals; the United States is a federated Union, not an organic
nation. To conceive of the organic law as a consolidating in-
strument binding the individual citizen ‘immediately to the central
government, , as Webster and Judge Story had done, was not only
unhistorical but contrary to every fact and every tradition. To
arrive at the principle of consolidation; and™hold that the right
of secession is only a revolutionary right, one must deliberately
shut one’s eyes to the early history of the Constitution.
ot content to prove the original compact nature of the Con-
stitution—an argument that runs through fourteen hundred pages,
buttressed by a mass of citations from all sources and wholly
convincing in its evidence—Stephens undertakes to prove the
wisdom of the fathers in establishing the federal union in compact.
Tn respecting existing loyalties to the several commonwealths,
they not only preserved the local democracies—which, as a Jeffer-
sonian, Stephens believed were the foundation of good govern-
ment—but they established the federal state on a strong and endur-
ing foundation. The Hamiltonian consolidationists had asserted
that a strong state must rest on the principle of coercive sover-
eignty, that it can he held together only through the exercise of


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 89


authority. Stephens replied by laying down the counter principle
that the secret of a strong and enduring state is to be discovered
in the spontaneous loyalty of its citizens, and that in consequence
a democracy which rests on the good will of the people as a whole
is the most enduring of all forms.


A Government, to be worth anything, . . . must be strong. Its parts
and members must be held together by force of some sort. This I cordially
admit. We do not differ as to the force or its extent; we differ only as to
its nature and character. Should it be a physical or moral force? In my
judgment, the strongest force that can hold the parts or constituent
elements of any Government together is the affection of the people to-
wards it. (Constitutional View, etc., Vol. I, p. 526.)


Affection, he reasoned, cannot be coerced. It must spring
spontaneously from the recognition that government is useful,
that it is just, that it treats all its parts and members equally,
that it is an agency erected by a free people to serve the ends of
freedom. Allegiance is an individual compact between the citizen
and government. Destroy the principle of voluntary allegiance,
seek to coerce the citizen, impose upon minorities the ruthless will
of majorities, subjugate individual commonwealths, and the fed-
eral Union which Jefferson believed to be ‘“‘the strongest Gov-
ernment on Earth,” would indeed become what Hamilton in
his blindness to the secret of power believed that it was—‘‘a
frail and worthless fabric.” ‘But the indissoluble union between
the several states of this Confederated Nation is, after all, not in
the right, but in the heart” (zbid., Vol. I, p. 527). So long as the
rights of all are respected, the common interest and common
loyalty will preserve the union. Injustice alone is to be feared, for
no political bonds can long resist the action of this most potent
of social dissolvents.

Modern as Stephens was in the assertion of the principle of good
will as the source of sovereignty in democratic government, he

elonged to his own generation in his blindness to economic

ate He thought exclusively in legal and constitutional terms;
he remained wholly a lawyer. It is hard to understand how one
so profoundly read in our political history should have failed to
discover the workings of economic forces beneath the surface of
politics. Calhoun, bred in the same Jeffersonian school, had found
his way through the mist of equalitarianism to the solid realism
of an earlier day; but to the last of his fourteen hundred pages of


90 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


exposition Stephens retained the illusion that the political state
is something apart from economics and superior to it. He con-
ceived of government as an end in itself, and this lends an air of
unreality to his thinking. An ardent Jeffersonian, he reduced the
philosophy of his master to the compact theory of government.
The economic basis of Jefferson’s philosophy, his love of an agra-
rian order and hatred of capitalistic exploitation—motives which
serve to explain and justify his theory of local self government—
Stephens wholly ignores. The result is a grotesque perversion of
a philosophy which John Taylor had elaborated clearly. Jefferson
was a much greater political thinker than Stephens conceived, al-
though he called him the “greatest philosophical statesman”
America has produced. In his estimate of Andrew Jackson he falls
into the same mistake. He attempts to reduce the confused career
of Jackson—half middle-class in his earlier years and later return-
ing to agrarian principles—to the same narrow compass of the
compact theory. Even Webster, for whom he entertained “the
highest esteem and admiration,” and in praise of whose moral qual-
ities he is almost fulsome, *he quite failed to understand. Webster’s
theory of the Constitution, he clearly demonstrated, was utterly
unhistorical; but Webster’s economic alliances he ignored. What
havoc was wrought in current politics by suffering political theory
to obscure economic reality is suggested by the fact that Stephens,
a Jeffersonian in every instinct, turned Whig and voted for Webster
in 1852—after the latter’s death. Politics makes strange bed-
fellows, yet it must have been an ample bed that could sleep the
spokesman of an agrarian economy and a spokesman of capital-
ism side by side.

In his attitude towards slavery erates was a product of his
Georgia environment. His views were ready-made, out of the
common southern storehouse. The economic determinism which
he ignored in politics had its revenge, and the man who often
differed with his constituents on political issues fell victim to the
subtle power of economics. As the South Carolina philosophy
took form, issuing finally in the romantic conception of a Greek
democracy, it imposed itself imperiously on the southern mind, on
the commoner equally with the aristocrat. It was impossible to
escape, unless, like Moncure Conway, one were of an idealistic
temper far different from the common run. For Stephens it


4 See 4 Constitutional View, etc., Vol. I, pp. 406-408.


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 91


proved impossible. In this matter of slavery he had no individual
opinion; his mind was molded by the common psychology and
became a repository of the common prejudice. He followed his
fire-eating friend Bob Toombs into the camp of Calhoun, and
talked about a Greek democracy in true Charleston style. In a
speech delivered on March 21, 1861, shortly after he was chosen
Vice President of the Confederacy, he gave expression to the new
philosophy in these words:

The prevailing ideas entertained by . . . most of the leading statesmen
at the time of the formation of the old Constitution were that the enslave-
ment of the African was in violation of the laws of nature; that it was
wrong in principle, socially, morally, and politically. It was an evil they
knew not well how to deal with, but the general opinion of the men of
that day was that, somehow or other in the order of Providence, the
institution would be evanescent and pass away. . . . Those ideas, how-
ever, were fundamentally wrong. They rested upon the assumption of
the equality of races. This was an error. Our new government is founded
upon exactly the opposite idea; its foundations are laid, its corner-stone
rests upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man;
that slavery—subordination to the superior race—is his natural and nor-
mal condition . . . in conformity with the ordinance of the Creator. . .
Our Confederacy is founded upon principles in strict conformity with
these [Divine] laws. This stone which was rejected by the first builders
“is become the chief of the corner’”—the real “ corner-stone” in our
new edifice. (Pendleton, Alexander H. Stephens, pp. 251-254.)


To the end of his life Stephens saw no reason to change his
opinion on negro slavery. He regarded it as more humane than
wage slavery because of the patriarchal responsibility devolving
upon the master. The,institution was not founded, he said, on
‘‘the erroneous dogma of the greatest good to the greatest number,”
but on the broader principle of securing “the greatest good possible,
morally, intellectually, and politically, to all classes of persons . . .
without necessary wrong or detriment to any” (Constitutional
View, etc., Vol. 1, pp. 539-542). In his relations with his own slaves
he followed the best traditions of the South. His kindness won
their loyalty and affection. ‘Ef he ain’t in heaven,” said a house
servant after his death, “’tain’t no use for anybody else to try to
git dere” (Pendleton, Alexander H. Stephens, p. 100). To the
argument of Hinton Helper that the system was economically
ruinous to the poor white, he seems to have given no consideration;
but to the argument of the Abolitionist that it was immoral, he
replied with deep conviction. On that point he would not yield


92 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


an inch. After quoting a miscellany of Biblical texts from the
earliest Hebraic times down-to Paul, he comments naively:


To maintain that Slavery is i ztself sinful, in the face of all that is said
and written in the Bible upon the subject, with so many sanctions of the
relation by the Deity himself, does seem to me to be little short of blasphe-
mous! It is a direct imputation upon the wisdom and justice, as well as
the declared ordinances of God, as they are written in the inspired oracles,
to say nothing of their manifestation in the universe around us. (Jdid.,


Wolls 1G jos 0)


It is doubtful wisdom for the layman to meddle with Scripture.
Stephens was a sounder interpreter of the writings of the constitu-
tional fathers than of the will of God.

A careful historian devoted to a single idea rather than a creative
political thinker; a thorough democrat of the Jeffersonian school,
humanitarian, liberty-loving, courageous; a man who devoted his
life to the preservation of constitutional liberty as it had taken
shape before the industrial revolution unsettled the basis of modern
life, Alexander H. Stephens was an honest gentleman who bravely
defended the traditions of the South in the face of a new order.
He was of an earlier generation, instinctively hostile to all consoli-

dation, which, under the impulse of economic evolution, was ob-
literating state lines, gathering financial power in great reservoirs,
and creating a new alignment between labor and capital. With
such evolution it was axiomatic that political practice should
follow economic fact; that a consolidating wealth should create a
consolidated political state. Great enterprises with ramifications
| in every section would not long tolerate a multitude of state
sovereignties; sovereignty must be centralized at Washington where
it could be guided and controlled. The war only hastened what in
{ the nature of things was inevitable. Stephens rightly insisted
that slavery was only the immediate casus belli. The deeper cause
was the antagonistic conceptions of the theory and functions of
the political state that emerged from antagonistic economic
systems. That the principle of local self-government should
have been committed to the cause of slavery, that it was loaded
with an incubus certain to alienate the liberalism of the North,
may be accounted one of the tragedies of American history. It
was disastrous to American democracy, for it removed the last
brake on the movement of consolidation, submerging the dem-
ocratic individualism of the South in an unwieldy mass will, and


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 93


surrendering the country to the principle of capitalistic exploita-
tion. Stephens never seems to have realized this grave mistake in
strategy. He never realized that the principle of democracy, in
the cause of which he believed that he was faithful to the end,
received a staggering blow from the enlistment of northern
liberalism under the banners of a consolidating nationalism.
He remained to the last an unreconstructed Jeffersonian, convinced
that the lost cause was the cause of liberal democracy.


IV
FRANCIS LIEBER
A New-Modeled Federalism


To turn from Calhoun and Stephens to Francis Lieber is to pass
from the South to the North, from an obsolescent political theory
to a prophetic conception, from the doctrine of states rights to


ties into its orbit by_ the law of attraction. Joseph Story had
educed ‘the Tegal conception of the organic nature of the federal
union from the terms of the Constitution; Francis Lieber provided
a_ philoso sophical background that justified the same conclusion;
and under the combined legal and philosophical attack the com-
pact theory found its philosophical breastworks leveled, its natural-
rights theory undermined, and its commanding position effectively
turned.

The figure of our first academic political philosopher appears
oddly out of place in the midst of South Carolina politicians, yet
fate set the studious German in the thick of the Fire Eaters, to
cogitate a philosophy of freedom in the land of slavery, and to jus-
tify the spirit of nationalism amongst the advocates of particular-
ism. For twenty-one years he lived quietly in his southern class-
room and study, disregarding the passions that buzzed about him,
elaborating ideas that in later years came to exercise a determin-
ing influence upon our academic political thinkers, and publish-
ing ponderous volumes that marked the beginning of the swing
away from the natural-rights philosophy and towards the concep-
tion of an engrossing political state. Applying German liberalism
to American constitutionalism, he succeeded in new-modeling the
Federalism of Hamilton and sending it forth to meet the needs of
an imperializing generation. He agreed with Calhoun in the


94 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


latter’s attack on French romantic theories; he agreed with Webster
in the conception of the organic nature of the federal compact;
Jat he went further and elaborated a theory of the state as an his-
torical development that receives its form and spirit from the
impress of social needs. Building on a foundation provided by
Montesquieu and Burke, guided by Hamilton and Marshall, he
set about erecting a structure that in the hands of Theodore Wool-
sey and John W. Burgess came to overtop all local and state sov-
ereignties—an imperial authority that, in the words of Burgess,
must become “the organ of interpretation in last instance of the
order of life for its subjects” (Merriam, American Political Theo-
ries, p. 299). In that subtle shift of vocabulary from citizen to
subject appears the final result of the speculations begun by Lie-
ber, which in rejecting the natural-rights philosophy overthrew
the defenses erected by the eighteenth century against an engross-
ing political state, and set the individual citizen at the mercy of
a new divine-right sovereignty. ‘‘Really the state cannot be con-
ceived,” according to Burgess, “‘without sovereignty, 7. ¢. with-
out unlimited power over its subjects; that is its very essence”
(Merriam, American Political Ideas: 1865-1917, p. 380).

Between the democratic Stephens and the imperializing Burgess
stands the work of Francis Lieber. Born in Germany in the year
1800, son of a well-to-do Berlin family, Lieber’s youth and young
manhood fell in stirring times. When only fifteen he served in
the Waterloo campaign under Blicher, was wounded, stricken with
typhus, and nearly lost his life. From those perilous experiences
he emerged a pronounced liberal. During the Metternich reac-
tion he fell under suspicion, served a prison term for his political
opinions, graduated from the University of Jena, and in 1822 went
to Greece with a group of young German idealists to serve the
cause of revolution. Disgusted with the Greek character he made
his way to Italy, fell in with the historian Niebuhr, became tutor
to the latter’s son for a year, continued his university studies,
was a second time imprisoned, and finally in 1826 quitted a hope-
lessly reactionary Germany, spent a year in England, and then
emigrated to America, following the example of Prof. Charles
Follen. In Boston he taught gymnastics for a time, edited the
Encyclopedia Americana, and in 1835 was appointed to the pro-
fessorship of history and political economy in South Carolina
College. Here he remained till 1856, teaching, writing, and ac-


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 95


quiring academic fame. In 1855 he aspired to the presidency of
the college, a post then vacant, but his political theories were in
disrepute with the legislature, and his views on slavery were under
general suspicion. Becoming embroiled with the politicians, he
lost the post, resigned his professorship, and went to New York
City, and in 1857 he was called to the new chair of history and
political science at Columbia, where he remained till his death in
1872.

The two books on which rests his reputation, Political Ethics
(1838-1839) and Civil Liberty and Self-Government (1853), are
substantial volumes quite lacking the genial note that marks his
Stranger in America (1834), a series of sketchy letters that among
other things contains an extraordinarily vivid account of his ex-
periences at Waterloo (Letters VI, VII). Toa casual reader these
excursions into the philosophy of politics are as soberly respectable
as a judge’s wig, as studiously conventional as a professor’s gown.
He went about the business of blowing up the accepted Jeffer-
sonian philosophy decently, in the name of the law and under the
high sanction of liberty. There can be no doubt that this German
liberal was a passionate lover of liberty, and no doubt of his con-
viction that freedom is possible only in a society under the reign
of law. Like Hamilton, he had no local ties or state loyalties to
circumscribe his political allegiance. It was natural for him to
think in terms of nationality. His bitter experience in Germany
had laid open to him the fatal weakness of petty states, and he was
loath to see repeated in America the history of warring antago-
nisms that disrupted the German people. He was a profound
admirer of the British constitution, more English than German in
his conception of liberty.

The nationalism of Lieber was identical with that of John Adams.
It was, in a phrase, government by law. But this government by
law was both political and legal. The former, he believed, was
admirably provided for by the federal Constitution; the latter was

ually provided for by the body of the Common Law; with these
twin safeguards, he was convinced, the liberty of the citizen was
assured. In his interpretation of the Constitution Lieber added
little that was new. He followed the older Federalists back to
Montesquieu, and accepted the existing system of constitutional
checks as the final word of political wisdom. In Civil Liberty and
Self-Government he glorifies the federal system as the apotheosis


96 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


of representative republicanism, quite unconcerned at its undemo-
cratic features. The sufficiency of the Common Law to all social
needs and the implicit sovereignty of the judiciary, he regards as
equally axiomatic. “The law,” he says, ‘“‘must be the lord and
our ‘earthly god,’ and not a man, a set of men, or the multitude”
(Civil Liberty and Self-Government, p. 208). Yet with the common
blindness of the legalist, he proceeds to erect a profession above so-
ciety, and exalts a group of judges, appointive and not elective,
preferably holding office for life, as the embodiment of impartial
justice. That it is a presumption contrary to fact seems not to
have entered his mind. That judicial interpretation implies judi-
cial legislation, and that judicial legislation implies the sovereignty
of lawyers, are logical deductions of which his philosophy made no
account. Unfriendly to a democracy, he was content to yield
authority into the hands of the judiciary.

But if in his exaltation of the Common Law he was as extreme
a legalist as Hugh Legaré, in his doctrine of historical evolution
he discovered the seeds of freedom in what he calls institutions.
By these he means the organic expressions of daily life, or the cus-
toms of society which take spontaneous form from its needs.
It is no other than the social fabric that Tom Paine was fond of
contrasting, in its pervasive and beneficent codperation, with the
repressive tyrannies of the political state. Where liberty reposes
thus in the social fabric, Lieber argues, the sovereign power is
held in check; and where institutional freedom has not taken root,
the political state will run into absolutism.

“Liberty,” he argues, “is a thing that grows, and institutions
are its very garden beds. There is no liberty which as a national
blessing has leaped into existence in full armor like Minerva from
the head of Jove. Liberty is crescive in its nature. It takes time,
and is difficult, like all noble things. . . . It must be defended,
developed, conquered, and bled for. It can never be added, like
a mere capital on a column; it must pervade the whole body”
(Civil Liberty and Self-Government, pp. 334-335, third edition).
“Liberty stands in need of character,’ and this character is re-
ceived from social institutions. He then proceeds:


. . . An institution is a system or body of usages, laws, or regulations
of extensive and recurring operation, containing within itself an organism
by which it effects its own independent action, continuance, and generally
its own farther development. Its object is to generate, effect, regulate,


POLITICAL DOCTRINE 97


or sanction a succession of acts, transactions, or productions of a peculiar
class or kind. The idea of an institution implies a degree of self-govern-
ment. Laws act through human agents, and these are, in the case of
institutions, their officers or members. (Jd7d., p. 300.)


It was the deep-rooted civisme anglais, he believed, that had de-
veloped the orderly liberty of the English race; and it is this same
institutional spirit that provides the surest check upon the
augmenting power of the political state. There can be no tyr-
anny where society is trained and disciplined in liberty.

The creative source and origin of this excellent civisme anglais
Lieber discovered in the principle of local self-government; in the
exercise of local control of local interests; the enjoyment of in-
| numerable lesser sovereignties within the larger national organism.
These lesser sovereignties are both civil and social, and the amount
of liberty enjoyed in a given society is measured by the inde-
pendent vigor with which they function. The exercise of definite
rights by the several states is clearly one of the important institu-
tional functions of self-government, but it is only one. The New
England town-meeting, county and city governments, are even
more important, while outside these civil organisms are innumer-
able social organisms, exercising their common right of establish-
ing by-laws for their own governance, and spreading the spirit
of liberty through all the practices of society.


According to the Anglican view, institutional self-government consists
in the fact that all the elementary parts of the government, as well as the
highest and most powerful branches, consist in real institutions . . . [but
it] consists, farther, in the unstinted freedom and fair protection which
are granted to institutions of all sorts, commercial, religious, cultural,
scientific, charitable, and industrial, to germinate and to grow—provided
they are moral and do not invade the equal rights of others. It receives
its aliment from a pervading spirit of self-reliance and self-respect—the
real afflatus of liberty. (Jbid., p. 320.)


This, quite evidently, is the spirit of laissez faire applied to polit-
ical philosophy. A people thus used to order their social affairs,
as the English people have long done, will prove competent to
manage their political affairs; and the widespread spirit of in-
dividual independence will prevent the drift towards unregulated
centralism with its corollary of tyrannical power. The conception
of institutional liberty embodies much of the spirit of Jeffersonian-
ism, and it goes back in its origins as far as Roger Williams.


98 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


-The states-rights advocates, Lieber implies, were mistaken in seek-
ing the principle of liberty through particularism. In magnifying
the individual commonwealth they overlooked the more vital

| units of self-government. To erect the state above the nation was
no lasting solution of the most difficult problem in political philoso-

| phy, namely, the codrdination of sovereign power with individual
| liberty; it was only to substitute one sovereignty for another,
| whereas to encourage the spread of self-governing bodies through
| society was to provide the necessary countercheck to centraliz-
| ing power and coordinate liberty and sovereignty under the reign

Lot law.

A stimulating thinker was this German liberal with his histori-
cal method and his conception of an evolutionary freedom rooted
in the institutions of the English people. He gave a new tum to
speculation on the origin and nature of the political state, the
immediate consequence of which was the repudiation of the com-
pact theory and natural-rights philosophy by our academic polit-
ical scientists. The organic conception of the political state fell
in with the centralizing movement that followed the Civil War, a
movement which the forces of institutional self-government have
been powerless to prevent. On the whole the influence of Lieber
has been rather against than for that liberty which was so dear to
him, and the explanation is to be found in the tragic divorce, in
his thinking, of politics and economics. His inveterate legalism
and his failure to investigate the economics of politics proved in
the end the undoing of his liberalism.


CHAPTER III
THE DREAM OF A GREEK DEMOCRACY


I


THE pronounced drift of southern thought, in the years im-
mediately preceding the Civil War, towards the ideal of the Greek
democracy, has been too carelessly forgotten by later times. It
was no vagrant eddy but a broadening current of tendency. In its
blend of romanticism and realism it fitted exactly the temper of the
plantation mind, imparting a fine idealism to shiftless realities and
setting a generous goal to be achieved by somewhat inadequate
agencies. A humane and cultivated democracy, set free from the
narrow exactions of economics to engage in the higher work of
civilization, was a conception worthy of the generous southern
mind, a conception that does not suffer by contrast with the north-
ern dream of an exploitative industrialism. That it was an impos-
sible dream not does lessen its significance as an expression of the
best southern aspiration in the days when slavery was on the de-
fensive.

It is plain enough now that this drift of thought resulted from
the need of clarifying the logic of the situation, by bringing into
harmony two seemingly irreconcilable facts, the system of negro
slavery and the rising spirit of white democracy. The feudal
principle, which lurks in the background of all slave systems and
which was peculiarly congenial to the plantation temper, was con-
fronted on every side by the stubborn democracy of the yeomanry.
A hundred miles beyond Charleston the feudal spirit encountered

- the leveling individualism of the frontier; and this passion for
equality, that grew fiercer with every remove westward, was a
stumbling-block in the way of the planter aristocracy. Caught thus
between the two forces of a Jeffersonian democracy and a slave

_sesnomy, southern thought found in the Greek ideal the most

Wonatural compromise. Since manual labor was black, a white skin

was a guarantee against serfdom, and the common race prejudice

was accounted sufficient to draw even the poor whites to the sup-

port of slavery. The sharp cleavage between the races provided

the basis for the conception of a common white democracy of the
99


100 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


master class, every member of which shared in the supremacy of
the race and was free to enjoy the profits of negro exploitation.
The enterprising small farmer might rise to be a gentlemanly
planter, providing his children with leisure to fit themselves for
citizenship in the commonwealth and assist in the great work of
creating a southern civilization. The Greek ideal, in short, met
the double need of southern economics and southern prejudices,
and made its appeal even to the frontier spirit of equalitarianism.

A native growth and rooted deep in southern realities, the new
conception emerged in response to the changing times. It may be
considered the plantation counterpart of northern industrialism,
marking the reaction of the southern mind to the economic revolu-
tion in western civilization. With their diverse economics, North
and South were facing in different directions, and the Greek ideal
was as natural in Charleston as industrial feudalism was natural in
Lowell. Created in part as an ingenious measure of defense, it
provided an excellent counter offensive against alien critics by
turning the light of inquiry upon the bases of capitalism and
thrusting upon the attention of godly Puritans the dependence of
culture upon exploitation. The new industrialism was creating
a new philosophy of labor, and this philosophy the southern
apologists seized upon and turned to their special ends. They
accepted certain of the capitalistic premises, but they interpreted
those premises in a spirit of drastic realism, deducing conclusions
disconcerting to the apologists of industrialism. In defending the
plantation system they attacked the factory system; in upholding
black slavery they attacked wage slavery; and in this game of the
pot and the kettle the exploitative root of both systems was
nakedly exposed.

The major premise of the new southern philosophy was identical
with that of northern capitalism, namely, that every civilization
rests on labor exploitation. However quaintly they might em-
broider this fact with romantic patterns, they saw it clearly and
deduced from it the conclusion that the North was indulging in a
vicious fallacy in confusing wage labor with free labor. In every
industrialized society, they pointed out, free labor is an anach-
ronism; where it exists it is a hold-over from a simpler social order.
The development of industrialism tends to draw all labor into its
capacious maw, and the labor surplus that results from evicting
the peasant from the land creates a competitive labor market


GREEK DEMOCRACY 101


that speedily reduces the laborer to the status of a wage-slave.
Since slavery, then, in some form is the inevitable counterpart of
modern civilization, the question that presses on the conscience of
every enlightened and generous observer is the question of the
relative well-being of the slave under the different systems. Upon
this question the southern apologists turned their shrewdest
analysis. They examined the condition of the proletariat in the
English mill towns; they commented on the callous exploitation
of the textile workers in Massachusetts; they, assessed the waste
in the labor turnover under the factory system; they considered
the seeds of class war sown by industrialism and pointed out the
insecurity of society under a system of capitalistic irresponsibility.
In their estimate of the social evils of industrialism they concurred
in the findings of Carlyle and antedated much of the criticism of
Ruskin. The huge mass of unpalatable fact which they uncovered
was the same mass that inspired George Ripley and Albert Brisbane
and Horace Greeley to seek a way out by the path of cooperative
commonwealths.

But in the hands of these apologists the argument was turned
to the narrower end of proving that the southern field-hand fared
better than the northern mill-hand. They recognized both systems
as capitalistic, established in labor exploitation; but they proved
to their own satisfaction that the southern was far humaner, more
truly social. In the South, they pointed out, there was no waste
in the labor turnover, no ugly labor scrap-heap, no ruthless
efficiency in using up the human material. The master was re-
sponsible to society for the treatment and conduct of his slaves,
and the southern conscience was far tenderer in the matter than the
northern. The workers were never troubled by uncertain means
of subsistence. The young were free from care, the old and infirm
were adequately provided for. Living conditions were commonly
pleasant, and the personal relations between master and slave
kindly and loyal. When every argument against slavery had been
urged it still remained true that the patriarchal tie that existed on
the plantation was more humane than the cash-nexus of capitalism.
In this fundamental matter Carlyle was right; and right also in his
insistence on the need of capable masters. The South was fortunate
in its system. On the self-sufficient plantations there was many an
Abbot Sampson directing his little world wisely and humanely;
collectively these Abbot Sampsons formed a capable and socially


102 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


responsible ruling class worthy of their trust. The economic re-
turns of a wage-slave industrialism might be greater, but the re-
turns in civilization were far less.!

Such, in brief, was the reaction of the southern mind in the early
fifties to the challenge of an industrializing generation. It was not
till the publication of Uncle Tom’s Cabin in 1851 that southern
apologists were fully aroused to the need of counter propaganda.
They had been moving slowly towards the conception of a Greek
democracy under the leadership of Calhoun, but now under the
sharp prod of Abolitionism they turned militant. Facts were
collected and arguments clarified, and the war was carried home to
New England. In three years following Uncle Tom, according to a
recent student, fourteen pro-slavery novels appeared together with
other matter.?, Much of the material made use of in these stories
was conveniently assembled in a work entitled Pro-Slavery Ar-
gument, published in 1852, a collaboration by Professor Dew of
William and Mary College, Chancellor Harper of the Supreme
Court of South Carolina, Governor Hammond of South Caro-
lina, and Gilmore Simms. The first reviewed the Scriptural
authority for slavery; Chancellor Harper drew from Hobbes
the familiar argument that “a state of nature is a state of war”;
Simms elaborated the patriarchal theory; but Governor Ham-
mond developed the more significant argument of the degrada-
tion of the wage-slave, an argument elaborated at considerable
length in another work entitled Letters on Slavery, in which he
presented the results of his investigation of English factory condi-
tions. The novels that Miss Tandy comments upon have been
pretty much forgotten, but the titles of some of them sufficiently
reveal the lines of attack. L. B. Chase’s English Serfdom and
American Slavery (1854), J. W. Page’s Uncle Robin in His Cabin
in Virginia and Tom without One in Boston (1855), and S. H.
Elliott’s New England Chattels (1858) quite evidently reflect the

1The same argument was made use of by northern supporters of slavery.
Gordon Bennett’s New York Herald, for example, “printed a description of slum
life in Liverpool, remarking that compared with the English laborer, ‘the slave
lived like a prince.’ He had his cabin, neat, clean, and weather-proof: he had his
own garden patch, over which he was lord paramount; he was well fed, well lodged,
well clothed, and rarely over-worked; sleek, happy, contented, enjoying his many
holidays with gusto, he lived to a great age” (quoted in Allan Nevins, The Evening
Post: A Century of Journalism, p. 271).

2 See Jeannette Reid Tandy, “ Pro-Slavery Propaganda in American Fiction in the


Fifties,” South Atlantic Quarterly, January-March, 1922. See also Francis Pendle
ton Gaines, The Southern Plantation, Chapter III.


GREEK DEMOCRACY 103


new southern philosophy. If the South were attacked, it was not
without weapons to defend itself.


II
WILLIAM J. GRAYSON


Of this very considerable literature of defense, The Hireling and
the Slave presents in convenient compass the most telling southern
arguments, and reveals in its sharp contrast of realism and roman-
ticism the common southern temper. Its author, William J.
Grayson, was a cultivated South Carolinian who had served two
- terms in Congress and for years was collector of the Port of Charles-
ton. He was widely read, was familiar with contemporary English
writers on economics, and possessed a fluent pen. He had published
“an elaborate heroic poem entitled The Country,” in which he had
sung ‘‘the praises of rural life and agricultural pursuits” (Intro-
duction to Grayson’s Life of James L. Petigru), and a volume en-
titled Chicora and other Poems, the title work of which was a
romantic poem celebrating the primitive virtues of the Indian.
Politically he was affiliated with the anti-Calhoun party of Union-
ists. His closest friend was James L. Petigru, a sketch of whose
life he wrote as a last labor of love, during the unhappy days of
the Charleston siege. He did not go so far as Petigru in refusing
to have any part in a war that he opposed, but the tragedy of it
cut him to the quick. He was no Fire Eater, but a southern mod-
erate—a gentleman of old-fashioned tastes whose views may be
taken as those of the cultivated Charleston group to which he be-
longed, of Petigru, of Legaré, of Alfred Huger.

The Hireling and the Slave, published in 1856 when Grayson was
sixty-eight and dedicated to Petigru, is a poem in heroic couplets
of approximately 1600 lines, divided into two parts. The first part
draws a realistic picture of the life of the wage-slave, the second
paints an idyllic picture of the life of the bond-slave. In this
second part the spirit of romance holds high carnival; the descrip-
tions are done with gusto and the rural pleasures that fall to the
lot of the negro provide a striking contrast to the mean environ-
ment of the factory worker. About this contrast are grouped the
lesser arguments: the hypocrisy of the Yankee Abolitionist, the
sentimentalism of English humanitarians, the wisdom of provi-
dence in providing masters to protect the negro from destruction


104 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


by a superior race and train him through apprenticeship in slavery
to carry the blessings of civilization to Africa. The heroic couplet
was deliberately adopted to offer ‘‘some variety to the poetic forms
that are almost universally prevalent.” “The poetry of the day
is, for the most part,” Grayson remarked, “subtile and tran-
scendental in its character”; yet “‘the school of Dryden and Pope
is not entirely forgotten,” and “‘the most fastidious appetite may
tolerate an occasional change of diet, and exchange dainties now
and then for plainer fare” (The Hireling and the Slave, Preface,
pp. xiv-xv). The poem seems to have been popular in the South,
and a southern reviewer declared that ‘‘it ought to be on every
man’s mantel” (Life of James L. Petigru, p. vii).

In the preface Grayson discusses the subject of slavery with a
candor somewhat unusual, acknowledging its evils, yet discovering
compensations. As an expression of intelligent southern opinion
on a question in which the passions of the country were becoming
deeply engaged, his views deserve quotation. Slavery, he says,


... is that system of labor which exchanges subsistence for work,
which secures a life-maintenance from the master to the slave, and gives
a life-labor from the slave to the master. The slave is an apprentice for
life, and owes his labor to his master; the master owes support, during
life, to the slave. Slavery is the Negro system of work. He is lazy and
improvident. Slavery makes all work, and it insures homes, food, and
clothing for all. It permits no idleness, and it provides for sickness, in-
fancy, and old age. It allows no tramping or skulking, and it knows no
pauperism.

This is the whole system substantially. All cruelty is an abuse; does
not belong to the institution; is now punished, and may be in time pre-
vented. The abuses of slavery are as open to all reforming influences as
those of any civil, social, or political condition. The improvement in the
treatment of the slave is as marked as in that of any other laboring class
in the world. . . . If slavery is subject to abuses, it has its advantages
also. It establishes more permanent, and, therefore, kinder relations
between capital and labor. It removes what Stuart Mill calls ‘the widen-
ing and imbittering feud between the class of labor and the class of capital.’
It draws the relation closer between master and servant. It is not an
engagement for days or weeks, but for life. There is no such thing with
slavery as a laborer for whom nobody cares or provides. The most
wretched feature in hireling labor is the isolated, miserable creature who
has no home, no food, and in whom no one is particularly interested.
This 15 seen among hirelings only. (Ibid., Preface, pp. vii-viil.)


The principle on which Grayson bases his argument is the prin-
ciple that civilization rests on labor exploitation, but as a good


GREEK DEMOCRACY 105


churchman he attributes the evil to God and discovers the children
of Adam to be suffering from the primeval curse—“ Slave, hireling,
help—the curse pursues him still.” More specifically the thesis
which he defends is this, “The state of the hireling and the slave
[is] the same substantially—the condition hard labor, the reward
subsistence;”’ and the conclusion which he draws is that the slave
obtains a larger return for his labor than the factory hand. The
picture he paints of the condition of the wage slave of England is
Hogarthian in its details:


There, unconcerned, the philanthropic eye
Beholds each phase of human misery;

Sees the worn child compelled in mines to slave
Through narrow seams of coal, a living grave,
Driven from the breezy hill, the sunny glade,

By ruthless hearts, the drudge of labor made,
Unknown the boyish sport, the hours of play,
Stripped of the common boon, the light of day,
Harnessed like brutes, like brutes to tug, and strain,
And drag, on hands and knees, the loaded wain:
There crammed in huts, in reeking masses thrown,
All moral sense and decency unknown,

With no restraint but what the felon knows,

With the sole joy that beer or gin bestows,

To gross excess and brutalizing strife,

The drunken hireling dedicates his life:

Starved else, by infamy’s sad wages fed,

There women prostitute themselves for bread,
And mothers, rioting with savage glee,

For murder’d infants spend the funeral fee;
Childhood bestows no childish sports or toys,

Age neither reverence nor repose enjoys,

Labor with hunger wages ceaseless strife,

And want and suffering only end with life;

In crowded huts contagious ills prevail,

Dull typhus lurks, and deadlier plagues assail,
Gaunt Famine prowls around his pauper prey,
And daily sweeps his ghastly hosts away;
Unburied corses taint the summer air,

And crime and outrage revel with despair. (Jbid., pp. 24-25.)


Grayson does not stint his facts but traces the wretchedness of
the wage-slave through all the phases of his misery to provide a
background for the happier lot of the bond-slave. It is an unlovely
picture, done with considerable vigor, from which one turns
gladly to contemplate life on the southern plantation.


106 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


And yet the life, so unassailed by care,
So blessed with moderate work, with ample fare,
With all the good the starving pauper needs,
The happier slave on each plantation leads;
Safe from harassing doubts and annual fears,
He dreads no famine in unfruitful years;
If harvests fail from inauspicious skies,
The master’s providence his food supplies;
No paupers perish here for want of bread,
Or lingering live, by foreign bounty fed;
No exiled trains of homeless peasants go,
In distant climes, to tell their tales of woe:
Far other fortune, free from care and strife,
For work, or bread, attends the Negro’s life,
And Christian slaves may challenge as their own,
The blessings claimed in fabled states alone—
The cabin home, not comfortless, though rude,
Light daily labor, and abundant food,
The sturdy health that temperate habits yield,
The cheerful song that rings in every field,
The long, loud laugh, that freemen seldom share,
Heaven’s boon to bosoms unapproached by care,
And boisterous jest and humor unrefined,
That leave, though rough, no painful sting behind;
While, nestling near, to bless their humble lot,
Warm social joys surround the Negro’s cot,
The evening dance its merriment imparts,
Love, with its rapture, fills their youthful hearts,
And placid age, the task of labor done,
Enjoys the summer shade, the winter sun,
And, as through life no pauper want he knows,
Laments no poor-house penance at its close. (Ibid., pp. 50-51.)


Convinced of the righteousness and humanity of slavery Grayson
turns with scorn upon the Abolitionists and their meddlesome inter-
ference with the beneficent ways of Providence. With a few dexter-
ous turns of the spit he browns each one nicely like a roasted goose.
His descriptions strip off the gay plumage and reveal the naked
fowl. He makes a good job of it, as witness these bits:


There supple Sumner, with the Negro cause,
Plays the sly game for office and applause;
What boots it if the Negro sink or swim?

He wins the Senate—’tis enough for him. . . .
He heeds nor court’s decree nor Gospel light,
What Sumner thinks is right alone is right. . . .


GREEK DEMOCRACY 107


There Greeley, grieving at a brother’s woe,
Spits with impartial spite on friend and foe. . . .
To each fanatical delusion prone,

He damns all creeds and parties but his own,
Brawls, with hot zeal, for every fool and knave,
The foreign felon and the skulking slave; . . .
And faction’s fiercest rabble always find

A kindred nature in the Tribune’s mind;
Ready each furious impulse to obey,

He raves and ravens like a beast of prey. . . .


There Seward smiles the sweet perennial smile,
Skilled in the tricks of subtlety and guile;
The slyest schemer that the world e’er saw;
Peddler of sentiment and patent law;
Ready for fee or faction to display
His skill in either, if the practice pay. . . . (Ibid., pp. 38-40.)


As he contemplates Mrs. Stowe his full wrath is stirred. He does
not spare her sex. Southern chivalry serves the pure and good in
lovely woman, not the malignant and selfish. An unsexed woman
is hateful to it, and after extolling the true womanliness of Florence
Nightingale, angel of mercy, Grayson pays his compliments to
the Yankee propagandist thus:


Not such with Stowe, the wish or power to please,
She finds no joy in gentle deeds like these;
A moral scavenger, with greedy eye,
In social ills her coarser labors lie;
On fields where vice eludes the light of day,
She hunts up crimes as beagles hunt their prey;
Gleans every dirty nook—the felon’s jail,
And hangman’s mem’ry, for detraction’s tale,
Snuffs up pollution with a pious air,
Collects a rumor here, a slander there;
With hatred’s ardor gathers Newgate spoils,
And trades for gold the garbage of her toils.


In sink and sewer thus, with searching eye,
Through mud and slime unhappy wretches pry;
In fetid puddles dabble with delight,
Search every filthy gathering of the night;
Fish from its depths, and to the spacious bag
Convey with care the black, polluted rag;
With reeking waifs secure the nightly bed,
And turn their noisome stores to daily bread.

(Ibid., pp. 42-43.)


108 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


The Hireling and the Slave, is vigorous propaganda, carefully
documented and pointed with modern instances, the work of an
intelligent and humane writer who might be blind to certain evils
in slavery but whose eyes were open to the social ills that grew
rankly in the muck of industrialism. Outside of the South few in
America had as yet come to understand so much—a handful of
New England idealists, Parker and William Henry Channing and
Emerson and Wendell Phillips, and Orestes Brownson, and a
handful of Utopians, Albert Brisbane and George Ripley and
Horace Greeley. The inadequacy of southern thought was iden-
tical with that of northern: blinded by sectional economic interests,
they saw only half the truth. They beheld the mote in a brother’s
eye, but considered not the beam that was in their own.


CHAPTER IV
ADVENTURES IN BELLES LETTRES


I
OLD CHARLESTON


In the year 1825 the little city of Charleston, with its fourteen
_ thousand whites and more than fourteen thousand blacks, was
perhaps the most delightful spot in America. The Mecca of plan-
tation fashion and the capital of plantation politics, it prided itself
on its genial and distinguished society. It was the last stronghold
in America of the older pride of aristocracy. The tone of society
still remained pretty much what it had been before the schism of
76. Social lines were rigid and an old-fashioned conservatism
of temper marked the upper class. Despite the large admixture
of French Huguenot blood the manners and prejudices of the
aristocracy retained the pronounced British cast that came down
from pre-Revolutionary times, and if Dr. Johnson could have
stepped from the Fleet Street of 1780 to the Charleston of 1825 he
would have felt almost at home. ‘We are decidedly more English
than any other city of the United States,’ said Hugh Legaré,
whose love of the English character was second only to his love
of Charleston. It was a gay world with its country squires and
their horses and racing, its Madeira drinking, its promenades and
dancing and assemblies; one to win the affection of all who liked
lighthearted ways.

But underneath this gay life was a more serious Charleston,
which in certain of its aspects was not unlike Boston. From both
the Huguenot and Scotch-Irish strains came a sobering Puritanism
that gave a serious cast to thoughtful natures and disciplined
them in a strict morality. Calhoun was far more Puritan than
Fisher Ames, and Hugh Legaré than Edward Everett. Life was
likely to be a serious business to these southern Puritans, filled
with weighty responsibilities, to be lived, like Milton’s, as ever in
the great Taskmaster’s eye. Aristocrat though he was, young
Hugh Legaré was no gay cavalier treading the primrose path, but
as serious-minded as any Roundhead. Victorian in manners, he

109


¢


110 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


would have found the bluff speech of the old revolutionary,
General Charles Cotesworth Pinckney—‘‘more pregnant with
meaning than prudish in dress”—somewhat too “salt” for re-
fined ears. It was this note of Puritanism that marked the finest
characters in Charleston and gave its tone to society; but it was


.-a Puritanism of conduct rather than dogma. Charleston gentle-


men were of the English church, and their Puritanism, unwarped
by Calvinism, assumed a moral rather than a theological cast.

The lawyer came to assume the position of intellectual leader-
ship taken by the minister in New England. A profound respect for
law dominated the Charleston mind. Blackstone was the Charles-
ton Bible, and the lawyer who was master of dignified oratory was
looked upon with high regard. The aristocracy opened its doors
to young James Louis Petigru, an Irish-Huguenot lawyer with
his own way to make, but it closed them tightly against young
Gilmore Simms, apprentice to an apothecary and unread in the
classics. Ambitious youths therefore turned to the law as a congen-
ial career, for there reputations lay, and political influence. A
pronounced cult of the law, and regard for orderly procedure, went
hand in hand with the old English respect for individual rights.
Charleston gentlemen could not be coerced, even by their own

politicians, and Legaré was bitter against the Nullifiers because the
spirit of dictation was “‘alien to our old habitudes, to the gentle
courage, the courteous hostility, the mild and merciful justice,
the proud submission to Jaw and respect for right, which once dis-
tinguished our low country society from and above all other
American society” (Writings, Vol. I, p. 211).

Politically Charleston was of the old Federalist tradition,
as that Federalism was embodied in the picturesque figure of
General Pinckney. Outside the narrow circle of the aristocracy,
Federalism had long since given way to a democratic faith with


amongst the gentry and provided the nucleus of the later Union
party. Grayson tells a story of Petigru that suggests the bitter-
ness of the back-country democracy towards the old Federalism.
The latter one day was being abused by a swamp-sucker ‘“‘who
lavished on him all the foul epithets and appellations he could re-
member or invent, of which rogue and ‘scoundrel were among the
most moderate.” At last he hit upon a term of reproach “which
at that day comprised everything hateful—he called him a


We background of states-rights Jeffersonianism; but it lingered


BELLES LETTRES 111


‘damned Federal,’” and was promptly knocked down for the insult
(William J. Grayson, James Louis Petigru, pp. 83-84). But the
Charleston vintage of Federalism was little more than a stout con-
servatism that idealized the Union and preached the sufficiency and
sacredness of the law. It was social rather than political or eco-
nomic—the assertion of the prescriptive right of gentlemen to gov-
ern the state. Jeffersonianism never took possession of the first
circles of Charleston as it did in Virginia, and French revolutionary
philosophy found there an uncongenial soil. The profound con-
servatism of the aristocracy is sufficiently expressed in a comment
of Hugh Legaré—“The politics of the immortal Jefferson! Pish! ”
(Writings, Vol. I, p. 207.) Physiocratic agrarianism found few
advocates amongst Carolina gentlemen. The Charleston mind
was au and legal rather. than economic in its interests, and as


ism ‘than with agrarianism. ‘Its politics, in which it found much di-
version, ‘it preferred highly seasoned, and when Nullification di-
vided the state into hostile camps, the Nullifiers and Unionists
brought Charleston to the verge of civil war. Respect for law and
the amenities vanished before the hot demands of partisanship.

The culture of Charleston was as conservatively old-fashioned as
its politics. Such a renaissance as it enjoyed before the Civil
War wrought its destruction was delayed by its rejection of French
romantic thought until the beginning of the thirties, and syn-
chronized with the renaissance of New England. When the ro-
mantic spirit appeared about 1825, it was primarily English, of
the school of Tom Moore. There had never been any literature in
Charleston worthy of the name, except such as had come from Lon-
don, bound in calfskin and tooled morocco. Those who affected
a love of letters were still enamored of the heroic couplet and the
Addisonian essay. Not until he went to Brussels in 1832 did Le-
garé, the most brilliant southern linguist, take up the study of
German. The classics still dominated education, and literary
taste inclined to a mingling of wit and sentiment. Young and
Ossian and Mrs. Radcliffe held honored places on Charleston
bookshelves. The young poets were deep in Byron, and Sir Walter
was in high repute. But Wordsworth and Shelley and Keats were
scarcely mentioned, and Carlyle could not hope to gain a hearing.
Nevertheless by the year 1828 the example of the North American
Review proved so stimulating an incentive that the scholarship


112 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


of Charleston collaborated to establish the Southern Review, which
ran a sober course for four years, providing a medium for learned
articles on law, letters and politics. It was a serious venture that
concerned itself little with belles lettres, but the intellectual resources
were inadequate, and on Legaré’s departure for Europe The Re-
view came to an end. Later, Gilmore Simms labored to the same
purpose, but even his enormous energy was insufficient to sustain
a magazine esteemed worthy of southern genius, and the work lan-
guished. Facile writers were fewer in Charleston than in Boston.

But despite any shortcomings in the way of letters, to members
of its polite circles Charleston was the most delightful of American
cities, and its society the most distinguished. “‘I have never,
since I could form an opinion on such matters,” wrote Legaré from
Brussels, where he mingled with the most cultivated society,
‘doubted of the immense superiority of Carolina society over all
others on that continent, and now feel it more than ever” (Writ-
ings, Vol. I, p. 218). It was a common opinion of southern gentle-
men, who, with their English notions of a landed aristocracy, be-
lieved that ‘“‘fixed landed property is of the essence of civil society,
properly so called.” It embodied the planter ideal of a social
capital, uncorrupted by a vulgar plutocracy. Its highways ran out
to the plantations; the free citizen of the Greek democracy drew
his wealth from the soil; the slave labored while the master rode
to and fro from the city. Law and politics were regarded as re-
spectable vocations for sons of gentlemen, but the ideal life was
acknowledged to be that of the planter, with his three thousand
acres, his three hundred negroes, his ricks of rice and bales of to-
bacco and cotton. The profits that came from the law were cer-
tain to be invested in land, and the young attorney dreamed of
retiring in middle life to a well-stocked plantation. To become a
member of the ruling squirarchy was an ambition that filled and
satisfied the Charleston imagination.


II


WILLIAM CRAFTS
Charleston Wit
The slightness of literary achievement in the Charleston of 1825


is sufficiently attested by the considerable local fame that rewarded
the efforts of the volatile William Crafts. Born in Charleston in


BELLES LETTRES 113


1789, the son of a well-to-do Yankee father and a southern mother,
he was sent to Harvard to complete his education, distinguished
himself in the classics and in declamation, achieved a gownsman’s
fame for the brisk informality of a Latin oration, and carried back
to Charleston a great reputation as a wit and scholar. He went
into the law but burnt too few candles at the shrine of Blackstone;
was seized with political ambition and proposed to make a great
name for himself as a statesman, but his politics were not agree-
able to his constituents and his career failed to arrive. He was a
graceful orator in the florid southern style, an agreeable fellow with
_ a pleasant wit, who loved society, dabbled in prose and verse, but
proved to be unstable. He spread too much canvas to the un-
certain winds and his unballasted bark came to grief. He died at
the age of thirty-seven, leaving his writings to be gathered up and
published by his family—a miscellany that brought down upon it
the severe judgment of Hugh Legaré.

William Crafts was a transplanted Bostonian who essayed to
domesticate Harvard culture among the polite circles of Charles-
ton. As an undergraduate he admired the graceful preaching of
Buckminster and the acrid eloquence of Fisher Ames. The latter
he seems to have adopted as his political godfather, and from him
he accepted a decadent Federalism that got him into trouble when
later he entered politics. But the chief model on whom he shaped
his life seems to have been Robert Treat Paine, in the declining
sun of whose fame the young Harvard undergraduate warmed
himself. With a less pregnant wit, a less trenchant prose style,
a less masculine oratory, he succeeded in becoming a smaller edi-
tion of a petty master. The parallelism in the lives of the two
apostles of wit is striking. They were both dabblers, but Crafts
possessed less skill and dabbled less felicitously. They both broke
with the rigid decorum of their circles, but Paine achieved a more
tragic shipwreck. They both marked the last ebbing of the eight-
eenth century before the wit ideal was submerged by the incom-
ing tide of romanticism, and the reputations of both have been
forgotten.

In Crafts’ case, certainly, no injustice has been done. Such
literary wealth as he displayed would seem notable only in an
indigent society. His prose is vapid and feeble in the essay, and
stilted and artificial in the oration. His verse is insignificant in
quantity—two formal poems and a handful of occasional pieces—


114 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


and wanting in distinction of phrase or imagery. It is the work
of a graceful imitator of doubtful models. He wrote at the moment
when the long supremacy of Pope was yielding to the popularity
of Moore, and his verse wavered between the old loyalty and the
new love. Sullivan’s Island, a carefully elaborated descriptive
poem, applies the structure and method of Windsor Forest to
a local theme, following the original so closely as to imitate the
detail. His skill in the grand manner may be judged by a single
passage that phrases feebly what Pope had done vigorously:


When cooler gales foretell departing day,

The plaintive curlew homeward wings his way—
Now stoops, then soars, and fearing danger nigh,
To guardian heaven pours forth its piteous cry.
Alas! in vain. The fowler’s fond reply,

Still deemed its own, but tells it where to die.


The Raciad is less crudely imitative. It is a brisk and rather amus-
ing account of the outpouring of Charleston society to the races,
the great event of the year in the gay southern capital. It is done
with some sprightliness, it is an amiable historical document,
but it is not important. When Crafts died in 1826 Charleston
had done little in the way of creative literature, but the stirring
of the waters was beginning. The following year a young apoth-
ecary just admitted to the bar published a volume entitled Lyrical
and Other Poems, first fruits of the colossal labors of Gilmore
Simms. In 1828 Hugh Legaré got The Southern Review on its
feet, a substantial magazine that aspired to be the mouthpiece of
southern culture. With the beginning of the thirties the Charleston
renaissance was under way.
II


HUGH SWINTON LEGARE


Charleston Intellectual


A far solider nature than the ebullient Crafts was Hugh Swinton
Legaré. Of distinguished social position, the most cultivated
mind in the South before the Civil War, and one of the most
cultivated in America, he was an embodiment of the serious
Charleston that served as counterweight to the gayer. In
Legare the moral earnestness of the South came to its most
attractive expression. The repository of two streams of ethical


BELLES LETTRES 115


idealism, he was as Puritan as Calhoun. Natively aristocratic,
with a high sense of personal integrity and civic responsibility, a
profound student of law and letters, with the Charleston parochial-
ism brushed away by wide travel and intimate acquaintance with
old-world civilizations and classical cultures, he represented the
excellent seriousness that came to flower on the Carolina plantation
as well as in the New England meetinghouse. Southern Puritan-
ism might be less ungainly than that of Massachusetts, but it was
equally introspective, given to melancholy; and Hugh Legaré
found his life as serious an affair, and as laborious, as any New
England Calvinist discovered his to be. It is no holiday business
to serve righteousness; wisdom does not flower in the primrose
path of dalliance; and this Charleston gentleman emerged from
a prolonged and arduous self-discipline as complete a Puritan as
Theodore Parker.

Descended in the fifth generation from a Huguenot ancestor who
settled in Charleston about 1695, he was French in name and by
cherished family tradition, but in little else. Through succes-
sive intermarriages, the original French strain was _ pretty
much diluted by the Scotch and English, and few Gallic traits
came down to him. In temperament and sympathies he was
the child of his mother, Mary Swinton, of Scotch Covenanter
blood. The native seriousness that came to him by right of
inheritance was intensified by fate. Inoculated for the smallpox
in his fourth year, the poison lingered in his system, keeping him
sickly for years and permanently stunting the lower half of his
body. Thus set apart from active life, he turned to books and
entered upon the career of a scholar. At the time of his death in
1842, at the age of forty-five, he was perhaps the best linguist
and the most widely read man in America. A mature student of
the classics, he was intimately acquainted with French, Spanish,
Italian and German, and had added Romaic as a help to his Greek.
This may seem a meager list in comparison with Theodore Parker’s
nineteen languages, but the substantial acquisitions he gathered
from the several bodies of literature were far from meager.

Yet immense as were those acquisitions they were only sup-
plementary to his professional studies. The Charleston Puritan
gave to the study of law the same intensity that the Boston
Puritan gave to theology. Not content with a three years’ reading
course in a law office, he went to Europe to pursue his studies more


116 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


comprehensively. At the University of Edinburgh he plunged
into an investigation of the Roman and Civil Law, which hence-
forth was to be his major intellectual interest. He found in the
continental systems, he believed, a body of legal principles more
comprehensive and philosophical than the English Common Law,
and the ambition grew upon him to ingraft certain features of the
Civil Law upon American practice. After two years’ intense study
he came home, engaged in active practice of his profession, and ten
years later, at the age of thirty-five, was appointed chargé d’ affaires
at Brussels, where he spent four rich years. His diplomatic
and social life was subordinated to his studies, into which
he threw himself with the keenest zest, enlarging his knowledge of
modern letters and adding to his encyclopedic knowledge of legal
systems. In 1841 he was appointed Attorney-General of the United
States in the cabinet of President Tyler, and upon Webster’s
retirement was given the additional portfolio of Secretary of
State ad interim. While on a visit to Boston with President Tyler
to assist in the Bunker Hill Monument celebration, he was taken
suddenly ill and died at the home of his friend Professor Ticknor.

The man thus prematurely cut down was a nature of vast
solidity. Profoundly serious, inclined to the blackest melancholy,
as pessimistic as Fisher Ames, with no leaven of humor, no ro-
mance, no careless idling, he was a hard taskmaster to his days.
He toiled prodigiously at his self-appointed tasks. His standards
were severe, whether in letters or law or politics or morals. As
a critic he dealt with substantial subjects: The Constitutional
History of Greece; The Origin, History and Influence of Roman
Legislation; Early Spanish Ballads; Jeremy Bentham and tne
Utilitarians; Lord Byron’s Character and Writings—solid disserta-
tions done with German thoroughness—reviews of huge compass
that provided opportunity for independent treatises. As a lawyer
he was rather a philosophical historian than a special pleader.
He was far more given to exploring the labyrinths of ancient
codes than to arguing cases. His legal erudition appalls the lay-
man. He had sat at the feet of black-letter philosophers; he had
been instructed by sages long since forgotten. His mind was an
ample storehouse of archaic legal maxims. He delighted in the
crabbed law Latin—its sententious phrases worn to the quick, the
residuum and repository of the wisdom bequeathed by past
generations. Richer in poetry than any verses of Byron were the


BELLES LETTRES 117


Latin words habeas corpus to one who, like this scholar, understood
how packed they were with English history, how rich in suggestion
to all who love English freedom. From this immense erudition
came his love for old books and venerable authorities. Blackstone
he looked upon as a modern—‘“‘a gentleman’s law book, clear, but
not deep”’; and the wisdom of my Lord Coke seemed to him not so
mellow as that drawn from the more capacious vats of earlier days.
He quoted Grotius and Vattel and Pufendorf and Bourlamaqui
more readily than the South Carolina Digest, and the names of
Papinian and Ulpian and Modestinus and Voet and Cujacius,
of the Corpus Alaricianum, of the Justinian, Gregorian, Hermoge-
nian, and Theodosian codes, slipped familiarly from his pen. How
many outlandish authorities were contained in the huge inkwell
on his desk it is idle to conjecture. Probably not three men in
America comprehended the significance of half the references that
he offered for the consideration of his fellow lawyers, or were
competent to question his deductions. Even the learned Judge
Story and Chancellor Kent seem mere dabblers in comparison
with this philosophical historian.

Such learning must imevitably mold one’s thinking in kindred
fields, and he came naturally to espouse what for want of an exacter
term may be called the Common Law theory of politics. It is a
conception of law as an organic growth, the result of man’s labo-

per search for a rational freedom in the social body, the single
and avowed end of which is justice. It has taken form not by the
decrees of legislatures, but by decisions of the judiciary, tested
and reéxamined and reargued generation after generation; built
up code by code through slow evolution, the wisdom of the past
serving as counselor to the present; continuously expanding its
jurisdiction from the community to the nation, and from the
nation to a world society; the one guarantee of a sober and ra-
tional progress. Theorists and philosophers come and go; revolu-
tions succeed and fail; foolish statutes and temporary constitutions
have their day; but the organic body of the law survives all surface
change, building into the fabric of society what experience proves
to be good, sloughing off what experience has outgrown—the
tempered rule of social justice; the exact measure of every civiliza-
tion compared with which the majority will is a crude and inad-
equate makeshift.

From such a conception it follows that government is little more


118 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


than ancillary to the law, and political principles are sound in the
measure that they are founded on legal principles. Thus by follow-
ing the musty path of jurisprudence Legaré arrived at the same
goal that John Cotton had reached two hundred years before—
the apotheosis of magistracy. With the older Puritan he could
assert, Scripturae plenitudinem adoro. The sufficiency of the law
to social justice was axiomatic in his thinking. But the scriptures
which he adored were the words of the judges, whose decisions
were above the authority of legislator or governor and little
concerned with a transient majority will. The old theocrat had
set up his theocracy; the modern lexolater would set up his lex-
ocracy; but the end was pretty much the same. Very likely Legaré,
like the present-day lexolater, would deny the conclusion, yet
it was implicit in his premises, and his scorn of political theory
was sufficient proof. Practical politics he regarded as rather a
trumpery business that achieves no solid results.! The political
philosopher he was profoundly suspicious of. The flood of specu-
lation let loose upon the world by the revolutions of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries seemed to him to have
invited disaster, and the political classics of those revolutions
he cared little for. He distrusted the ‘‘era of illumination”
that sacrificed use and wont to abstract theory. ‘‘We have not
too much faith in the ‘march of intellect,’” he remarked dryly,
“and would not . . . pitch our anticipations in too high a key”
(ibid., Vol. II, p. 264). But his greatest contempt he reserved for
the intellectual revolutionaries—“‘hair-brained metaphysicians
and empirical demagogues” (ibid., Vol. I, p. 216), who would up-
set the nice balance of the law. To this matter he returned again
and again, with the scorn of the legal mind for ambitious political
systems. “Innovators or Revolutionists, who go only for an
imaginary abstract rectitude and symmetry of government,” he
said, “are always dangerous, and sometimes the greatest curse
with which heaven in its wrath can visit an offending people”’(ibid.,


Vol. II, p. 286).


I have no faith at all in speculative politics. A theorist in government
is as dangerous as a theorist in medicine, or in agriculture, and for pre-
cisely the same reasons—the subjects are too complicated and too obscure
for simple and decisive experiments. I go for undisputed results in the
long run. (Jbid., Vol. I, p. 303.)


1See Writings, Vol. Il, p. 104.


BELLES LETTRES 119


Man begins a revolution, but its issues are with God alone. The
voluntary revolutions of man have always been abrupt, violent and for
the worse: so that the wisdom of antiquity laid it down, as a maxim, that
every fundamental change in the State must needs be bloody and deadly.
(Ibid., Vol. II, p. 297.)


This inherent conservatism of the legal mind explains Legaré’s
intellectual sympathy with Federalism and his contempt for
Jefferson. The latter to him was the prince of demagogues, and
his ink was vitriol when he wrote of him, as thus in one of his
letters: ‘““The immortal sayings and doings of the holy father
in democracy—the servant of the servants of Demos (whose nose
of wax he knew better than anybody how to shape to his own
convenience,)—the infallible, though ever-changing, St. Thomas
of Canting-bury. And here, you may be sure, I cross myself
devoutly and cry out, with an all-fervent benediction to that
canonized worthy, pax tecum (pronounced, you know, Scottice,
pox tacum)”’ (Writings, Vol. I, p. 208). Modern political theories
seemed to him mere upstart doctrines compared with the venerable
principles of the law, and he came to look with suspicion on all
political liberalism not sponsored by lawyers and supported by
briefs. A passionate lover of liberty, he was as distrustful of
democracy as John Adams, and his condemnation was as frank—
“that scene of wild impulse, and tyrannical misrule—a pure
democracy”? (zbid., Vol. II, p. 271). No state, Beverley Tucker
pointed out, was so little democratic as South Carolina, and Legaré
shared the common Charleston distrust of it. As he watched
England and France during the tumultuous thirties, and saw the
struggle over Nullification at home, his concern for the future
became acute and his pessimism as black as Fisher Ames’. In a
letter from Brussels, in the year 1833, shortly after the passage of
the English Reform Bill, he wrote:


Mankind have too little sense to maintain, for any length of time, a
well-tempered democracy, and a great deal too much to bear an unlimited
one—the most dreadful form of “ State sovereignty,” beyond all doubt, in
which the descendants of the father of the first murderer have ever given
loose to their ruffian instinct of violence and oppression. If they have
a moderate policy of the kind, which happens (as all complicated machines
will) to be occasionally a little out of order, their only idea of a remedy
is to pull it down, and along with it every thing that makes a civil society
worthy of its name. Who could ever have dreamed that the law of brute


120 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


force which now crushes Europe . . . should be deliberately adopted in
America, instead of the really sublime institutions of a federal jurisdiction,
(fallible, of course, but generally right) and that this relapse into down-
right barbarism should be vaunted, by the most enlightened men in the
Southern States, as a grand improvement and the only thing wanting to
make our government as perfect as we have been swearing it was all along.
(Lbid., Vol. I, p. 210.)


Back of this ingrained conservatism was a tender Puritan con-
science that must twist his legal studies to ideal ends. After all it
was no other than a juridical romanticism that Hugh Legaré dis-
covered in the bottom of his scholar’s cup. As medieval as Sir
Walter, he sought his romance in old law-courts rather than in
feudal castles, in black-robed advocates rather than in knights and
ladies; and he persuaded himself that those old litigations, pre-
served in scraps of Latin and law French, were dramatic episodes in
the ceaseless battle for human rights, whereof the single objective
was justice. Slowly, stone upon stone, the lawyers were erecting
an impregnable citadel, within which justice kept her inviolable
court. It is a pleasant fiction still believed in by lawyers of the old
school, and to Legaré in his study it bore the very semblance of
truth. He had read too many law books; he had speculated too
little on politics; immersed in his codes, he had forgotten to inquire
into the hidden springs of sovereignty. In his contempt for prac-
tical politics he had neglected to study even the primer of economic
determinism. To the economic historian, Legaré’s boundless faith
in the sufficiency of legal processes is incomprehensible. A few
lessons from the wiser Jefferson would have taught him much that
he needed to know concerning the economic sources of power. In
his attitude towards the law Jefferson was a suspicious realist.
He had no faith in legal codes that had grown up under monarchical
and aristocratic systems, and he put no trust in government by
lawyers. He could not understand how the Common Law, inter-
preted by the Tory Blackstone, and applied by Federalist lawyers,
should serve the needs of a democracy. Democratic America, he
was convinced, must create a new democratic law, and hold its
judiciary in strict subjection to its will; to surrender sovereignty
to an aristocracy of the bench would mean the abdication of de-
mocracy. But Legaré refused to go to.school to Jefferson. He
clung to his romantic conception of the law with the same pas-
sionate conviction that Calhoun clung to his romantic dream of a


BELLES LETTRES 121


Greek democracy; and with the ebbing of the romantic tide they
were both left stranded.

But if Legaré was unsympathetic towards the new political
theory that came from the French intellectuals, and frankly hostile
to the new political practice that came in with the Jacksonians,
he warmly approved the new economics that came with the In-
dustrial Revolution. In his whole-hearted acceptance of Adam
Smith he seems not a Carolinian at all, but an English liberal of the
Cobden-Bright school. He adopted the principle of laissez faire,
the gospel of progress, the attitude of optimism. He accepted the
theory of the beneficence of commerce as a universal civilizing
agency, and he looked forward confidently to an eventual parlia-
ment of man, a future federation of the world. Commerce in the
end must outlaw war, and peace with freedom would spread the
blessings of civilization to the ends of the earth.’

A convincing object-lesson in the sufficiency of the principle of
laissez faire, he discovered in the amazing progress of America. The
mainspring of that progress he found in economic freedom—
freedom “from those undue restraints and that impertinent inter-
ference of government in the interests properly belonging to
individuals.” “I know,” he said, “‘that the cardinal spring and
source of our success is freedom—freedom of thought, freedom of
speech, freedom of action, freedom of commerce” (Writings, Vol.
I, p. 306). The greatest of these was free trade between the states.
His travels in England and the contrast between English progress
and continental backwardness confirmed him in this belief. ‘The
doctrine of Free Trade,” he asserted, “is a great fundamental
doctrine of civilization. The world must come to it at last, if the
visions of improvement in which we love to indulge are ever to be
realized” (ibid., Vol. I, p. 272). He went further and accepted the
Industrial Revolution with its division of labor as a necessary
agency of social amelioration. “It is evidently in the order of
nature, and we must take it with all its good and all its evils to-
gether.” In forecasting the effect of that revolution he was troubled
by no fears.

Sir, it is a favorite phrase of those who boast of what is called “the march
of intellect,” that things are thus changed because the “‘ schoolmaster is


abroad.” But I tell you that something far more effective than the school-
master, a mightier than Solomon, is abroad. It is the sTEAM-ENGINE—in


2 See “The Arbitrament of National Disputes,” in Writings, Vol. I, pp. 355-357.


122 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


its twofold capacity of a means of production and a means of transport—
the most powerful instrument by far of pacification and commerce, and
therefore of improvement and: happiness that the world has ever seen;
which, while it increases capital, and multiplies beyond all imagination
the products of industry, brings the most distant people into contact with
one another .. . effaces all peculiarities of national character, and
promises, at no distant period, to make the whole Christian world, at
least, one great family. . . .

A people well clad and well housed will be sure to provide themselves
with all the other comforts of life; and it is the diffusion of these comforts,
and the growing taste for them, among all classes of society in Europe—
it is the desire of riches as it is commonly called, that is gradually putting
an end to the destructive and bloody game of war, and reserving all the
resources hitherto wasted by it, for enterprises of industry and commerce,
prosecuted with the fiery spirit which once vented itself in scenes of peril
and carnage. (Jbid., Vol. I, pp. 285-286.)


Remembering how dependent were southern cotton interests on
English industrialism and commerce, one can understand Legaré’s
acceptance of laissez faire economics. His idealism, his local pride,
his romanticism, were all enlisted in its behalf, and he painted in
glowing colors. But his frank advocacy of capitalism is harder to
understand, except perhaps on the ground that Charleston was a
considerable shipping port and his clients were engaged in com-
merce. In the bitter dispute with Jackson over the Bank, Legaré
adopted northern views on national finance. Although nominally
a Democrat, he had never been an agrarian, and he went with
Webster and Clay against the subtreasury scheme and a metallic
currency. His thoughtful speech on The Spirit of the Sub-Treasury,
delivered in 1837, was thoroughgoing Whig doctrine, asserting
the excellence of the modern banking system and extolling the
economic fruitfulness of credit. He repudiated every principle
of John Taylor; denied every dogma of agrarian economics; and
eulogized the English financial system as the germinal source of
English greatness. Applying the principle of credit to American
conditions, he discovered the secret of American expansion in the
principle of speculative borrowing, and expanded his doctrine of
economic freedom by asserting that freedom to borrow was a
necessary preliminary to freedom to work. ‘‘A people have been
enriched by debt,” he argued, overlooking the possible fallacy
of a post hoc ergo propter hoc, “and ‘by owing, owe not.’” As
he contemplated the amazing progress of the nation, his lyric
enthusiasm becomes prologue to a somewhat lame conclusion


BELLES LETTRES 123


that enthrones the banker as the fairy godmother of the hardy
pioneer.


There is a grandeur and a majesty in this irresistible onward march of

a race, created, as I believe, and elected to possess and people a continent.

. We may become so much accustomed to such things that they shall
make as little impression upon our minds as the glories of the Heavens
above us; but, looking on them, lately, as with the eyes of the stranger,
I felt, what a recent English traveller is said to have remarked, that far
from being without poetry, as some have vainly alleged, our whole country
is one great poem. Sir, it is so; and if there be a man that can think of
what is doing, in all parts of this most blessed of all lands, to embellish
and advance it, who can contemplate that living mass of intelligence,
activity and improvement as it rolls on, in its sure and steady progress,
to the uttermost extremities of the west; who can see scenes of savage
desolation transformed, almost with the suddenness of enchantment, into
those of fruitfulness and beauty; crowned with flourishing cities, filled
with the noblest of all populations; if there be a man, I say, that can wit-
ness all this passing under his very eyes, without feeling his heart beat
high, and his imagination warmed and transported by it, be sure, sir, that
the raptures of song exist not for him. .

But of this rational, diffusive liberty, among a people so intelligent as
ours, the credit system is the natural fruit, the inseparable companion,
the necessary means and instrument. It is part and parcel of our exist-
ence. Who ever heard of CREDIT in a despotism, or an anarchy? It
implies confidence—confidence i in yourself, confidence in your neighbor,
confidence in your government, confidence in the administration of the
laws, confidence, in a word, in your destiny, and your fortune, in the des-
tinies and the fortunes of the country to which you belong; as, for instance,
in the case of a great national debt. It is the fruit, I say, of all that is
most precious in civilized life, and to quarrel with it is to be ungrateful
to God for some of the greatest blessings he has vouchsafed to man.
(Writings, Vol. I, pp. 306-307.)


Such ebullient rhetoric fits the mouth of the politician rather than
the scholar, and such careless logic comes oddly from a southern
intellectual. In his ignorance of the economics of John Taylor,
Legaré was unprovided with principles to reply to his own argu-
ments, and unaware of the lameness of his confident conclusions.
But though he might glow with optimism as he contemplated the
westward expansion, for the future of the South and of his own
beloved state he was deep in pessimism. From the first he had
dissented vigorously from the program of Nullification. An ar-
dent Union man, he believed with his friend James Petigru that
secession meant ruin for South Carolina. Calhoun seemed to him
a monomaniac, consumed by a single idea. He feared the hot


124 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


passion of the states-rights party and he was troubled over slavery.
His travels abroad had acquainted him with European views on
the subject; he watched the spread of English humanitarianism
and he had come to recognize the institution as an anachronism.
It seemed to him impossible for the South to withstand much longer
the augmenting pressure of civilized opinion. He could justify
slavery in his own eyes both by ancient law—servitus est constitutto
juris gentium—and by comparison of the condition of the negro
with that of the English wage worker. The ideal of a Greek de-
mocracy was vastly congenial to his aristocratic temperament, but
he knew that it was a romantic dream, and he was oppressed by the
shadow of impending ruin. Writing from Brussels on April 8,
1833, he concluded an anxious letter thus:


It ends in my not knowing what to think, except that dangers are
around and above and below and within our poor little State,—which
may God preserve us from! I ask of heaven only that the little circle I
am intimate with in Charleston should be kept together while I live,—
in health, harmony and competence; and that, on my return, I may my-
self be enabled to enjoy the same happiness, in my intercourse with it,
with which I have been hitherto blessed. We are (I am quite sure) the
last of the race of South-Carolina; I see nothing before us but decay and
downfall,—but on that very account, I cherish its precious relics the
more. . . . Yet my heart sinks within me often when I think of what
may too soon be, and I say, in those touching words, “Why should not my
countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers’ sepulchres,
lieth waste, and her gates are burnt with fire.” (Writings, Vol. I, p. 215.)


Thus like old John Winthrop two hundred years before, this
descendant of southern Pilgrims, this Charleston lawyer and
intellectual, found the words of the Hebrew Scriptures rising to his
lips in moments of deep emotion. In spite of travel and many
books and ripe culture and catholic sympathies, Hugh Legaré
remained Puritan at heart, sorely puzzled with life, the burden of
his days heavy upon him, walking soberly in the way of duty.
North or south, the Puritan was still Puritan, whether he were
Theodore Parker, the Boston radical, or Hugh Swinton Legaré,
the Charleston conservative.


ADVENTURES IN BELLES LETTRES 125
IV


WILLIAM GILMORE SIMMS
Charleston Romancer


From the background of old Charleston emerged, about the year
1825, the figure of Gilmore Simms, lately a drug clerk but now
come to the dignity of admission to the bar; a tall, vigorous young
fellow, with little formal schooling, no Latin or Greek, without
land or slaves, but heavily involved in Byronic odes and like un-
profitable investments; a social nobody soon to be married at the
age of twenty to a girl of no better station than his own, who
offered himself as candidate for the poet laureateship of the South.
A somewhat presumptuous proceeding on the part of a plebeian
quite outside the cultivated circle of the Petigrus and Grimkés and
Hugers and Legarés, who were the accepted custodians of Charles-
ton culture and who did not take kindly to ambitious newcomers.
They regarded literature as a polite art that could flourish only
in polite circles, and they turned a cold shoulder upon a young man
whose ways suggested the Carolina buckra. =

After all these years one may well cherish a grudge against the
amiable little city for its shabby treatment of Gilmore Simms.
The most richly endowed of any son she ever gave birth to, he was
snubbed for years by the social oligarchy and suffered keenly from
the ostracism. His extreme parochialism made him the more
sensitive to the slight. An ardent Southerner, loyal to all the
Carolinian totems and taboos, he accepted the Charleston judg-
ment in literature and politics as the very law and the prophets.
He loved the soil of South Carolina, he loved the people and the
way of life, and he was steeped as no other Carolinian in local
history and tradition. He could perceive no shortcomings in a
society he warmly admired, and he accepted the Charleston pro-
vincialisms as the lover accepts the mole on his mistress’ cheek.
The more Charleston snubbed him, the more admirable he pro-
fessed to believe was an aristocracy that so jealously guarded its
fine exclusiveness. His lifelong ambition was to receive recognition
from his native city, and when after the death of his first wife and
his marriage to the daughter of a prosperous planter, he gained
admission into the ranks of the lesser gentry, he eagerly made
common cause with them. He accepted the Carolinian standards


126 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


and conventions; he advocated social caste: he honored the
southern gentleman as God’s best handiwork; he unconsciously
reflected an aristocratic arrogance towards all social inferiors. He
abandoned the Jeffersonian philosophy of his youth and adopted
the revised gospel of Calhoun. He became, in short, a Carolina
Fire Eater. He set up as a militant defender of slavery and col-
laborated with other eminent Carolinians to develop the pro-
slavery argument.? He could have escaped the subtle compulsions
of the southern system only by emptying his mind of his dearest
prejudices, and this he had neither the will nor the wish to do.
And so in spite of the fact that his every instinct was democratic,
and every natural impulse generous and manly, he fought the
battles of the peculiar institution as stoutly as if he had been born
to his three hundred slaves; and he suffered in consequence the
loss of pretty nearly everything, including his art. After his death,
his friend Paul Hayne wrote of him: “‘Simms’s genius never had fair
play! Circumstances hampered him!” The judgment is just.
Parochial Charleston brought about his literary undoing.

In taste and temperament Simms was a pronounced realist, but
his career took shape from a generation given to every romantic
excess. His genius, in consequence, was always at cross purposes
with the popular taste. His realism turned naturally to low-life
adventure; his upper-class romance became stilted and posturing,
and his love of action degenerated into swashbuckling. That he
survived such mishaps at all, suggests the enormous vitality of
the man. If there had only been a little more of the intellectual
in him, if he could have detached himself as an artist from the
immediate and present, he might have risen superior to his unfor-
tunate environment. But he was constitutionally incapable of
aloofness, and hence incapable of criticism. To analyze, compare
and judge was impossible to so ardent a nature. He must be
partisan to a people and a cause, rather than to his art. The South
that he loved was romantic, and he would appeal to the world as
a Southerner. He wore his sectional prejudices as the southern
politician wears his rumpled Prince Albert coat, broad-brimmed
hat and black string tie. He never realized what a clutter of use-
less luggage he carried into his study. It is a pity that he con-
stricted himself to the shell of an outworn order, instead of realizing
that social orders and institutions are significant to the novelist


3 See above, page 102.


BELLES LETTRES 127


only as he stands apart from them, observing their ways and
considering their interplay in the lives of men and women. It
was a major loss to American letters that he should not have striven
to be an artist first, and a southern romantic only at a later and
more convenient season. Ifhe had served his art more jealously, if
he had learned from Poe to refuse the demands of inconsequential
things, he would have viewed his beloved Charleston with keener
eyes and portrayed it more adequately.

But he would not serve his art alone. Unhappily he conceived
that he owed an imperative duty to his native commonwealth,
and in fulfillment of that duty he frittered away his enormous
vitality in delivering patriotic orations and occasional addresses,
serving in the Legislature, pottering over politics, lecturing upon
literature, founding and editing magazines and essaying to bring
culture to Charleston by fiery impetuosity of appeal. He struggled
as few other Americans have done to further the cause of letters
in a desperate environment; but creative literature could neither
be cajoled nor coerced to take up an abode in the indolent little
city, and Simms wore himself out in a fruitless undertaking. Our
literature has suffered few greater losses than this wasting of the
genius of Gilmore Simms in trumpery fields that belong to the
literary dray horse. It was the inevitable outcome of the conflict
between the creative artist and the citizen of South Carolina.

Little as he is known to later readers Simms is by far the most
virile and interesting figure of the Old South. He was built on a
generous plan. He was endowed with a rich and prodigal nature,
vigorous, spontaneous, creative. There was in him much of
Whitman’s largeness and coarseness, much of his delight in the
good things of earth. He wrote with extraordinary gusto, and
his fine strong face suggests that he lived with equal gusto. As
a professional man of letters he turned out an incredible amount of
work, by ordinary two tales a year—solid works of five hundred
pages each—together with poems and plays and pot-boiling stuff
to tax the capacity of two or three hack writers. He poured out
his material copiously, lavishly, with overrunning measure. His
stories flow as generously as his Jamaica rum. He is a veritable
geyser of invention, an abundant sea of salty speech. He has
no sense of restraint; he does not stop to prune the tangle of his
imagination; he refuses to strip the plot of extraneous incident to
hasten its action. He is as episodic as Dickens at his worst, pil-


128 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


ing up action and multiplying threads till the story bogs down.
The major plot is always struggling from hummock to hummock
in the endless swamp where his characters slip in and out, rarely
getting to firm ground, yet never quite submerged. Prodigal of
adventure and loving action, clumsy as the natural man when
confronted with sentiment, he is an American Fielding with a dash
of Smollett. He is at ease only out of doors, in the fields and swamps
and highways; there his speech becomes racy, and there the rich
poetry of his nature, which somehow rarely got into his verse, comes
to abundant and spontaneous expression. When he enters the
drawing-room his stilted language betrays his lack of ease. He
writes with his pen and not with his heart. The plantation tradi-
tion has him in its grip and his fine ladies and gentlemen are done
up with much literary starch. But let him come upon a happy-
go-lucky blackguard and he loves him as Fielding would have
loved him. The amusing scene in which Lieutenant Porgy heaves
a pot of hot hominy in the face of a Scotch dragoon is quite evi-
dently reminiscent of Parson Adams’ recourse to a dish of hog’s
blood in a certain tavern brawl.4 Like Fielding also is his
criterion of morality. A frank and generous nature is his in-
fallible test of worth, and if his patriotism led him to bestow a
large share of generosity on the patriots, and a correspondingly
meager share on the Loyalists and British, he was but exercising
an ancient prerogative of the romancer.

Contemporary romanticism engrafted on a nature fundamen-
tally realistic developed a pronounced strain in his work which, for
lack of an exacter word, we may call picaresque. This comes out
at its worst in the crude border tales of Richard Hurdis and Bor-
der Beagles, stories marked by the coarseness of the eighteenth
century, backwoods versions of Jonathan Wild. At its best it
created a goodly company of blackguards that are an asset to
American literature. Simms dearly loved a rogue, and the more
picturesque the latter’s knavery the more he loved him. A gentle-
man villain turns to a thing of wood in his hands, but a low-born
rascal he creates out of living flesh and blood. A surprising num-
ber of low figures, both rogues and honest men, enliven his clut-
tered pages, individual, racy, often poetic. Realistic in speech and
action, they are men of special gifts, nimble of wit and rich in
imagination, sometimes fallen to base uses and sometimes ennobled

4 See Katherine Walton, Chapter XLI.


BELLES LETTRES 129


by affection for their superiors. Thumbscrew, Supple Jack Ban-
nister, and Joe Ballou, the partisan scouts; Isaac Muggs, mine host
of the Black Riders; Goggle the half-breed; Hell Fire Dick of To-
phet, the blackguard converted by Pilgrim’s Progress; Sam Bost-
wick the Squatter—these are admirable figures, done with inimi-
table spirit, the choicest collection of homespun in American
literature. They impart life and drama to Simms’s tales. Remove
them, and his romances are only a welter of stilted language and
starchy situations. The scene, for example, between Jack Bannis-
ter and Isaac Muggs, in which the latter is converted to true re-
publican principles by appeal to a backwoods ordeal by battle,
is magnificent in its broad humor, and it is a pity that Simms did
not give freer rein to his genius for such work. It is incomprehensi-
ble that a man who could put into the mouth of Thumbscrew such
language as the following could have stooped to scribble the love
scenes between Ernest Mellichampe and Janet Berkeley:


When it so happens that the things a man’s got to love gits fewer and
smaller, they gits more valuable, Airnest, in his sight; for he knows mighty
well, if he loses them, that he’s jist like an old bird that comes back to the
tree when the blossoms and the flowers have all dropped off, and are
rotting under it. It’s mighty nigh to winter in his heart then, Airnest—
mighty nigh—and the sooner he begins to look out a place to sleep in, the
wiser man you may take him tobe. (Mellichampe, Chapter IX.)


But Simms was too inveterately episodical to construct a pretty
plot, and too careless in his generous southern hospitality to dis-
criminate between guests at his board. He throws a huge mis-
cellany on the table from which each may choose what pleases his
taste.

Here again romanticism did him an evil turn. Southern taste
was too aristocratic to like coarse fare. Gentlemen must dine like
gentlemen even though black rascals served as waiters. Common
fellows were well enough in the background, but they must not
presume to crowd their betters from the table. In such matters
Simms was constrained to follow the orthodox literary tradition.
From Shakespeare to Scott the notion prevailed that legitimate
romance must be conceived of as a flitch of bacon, the lean of vul-
garity alternating with the fat of gentility. Hence Simms was
forced to keep a weather eye on the popular taste lest it be offended
by too free an offering of the low. His negroes, such as Scipio and
Bram and Benny Bowlegs, are more worth while than their mas-


130 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


ters, and his swamp-suckers are done with more gusto than the
officers; but when the plot demands the appearance of the gentry
he sends his black-bottle rapscallions about their business. Ex-
cept in occasional instances, as in the case of old Colonel Sinclair,
the Carolinian baron—a testy old gentleman done in the best
gouty manner—Simms does the “quality” badly and the canny
reader soon learns to skip the genteel passages in order to visit
with Lieutenant Porgy or follow the adventures of Hell Fire Dick
or Supple Jack Bannister. There is ample fare at his generous
board, but one must pick and choose.

The critics have made quite too much of the Gothic extrava-
gancies that mar so many of his pages. It is true that Simms was
a generous purveyor of “‘blood-pudding” romance with its gory
exploitation of crime and mystery. Nothing can excuse or ex-
tenuate such folly in the abstract; but it is easily comprehensible.
It was a part of the price which the professional man of letters
had to pay as caterer to a provincial reading public. After the
surprising success of Guy Rivers, Simms deliberately tested the
taste of his readers by sending forth Richard Hurdis under a
pen name; and the equal success of the latter convinced him that
American readers liked such fare. He had a living to make; the
market was limited, and he resolved to give the public what it
wanted. This accounts for his major sins. An enormous number of
chapters, together with whole volumes such as Charlemont and
Beauchampe—preposterous accounts of a notorious murder case
in Kentucky—deserve no better fate than the rubbish heap. They
are in no sense literature; yet unfortunately the very great pow-
ers of Simms are too commonly measured by such trash, instead
of by his Revolutionary tales.

Simms was a loving student of older English literature and drew
much of his water from excellent wells. A happy instinct led him
back to the robust time of Elizabeth and those masculine play-
wrights whose ample natures were so like his own. Shakespeare
may be reckoned his particular master—especially the prose of
Shakespeare with its Cheapside colloquialisms and racy idiomatic
thythms. No better training school could be desired, and his loving
apprenticeship to the older vernacular serves to explain the source
of Simms’s greatest literary virtue. From long familiarity with the
Elizabethans he derived his mastery of English idiom that sets him
widely apart from most other contemporary Americans. In easy


BELLES LETTRES 131


outpouring of picturesque speech, of the lithe and muscular idiom
of the older literature, he was without a rival in his generation.
Many an old Elizabethan phrase lingered in the southern back-
woods, and many an indigenous turn of speech had sprung from
homely new-world experience. All such Simms seized upon with
the relish of a gourmand, stirring them into the great pot from
which he ladled such generous spoonfuls. Later critics have been
singularly obtuse in their failure to do justice to his rich linguistic
equipment. Quite too much comment has been devoted to his
careless slips in rhetorical construction, and quite too little to his
command of masculine English prose. It is absurd to couple him
with Cooper in sinning against good writing. They are as unlike as
two men could well be. Simms is incomparably the greater master
of racy prose, as he is much the richer nature. The only contem-
porary indeed who approaches him is Melville in Moby Dick.
He is careless and slovenly enough in all conscience; when he goes
on a rampage he mouths his lines like any town crier. But though
he keeps a sharp eye on the groundlings, though he is often pre-
posterous, he is rarely wooden, never feeble.

The Elizabethan influence comes out strikingly in the char-
acter of Lieutenant Porgy, the spoilt child of his imagination,
who runs through the Revolutionary romances as a sort of comic
chorus. Despite Professor Trent’s opinion to the contrary, Porgy
is a South Carolinian Falstaff, quite evidently done with a close
eye to the original. He is a very mountain of a fellow, with huge
paunch and spindling shanks from too much sitting at the table
and in the saddle—the most amusing and substantial comic
character in our early fiction. As a South Carolina gentleman,
Porgy of course was no liar or coward or woman cheater. In battle
he is an avalanche of patriotic valor, and in his deference to the
weak and dependent, in his free-handed generosity that encum-
bers him with penniless hangers-on, he is model of southern chiv-
alry. But in the far greater matters of the belly, he is strikingly
Falstaffian. He is not so much a valiant trencherman, as an art-
ist in food and drink. He lived to eat and he ate to speculate on
the virtues of a good dinner. ‘He took philosophy with him to
the table, and grew wise over his wine” (Woodcraft, Chapter
XVIII). He is an epicure in words, a gourmand of wit. The
copious stream of his speech runs on in an endless flow, sometimes
roily but never stagnant. A pat aphorism or a picturesque phrase


132 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


is as succulent to him as Carolina terrapin. When philosophy
fails he stoops to horseplay, but his practical jokes are carried
off with theatrical splendor, with colossal assurance. Like Fal-
staff he is fond of practicing his wit on his followers. His
Bardolph is a certain Geordie Dennison, the swamp poet of
the troop; and Porgy honors him as one artist honors the craft
of another.

But the most satisfying comradeship lies between Porgy and
Black Tom, fellow practitioners of the gentle art of cookery,
sworn liegemen to roasts and soups and stews. Together they
make the swamp commissariat bloom like a Covent Garden
market. They are master foragers untroubled by an overnice
conscience. “Do as much stealing in an honest way as you can,”
the lieutenant remarks to Tom. ‘‘D—n the patriotism that can’t
eat stolen fruit!’’ At a pinch the native resources of the swamp are
boldly commandeered ‘The creative masterpiece of the valiant
Porgy was a notable banquet which he proffered General Greene
and his staff in their swamp quarters. His infinite resourcefulness
in this great affair, his huge inventiveness, elevate the dinner to
the rank of a culinary epic. The swamp frogs that he speared by
moonlight, and the young alligators that he took by subtle strata-
gem, were transmogrified into delectable dishes served to his guests
under the alluring names of alerta and lagarta.> The scene is done
with a gusto that only the worshiper of fleshpots could achieve.
Simms delighted in Porgy because he was himself something of a
Porgy. There is good fare for those who sit at table with the fat
humorist of The Forayers; the ready talk does not lack the salt of
wit. The later Porgy of Woodcraft scarcely comes up to the earlier.
His debts weigh too heavily on his spirits for the easy play of his
fancy; he is less redoubtable as a wooer than as a warrior;
nevertheless there is excellent humor to be enjoyed at Glen
Eberle, and some extraordinary pranks.

The two major themes with which his romances deal, as has been
often pointed out, are the frontier and the Revolution; but the inti-
mate connection between them has not been so commonly remarked.
In much of his better work the two themes blend into one. The
conditions of civil war in the South thrust into sharp relief the
cultural and psychological frontier that clung to the outskirts
of the plantations—the ragged edges of a society that kept the

5 See The Forayers, Chapters XLIII-XLVI.


BELLES LETTRES 133


poor whites submerged and bred a numerous progeny of coarse and
primitive creatures, little better than social outcasts. Not the
least of the curses of slavery—as Helper pointed out—was its
blighting effect on the less prosperous whites who environed every
plantation with its special frontier. With his strong bias towards
realism Simms refused to romanticize what was inherently un-
lovely. Like Baldwin in his Flush Times of Mississippi and Ala-
bama, he discovered an ample supply of blackguards and sharpers
in the no man’s land beyond the settlements. The log cabins of
the swamp country harbored their motley crew in no wise different


from their fellows of the farther frontier along the Mississippi;


and these precious rascals he drags from their lurking-places to
exhibit in the light of day. The frontier in consequence is rarely
absent from his stories, and it is this picaresque interpretation that
sets him so sharply off from Cooper. A recent student, in comment-
ing on the contrast between the frontier of Cooper and Simms,
suggests that “perhaps the earlier frontier had been intrinsically
more dignified than that which Simms had observed; perhaps the
difference is that Cooper’s had lain deeper under the softening
shadow of the past” (Van Doren, The American Novel, p. 65).
But this is quite to miss the point, both of Cooper and Simms. The
real explanation is to be sought in the different interpretations of
the romantic and the realist. Cooper’s frontier existed only in
his imagination. When he came face to face with the reality,
as in the case of old Aaron Thousandacres and his lawless brood,
he hated it too frankly to portray it justly. The stern Puritan


_ squatter and his fiercer wife are magnificent caricatures, drawn to


serve a partisan purpose. They provide a romantic contrast to
the honest Chainbearer, spokesman of the psychology of the set-
tlements; but set beside Simon Suggs, master of the frontier
technic of easy money, as depicted by Joseph Baldwin, they are as
romantic as Cooper’s Indians.

The picaresque note is frankly emphasized in Simms’ Revolu-


tionary tales. All the swamp-suckers and rapscallions found their


heaven-sent opportunity in the disorders of civil war. No realist
could write about the Revolution in South Carolina without not-


ing the flocks of buzzards gathering to fall upon the carrion. War


;


is not a heroic thing in these stirring pages. It invites debauchery
and encourages brutality. Blackguards put a black stain on mili-


tary glory. In the preface to The Scout, Simms remarks:


134 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


To burn and slay were not the simple performances of this reckless
period and ravaged country. To burn in wantonness and to murder in
cold blood, and by the cruellest tortures, were the familiar achievements
of the time: . . . The face of the country was overrun by outlaws. De-
tached bands of ruffians, formed upon the frontiers of Georgia, and in the
wilds of Florida—refugees from all the colonies—availed themselves of
the absence of civil authority to effect a lodgment in the swamps, the
forests, and the mountains. These, mounted on swift horses, traversed
the state with the wind; now here, now there; one moment operating on
the Savannah, the next on the Peedee; sometimes descending within sight
of the smokes of the metropolis; and anon, building their own fires on the
lofty summits of the Appalachian ridge.


Now and then in his pages war flashes out in romantic or heroic
episodes, but for the most part it is mean and degrading, a thing
to be hated. Simms loved action too keenly not to make the most
of the countless onsets and forays, the ambushing of Hessians and
the cutting off of wagon trains; he found in them material for many
a brisk page and stirring adventure; but in the end it is the brutal-
ity of it all, the unhappy loosing of evil passions, that gives him
most concern. It was a hard world, and the soft-hearted Jack
Bannister, speaking with the tongue of Simms, could find com-
fort only in stoicism. “‘A man ought not to be too soft about the
heart, in a world like this, so full of rascals that need the knock-
ings of a hard and heavy hand.”

It is this strong seasoning of the picaresque, perhaps, that ac-
counts for the neglect that has befallen the work of Simms. Many
blackguards and generous potations of Jamaica rum consorted ill
with the genteel tradition in letters that grew up in the days
following the Civil War; and romantic memories of a lost cause
threw an idyllic haze over earlier times. The Revolutionary War
lay too far in the past for a generation suffering from a great
tragedy to concern itself with, and the vivid and vital work of |
Simms scarcely outlived its creator. The Revolutionary tales
have been largely forgotten, and from his abundant work only —
The Yemassee has survived in popular affection, and this partly
from the vogue of Cooper. The winnowing has been severe and
scarcely just. The best of Simms is not in The Yemassee, but in
those stirring tales of Marion’s men who carried on a bushwhack-
ing campaign under the hot sun of .the dog days. The Parti-
san and The Forayers and Woodcraft deserve a better fate than
has befallen them. The ghost of Cooper does not haunt their


BELLES LETTRES 135


pages to challenge comparison, as it does The Yemassee, and
bring into question their relative merits. There Simms is at
home, in the swamps and fields and villages, with men whose
ways he knew and loved, and his generous nature followed
its own impulses.

But in dealing with the Indians he entered a domain preémpted
by the romantic, and his picaresque realism suffered a disastrous
rivalry. Like Robert Montgomery Bird’s Nick of the Woods,
The Yemassee is heavily marked by the frontier psychology. It
was unfortunate, perhaps, that Simms did not follow Cooper’s
example and plunge into the wilderness, leaving behind him the
squatter and settler with their sordid prose. Instead, his Indians
are encompassed by a dark background of civilization, and their
tragic destiny is poignantly dramatized in the fate of young
Occonestoga, besotted with the white man’s rum, and doomed
to a destruction far less poetic than befalls Uncas fighting his hered-
itary foes. Nevertheless a wealth of romantic material is crowded
into the volume, enough to serve Cooper for half a dozen tales.
In simplifying his plots to the uncomplicated problem of flight
and pursuit, the latter gains in dramatic swiftness of movement,
but he loses in abundance of accompanying action—the sense of
cross purposes and many-sided activities, which The Yemassee
so richly suggests. The latter is an elaborately carved and heavily
freighted Spanish bark that is left far astern by the trim Yankee
clipper ship; yet its cargo of the gold of the Indies is far richer.
It is the familiar story of southern prodigality and wastefulness—
an exuberant nature pouring out its wealth in spendthrift fashion,
and failing to achieve the greater results attained by a simpler
nature held in closer restraint. After all it is idle to compare
Cooper and Simms, and even more futile to catalogue the latter
as a disciple of the Cooper school. Simms was far too rich in his
own right to live as a dependent on anyone, and certainly far too
original to be an imitator. Nature was lavish in her gifts to him,
and as if his fame as a story-teller is less than Cooper’s, the debit
must be charged against his unfortunate environment.

The later years of Simms were utterly devastated by the un-
happy war, in which, as was to be expected, he was a stalwart and
uncompromising partisan. His native commonwealth that had long
treated him shabbily, sacrificed him in the end to her folly. It was
his own fault of course, but how could one warped by the perva-


136 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


sive southern provincialism hope to escape? Scratch a Carolinian
of the Calhoun school and you find a Fire Eater. In this respect
Simms was not different from the McDuffies and Hamiltons from
whom he took his cue—gentlemen whom, because they were polit-
ically prominent, he regarded as socially intelligent. That a man
of such native powers as Simms should have taken seriously the
Charleston politicians—blown up like a pig’s bladder after butch-
ering; that he should himself have aspired to become another
such bladder—these are sobering facts to remind us that the man
of letters is very likely to be a child outside his study walls. What
was wrong with Simms that he read the signs of the times so badly?
This, that he lived in a world of unreality, of social and economic
romanticism, that was forever benumbing his strong instinct for
reality. His father-in-law owned seventy slaves; his neighbors
and acquaintances owned slaves; all South Carolina gentlemen
owned slaves; and in judging this matter of slavery Gilmore
Simms went unquestioningly with his little world. He who had
drunk of the rich wine of Elizabethan culture came at last to drink
himself under the table with his drafts of Charleston Jamaica.
The dream of a Greek civilization based on black slavery was dis-
covered in the bottom of the cup of southern romanticism. And
Simms emptied his bottle with the rest. Charleston, no doubt,
has paid a sufficiently heavy price for her too copious potations,
but she can never atone for the undoing of her greatest son—for
the foolish intoxication that befuddled the generous mind of
Gilmore Simms. The loss is not Charleston’s alone; it is a loss to
our common American literature. There is food for thought in
the words of the epitaph which he composed for himself: ‘‘ Here
lies one who, after a reasonably long life, distinguished chiefly by
unceasing labors, has left all his better works undone.” Juster
words could not have been written, nor more tragic.


PART THREE: THE ROMANCE OF THE WEST


CHAPTER I
NEW WORLDS


I

Waite Calhoun was instructing the South in the theory of a
Greek democracy, other sons of the South were learning, in the new
world to which they had removed, the ways of a very different
democracy—a democracy native to the frontier and quite uncon-
cerned with Greek ideals. In the Ohio valley was gathering a
multitude of rough libertarians who had exchanged the restrictions
of the old settlements for the freedom of the new. To these bump-
tious levelers rulership by established authorities made no appeal.
They attached no respect to broadcloth, but preferred to manage
their affairs in their own way by appeal to the majority. Taught
by experience the worth of certain Jeffersonian principles, they
took seriously the doctrine of equality and proposed to put it into
practice. They were coonskin apostles of liberty and equality—if
not of fraternity—backwoods democrats who by virtue of numbers
established in common practice the principle of the sovereignty of
the popular will. Springing up naturally on the frontier, the prac-
tice of democracy received from it a new validity and became the
determining factor in the nationalism that America was creating
in the early years of the nineteenth century. That it was a crude
and often shoddy democracy, that it never justified its pretentions
in the eyes of a critical realism, did not lessen the zeal with which
men clung to it or weaken their loyalty. Democracy became the
common faith of the West, and in becoming the common faith of
the West it was put in the way of becoming the common faith of
America.

If the romantic temper is a spontaneous by-product of social
change, that temper found in the upheaval attending the western
migration a plentiful aliment that had been wanting in the static
eighteenth century. In that older world men had been held fast
in the grip of the customary and familiar; but in the free West all

137


138 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


was new and strange. The crossing of the Appalachian barrier that
had long held back the settlements was an adventurous under-
taking that fired the imagination. Romantic in spirit and scope,
it was meanly picaresque in a thousand unlovely details. Plain
men engaged in it, provident and improvident, hard-working and
shiftless; heroes had a share in it, but blackguards and outlaws and
broken men—the lees and settlings thrown off from the older com-
munities—had a share as well. The world that provided a stage
for the courage of Daniel Boone and the fighting qualities of George
Rogers Clark bred also the Davy Crocketts and Mike Finks and
Col. William Suggses, who discovered there opportunities for the
development of less admirable qualities; and it engulfed in its
depths a host of nameless adventurers who drifted into the wilder-
ness settlements, drank and quarreled and begot children, suf-
fered from the chills and ague, spread a drab poverty along the
frontier, and were put away under ground and forgotten by the
more fortunate who salvaged prosperity from the abundant
wreckage.

From this crude society emerged the new states with govern-
ments designed to serve simple ends. Jealousy for his sovereign
right to do as he pleased was the chief concern of the free western
voter; as a sovereign citizen he refused to be subject to the creature
commonwealth. If governors and legislators and judges got
uppish he would throw them out of office and put in others who
better understood the rights of free Americans. It was this rude
equalitarianism that marked the early stage of western common-
wealth building. Naive Jeffersonians, these frontier citizens had
not learned from Hamilton how useful the political state may be-
come to those who know how to control its policies to their partic-
ular ends; but that lesson they were soon to learn. The citizens
of Georgia received excellent instruction from no less a man than
Chief Justice Marshall in the matter of the Yazoo frauds; and as
such lessons sank into their minds their political philosophy under-
went a silent change. The coonskin individualism that created
Jacksonian democracy was gradually undermined by a middle-
class individualism that inclined to the Whiggery of Henry Clay.
The former was a spontaneous expression of the frontier spirit, the
latter a calculating expression of the maturing settlement. The
one discovered its native habitat on the backwoods farm, the other
in the county seat town. The one was agrarian laissez faire, the


NEW WORLDS 139


other was exploitative paternalistic. The followers of Jackson
wanted the state kept simple and frugal, the followers of Clay
wanted it to engage in ambitious programs of internal improve-
ment; and from these antagonistic principles emerged a bitter feud
between Democracy and Whiggery that in western townships
revived the old alignment of agrarian and Federalist of earlier
times.

In such a contest the principle of Whiggery must eventually
triumph. It was an expression of “the genius of the times.”
Economics and psychology were daily arguing in its behalf. From
the first early settlements of the Ohio valley, it must be remem-
bered, circumstances were creating a new middle class that was to
stamp itself indelibly on western life and institutions. The spirit
of speculation had entered the wilderness with the early surveyors.
With its vast resources the Inland Empire offered the first oppor-
tunity to exercise the newly won right to exploit the western hinter-
land, and it was seized upon greedily. Agriculture was still the
common business and land hunger the common passion. The
irruption of the land-hungry hordes upon the fertile Ohio valley, it
will be recalled, synchronized with the speculative debauch that
followed the conclusion of the peace of 1783, and this in turn was a
by-product of the sudden expansion of the new capitalistic finance.
Speculation had suddenly become every man’s business, and wild
lands and wild-cat banks, joining fortunes for better or worse,
brought forth a characteristic progeny. The new gospel of progress
found more willing hearers than the old gospel of righteousness.
Every adventurer into the Ohio valley was a potential speculator,
and every settler was eager to sell out to a later comer at an ad-
vance. ‘The real estate agent followed close on the footsteps of
Daniel Boone, quick to profit from the explorations. Land was
the staple commodity and such a turnover had never before been
known in America. Every clearing in the woods was speedily
capitalized, and every townsite was reckoned rich in potential
values. The new cities were founded in unearned increment and
prospered with its increase. With European peasants flocking
to the West from their poverty-stricken countries, and the ex-
ploited of the East seeking new openings there, it was an unlucky
speculator who could not exchange his paper values for substan-
tial equivalents. Law, religion, education, culture, were pressed
into the service of speculation. How widely the spirit permeated


140 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


the West is suggested in the experience of Timothy Flint, frontier
missionary. Writing from Saint Charles, Missouri, in 1818, he
commented somewhat bitterly:


Religion, when I came here was considered contemptible. The phalanx
of opposition was in array from one end of the street to the other. Why
did they invite me here? On speculation. A minister—a church—a
school—are words to flourish in an advertisement to sell lots. (John
Ervin Kirkpatrick, Timothy Flint, etc., Appendix B, p. 293.)


From the determining factors, then, of abundant wild lands,
rapid increase in population, and an elastic credit, operating on a
vast scale, came the optimistic, speculative psychology of the new
West. It is the common disease of every period of unstable econom-
ics. It had traveled west with every extension of the frontier;
and it became acute in the Ohio valley in the romantic days follow-
ing the War of 1812. In colonial times before the upheaval of the
Revolution, prices of land and commodities had been stable. The
basic silver currency varied little in quantity or value; coin was
scarce, but the occasional emission of paper money produced little
disturbance, for the reason that the farmer habitually reckoned his
income in the produce of his farm and fireside. But with the un-
settling of exchange values by the wide use of bank notes, prices
at once shifted to a speculative basis. The familiar commodities
ceased to have a fixed use value, and a cash psychology superseded
the traditional commodity value. The old stability was gone.
The familiar domestic economy that functioned primarily in terms
of consumption rather than profit disintegrated under the work-
ings of a paper system and gave place to a speculative economy.

It was this revolution that set apart the new West from the older
traditional America and made it the special repository of the new
middle-class spirit of progress. The change had been long prepar-
ing. Writing from Boonesborough in January, 1776, the agent of
the Transylvania Land Company pointed out that the western
country “abounded with land mongers,” and that his company had
already issued nine hundred patents.!_ These adventurous spirits
were only pioneers pointing the way for later hordes that after
1815 pushed eagerly onward. “Old America seems to be break-
ing up, and moving westward,” commented a traveler in 1817 as he
watched the long line of Conestoga wagons moving towards Pitts-


1 See James Hall, Romance of American History, Appendix.


NEW WORLDS 141


burgh; and in the fall of the same year Timothy Flint said of Saint
Charles, Missouri, that “there was an average of one hundred
people every day coming to the town, or passing to near-by points.
Nearly all were poor and not one family in fifty had a Bible”
(Kirkpatrick, Timothy Flint, etc., p. 102). ‘This western fever has
seized old and young,” remarks a character in Cooper’s Home as
Found, “and it has carried off many active families from our parts
of the world. . . . Most of the counties adjoining our own have
lost a considerable portion of their population.”’ One reason for
this vast exodus from the East is suggested by a recent student
who remarks: “‘A considerable part of the significance of the
frontier lies behind the frontier. In one sense, the westward ex-
pansion of the American people was a flight from the new in-
dustrialism” (Norman Ware, The Industrial Worker, p. xx). To
these adventurers from the East was added an increasing immigra-
tion. During the period from the close of the Revolution to the
War of 1812, the annual immigration averaged no more than four
or five thousand. In the year 1817 it rose to 22,000, and thereafter
an augmenting stream poured into America and filtered westward.
They were natural prey to shrewd promoters, and in Martin
Chuzzlewit Dickens has drawn a picture—not wholly caricature—
of what befell some of them. But whatever might be their in-
dividual fate, they provided fuel to the fire that was consuming the
old agrarianism and clearing the ground for the western middle


class.


II


With land as its staple commodity the West naturally inter-
preted progress in terms of increasing land values; and these in
turn were dependent on better markets, better roads, and a freely
flowing tide of immigration. In a country of such vast distances
internal improvements were an everyday necessity. With every
mile that a turnpike was driven into the wilderness new oppor-
tunities were opened up. Monies paid for wild land went into
the Federal treasury; it was only just, according to the western
view, that such monies should return to the West in the form of
public improvements, for with such improvements tax values
were increased, prices of all commodities rose, and progress was
furthered. The Federal government could not fairly leave its
offspring to shift for themselves, but must consider itself in loco


142 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


parentis to the rising commonwealths. It was a persuasive argu-
ment, appealing alike to farmer and speculator, to town and
country, but it played havoc with the older Jeffersonianism. Jef-
ferson thought always in terms of the agrarian producer function-
ing in a stable economic world; speculation was not in his philoso-
phy; unearned increment was a crop he never calculated on; and in
sympathy with an older liberalism he would reduce the state to the
narrow role of policeman. But the new West, thinking in terms
of its immediate needs, desired a broad and benevolent pater-
nalism. It wanted the Federal government to butter its bread
regardless of the ultimate cost of the butter.

The complete embodiment of this spirit of paternalistic progress
was the master politician of the times, whose dramatic career,
beginning as a Jeffersonian and ending as a Hamiltonian, suggests
the confusions of a world in transition. Henry Clay was the hero
of the new West, the spokesman of the new ambitions. A man
of great personal charm, engaging manners, buoyant temperament,
exuberant patriotism, and persuasive tongue, he migrated in 1797
at the age of twenty-one from Richmond, Virginia, to Lexington,
Kentucky, then a booming county-seat town only twenty-two
years removed from the building of its first blockhouse. The
population of the state had more than doubled in seven years, and
by 1797 it had risen above 180,000. Of this aggressive little world
Clay soon became the accredited representative at Washington.
He had been brought up under the old domestic economy and
carefully tutored in the Jeffersonian philosophy. For four years
he had been private secretary to George Wythe, a distinguished
Virginian of the older generation, a profound lawyer and teacher,
a scholarly political thinker, a humanitarian, and a confirmed
agrarian. When Clay left Virginia he carried with him the Jef-
fersonianism of Wythe; but he was wanting in the trained intellect
of his preceptor and his views were inadequately grounded. His
subsequent career revealed him as an impressionable nature
modifying his convictions with his environment. In Kentucky
the spirit of speculative expansion seized him and inoculated his
mind with the new gospel of progress. He early convinced himself
that government was not doing its full duty unless it helped its
citizens to make money, and he persistently pressed on Congress
the need of federal aid to develop the West. In 1812 he fell victim
to the war psychology, turned jingo, and substituted an ardent


NEW WORLDS 143


patriotism for sober reason. Thereafter he became increasingly
nationalistic, demanding a strong army and navy, pleading for a
loose construction of the constitution, arguing for paternalism.
His Jeffersonianism was quietly put away like a garment out of
style. Grossly ignorant of the schools of economic thought, he
was an opportunist who shifted from the older domestic economy
to the later capitalistic, without comprehending the significance
of the change. Unread in history and political theory, he trusted
his fluency to get him out of any inconsistencies he might blunder
into. In the course of his long career he found himself at different
times on both sides of every important question; yet gravitating
to the middle-class position, the exponent of exploitation in the
name of progress, spokesman of the commercial, financial and
manufacturing interests, a new-model Federalist passionately de-
fending the new money economy—a curious ending for one who
began as a pupil of George Wythe.

And yet not curious when one considers the ambitions of the
world that molded him. Clay was a born politician who rarely
came to grips with reality. Devoted to the principles of republican
liberty as he found them in the Constitution, he professed to
believe that government could be trusted to distribute favors
with impartial hand. Personally honest, he never realized how
often he allowed himself to become the unconscious tool of power-
ful economic interests. With his desire to please everybody he
was an easy prey for skillful lobbyists. He had been at one time
attorney for the Bank, yet he denied vehemently that his defense
of the institution had been influenced by such connection. He
had become a Hamiltonian without gaining Hamilton’s clear
understanding of the economic basis of politics. A brilliant op-
portunist, he was guided by no fixed political principles but tacked
with the shifting winds. A brilliant romantic, he was the persuasive
prophet of an age that was dreaming of a prosperity that should
gather in certain favored reservoirs through the agency of
subsidies and taxes, and trickle thence through all the land to
water the roots of industry. It was fitting that such a man should
be the father of Whiggery, and fitting also that he should stand
as the embodiment of the spirit of compromise. One great lesson,
at least, he had learned, that greater men too often do not learn,
the lesson that republican government rests on good will and that
such good will demands a policy of give and take among rival


144 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


interests. Compromise may be displeasing to earnest souls, but
it is implied in any workable system of democratic rule.

Like Calhoun and Webster, Clay was a victim of changing
times. If he had lived a generation later, when the middle-class
revolution had been accomplished and the principle of capitalism
was in undisputed control, he would have achieved a far greater
personal success. But capitalism was not yet strong enough to
uphold him against rival economies, and he failed of his lifelong
ambition to be President. He was broken by the Jacksonian
revolution, in spite of the fact that no other American politician
has been so loved by a hero-worshiping electorate—and it should
be added, has been so lovable.


CHAPTER II


TWO SPOKESMEN OF THE WEST
I
ANDREW JACKSON
Agrarian Liberal


Ciay’s pleasant dream of a paternalistic prosperity for America
got its first rude awakening from General Jackson and his motley
following of western equalitarians and eastern proletarians.
Gentlemen were suddenly reminded that the plain people had been
overlooked in the distribution of benefits. The waters of prosper-
ity, it would seem, had been trickling somewhat too scantily to
them from the great reservoirs where they were impounded; and
as they saw the wealth pouring into private ponds through govern-
mental pipe lines, a natural human envy took possession of them.
In theory the pipe lines belonged to them, and the impounded
waters were to be used for common irrigation; but in practice
the mains seemed to conduct only to Lowell industrialists and
Philadelphia and New York capitalists, and the waters turned
out to be privately owned. As the recognition of this fact came
home to the producing mass it provided a rallying point for an
anti-monopolist movement and determined the great objective
of the Jacksonian attack, the assault on the Bank.

The driving force of the new Democracy was the same class-
feeling that had done service a generation before, the will to
destroy the aristocratic principle in government. This conscious
class-feeling had been strengthened by the spread of the dogma of
equalitarianism through the frontier, and this in turn had brought
about an extension of manhood suffrage which enfranchised a
numerous body of voters who turned against an aristocracy that
had long resisted their demands for the vote. The spirit of 1798
was rising afresh, and the re-alignment assumed the form of a
democratic-aristocratic struggle, which for the moment obscured
the more significant fact of an emerging middle class. The battle
seemed to lie between homespun and broadcloth for control of
government, and this serves to explain the odium that quickly

145


146 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


attached to Jacksonian Democracy in polite circles. In drawing
together mechanics and frontiersmen, the new party inevitably
became a lower-class instrument, offensive to gentlemen of the old
school of politics. The records of the times carry abundant ev-
idence, often amusing, of this aristocratic contempt. In the early
forties a girl of seventeen living on a Mississippi plantation,
describing Jefferson Davis—whose wife she afterwards became—
was surprised at the contrast between his politics and his manners.
““Would you believe it,’”’ she wrote, “he is refined and cultivated,
and yet he is a Democrat!” (Jefferson Davis, A Memoir by his
Wife, Vol. I, p. 192.)

There were quite evident reasons for this aristocratic contempt.
The new Democracy was heavily weighted with what gentlemen
were pleased to call the rabble. Fresh Democratic recruits had
been gathering since Jefferson molded the first party of protest.
Industrialism was creating a city proletariat, and the frontier was
producing the coonskin voter; neither as yet possessed any ad-
equate political philosophy, but they needed no philosophy to
enlist against the traditional privileges and perquisites of broad-
cloth. They had had their fill of such rule. The stake-in-society
theory was worn threadbare, and other philosophies were prepar-
ing. Meanwhile in the person of Old Hickory they saw the visible
embodiment of their vague aspirations, and they turned to him
with an unquestioning loyalty that nothing could weaken. He
was our first great popular leader, our first man of the people. If
he aroused a wild enthusiasm in breasts covered by linsey-woolsey,
it was because he believed that linsey-woolsey had its stake-in-
society equally with broadcloth. He was one of our few Presidents
whose heart and sympathy were with the plain people, and who
clung to the simple faith that government must deal as justly with
the poor as with the rich. Believing so, he could not be turned
aside from his course by paid clamor, but with a courage rare in
the White House he dared make a frontal attack on the citadel
of exploitation in the face of an army of mercenaries.

The dramatic career of Andrew Jackson, so unlike that of
Jefferson, which was determined by a speculative temperament
and founded on a critical examination of diverse systems of
society and politics, was shaped in large measure by prejudice and
circumstance. A man of iron will and inflexible purpose, he was
almost wholly lacking in political and social philosophy. His


SPOKESMEN OF THE WEST 147


conclusions were the reactions of a simple nature of complete
integrity, in contact with plain fact. Fundamentally realistic,
he cherished few romanticisms. There was no subtlety in his
mental processes and this lack kept him free from the temptation
to follow devious paths beloved of politicians. He must take the
shortest way to his objective, crashing through such obstacles as
lay in his path. He was never a bookish man. He was surprisingly
ill read, and his grammar and spelling were those of the plain
people. He loved horse racing and was a master of profanity; yet
in spite of characteristics that link him with Davy Crockett, he
possessed an innate dignity and chivalry that set him far above
the wag of the canebrakes. He was a born leader whose headlong
onslaughts and rash mistakes might imperil the cause but could not
shake the confidence of his followers. All who knew a man when
they saw one respected Andrew Jackson. Imperious and dicta-
torial, he knew how to command but not to obey; he took orders
from no one, not even his superiors, unless such orders fell in with
his own plans. In short General Jackson represented the best
which the new West could breed in the way of capable and self-
reliant individualism, and the backwoodsmen loved him for the
enemies he made, and backed him loudly in his fight against the
aristocratic East.

When Jackson settled in Nashville in 1788, at the age of twenty-
one, the Cumberland valley had somewhat under five thousand
inhabitants scattered a distance of eighty-five miles along the
river. The first settlements had been made only nine years be-
fore, and Nashville was a frontier post with frontier manners.
Into this rough society the young Scotch-Irishman fitted easily.
His smattering of the law sufficed to gain him clients and he soon
became a local political leader. When he was only twenty-nine
he was sent to Philadelphia as the first Congressman from the
state of Tennessee, where he came in contact with the “‘aristo-
cratic Neebobs” of the government and heartily disliked them.
The next year he was sent to the Senate, but a single session satis-
fied him and he resigned to accept a judgeship in the state Supreme
Court, which post he held for six years. During these early years
he was unconsciously following the path that conducted straight
to a middle-class philosophy. He threw himself into speculation,
bought and sold land in great blocks, traded in horses and slaves,
set up a general store, and was well on the road to wealth when the


148 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


panic of 1795 caught him unprepared. He lost most of his ex-
tensive holdings, including his homestead and many of his slaves,
and removed to a six hundred and forty acre tract eight miles
from Nashville—the Hermitage—which was to become one of the
famous places of America. With this removal his middle-class
ambitions fell away and he became a planter with a simple agra-
rian point of view; and this old-fashioned agrarianism became in
later years the determining force in all his political thinking.

He was fifty-eight when he emerged as a potential candidate for
the Presidency in 1822, and for years his sole interests, other than
those of his plantation, had been military. He was singularly
wanting in any formulated political philosophy, and his reélec-
tion to the Senate two years later did little to supply the lack.
He had picked up some shreds of the protectionist theory and in a
letter written in 1824 he went so far as to declare for a “judicious ”
protective tariff, basing his view on the grounds of the country’s
economic unpreparedness at the time of the War of 1812, on the
lack of markets for the produce of western farms, and on the de-
sirability of drawing labor from the farm to the factory. But he
added a significant passage that reveals the agrarian bias of his
mind. To the end of his life he insisted that he was an old Repub-
lican of 1798, and this comment of 1824 suffices to connect his later
attack on the Bank with Jefferson’s attack on Hamilton’s fiscal
policy.

Beyond this, I look at the Tariff with an eye to the proper distribution
of labor and revenue; and with a view to discharge our national debt.
I am one of those who do not believe that a national debt is a national
blessing, but rather a curse to a republic; inasmuch as it is calculated to
raise around the administration a moneyed aristocracy dangerous to the


liberties of the country. (Quoted in Bassett, Life of Andrew Jackson,
Vol. I, p. 346.)


The tariff was the only question on which he was receptive to
Whiggish arguments, and although he never openly repudiated
a protectionist policy he soon grew lukewarm in its support. Such
other fragments of Whiggery as found accidental lodgment in his
mind were swept away in the fierce struggles that marked his years
in the White House. During those eight years Jackson found him-
self, and the man who emerged from the struggle was an agrarian
of the old Virginian school. As he came to understand the signif-
icance of the principle of exploitation he learned to interpret social


SPOKESMEN OF THE WEST 149


classes in terms of economics. He instinctively hated all aristo-
crats, extending his dislike to the circle that pretended to social
preéminence in Tennessee, speaking of them contemptuously as
the “aristocrats of Nashville.” But in these later years a change in
his vocabulary appeared; his favorite phrases became ‘‘the monied
capitalists” and the “hydra of corruption.” He had come to asso-
ciate aristocracy with the control of the economics of society. He
was learning how aristocracies are built up through the instrumen-
tality of the state; and as that lesson sank into his mind his op-
position to such class favoritism hardened into adamant. He would
put a stop to such practices, cost what it might. His attack on
the Bank was perhaps the most courageous act in our political
history; he knew how fiercely it would be defended; yet he was
amazed at the number of hornets that issued from the shaken
nest. ‘Such has been the scenes of corruption in our last con-
gress,” he wrote in 1833, ‘‘that I loath the corruption of human
nature and long for retirement, and repose on the Hermitage.
But until I can strangle this hydra of corruption, the Bank, I
will not shrink from my duty.” And a little later, “I want re-
laxation from business and rest, but where can I get rest; I fear not
on this earth” (Bassett, Life of Andrew Jackson, Vol. II, pp. 635,
637).

As his policy unfolded it became clear that Jackson had not
changed with the changing times. He remained to the last the
product of an earlier domestic economy, with an old-fashioned
horror of debt. He was too generous to be frugal, too kind-hearted
to be thrifty, too honest to live above his means. He desired a
simple independence for himself and for his country. He believed
that the government should pay its debt, reduce its revenues, and
live simply. In his austere personal rectitude he exhibited a Puri-
tan conviction of the sacredness of stewardship; he must return to
the common people, who had put their trust in him, an honest
reckoning of that trust. It was not in his nature to betray their
faith. He would have nothing to do with the new theory that
government is an agency to help business. To take profits from
an instrument erected supposedly for the common good was
abhorrent to his old-fashioned views; it was impossible for him to
lend the sanction of his office to particular or special interests;
and when circumstances made the Bank the central vexing prob-
lem of his administration, his position was predetermined by every


150 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


conviction of his mind. While he was President he would not allow
the government to be used.for business ends; he would not permit
its funds or credit to be turned to private profits; he would not
tolerate a money monopoly, no matter how conventionally cor-
rect its operations might be proved to be, that challenged the
sovereignty of the national government. The twin powers of the
purse and sword—to recall Clay’s famous phrase that every Whig
orator used on the stump—were in Jackson’s opinion the ultimate
tests of sovereignty; and to turn over the money of the govern-
ment to private hands for private use, he believed, was as grave an
abrogation of sovereign rights as would be the use of the army
and navy by private interests for private ends.

In the judgment of many critics Jackson, in his ignorance of
the intricacies of capitalistic finance, wantonly destroyed a neces-
sary credit system, thereby bringing a devastating panic on the

“2 country. Whether or not that judgment is true is of little impor-
‘~tance today. More interesting historically is the fact that in
his attitude towards the Bank, as in his attitude towards internal
improvements, Jackson returned to the agrarian position of Jef-
fferson and John Taylor, nullifying for a time the victories gained
{by the middle class during the boom period of nationalism. The
more he learned about the methods of capitalistic finance, the
more he distrusted it. His prejudices were his strength. He
disliked speculation and he could see nothing permanently wise
or sound in a speculative economy that put American industry
at the mercy of bankers to expand or contract credit. With an
old-fashioned love of a stable currency he gave his warm support
to the project to return the country to a specie basis. “The great
desideratum, in modern times,” he said in his message to the
twenty-fourth Congress, “‘is an efficient check upon the power of
banks, preventing that excessive issue of paper whence arise those
fluctuations in the standard of value which render uncertain the
rewards of labor.” The establishment of additional mints to pro-
vide an adequate coinage of gold or silver became therefore a
natural corollary of his attack upon bank currency. It was John
Taylor’s economics written into the law of the land.

In his attitude towards the state Jackson followed the national-
istic tendencies of the West. He was as patriotic as Clay, and in
spite of strong states-rights sympathies he contemptuously re-
jected Calhoun’s theory of nullification. But he had no love for


SPOKESMEN OF THE WEST 151


an omnicompetent state. More and more he drifted back to the
Jeffersonian position in his conception of the powers and duties
of the federal government. Replying to the vote of censure of
1834, he stated his ideal of government in words that would have
become Jefferson’s first inaugural speech. He had been charged
with being ambitious, to which he replied:


The ambition which leads me on, is an anxious desire and a fixed de-
termination, to return to the people, unimpaired, the sacred trust they
have confided to my charge—to heal the wounds of the constitution and
preserve it from further violation; to persuade my countrymen, so far as
I may, that it is not in a splendid government, supported by powerful
monopolies and aristocratical establishments, that they will find happiness,
or their liberties protected, but in a plain system, void of pomp—protect-
ing all, and granting favors to none—dispensing its blessings like the
dews of heaven, unseen and unfelt, save in the freshness and beauty they
contribute to produce. It is such a government that the genius of our
people requires—such a one only under which our States may remain for
ages to come, united, prosperous, and free. (Benton, Thirty Years’ View,
Vol. I, p. 427.)


The evils entailed on America by the Jacksonian revolution
were many, but they cannot properly be charged against Andrew
Jackson. They came in spite of him, and they came as a result
of the great object lesson in the manipulation of the majority
will that his popularity had laid bare. His instincts and the main
outline of his policy were Jeffersonian; but neither he nor any
other man was strong enough to stop the current of middle-class
¢ndividualism then running. The American people were wanting
in an adequate democratic program suited to the changing times,
as they were wanting in desire for a social democracy. And when
his capable hands fell from the machine he had created, it was
seized by the politicians and used for narrow partisan ends. Yet
one far-reaching result survived the movement, the popularization
of the name of democracy and the naive acceptance of the belief
that the genius of America was democratic. In choosing a party
name the Jacksonians were shrewder politicians and better prophets
than the Whigs. For better or worse the American masses, and in
particular the nationalistic West, had espoused the principle of de-
mocracy, and interpreted it in terms of political equalitarianism
—a principle that had inspired a fanatical hatred in the breasts
of old Federalists. To gentlemen of that earlier school democracy
had meant the right of the propertyless majority to plunder the


152 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


minority in the name of the law. The later Whigs did not make
so blundering a mistake. Instead of proclaiming democracy the
mother of all mischiefs, they welcomed it as an effective aid
in vote-getting. Learning their lesson from Jackson, the Whig
politicians outdid him in democratic professions. They had dis-
covered that business has little to fear from a skillfully guided
electorate; that quite the safest way, indeed, to reach into the pub-
lic purse is to do it in the sacred name of the majority will. Per-
haps the rarest bit of irony in American history is the later custo-
dianship of democracy by the middle class, who while perfecting
their tariffs and subsidies, legislating from the bench, exploiting
the state and outlawing all political theories but their own, de-
nounce all class consciousness as unpatriotic and all agrarian or
proletarian programs as undemocratic. But it was no fault of
Andrew Jackson if the final outcome of the great movement of
Jacksonian democracy was so untoward; it was rather the fault
of the times that were not ripe for democracy.


II
LINCOLN
Free-Soil Liberal


The equalitarian West that bred Andrew Jackson bred Lincoln
also, a man with the same homespun mind, the same sterling
integrity of nature, the same instinctive democracy, but shaped
by an environment in which the new philosophy of progress had
displaced the older agrarianism. The road of middle-class ideals
he traveled further than Jackson, but in the end he also turned
back to pick up once more the democratic faith then being repudi-
ated by the proponents of slavery, north as well as south. Long an
ardent Whig of the Clay school, and thoroughly indoctrinated in a
paternalistic nationalism, he was brought, as every thoughtful
American of the times was brought, to weigh the program of
slave imperialism in the scales with the Declaration of Indepen-
dence. The doctrines of that great document lay before every
man’s feet in those uncertain days, to get over as one could. They
could not easily be evaded or got round; they must be dealt with.
Rufus Choate, representing Boston Toryism, had come upon them
and dismissed them as “glittering and sounding generalities.”
Calhoun, representing southern imperialism, had come upon them


SPOKESMEN OF THE WEST 153


and essayed to destroy them by a critical realism. Lincoln, em-
bodying the spontaneous liberalism of the West, came upon them
and paused to take his bearings afresh. He could neither wave
them aside nor destroy them. The deep-rooted equalitarianism
of his simple social philosophy found in them an eloquent pro-
nouncement of its democratic faith, that set him upon considering
how such doctrine might be squared with the reality of slavery.
The agrarianism of John Taylor and the Whiggery of Henry Clay
could tell him nothing about that; he must seek elsewhere; and the
solution he found in an amalgamation of equalitarianism and free-
soilism, in an adaptation of western Whiggery to Jeffersonian
principles.

Whatever party name he might call himself by, in his love of jus-
tice and his warm humanity Lincoln was essentially Jeffersonian.
He respected property rights, but other rights he believed more
sacred. And as he watched the emergence in the South of the ideal
of a Greek democracy, as he considered how the party of Jackson
had become the party of Calhoun and Douglas, bent solely on
strengthening and spreading the institution of slavery, his equali-
tarianism took alarm. He could not sit quiet while the principles
of the Declaration of Independence were being openly flouted;
he must speak out; he must arouse the idealism of the people to
deal with the iconoclasts. In an important pronouncement written
in 1859, he set the problem before them thus:


Remembering . . . that the Jefferson party was formed upon its sup-
posed superior devotion to the personal rights of men, holding the rights
of property to be secondary only, and greatly inferior . . . it willbe...
interesting to note how completely the two [parties] have changed hands
as to the principles upon which they were originally supposed to be divided.
The Democracy of today hold the liberty of one man to be absolutely
nothing, when in conflict with another’s right of property; Republicans,
on the contrary, are for both the man and the dollar, but in case of conflict
the man before the dollar. . . . But, soberly, it is now no child’s play to
save the principles of Jefferson from total overthrow in this nation. .
The principles of Jefferson are the principles and axioms of free society.
And yet they are denied and evaded, with no small show of success. One
dashingly calls them “ glittering generalities.” Another bluntly calls
them “ self-evident lies!” And others insidiously argue that they apply
to “superior races.” These expressions, differing in form, are identical in
object and effect—the supplanting the principles of free government, and
restoring those of classification, caste, and legitimacy. . . . They are the
vanguard, the miners and sappers of returning despotism. We must


154 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


repulse them, or they will subjugate us. (Letter to H. L. Prince and
Others, April 6, 1859, in Works, Vol. V, pp. 125-126.)


Two conceptions were here competing in Lincoln’s mind, the
older equalitarianism that sprang from French humanitarianism
and the newer economics that came from English laissez faire;
and the attempt to reconcile them suggests how far he had traveled
along the path of western Whiggery. With the spirit of enter-
prise he had no complaint; the ideal of progress was associated in
his mind with a fluid economics that permitted the capable to
rise through skillful exploitation. He had no love for the stable
economics of the eighteenth century that Jackson preferred; the
profit motive, functioning freely, he regarded as the legitimate
driving force of society; but he was concerned that competition
should be open to all on equal terms. As he watched the transition
from an agrarian to an industrial order, he found himself more in
sympathy with the new than the old. Accepting the principle of
exploitation he came to the position of the little capitalist who be-
lieved that in America capitalism could be democratized by the
simple method of keeping the opportunities for exploitation open
to every citizen. It was common view of western Whiggery, and
in so far Lincoln remained a Whig, content with a system which he
accepted as peculiarly suited to the genius of the American people.
In a late speech he summed it up thus:


What is the true condition of the laborer? I take it that it is best to
leave each man free to acquire property as fast as he can. Some will get
wealthy. I don’t believe in a law to prevent a man from getting rich; it
would do more harm than good. So while we don’t propose any war upon
capital, we do wish to allow the humblest man an equal chance to get
rich with anybody else. When one starts poor, as most do in the race of
life, free society is such that he knows he can better his condition; he knows
that there is no fixed condition of labor for his whole life... . I want
every man to have a chance—and I believe a black man is entitled to it—
in which he can better his condition—when he may look forward and
hope to bea hired laborer this year and the next, work for himself after-
wards, and finally to hire men to work for him. That is the true system.
(Speech at New Haven, March 6, 1860, in Works, Vol. V, pp. 360-361.)


But as a western man Lincoln was far more concerned over the
application of laissez faire to the problem of western lands, and as
he contemplated the practical workings of ‘“‘squatter sovereignty”
he learned how the free functioning of laissez faire may be inter-
fered with by economic imperialisms. That lesson determined his


SPOKESMEN OF THE WEST 155


final stand. The virgin prairies beyond the Mississippi were cov-
eted equally by northern and southern exploiters; and who should
finally possess them, whether the small freeholder or the slave-
master, was a question that could not be put off forever. None
knew this better than the small farmers who were already staking
out homesteads there. If Congress yielded to the pro-slavery
demands their economic future would be endangered. It was the
free-soil West that sent the first anti-slavery men to Washington
and provided the backbone of the new party. Not the respectable
West, but the plain people, Whig as well as Democrat. “Much
of the plain old Democracy is with us,” said Lincoln in 1858, “‘while
nearly all the old exclusive silk-stocking Whiggery is against us.
I don’t mean nearly all the old Whig party, but nearly all of the
nice exclusive sort” (Letter to A. C. Henry, in Works, Vol. V, p. 95).
It was no humanitarian regard for the rights of the negro that
welded them into a militant party. Racially and economically
the free-soiler was hostile to the black, whether slave or free. The
Topeka constitution adopted by the Kansas free-soilers barred
all negroes from the new state; Kansas was to be a white man’s
country. The free labor of the West wanted no competition with
an alien race, and was prepared to fight both the white master and
free black for exclusive possession of the national domain. There
were few John Browns among these western homesteaders—un-
compromising idealists who rebelled at the injustice done the
negro. ‘The free-soiler hated slavery because it threatened his
immediate interests; nevertheless as the great struggle developed,
the moral injustice of slavery was thrust to the fore and imparted
a humanitarian motive to the free-soil argument. This humani-
tarian motive Lincoln seized upon, wedded it to the ideal of na-
tional union, and thus doubly armed went forth to the fight.

To amalgamate idealism and economics is no easy task. “ Public
opinion,” he said in a speech at Hartford, “‘is founded, to a great
extent, on a property basis.” But it is not the sole basis. The
ideal of justice comes in to upset all purely economic calculations.
“The property basis will have its weight. The love of property
and a consciousness of right and wrong have conflicting places in
our organization, which often make a man’s course seem crooked,
his conduct a riddle” (Works, Vol. V, p. 330). Beyond question
it was this recognition of the perennial conflict between economics
and justice, between realism and idealism, that explains the hes-


156 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


itancies and harassing doubts that marked Lincoln’s development.
To reconcile the principle of exploitation with the Declaration of
Independence it was necessary to stick like a flea to laissez faire—
to eliminate slave labor and accept only free labor. Lincoln was
a slow man and cautious, and he pulled himself forward to such a
position by main force. He was not a rare intellect like Thoreau,
to think swiftly to a conclusion and abide the consequences. He
was a political leader rather than an intellectual, and he could ad-
vance only a little ahead of the slow-moving mass he sought to
draw after him. A hundred invisible ties held him back—his
belief in the rights of local democracies, his respect for law and
order, his devotion to the Constitution, his recognition of property
interests in the slave, his understanding of the complexity of the
problem, with the entire economy of the South resting on a slave
basis. Here were difficulties enough to trouble an honest mind.
His practical sense, which is only another name for political realism,
restrained his idealism and made him of necessity an opportunist,
willing to yield much if he might save the Union. A simple, tolerant,
easy-going man, he was at bottom a realist who had come to under-
stand what may be considered the greatest truth in political
science, namely, that an enduring state must rest on willing al-
legiance. Force cannot compel loyalty; authority may put down
revolt but it cannot destroy the seeds of discontent; for that only
the sovereignty of good will is competent, and in free states the
sovereignty of good will must rest upon compromise. Lincoln wasa
better democrat than Jackson, for he would rather persuade than
drive. If Hamilton embodied the aristocratic principle of coercive
government, Lincoln embodied the democratic principle of give
and take, that prefers compromise to bayonets. With a cause rest-
ing on the common good will it might safely be trusted to muddle
through.

Slowly pushed forward by his cautious realism, Lincoln was
forty-nine before he reached the ‘divided house” position of the
Douglas debates, that was to entail such consequences. It was a
bold pronouncement to address to a generation desperately engaged
in erecting sham defenses against reality, in fleeing from the truth
that cried aloud to be heard. But he would not let men stop their
ears longer; the truth must be spoken to their understanding.


In my opinion [he said] agitation will not cease until a crisis shall have
been reached and passed. “A house divided against itself cannot stand.”


SPOKESMEN OF THE WEST 157


I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half
free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolved—I do not expect the
house to fall—but I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become
all one thing, or all the other. Either the opponents of slavery will arrest
the further spread of it, and place it where the public mind shall rest in the
belief that it is in the course of ultimate extinction; or its advocates will
push it forward till it shall become alike lawful in all the States, old as
well as new, North as well as South. (Speech at Springfield, June 16,
1858.)

The situation could not have been put more neatly. It was an
appeal of honest realism to put away all shoddy romanticisms, all
mean evasions, and to face the situation fairly; and it cut across the
murky clouds like a flash of lightning. Thenceforth there could
be no longer a conspiracy of silence; the problem of slavery had
been brought home to the common mind and common conscience,
the question of its relation to our national unity and national well-
being had been brought out into the realm of homely discussion. It
is the democratic way, and as an honest democrat, Lincoln stripped
away all the protective coloring of lies that politicians use and
appealed to the honesty of plain men. The same method he ap-
plied to the Dred Scott decision. He proposed to bring to the bar
of the majority opinion the stale legal romanticisms of the Supreme
Court. He refused to accept the divine right of the courts to ruler-
ship, he denied the sovereignty of the judiciary, and proposed to
make a political issue of the matter. He would have it settled in
town-meetings and at the polls, by the plain people, and not by
lawyers and judges. It was a reversion to Jeffersonian principles,
to the simple democratic creed that fundamentals of public policy
must be determined by the people themselves.

Lincoln had thought his way slowly to the “divided house”
position, but he could not pause there. Those were hurrying times,
and the liberalism of yesterday was inadequate for the liberalism
of today. A weak man or a time-server would have gone upon the
rocks, and a man of unyielding policy must have broken; to be
certain of one’s conclusions was possible only to one who saw less
than the whole. Patience and an open mind alone could be relied
on, an intelligent opportunism alone would serve during the
months the country was fiercely debating with itself; and the
heart-breaking hesitation of Lincoln, the troublesome doubts and
perplexed questionings, reveal as nothing else could the simple
integrity of his nature. He must go forward, but he must carry


153 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


the people with him, the North as a whole, the border states if
possible, even the rebellious South if charity might suffice. Though
in arms, they were Americans, and their hearts must be brought to
willing allegiance; how otherwise could a democratic people emerge
from the bitterness of civil war? He was not made for a dictator,
and blood and iron he accounted poor cement to mend the sun-
dered democracies. He trusted the better impulses of men to
prevail in the end, because with Jefferson he believed in the es-
sential justice of the plain people. In this faith he exemplified
his democracy. Not a great political thinker, he was a great
leader because he never forgot that he was one with those he led.

The slow unfolding of Lincoln’s mind is sufficiently revealed
in the changing quality of his speeches. He was rarely eloquent—
never after the ornate fashion of the time; and the bits of Hebraic
poetry that have come to be associated with his name are singu-
larly few and belong to the last years of his life. His usual style
was plain homespun, clear and convincing, but bare of imagery
and lacking distinction of phrase. The thought seems to break
into speech hesitatingly, in the way of a man visibly seeking to
adapt his words to his meaning. Matter he judged to be of greater
significance than manner. Few men who have risen to enduring
eloquence have been so little indebted to rhetoric. Very likely
his plainness of style was the result of deliberate restraint, in keep-
ing with the simplicity of his nature. When he let himself go
he discovered a well of poetry in his heart. When he chose he
could even play the rhetorician. In those rare moments when
he put caution behind him, his words fell into a stately rhythm
that suggests the orator. Witness such a passage as this:

In those days our Declaration of Independence was held sacred by all,
and thought to include all; but now, to aid in making the bondage of the
negro universal and eternal, it is assailed and sneered at and construed,
and hawked at and torn, till, if its framers could rise from their graves,
they could not at all recognize it. All the powers of earth seem rapidly
combining against him. Mammon is after him, ambition follows, philos-
ophy follows, and the theology of the day is fast joining the cry. They
have him in his prison-house; they have searched his person, and left no
prying instrument with him. One after another they have closed the
heavy iron doors upon him; and now they have him, as it were, bolted in
with a lock of a hundred keys, which can never be unlocked without the
concurrence of every key—the keys in the hands of a hundred different
men, and they scattered to a hundred different and distant places; and
they stand musing as to what invention, in all the dominions of mind and


SPOKESMEN OF THE WEST 159


matter, can be produced to make the impossibility of his escape more
complete than it is. (Speech at Springfield, June 27, 1857, in Works,
Vol. II, pp. 327-328.)

But he did not often let himself go. As one reads his speeches
one feels that an English diffidence held him back—this and the
strong prose of his environment. Like a true Anglo-Saxon he was
reluctant to speak out, afraid to let his emotions seize upon his
speech. Only at the last did that diffidence yield to complete
unconsciousness. The Gettysburg speech and the Second Inau-
gural are marked by the sincerity and self-effacement that en-
_nobled the words of John Brown in the Virginia court-room—it
is the eloquence which rises from the heart when life has been
felt in its tragic reality, an eloquence that Webster could not rise
to. Such words come only to those who have been purified by
fire; they are the distillation of bitter experience. But the mass
of his speeches are in quite another manner—that of the simple,
everyday world that bred him. He had none of the itch of pub-
licity that afflicts the second-rate mind. Webster was a magnificent
poseur; Edward Everett repeated the same academic oration a
hundred times; but Lincoln was too modest to pose and too honest
to turn parrot and speak by rote. He was a man who loved to talk
with his neighbors in homely metaphor, and it was then that his
thought clothed itself in whimsical humor. He did not wear his
heart on his sleeve, but like Mark Twain he let it slip out in a
witticism.

Even more than Washington has Lincoln suffered at the hands
of the myth makers. Of late years he has come to be looked upon
too often as the invaluable asset of the political party that he
honored in its founding, and too rarely as the embodiment of the
kindly, liberal soul of our native democracy in the simpler days of
a fluid economics and an unsophisticated equalitarianism. With
his instinctive kindliness, his abiding faith in the good will of men,
his dislike of coercion, his readiness to compromise, he may seem
old-fashioned to a generation that has grown intolerant—but that
is a reflection on our own times rather than on Lincoln. The real
Lincoln can grow old-fashioned no more than Jefferson. As he
went back in a day of sordid imperialisms to the earlier liberalism
of the great Virginian, seeking to rescue the idealism of the Declara-
tion of Independence from the desecration of the market place
where it was openly flouted, so in a day of vaster imperialisms and


160 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


greater complexity we may take counsel of his humanitarian-
ism, his open-mindedness, his trust in tolerance and good will,
his democratic faith that held firm in spite of disappointment.
The market place is mighty now as it was then, and liberalism
finds as few friends there: but when did its gods become immortal?


CHAPTER III
THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS


WHEN the West began to appear in literature in the late twenties
and early thirties, it was the Ohio valley that became the bene-
ficiary of the new interest, and over the vast region through which
flowed the Beautiful River—as far as the Mississippi and beyond—
was thrown the romance of the settlement. It was a beguiling
theme with its background of dark forests and bloody Indian
fights, with its venturesome flatboats that drifted with the cur-
rent, its picturesque rivermen, “half horse, half alligator,” who
towed their heavy crafts upstream, its rude miscellany of settlers
who intrusted their families and goods and cattle to great rafts and
set forth hopefully on waters that were to bear them presumably
to the Promised Land—a theme to appeal to imaginations easily
stirred to romance. There was a darker side to be sure; wrecks
in plenty littered the shores, wrecks of fortune and character and
life; outlaws and blackguards thronged the river and preyed on
the adventurers; but in spite of such misadventures the great
movement was invested with dramatic interest, and the Ohio
valley became the particular repository of the romance of the
frontier, a monopoly which later times never despoiled it of and
which only the Golden Coast of California ever remotely rivaled.
It was fortunate in that its early history was recorded by a ro-
manticizing generation that wove its myths about the wilderness
scouts, that delighted in the picturesque talk of river boatmen
and discovered themes for epics in the founding of new common-
wealths.

From the first, therefore, the literature of the new West fell
naturally into the romantic note. The early writers who essayed to
deal with frontier materials were eastern men who proposed to
exploit the romance of the Inland Empire as frankly as their fellow
adventurers were exploiting the material resources. Gradually
in their work two main conceptions crystallized, which came to
overshadow all lesser themes: one localized itself in Kentucky and
took form in the poetic conception of the Dark and Bloody ground;
the other associated itself first with the rivermen but quickly

161


162 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


diffused its spirit through the backwoods and took form in the con-
ception of western humor. The first was a heritage from the early
days when the Indian tribes fought for their ancient hunting
grounds and fell upon the isolated stations with knife and toma-
hawk; the second grew up with a later generation that had pene-
trated far into the wilderness, where, stimulated by much whisky,
its rough vigor found issue in exaggerated boasting. Each created
its legendary hero about whom popular imagination wove its
myths: the figure of Daniel Boone came to symbolize the heroic
qualities of a race of scouts and backwoodsmen who matched their
wits in woodcraft with the Indians and proved the quality of
their Kentucky rifles in many a brush with the warriors; and the
figure of Davy Crockett came to embody in the popular mind the
loquacious eccentricities and exaggerated wit that were already
passing into a literary tradition. Many hands contributed to the
common work: writers as different as James Kirke Paulding with
his Westward Ho!, Robert Montgomery Bird with his Nick of the
Woods, Nathaniel Beverley Tucker with his George Balcomb,
Albert Pike with his Prose Sketches and Poems, Augustus Long-
street with his Georgia Scenes, and Joseph G. Baldwin with his
Flush Times of Alabama and Mississippi—to name only a few.
From such diverse elements was created the new literature of the
West that was contemporary with the rise of Jacksonian de-
mocracy and that gave wide currency to certain romantic concep-
tions.
I


THE ROMANTIC FRONTIER


Of this very considerable group of writers the two who earliest
wrote from immediate first-hand knowledge of frontier life were
Timothy Flint, Harvard graduate and missionary, and Judge
James Hall, Pennsylvania lawyer, both of whom spent a consider-
able portion of their mature lives in the West. Of Timothy Flint’s
restless wanderings and periodic settlements, at Saint Charles,
Missouri, at New Orleans, at Alexandria on the Red River in
Louisiana, at Cincinnati, with frequent returns to his native
Massachusetts and a short editorial experience in New York City, it
is impossible to speak in detail; they suggest, however, the breadth
and intimacy of his knowledge of the West got from twenty-five
years’ experience there from 1815 to his death in 1840. Few men


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 163


traveled so widely through the frontier, or carried with them such
keenly observant eyes. He wrote much, conducted for several
years a literary magazine in Cincinnati, was for a short time edi-
tor of The Knickerbocker Magazine on the withdrawal of Charles
Fenno Hoffman, and established a considerable reputation as
a representative of western letters. Much of his work was
frankly casual, but his Recollections of the Last Ten Years, Passed
in Occasional Residencies and Journeyings in the Valley of the
Mississippi, published in 1826, and his four novels published
between 1826 and 1830, make up the first important contribution
to the new literature of the West.

_ In temperament Timothy Flint seems to have been something
of a realist. In his daily life he was frankly outspoken and criti-
cal, often to his own hurt, and some of the many troubles he met
with in his honest preaching to frontier heathen, resulted from this
plain speaking. He refused to measure life and conduct by the
crude western standards, and the enmities resulting from such re-
fusal brought about a rupture with the home society that had sup-
ported his missionary undertaking. It was this intellectual honesty
that filled his Recollections with an invaluable body of observation
and criticism, and constituted it an important source-book for
later historians. Paulding early made use of it writing his West-
ward Ho!—published in 1832—and in his introduction, after paying
tribute to Flint’s “ picturesque description,” he went on to say that
the work “has not met its deserts, and he should be highly grati-
fied if this passing notice served in any way to call public attention
to its interesting details.” Unfortunately the occasional realism
of the Recollections gave place in his novels to romance saturated
with sentiment and heavily coated with moralizing. With a fund
of exact information at his disposal he chose to turn away from
reality and project his stories into regions he had visited only in
imagination. Francis Berrian, or the Mexican Patriot, deals with
a Southwest far beyond his extremest journeyings; The Life and
Adventures of Arthur Clenning is a romanticized version of Rob-
inson Crusoe; and The Shoshonee Valley is a romance conceived out
of tales told him by far western travelers, woven into an extrav-
agantly romantic plot. The only one of his tales that makes use
of familiar settings is George Mason, the Young Backwoodsman;
or “Don’t Give up the Ship,” in which he put some of the mate-
tials gathered in his journeyings up and down the Mississippi,


164 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


but sentimentalized and moralized out of all realism. It is a pity
that Flint should have fallen in with the extremest mode of the
times, for in many essential respects he was the best qualified man
of the West to write an honest account of a world just taking form.

The literary reputation of Timothy Flint soon came to be over-
shadowed by that of Judge Hall. ‘Among writers of short nar-
ratives, the most characteristically Western fiction of the time,”
remarks a recent student, “‘ James Hall was clearly preéminent;
and he became the central figure in a kind of school of experiment-
ers in the materials of frontier life’ (Ralph Leslie Rusk, The
Literature of the Middle Western Frontier, Vol. I, p. 274). In the
early twenties he had ridden the circuit in Illinois as a very young
lawyer, when the settlements were scattered thinly through the
southern portion of the state. At Vandalia he started the Illinois
Monthly Magazine, which survived for two years, when he removed
to Cincinnati and established The Western Monthly Magazine,
which in the four years from 1832 to 1836 became one of the “‘most
important of the pioneer period.”” “The purpose,” says the student
above quoted, ‘‘was not so much to introduce the East to the West
as to make the West conscious of itself’ (Rusk, ibid., Vol. I, p.
173). Lo this end Hall was writing and publishing short tales and
descriptions, and he had already collected a miscellany of prose and
verse by several hands which he issued as an annual, The Western
Souvenir, a Christmas and New Year’s Gift for 1829. Thus launched
on a literary career, he wrote in the next twenty years a very con-
siderable amount, including tales, sketches of manners, history and
casual comment.

His best-known story is probably Harpe’s Head, which he later
incorporated with other tales in a volume entitled Legends of the
West: Sketches Illustrative of the Habits, Occupations, Privations,
Adventures and Sports of the Pioneers of the West, and published
in 1832. The work proved popular and passed through half a
dozen editions. Sketchy and loose in construction, it belongs to the
school that hovered between the essay and the romance, delight-
ing in the picturesque, exuding sentiment, and going out of its way
to exploit the pleasantly horrible. It is a mingling of Virginia
chivalry and frontier bravery, woven about a central plot of a
daughter of a Virginia house who removes to Kentucky under
tragic circumstances, is abducted by a roving band of Indians, and
subsequently rescued. Additional romantic interest is sought in


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 165


the melodramatic deeds of the title hero—a well-known border
ruffian with an insatiable blood-lust who murders his unsuspecting
victims wherever he comes upon them—and in the curious exploits
in rattlesnake killing of Hark Short, a waif from the Carolina
swamps who lives like a fox in his den. The interest of the story
today lies in the pleasantly idealized descriptions of such scenes as
the barbecue and the camp meeting, rather than in the portrayal
of backwoods characters. Although Hall frequently professed his
devotion to realism, there is little evidence of it; occasional fig-
ures like Pete Featherton, whose rifle had been bewitched, and
occasional indulgence in a conventionalized backwoods dialect,
serve only to heighten the somewhat gaudy romance of the whole.
Yet even such timid ventures brought on his head criticism from
a Cincinnati editor “for tiring the reader with vulgar backwoods
expressions” (Rusk, ibid., Vol. I, p. 282).

That Hall’s interest in backwoods eccentricities of speech and
manner suffered a heavy handicap from the romantic taste of his
readers may easily be believed. Matter excluded from his tales he
sometimes put into his introductions. Thus in the third edition of
Harpe’s Head he analyzed at some length certain characteristics of
the crude pioneers who were creating the psychology of the West—
their fondness for drinking, betting, horse-trading, stump-speaking,
swearing. Particularly it is the exuberance of their picturesque
language that he emphasized, an exuberance that was already be-
coming a literary tradition and that flowered in the cento of western
folk ways that were gathered into the Davy Crockett myth. A
single passage will suffice to suggest some of the elements from
which Davy was created:

Though usually taciturn in the presence of strangers, [the frontiersman]
is communicative to his friend or guest, has often strong colloquial powers,
with quaint, singular, figurative, and even eloquent forms of expression.
His language, which is commonly brief, sententious, and abrupt, becomes,
when excited by the interest of the subject or by passion, highly expletive,
and redundant with exaggerated forms and figures of comparison. When
he swears—and he is probably not more given to this exceedingly vulgar
vice than other men—but when he does swear in earnest, his philology


becomes concentrated, and explodes with an appalling energy, which
would have astonished even the celebrated army in Flanders. (Jbid.,


Introduction, p. xii.)
In his last collection, The Wilderness and the War Path, published
in 1846 and including some earlier tales, Hall contributed little that


166 THE MIND OF: THE SOUTH


was new. There is the same heavy romance with touches of real-
ism, and by way of reply to Bird’s interpretation of the Indian
‘ character he exploits the romantic qualities of the red man; but
his failures are commoner than his successes, and his work as a
whole must be regarded as a sacrifice to the bad taste of his genera-
tion. From this judgment, perhaps, should be excepted his Ro-
mance of American History, which is still pleasantly readable.


II
THE REALISTIC FRONTIER


Far more vital than these literary tales with their heavy coating
of romance are the few realistic sketches—only too rare in those
exuberant days of the high-flown—that preserve the authentic
ways of backwoods life in their rude vernacular. Of such sketches
those that most faithfully reveal the impress of the frontier, pre-
serving down to the present the note of verisimilitude, are Georgia
Scenes by Augustus B. Longstreet, and the Autobiography of Davy
Crockett, to which may be added, perhaps, Joseph G. Baldwin’s
Flush Times of Alabama and Mississippt.


1
AUGUSTUS LONGSTREET
The Georgia Frontier


For some reason no glamour has ever gathered about the Georgia


frontier. It may be that fate conspired against it in bestowing no >


idealizing historian to throw a romantic haze over life in the pine
woods. Or perhaps it was the Georgians themselves who did the
commonwealth an evil turn. As a matter of sober fact what could


even romance do with the raw materials that went to the making |


of this crude southern Yankee state? How could the most con-


firmed romantic discover rare graces in the indigenous Cracker, or |


weave poetry about the ubiquitous peddler with his pack of Yankee
notions? Any honest historian could hardly avoid taking into
account the ungainly throng that attended a gander pulling, or
depict Ransy Sniffle as other than a pallid, pot-bellied, clay-eating
grotesque. Crude, uncouth, drab, with primitive passions and
unlovely manners, Georgia offered scanty materials for the most |
ardent eulogist. Frontier life there ran a petty round between :
fist fights and horse races, between politics and religion. These :


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 167


were the staples of everyday existence, as necessary to the natural
man as whisky and salt pork; and the honest Georgian preferred
his whisky straight and his politics and religion red-hot. The °
Jeffersonian hated the Federalist vindictively; and Presbyterian,
Baptist, and Methodist regarded each other malignantly, con-
vinced that the devil was stoking his fires for the lost neighbor
who persisted in sitting under the wrong preaching. Denomi-
nationalism on the Georgia frontier was as harsh and unforgiving
as political partisanship. Alexander H. Stephens believed that
the plain people of Georgia were the most democratic on the face
of the earth, and the kindliest; yet the pugnacious little democrat
was himself nearly butchered by a democratic neighbor. In
depicting such a society realism was the only honest method; but
to make it palatable it must be well seasoned with humor. If it
were garnished with moralizing, so much the better. There must
be no subtleties in the treatment, no literary touches. The humor
must be in the backwoods vernacular, and the preaching open and
aboveboard—frank pulpit-thumping lessons to awaken the sur-
liest sinner.

For such business Gus Longstreet was ideally fitted. A true child
of the Georgia border, he never quite outgrew his early environ-
ment. Born in Augusta in 1790 of New Jersey parents, Holland
Dutch but with a large admixture of English blood,! he came of
plain stock. A driving, robust, energetic fellow, never squeamish,
with a ready wit, he was at home amongst the plain people, the
greatest wag in every gathering. He could knock a man down or
shoot out a squirrel’s eye with any champion of them all; he
could enter into a dance or a revival meeting with equal ardor,
or take the stump against a seasoned campaigner. A fellow must
be simple-minded who would expect to get the best of him in
swapping horses, or in the way of a practical joke. It came hard
for so vigorous a plebeian to settle down as a substantial citizen,
and the dignified titles that he gathered in the course of a long and
prosperous career—judge, doctor of laws, doctor of divinity—
fitted him somewhat incongruously. On the whole one prefers the
plain Gus Longstreet to Judge Longstreet, but his neighbors, who
thought they knew a man when they saw one, thrust his titles upon
him. Besides he had gone to college and was thereby lifted to a
place of distinction which he could not avoid. The process of


1 The family name of Langestraet was given an English form by his grandfather.


168 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


scraping off the bark of the frontier followed orthodox southern
lines. A few years’ schooling at Dr. Moses Waddell’s celebrated
Academy, where at different times Calhoun, Crawford, McDuffie,
Petigru and Legaré prepared for college, and two years at Yale,
provided him with a stock of rusty Latin to suffice a college presi-
dent; and a winter or two at the law school in Litchfield, Connecti-
cut, following Calhoun’s high example, furnished him with enough
Blackstone to meet the demands of Georgia law courts. Thus
provided intellectually, he went forth boldly to cope with the
Georgia world as he found it.

It was a plebeian world that approved his plebeian qualities.
There was nothing of the southern patrician in Gus Longstreet,
nothing of the ascetic Puritan that marked so deeply men like
Calhoun, Legaré, and the Grimkés. In his strong instinct of ac-
quisitiveness, his canny thrift that never failed to seize advantage
by the forelock, his desire to get on in the world while serving God,
he was a Georgia Yankee, with an emotional religion that took
comfort in discovering that God was always on his side of any
controversy. Yankee also was his knack of doing many things
well enough to impress his less capable neighbors. He was a
frontier jack-of-all-trades, passing easily from one profession to
another, lawyer, newspaper editor, writer, minister, politician,
teacher, and between times busying himself with all sorts of odd
jobs, doing everything readily and nothing thoroughly well. A
good talker, his chief interests were politics, religion, and money-
making. He wrote much in careless haste, apologizing always for
the lack of finish; but except for the sketches which were gathered
under the title of Georgia Scenes, he produced nothing that needs
to be remembered. At the age of forty-eight he quitted the law
for the Methodist ministry, proved to be a mediocre preacher,
and was soon given the berth of president of Emory College, a
denominational school then recently established at Oxford, for
which his literary reputation and his reputed scholarship seemed
to fit him. Later he was president for a few months of Centenary
College, Louisiana, but found the place uncongenial, resigned, and
was chosen president of the University of Mississippi, where he
served seven years and made full use of the opportunity to specu-
late in real estate. At the age of sixty-six he was made president
of the University of South Carolina, where he ruled patriarchally
till the school was closed by the war.


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 169


How great a man he was judged to be by his fellow Georgians
is hard for us to realize today. Throughout his later years he was
regarded by his friends as the brightest ornament of Georgia
society, a Christian gentleman who was a model to southern youth,
a scholar who had brought honor to the commonwealth, an
author who had silenced the reproach that the state had produced
no literature. Yet it must be confessed that the Judge shrinks in
compass when taken out of his native environment. Beside John
P. Kennedy or Hugh Legaré, he lacks distinction either of mind or
manner; compared with Gilmore Simms he is only an amateur in
letters. His latest biographer” has sifted a mass of material to
prove the solid and eminent worth of the man; yet no impression
of intellectual vigor emerges from the analysis; one must take it
on the authority of somewhat incompetent witnesses. The figure
that emerges from the clutter of contemporary estimate is that
of a capable, expansive, middle-class soul, disputatious in the
lordly southern manner, genially domineering, magnificently su-
perior to logic, given to erecting an imposing structure of convic-
tions on the slightest of foundations, impatient of contradiction and
inclined to lose his temper when the argument went against him—
a witty, agreeable gentleman, at home amongst mediocre preachers,
and an oracle to admiring friends. He was on terms of intimacy
with not a single first-class mind. He had no intellectual cu-
riosity and was incapable of rigorous intellectual processes. Yet
good fortune had marked him for her own. A small investment
in letters, made at odd moments between law cases and farming
operations, returned him such dividends in the way of contem-
porary fame that for forty years thereafter he lived in the sun-
shine of a literary reputation. No other American, unless it
were William Wirt, ever drew such ample revenues of popular
praise from a casual investment, and certainly none ever expanded
with greater self-satisfaction. To the end of his life he was the
much-sought-after author of Georgia Scenes, and the most ambi-
tious southern magazines were glad to publish his frequent ef-
fusions; in all of which the Judge delighted, for he was a simple
soul and accounted himself an apostle of southern culture, a
mentor of southern taste, and he loved to see his name in print.

As a man close to the people Longstreet reflected the current
Georgia views on politics. He was an idolatrous admirer of

2 John Donald Wade, Augustus Baldwin Longstreet.


170 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH
Calhoun and George McDuffie. The former he rated “above


William Pitt, or any other premier who ever lived before or since
his day” (Wade, Augustus Baldwin Longstreet, p. 124) and the
latter he regarded as ‘“‘hardly inferior to him in anything.” Cal-
houn’s innate Hebraisms, so deeply imbued with a patriarchal
spirit, fitted to a nicety his own Hebraized conception of a Jeffer-
sonian order. Writing of Calhoun, in after years, Longstreet
remarked with evident approval:

I believe that he regarded the government of the children of Israel in
the wilderness, the most perfect that ever existed on earth. Be that as it
may, he called my attention to it more than once as exactly the govern-
ment ours ought to be, or was intended to be. “There,” said he, “‘each
tribe had its place on the march and in the camp, each managed its own
concerns in its own way, neither interfered in the slightest degree, with
the private affairs of another, nor did their common head interfere with
any of them in any matters, save such as were of equal interest to all, but
unmanageable by them as separate and distinct communities.” (Jbid.,
p. 60.)

The background of his political thought was Jeffersonian
agrarian. He was always a countryman at heart, and his dearest
interests were agricultural. But he seems to have been quite
unread in political theory, and probably had never heard of John
Taylor’s economic principles. Suffering from an incurable political
itch, he was one of the earliest and most ardent of states-rights
advocates. He went for Nullification before either Calhoun or
McDufhe had espoused it; and he followed his premises through
to the logical end of secession. But with the growth of northern
Abolitionism his Jeffersonianism began to disintegrate. Garri-
son’s appeal to equalitarianism and the rights of man aroused all
his southern prejudices. A philosophy that could be turned
against the sacred institution was no philosophy for a southern
gentleman, and like Calhoun he repudiated the whole French
liberal philosophy that he had imbibed in his youth. He even went
so far as to play with Calhoun’s doctrine of economic representa-
tion. Writing to President Lamar, of Texas, in the late thirties, he
said, ““A government should have a legislative assemblage to
represent each of its large economic interests, one, say, agricultural,
one manufacturing, one commercial. No bill not acceptable to
all three of these assemblages should become a law” (ibid., p. 138).
But in defense of slavery he argued as a minister rather than an
economist. He declined to consider it an economic question;


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 171


he would not discuss it as a social question; political theories, he
believed, had nothing to do with it. The right to hold slaves he
regarded as a moral question to be determined exclusively by the
authority of the Bible, and on such a question he professed to
speak with assurance. He was vastly annoyed at the Abolition-
ists’ unchristian appeal to the old doctrine of equalitarianism, and
in 1845 he wrote angrily, “Will not some of you accept my ideas
and then argue through the question on that basis, without taking
recourse to the Declaration of Independence or throwing up a
breastwork out of the long-forsaken rubbish of the Social Contract,
or bewildering your pursuers in the mazes of metaphysical sub-
tlety?” (ibid., p. 282). His religion was deeply involved in the
institution of slavery, and it seemed to him uncharitable for an
intellectual like Theodore Parker to question the sufficiency of
a southern minister’s texts, or to drag him beyond his intellectual
depths. So exasperated did he grow that finally he would have
no fellowship with northern Methodists, and was a prime mover
in the great schism that rent the church into sectional branches.
Abolitionism seemed to him hypocrisy and blasphemy and as a
minister of Christ he could not hold fellowship with those who
rejected the Master’s word. After the war, in reviewing the long
controversy, his Christian pugnacity flared up anew, and he
flung at the northern churches the accusation that they had been
“the most man-astounding, God-offending foes that we had”
(ibid., p. 367).

There could be no more telling commentary on the literary
poverty of ante-bellum Georgia than the extraordinary popularity
of Longstreet’s sketches. Written for the most part between the
years 1832 and 1836, while he was publishing the State Rights
Sentinel, they profess to be authentic documents of frontier life in
Georgia in the early years of the century, and the deliberate note
of realism contributes to the impression of authenticity. The
love of the romantic that spread like the plague among southern
men of letters during the long reign of Sir Walter, fortunately
did not infect the robust nature of Longstreet. The best of the
sketches are spun out of the vernacular; they are as objective as
Longstreet could make them—conscious studies in the local, done
with obvious delight in butternut ways and frontier dialect. The
- quality of the work improves as he draws nearer the backwoods,
and comes upon the unregenerate Cracker in his native habitat.


172 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


There his humor has free play, exuding in practical jokes and
ready repartee, in boyish pranks and homely idiom. And there
he finds characters to his liking and bits of realistic drama. If
one were to single out the sketch that is most indigenous to the
Georgia frontier, the truest local document, the choice might well
fall on The Fight, an account of a bloody meeting between back-
woods gladiators brought on by skillful diplomacy of Ransy
Sniffle, a grotesque clay-eater and Longstreet’s favorite character.
Other excellent sketches are The Gander Pulling, The Shooting
Match, Georgia Theatrics, The Horse Swap, The Militia Company
Drill—stories that throw an unromantic light on the ways of the
Georgia Cracker. Longstreet was as uncritical as his readers and his
frequent failures are glaring in their badness. Perhaps the worst
of the sketches are the absurd The “Charming Creature” as a Wife,
a crude sermon on the folly of marrying a lazy woman; The Song,
an overdone burlesque, and the puerile The Debating Society, a
heavy practical joke which for some inexplicable reason Poe
thought the best of the whole.

Slight though the sketches in Georgia Scenes are, they embody
solid merits; they are not literary and they are quite unaffected by
Irving and the exploitation of the picturesque. Realism was only
too rare in those days of high-flown romance, and how honestly
realistic was Longstreet’s work is revealed by a comparison with
James Hall’s contemporary stories of the West, such as Harpe’s
Head, or even with Kennedy’s Swallow Barn. After all Gus
Longstreet was an original, and he set the style that was followed
in a long series of frontier sketches, and established the tradition
of frontier humor that flowered at last in Mark Twain.


2
THE DAVY CROCKETT MYTH


The Narrative of the Life of David Crockett of the State of Tennessee
was woven from the same stuff that Longstreet made use of, but
the fabric is of far better texture. It is the great classic of the
southern frontier, far more significant than Georgia Scenes, far
more human and vital. Realistic in method, it is romantic in
spirit. In its backwoods vernacular it purveys the authentic
atmosphere of the cabin and the canebrake; it exhibits the honesty,
the wit, the resourcefulness, the manly independence of a coon-


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 173


skin hero; it reveals, in short, under the rough exterior of a shiftless
squatter and bear-hunter, qualities that are sterling in every society
where manhood is held in repute. It is an extraordinary document,
done so skillfully from life that homespun becomes a noble fabric
and the crudest materials achieve the dignity of an epic.

The thing had long been waiting to be done. The literary
romantics had tried their hand at the frontier materials and had
failed, and then came a realist of the Georgia school who used the
stuff as he found it and created a lasting document. A practiced
writer collaborated with a picturesque talker, and the fame of
the Tennessee Congressman was made. Romantic America found
_a new hero and Davy Crockett reaped a surprising reward. He
had the good fortune to preémpt the romance of the backwoods, to
file on an unsurveyed tract of western life, and when the lines were
run it was found that his claim embraced all that was native and
picturesque along the Mississippi frontier. Popular imagination
seized upon him and endowed the mighty hunter of the cane-
brakes with the fugitive romance that had been gathering for
years. He was erected into a mythical figure that drew to itself
the unappropriated picturesque that sprang spontaneously from
the crude western life. How this astonishing result came about,
how good fortune came to single out Davy Crockett for her smiles,
offers a somewhat amusing commentary on the ways of an un-
sophisticated generation.

That in its later development, if not in the beginning, the Davy
Crockett myth was a deliberate fabrication scarcely admits of
doubt, nor that its immediate purpose was frankly partisan. It
did not spring from the soil of the Tennessee canebrakes; it
was created at Washington. It was not the spontaneous product
of popular imagination; it was the clever work of politicians.
The successive stages through which it passed in its triumphant
progress can be traced fairly accurately with the aid of a little
historical imagination. Roughly they were three; the exploitation
of Davy’s canebrake waggery, the exploitation of his anti-Jack-
son spleen, and the exploitation of his dramatic death at the
Alamo. The first phase is embodied in the Sketches and Eccen-
tricities of Col. David Crockett, of West Tennessee (1833); the sec-
ond, in An Account of Col. Crockett’s Tour to the North and Down
East (1835), and The Life of Martin Van Buren (1835); and the
last, in Col. Crockett’s Exploits and Adventures 1n Texas (1836).


174 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


Midway between the first and second stages stands 4 Narrative
of the Life of David Crockett, of the State of Tennessee (1834), which
may be accepted in the main as authentic autobiography. None
of the five was written by Crockett. He probably had a hand in
the first in spite of his repudiation of the work, for most of the
important facts of his life and the language of many of the pic-
turesque episodes were taken from its pages to be reproduced in
the Narrative. The Tour and Martin Van Buren were claimed by
him and were certainly done under his eye and with his help,
but the Exploits is quite as certainly sheer fabrication, done by a
hack writer after Davy’s death. It was the politicians who con-
tributed most to the success of the myth. They exploited Davy
as a convenient weapon against Jackson, saw their work prosper
beyond all expectation, get out of their hands, enlarge itself to
a cento of backwoods romance and pass into folklore. It was an
unforeseen outcome that must have been vastly amusing to those
who set the thing going.

The early thirties, it will be remembered, were robustious times
when broadcloth in politics had suddenly gone out of style and
homespun had come in. The new coonskin democracy had de-
scended upon Washington, and picturesque figures provided with
ample plugs of tobacco were making themselves free with Congres-
sional perquisites. Nothing like it had been seen before in the city
of dignified politicians, and the spectacle must have delighted the
wags of the capital. But to the members of the overthrown dynasty
the Jacksonian votes which these picturesque backwoodsmen rep-
resented were very far from amusing. The loss of desirable
offices was a hard lesson that taught them the need of catering to
this new element of the great American democracy. In their re-
munerative occupation as representatives of the prosperous
and genteel constituencies of the East, the old-school politicians
had too long overlooked the power of the plain voter which the
progress of manhood suffrage was daily increasing. Hence began
a desperate campaign to counteract the Jacksonian appeal. The
coonskin vote could no longer be ignored and shrewd plans were
laid to capture the backwoods for the new Whig party. The pro-
gram of internal improvements was well enough in its way, and
the old Revolutionary cry of the sword and the purse might prove
useful; but the party needed a picturesque figure to draw the coon-
skin democracy to its standard. Men rather than principles


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 175


appealed to the West, self-made men, speaking the western ver-
nacular, imbibing western views with their whisky, uncorrupted
by broadcloth. This explains the tremendous Whig hurrah over
log cabins and hard cider that marked a later campaign; and this
explains likewise the singular fate that overtook Davy Crockett,
the bear-hunter from the canebrakes.

Davy had first come to Washington during Adams’ administra-
tion, and in four years’ loafing and boasting at the Congressional
bar had achieved some distinction as a picturesque original with
the tongue of a wag. He spoke rarely in the House and the few

records in the Congressional Debates are sadly commonplace. Un-
_ til after he broke with Jackson his political influence at Washing-
ton was negligible. But that fortunate break was the beginning
of his fame. He had unwittingly made himself. He had become a
valuable asset to the Whig party. To find a native Tennesseean,
a real coonskin democrat, one who had served under Jackson and
been sent to Congress as a Jacksonian, as authentic a Westerner
as the General himself, at bitter personal odds with Old Hickory,
ready to talk out in meeting and eager to repudiate the latter’s at-
tack upon the Bank, was a find indeed to the hard-pressed Whigs;
and they would have been no politicians if they had not used what
God sent. In consequence Davy soon found himself talked about.
His picturesque eccentricities began to be exploited. His rugged
western honesty was applauded; his shrewd backwoods intelli-
gence was praised; his frontier humor was skillfully touched up;
his characteristic motto, “‘go ahead,” was seized upon as an ex-
pression of the progressive spirit of the lusty young Whig party.
In short he was speedily turned into a myth by ways not unknown
in our time, and sent forth as useful campaign material in the
fight for political righteousness. Davy was vastly surprised at
his sudden rise to fame. He had never realized how great a man
he was; but he accepted it as an agreeable fact and went ahead.

The work had already begun with the publication of the Sketches
and Eccentricities of Col. David Crockett, that came from the clever
pen of some journalist with a liking for the new vein of back-
woods humor. A Whig bias runs through the pages, but the book
is more a character sketch than a political document. The first
embroiderings laid upon the original homespun are seen in an
extravagance of picturesque language—an extravagance quite
lacking in the more realistic Narrative. A well-known passage


176 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


professing to relate an occurrence on Davy’s first trip to Washing-
ton will serve to reveal an early stage of the myth-making proc-
ess—the fathering upon Davy of a type of humor then being
exploited by clever young writers:

I was rooting my way to the fire, not in a good humour, when some
fellow staggered towards me, and cried out, “Hurrah for Adams!” Said
I, “Stranger, you had better hurrah for hell, and praise your own country.”
Said he, ‘‘And who are you?”

“T’m that same David Crockett, fresh from the backwoods, half-horse,
half-alligator, a little touched with the snapping-turtle; can wade the
Mississippi, leap the Ohio, ride upon a streak of lightning, and slip without
a scratch down a honey locust; can whip my weight in wild-cats—and
if any gentleman pleases, for a ten-dollar bill, he may throw in a panther—
hug a bear too close for comfort, and eat any man opposed to Jackson.”


(Ibid., Chapter XIII.)


The touching up of the picturesque in the Sketches seems to
have been a little too much for Davy, who resented the note of
clownishness; but he was not the man to permit undue modesty
to blight so agreeable a myth in its tender stage. He loved to swag-
ger in the public eye too much for that, and he joined heartily
with his new political friends to clothe it in more dignified dress.
His incredible egotism was aroused and he swallowed the Whig
bait, hook, line and sinker. He began to take himself seriously
and set about the business of propagating the myth. He con-
ceived the plan of issuing in his own name books which he humor-
ously claimed to have written in the same way that the President
wrote his state papers. Some wag having suggested his name for
the presidency to succeed Jackson, Davy was at great pains to
advertise the fact to the world. .To link himself with Jackson in
the public eye and to contrast his own rugged honesty with the
latter’s reputed abandonment of democratic principles, was the
single purpose of these Whig documents. The autobiography was
quickly followed by the Tour, and this by the Life of Martin Van
Buren, each more obvious propaganda than the last, and frankly
designed to undermine the popularity of the President and his
advisers with the coonskin democracy. Who the writer was that
lent his pen to the work has never been determined. A recent
student has adduced testimony to prove that it was Augustin S.
Clayton, a Georgia Congressman, a ready talker and writer, a man
of sound culture, a close friend of Longstreet and fond of the
backwoods vernacular. The argument is plausible, but the case is


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 177


not established.? In the Life of Martin Van Buren the mask is
dropped and all the malicious gossip of the Congressional lobby is
poured out on “little Van,” the “heir-apparent to the ‘govern-
ment.’” The backwoods character is retained only in an occa-
sional coarseness or deliberate lapse of grammar inserted in a text
that is written with vigor and skill. The book is far less amusing
than Kennedy’s Quodlibet. Davy is pretty much lost out of its
pages and its contribution to the myth was probably slight.

It is in the Tour, on the title page of which Davy formally ac-
cepts the brevet dignity of Colonel conferred upon him by the
writer of the Sketches, that the myth expands more genially. A
clever and amusing campaign document, it is a masterpiece of
Whig strategy to gull the simple. The loquacious Davy joined
heartily with his managers to cash in on his reputation. His ego-
tism was played upon at every turn and he was quite unconscious
that he had become a mere cat’s-paw to pull Whig chestnuts out of
the coals. He was paraded at meetings with Daniel Webster, given
great dinners, applauded for his rustic wit and homespun honesty,
presented with a fine rifle; and he seems never to have realized how
grossly he was being exploited. His self-esteem was proof against
dillusionment and he accepted the applause greedily. Wherever he
went he was taken in charge by the young Whigs. Everything was
carefully arranged beforehand. News was sent forward that he was
coming; crowds were gathered to greet him; publicity was attended
to; morning, noon, and night he was invited to speak, and the
speeches were carefully reprinted—not the authentic speeches,
probably, but good campaign material nevertheless. It was a
gratifying experience and Davy swelled up like a turkey cock.

As a result of his tour he was immensely strengthened in his
new political faith and became a staunch nationalist. When he
first went to Congress he was anti-tariff and had won his seat on
that issue; but he was invited to Lowell, shown an idyllic picture of
contented and prosperous mill-hands, dined, given a prepared
table of statistics proving how industrialism “is calculated not
only to give individual happiness and prosperity, but to add
to our national wealth and prosperity,’’ and bidden Godspeed in
the work of spreading the true gospel among the honest, simple-
minded and patriotic frontiersmen. After having been presented


3 See John Donald Wade, “The Authorship of David Crockett’s Autobiography,”
Georgia Historical Quarterly, September, 1922.


178 THE MIND OF THE SOUTH


by Mr. Lawrence with a fine suit of domestic broadcloth, Davy
would have been an ingrate not to vote for a protective tariff.
But alas! the opportunity never came. A backwoods constituency
that had never been dined by Lowell capitalists and had little use
for fine broadcloth, a constituency that persisted in throwing up
coonskin caps for Old Hickory in spite of Lowell statistics, re-
sented his apostasy from the Democratic faith and at the next
election invited him to stay in the canebrakes. The gorgeous
bubble was pricked. Davy had expanded under prosperity
and could not now endure adversity. In a fit of anger he quitted
his family and the state of Tennessee, went off on the mad chase
to Texas and in March of the next year fell at the Alamo. Vain,
ignorant Davy Crockett! A simple-minded frontiersman, he
went down to Jericho and fell among thieves, and when they
were done with him they left him despoiled politically but invested
with a fame that has grown to this day. After his death other
hands took up the work, wove around his name the humor and
romance of the frontier, and made of him a legendary figure. It
would have pleased Davy to know how the myth had prospered.

Yet from this crude romanticism, this picturesque propaganda
of coonskin days, one solid contribution remains—the autobiog-
raphy. It isa striking bit of realism, done after the manner of the
Longstreet school. There is politics in it, of course. Written just
after Davy had gone through a bitter campaign from which he had
emerged triumphant, it is a bold pronouncement that he wears no
collar marked “‘My dog—Andrew Jackson.” In the campaign of
1830 he had been defeated by the Jacksonians, but two years later
he “made a mash” of his opponents, and the elation of that victory
adds a certain cockiness to his habitual swagger. But it is much
more than a political tract; it is a vital frontier document. The
main facts of his biography, as set down there, may be accepted as
true, and the general picture of backwoods existence in Tennessee;
but the humor has been elaborated and the effect of the picturesque
heightened by his collaborator. Such added touches were only
natural. The real Davy was very far from romantic. An honest
picture of the Tennessee democracy in its native habitat would
reveal few idyllic features. It was a slovenly world and Davy was


‘Among the miscellaneous material gathered together in the Exploits and
Adventures in Texas and attributed to Davy is Longstreet’s Georgia Theatrics,
lifted verbatim from Georgia Scenes.


THE FRONTIER IN LETTERS 179


pretty much of a sloven. Crude and unlovely in its familiar details,
with its primitive courtships and shiftless removals, its brutal
Indian campaign and fierce hunting sprees, its rough equality, its
unscrupulous politics, its elections carried by sheer impudence and
whisky, the autobiography reveals the backwoods Anglo-Irish-
man as an uncivilized animal, responding to simple stimuli, yet
with a certain rough vigor of character. Wastefulness was in the
frontier blood, and Davy was a true frontier wastrel. In the course
of successive removals he traversed the length of Tennessee, drink-
ing, hunting, talking, speculating, begetting children, scratching
a few acres of land to “make his crap,” yet living for the most part
off the country; and his last squatting place on the Obion River,
seven miles from the nearest neighbor, was as primitive as the
first. Willing to endure almost incredible hardships to obtain a
keg of gunpowder to celebrate Christmas, risking his skin to kill
a bear with a butcher knife, he was never much given to mending
fences or enlarging his plow lands. He was a hunter rather than
a farmer, and the lust of killing was in his blood. With his pack
of hounds he slaughtered with amazing efficiency. A later genera-
tion would call him a game-hog. His family must have had Gar-
gantuan appetites to have consumed one-tenth of the meat that fell
before his beloved Betsy; the rest went to the dogs and hogs and
buzzards. His hundred and five bears in a single season, his six
deer shot in one day while pursuing other game—two of which
were left hanging in the woods—serve to explain why the rich
hunting grounds of the Indians were swept so quickly bare of game
by the white invaders. Davy was but one of thousands who were
wasting the resources of the Inland Empire, destroying forests, skin-
ning the land, slaughtering the deer and bear, the swarms of pigeons
and turkey, the vast buffalo herds. Davy the politician is a huge
western joke, but Davy the wastrel was a hard, unlovely fact.

Strip away the shoddy romance that has covered up the real
man and the figure that emerges is one familiar to every back-
woods gathering, an assertive, opinionated, likable fellow, ready to
fight, drink, dance, shoot or brag, the biggest frog in a very small
puddle, first among the Smart Alecks of the canebrakes. Davy
was a good deal of a wag, and the best joke he ever played he played
upon posterity that has swallowed the myth whole and persists in
setting a romantic halo on his coonskin cap. Yet in spite of the
romantic machinery the play turns out to be broad farce.


Aa | all
5 i Pe tsteg ef raat s.
bi SB iI


BOOK TWO: THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


, iF Oys.: ay
i‘ BAAN is raw : : }
is @ ay a a ay


Mera man) =:
ae


BOOK TWO
THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Tue literature of the Middle East during the years of the roman-
tic revolution, unlike contemporary letters north and south, re-
vealed no coalescing unity of spirit and purpose; it was rather the
casual and somewhat fortuitous expression of two cities, both of
which were divided by language and custom into fairly equal
groups, and neither of which had developed a homogeneous native
culture. There were no intellectual hinterlands to Philadelphia
and New York, as there were to Boston and Charleston and Rich-
mond; no common ideals spread over broad areas, no dominant
schools of thought, no branching roots by which a common litera-
ture might be nourished. In consequence it may, perhaps, be
reckoned a misuse of terms to speak of the mind of the Middle
East, as one may speak of the mind of New England or of the Old
Dominion, where in spite of pronounced variations of individual
temperament a common culture had set its mark on the literature.
There were few common ties and few intellectual sympathies to
bind together the men of letters of New York or Philadelphia.
Certainly Irving and Paulding and Cooper and Melville and
Whitman reveal none of that strong community of taste and pur-
pose that marks the Concord group, or the Boston-Cambridge
group, or even the Charleston group. They expressed no common
culture, they had been disciplined in no common faith, and they
were held together by no common economic or political or intel-
lectual interests; as a result their writing is a frank expression of
individual temperament and taste, unfettered by schools, drawing
its nourishment from no common soil. They stand on their own
feet, and to understand them requires no critical examination of a
complex cultural background. And yet this very diversity may
prove to be symptomatic of the hurrying changes that the rise of
the middle class was bringing to America—to the city perhaps even
more dramatically than to the country. The confusions and
183


184 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


diversity of thought that mark the literature of Philadelphia and
New York may, perhaps, most adequately suggest the mercurial
temper of the revolutionary transition from the eighteenth century
to the nineteenth, of which the romantic spirit was the natural
expression.


CHAPTER I
THE OLD CAPITAE


I

In the year 1800 one might well have expected Philadelphia to
retain indefinitely its proud ascendency as the cultural capital of
America. For decades no other colonial city had come near to
rivaling it as a pleasant center of wealth and refinement. Its
society was accounted the politest and most agreeable in America,
and during the Revolutionary War young British officers had
found its hospitable drawing-rooms an agreeable substitute for
London clubs. It had long prided itself on its culture and it was on
chatty terms with the fine arts, with books and music and painting,
with actors and plays and playhouses. It was the recognized
center of the publishing business, and its busy presses turned out
books and magazines and newspapers for remote eolonial readers.
Ambitious young men were drawn to it as by a magnet, and Mat-
thew Carey from Ireland and William Cobbett from England were
outstanding figures amongst the many who found Philadelphia as
attractive as Franklin had earlier found it. Certainly it was the
least provincial spot in America in 1800, managing to keep abreast
of the latest English fashions in letters as well as smallclothes;
and when the supercilious Tom Moore favored the city with his
presence in the summer of 1804, he found there the companionship
which in some measure compensated for the meanness of the rest
of America, where he professed to see:


One dull chaos, one unfertile strife,

Betwixt half-polish’d and half-barbarous life,
Where every ill the ancient world can brew
Is mixed with every grossness of the new.!


The pronounced intellectual stir expressed itself not only in
belles lettres, and in the scientific experiments of Franklin and
Rittenhouse, but more adequately still in politics. Political dis-
putation would seem, indeed, to have been the common Phila-
delphia passion. Party forces were more equally divided than in

1 Quoted in Oberholtzer, Literary History of Philadelphia, p. 178.
185


186 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Boston. From the beginnings of the Revolutionary disputes
Philadelphia had produced notable disputants on both sides—
pamphleteers like Joseph Galloway and John Dickinson, and satir-
ists like Joseph Stansbury and Francis Hopkinson. In the succeed-
ing decades partisan pens had augmented rather than abated their
vigor. During Washington’s administration the French Revolu-
tion shook Philadelphia as it shook no other American city, and the
fierce battle between Federalist and Jacobin was waged with amaz-
ing fury and limitless invective. The deadly journalistic duel
between Freneau and Fenno in their two Gazettes was reflected in
the equally bitter duel of couplets between Matthew Carey and
William Cobbett. If Philadelphia was not more catholic than Bos-
ton, it was at least better informed on party questions, for clever
writers were daily flinging their arguments at its head. So long
as the political capital of the nation remained in Philadelphia the
city was clearly the place for the young American to sharpen his
wits, inform his mind, and quicken his literary enthusiasm.
Economically the future of the city seemed equally bright. A
younger generation of speculative merchants had taken the place
of the older conservatives, and great fortunes were being made with
a rapidity before unknown. When title to the western lands passed
from the crown to the new republic, Philadelphia merchants took
the lead in land speculation, and Robert Morris entered upon a
spectacular career that profoundly impressed his generation. The
city became the chief center of land speculation to which western
and southern investors looked. Economic opportunities increased
with the setting up of the new government, and the stir of national
politics increased the general activity. With the establishment of
the Bank, Philadelphia became the financial capital of the country,
receiving and disbursing the monies of the government and attract-
ing outside funds for investment. The decade of the nineties was
its golden age. Then came the removal of the seat of the Federal
government to Washington, and the gay little city underwent a
swift eclipse. It was an unwilling victim to the topography of the
North American continent. Between it and the Inland Empire, on
which rested its future economic expansion, lay the Appalachian
mountain range. To be sure, the opening of the Pittsburgh turn-
pike seemed to promise that Philadelphia should become the ship-
ping port for the Ohio valley; but the law of gravity sent the prod-
uce of the back-country downstream to New Orleans, rather than


THE OLD CAPITAL 187


upstream to the East. Mountains were a serious barrier then to
cheap transportation, and in consequence the contributory hinter-
land to Philadelphia was narrowly restricted, and with the rise of
the more fortunately situated New York her economic ascendency
was lost past recovery.

A like unforeseen fate overtook the cultural aspirations of the
ambitious little city. In the year 1799 Timothy Pickering, Sec-
retary of State in Adams’ cabinet, invited to Philadelphia as his
secretary Joseph Dennie, a young Boston lawyer who had achieved
a wide reputation as a writer of Addisonian essays; and with his
coming the literary vigor of Philadelphia flared up in a last
brilliant blaze. He established The Port Folio, gathered a club of
congenial spirits, and gained an extraordinary reputation through-
out the country at large. Dennie was a fierce Federalist who
hated French Jacobinism with more than the ardor of his party,
and he was encouraged by Tom Moore, who wrote,


Long may you hate the Gallic dross that runs
O’er your fair country and corrupts its sons.


But with the swift, decay of Federalism Dennie’s own fortunes fell
into a like decay, and with the suspension of The Port Folio in 1809
the golden age of Philadelphia came to a definite end. Though it
long retained its primacy as a publishing center, and though later
Godey’s Lady's Book became almost a national institution, its
intellectual vigor lessened, and its literary leadership passed to
other cities. It succumbed to the tastes of Victorianism and
became the acknowledged home of “‘female genius” that for years
fed the American reading public on cambric tea. It enjoyed no
such renaissance as came to Boston and Charleston, and ambitious
young writers abandoned it for more promising fields. While
other cities were caught up in the swirl of romantic expansion that
followed the War of 1812, Philadelphia remained content with the
ways of the eighteenth century, immersed in an old-fashioned
culture. With its geographical position disqualifying it to reap the
harvest of the westward movement, and with no Merrimac falls
to invite industrial development on a great scale, its fate was sealed.
It had been a delightful capital for an older America, but it was too
narrowly environed, too straitened in potential Tesources for ex-
ploitation, to become the capital of a more expansive and ambitious


generation.


188 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


II


Yet it enjoyed a brief moment of literary creativeness before
the hand of fate finally settled upon it. In the twilight of the eight-
eenth century the new liberalisms that were turmoiling Europe
found their way to Philadelphia, and for the moment it seemed as
if the city were to lead the thought of America in its venture into
new fields. It was a convenient port for the unloading of foreign
romanticisms, and under the stimulus of national politics the
demand for such commodities was greatly increased. Certainly
in no other American city did the French upheaval quicken so
sympathetic a ferment, and with this ferment came a more roman-
tic spirit in letters. The English pre-romantics found there re-
sponsive readers. In the verse of young Philadelphians began to
appear a note of the vague, the mysterious, the melancholy, echoes
of Gray and Cowper and Ossian, as a pleasant relief from vigorous
satire as practiced by the Hartford Wits. But it was in the field
of fiction that the new spirit most adequately revealed itself, and
particularly in the work of a young Philadelphian who had broken
wholly with the Federalism that immured the sympathies of young
poets like William Cliffton, and welcomed the romantic philoso-
phies then being formulated by radical thinkers in France and Eng-
land. .

Brockden Brown was fortunately spared the fate that might well
have been his if circumstances had not determined otherwise. As
a boy he had meditated epics on romantic historical figures, in-
spired perhaps by Dwight and Barlow; but from so profitless a
career he was saved by an early introduction to overseas fashions.
By* William Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft he was influenced
as profoundly as was young William Ellery Channing a few years
afterward, and with like results. Later generations have too care-
lessly forgotten how persuasive to young intellectuals, a century
or more ago, was the philosophy of Godwin. To generous minds
there was something vastly attractive in his confident appeal to
reason and justice; and to a new world and a new venture in govern-
ment it came with double appeal. How could the republican ex-
periment better justify itself than by establishing justice in the new
social order—justice for men and justice for women who had too
long suffered under narrow handicaps? It was certainly an ideal
worth serious consideration—particularly since the French school
had suggested that the germinal source of social injustice must be


THE OLD CAPITAL 189


sought in institutions rather than in the nature of man. It was
natural enough for gentlemen who profited by social wrong to
charge that injustice was inherent in human nature—that man’s
innate selfishness was to blame for the ills of society. But the new
thinkers were of an inquiring turn of mind, and under their critical
scrutiny the old conception was seen to rest on a perversion of fact.
Gentlemen had got the cart before the horse. The crying evils of
civilization, when analyzed, were traceable to vicious environment,
to social and political maladjustments; not to human nature. The
mind of the infant is plastic. Very well. If it is molded by social
environment, why is it so often misshapen and perverted to base
purposes, if institutions are not at fault? why may it not be
molded to nobler ends under more beneficent institutions? Reason
is a common possession; the ideal of justice is a common ideal.
The evil genius that has hitherto thwarted their benevolent work
is the overgrown political state, debased to selfish ends. Once let
the beneficent sway of social instincts supersede the exploiting
machinery of the political state, and reason must conduct to
justice. The heart of man is sound. Let it be free to follow its
natural promptings and war must give way to peace, the selfish
struggle of classes disappear in a common brotherhood.

To an ardent young American like Brockden Brown, with the
Hamiltonian struggle for power before his eyes, such a philosophy
must have come with immense appeal. America confronted a
future unmortgaged to the past; why should it repeat the old
follies and mistakes that had reduced Europe to its present level?
Here the pressure of vicious institutions was light as yet. Herethe
appeal to reason and justice was less hampered by selfish preémp-
tions. Let social commendation be bestowed on the uncorrupted
heart, on generous impulses, on native integrity of character. Let
education be a natural unfolding of humane instincts, not a
sharpening of wits to overreach one’s fellows. Let rewards
go to frank, outspoken truth, rather than to chicanery and
deceit. Inspired by such sentiments, Brockden Brown proposed
to make fiction serve social ends. He would spread the gospel
of Mary Wollstonecraft and Godwin by means of popular tales.
The views of the former he elaborated in Alcuin; A Dialogue,
which in the year 1798 presented for the consideration of the
American people the Wollstonecraft feminism in such passages


as this:


190 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Marriage is an union founded on free and mutual consent. It can-
not exist without friendship. It cannot exist without personal fidelity.
As soon as the union ceases to be spontaneous, it ceases to be just. This
is the sum. If I were to talk for months I could add nothing to the
completeness of the definition.


But it is in Arthur Mervyn that he gives his fullest pronouncement
of what he conceives must be done in America. He takes his hero
fresh from the plowtail, one of nature’s noblemen, and traces
his triumphant course through the thick of sordid intrigue to a
happy end. Generous in instincts, impulsive in sociability, re-
sponsive to suffering, hating injustice, loving the pure and dis-
interested, Arthur Mervyn is a Godwinian figure drawn to captivate
the imagination with the social ideal. It is not so much the plot
of the story that reveals the enormous influence of Godwin—
patent as the likeness is to Caleb Williams; but rather the expansive
nature of the title hero, whose instincts bid him espouse justice,
and-whose life is an implied criticisra of all that is sordid and mean.

With the political romanticism of his work was joined a literary
romanticism that likewise came from England, where it was mud-
dying the stream of English fiction and turning it aside from the
vigorous realism of the middle eighteenth century. The movement
that Paulding dubbed the “blood-pudding school ”’ was one of the
by-products of the romantic development that ran a far more
disastrous course in America than in England, distorting the
growth of native fiction for half a century. It was perhaps unfor-
tunate for the American novel that Wieland should have been
Brockden Brown’s most finished work, for it contributed in con-
sequence more powerfully to the spread of the melodramatic.
Lacking his strain of rationalism, other writers reveled increas-
ingly in the luridly picaresque, till the popular taste was so de-
bauched that Gilmore Simms found it well-nigh impossible to
struggle against it. For this of course Brown was not to blame;
yet his gross romanticisms of manner persisted long after his
Godwinian romanticisms had faded out of the popular mind, if
indeed they ever found lodgment there.


Ill


Brockden Brown’s career was in a sense symbolic of the fate of
his native city—a few brilliant years and then a swift decline.
Death cut him down before he fulfilled his promise. Something


THE OLD CAPITAL 191


of a like fate befell his most brilliant successor, Robert Mont-
gomery Bird, probably the ablest man of letters that Philadelphia
produced. Caught up by the romantic movement at the beginning
of his precocious career, he plunged into dramatic writing and from
1830 to 1834, between the ages of twenty-four and twenty-eight,
he wrote four plays for Edwin Forrest, one of which, The Gladiator,
met with extraordinary success, both in this country and in Eng-
land; and another, The Broker of Bogota, kept the stage for years.
At the age of thirty he gave over the writing of plays and turned
to other fields. The explanation of so unusual a course, according
to a recent historian, is not far to seek. He had been overreached
by Forrest, and after parting with his manuscripts to the actor,
the playwright found himself in the condition of the farmer who
after shipping his potatoes to market discovers himself to be in
debt to the commission merchant.? That he determined to try
a different crop was natural enough, but unfortunate for the
American drama.

Of his subsequent ventures into the field of romantic fiction, one
at least was an extraordinary success, rivaling if not surpassing
The Gladiator in popular favor. Nick of the Woods, or the Jib-
benainosay still remains one of the few outstanding tales of the
Kentucky settlement. Published in Philadelphia in 1837, it has
been reissued in successive editions, more than twenty in all
down to the present. It was translated into German in 1838,
into Dutch in 1877, and into Polish in 1905. There is abundant
reason for its popularity. It is a story of calculating revenge, done
with extraordinary vividness and set against a romantic back-
ground. A frontier Quaker, trusting in the spirit of good will,
finds his non-resistance futile; he is set upon by Indians, his family
murdered before his eyes, and himself scalped and left for dead
beside his burnt cabin. Recovering, he sets forth on a fierce career.
Under the mask of a non-resistant, so effectively worn as to awaken
the contempt of the frontier Indian-haters, he became a hunter of
men, and his secret passages through the wilderness leave no other
trail than the marked bodies of slaughtered warriors. The Jib-
benainosay is an uncanny figure who strikes with appalling
suddenness, a Nemesis that fills the hearts of border Indians with
terror and turns their dreams to nightmares—one of the most
striking and fearful figures in our early fiction. The Indians whom

2 See A. H. Quinn, 4 History of the American Drama, etc., pp. 244-248.


192 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


he pursues so remorselessly are depicted as thorough savages. In
describing them Bird has put all his romanticisms aside. There is
no sentimentalizing of the noble red man in the brisk pages of Nick
of the Woods; the warriors are dirty drunken louts, filled with an
unquenchable blood-lust, whom the frontiersman kills with as little
compunction as he would kill a rattlesnake. The ugly feud that so
long soiled the Border is depicted with almost startling frankness,
and through its worst phases moves the figure of Bloody Nathan,
professing to be a man of peace whilst cutting an appalling lot of
notches in his gun, an epileptic who perhaps deceives even himself.
If one likes stirring action that is certain to end in blood-letting,
there is good foraging in Nick of the Woods, despite its excesses of
conventional romance. And there is much else as well. Bird had
evidently studied his western materials with some care, and he did
his part to popularize certain conceptions that literature had come
to associate with the Ohio valley. The character of Ralph Stack-
pole is clearly suggestive of the wild antics supposed to be common
to the river boatmen. “The history of this wild scape-gallows,”
says Bird, “his prowess in the pin-fold and the battle-field, his
adventure on the beech-tree, and his escape from the meshes of the
._ law, with other characteristic events not included in our relation,
are recollections still cherished in some parts of Kentucky, and
made the theme of many a gleesome story.”” But what seems more
suggestive today is Bird’s conscious attempt to reproduce the new
type of western humor that found its expression in the Davy
Crockett myth. Perhaps the wild extravagance of Ralph Stack-
pole’s vocabulary goes back to Mike Fink, perhaps it derives from
Davy himself; at any rate the mode had spread so widely by 1837
that this Philadelphia man of letters had come to believe that such
was the indigenous form of humor in the new West of the Ohio
valley, and he took particular pains to draw the irrepressible Ralph
with vigorous touches. A pronounced romantic, Bird uncon-
sciously contributed his mite to the myth of western humor.


CHAPTER II
THE NEW CAPITAL


I


Very different from the gay and cultivated Quaker City was
the commercial port of Manhattan, with its Yankee energy in-
grafted on the stolid Dutch stock, which fate seized upon and
transformed into the greatest of our new cities, the favorite home
of the genius of American enterprise. Never a cultural capital
as Philadelphia had been, and as Charleston was becoming—a
fact which Fenimore Cooper untactfully announced to the world—
it was ambitious to acquire commercial and financial ascendency;
and this ascendency of the economic over the cultural, this frank
evaluation of progress in terms of exploitation, marks the definite
transition from the eighteenth century to the nineteenth, the
triumph of an aggressive middle class over the leisurely ways of
an older landed aristocracy. The romance of expansion was
creating there a new psychology, and this new psychology was
preparing the city for leadership in the new age that was rising.
Its strategic position brought to it the produce of the new settle-
ments that were pushing west to the great lakes and beyond; its
aggressive traders were reaching out for a share in the markets of
the world; the plodding methods of money-getting that had
satisfied an earlier generation no longer satished men who had
discovered the richer possibilities of capitalistic manipulation.
The potentialities that lay in the capitalistic system were shrewdly
explored, and the necessary machinery of the new finance was
devised. The acquisitive spirit of the city found itself in a posi-
tion to profit from the rage of speculation that was running through
the country, and it quickly outdistanced its rivals in the race for
financial supremacy.

The changes that came to New York in the last years of the old
century were enough to muddle a head stronger than Rip Van
Winkle’s. The quiet ways of colonial times were gone, and in
their stead was a restless activity that had no leisure for its pipe
and mug in the sleepy tavern. Business and politics could not
wait on men who like Wouter Van Twiller pickled their dreams in

193


194 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


tobacco smoke. The bewilderment of old Rip on his return from
the hills was the bewilderment of the colonial mind in the presence
of a new order. When Washington came to New York to assume
the presidency, the town contained approximately 29,000 inhabit-
ants, some two thousand of whom were slaves. Fifty years later
the census of 1840 set down its population as 312,710. In 1789
Albany was a Dutch village of four or five thousand, and a few
miles to the West lay an unbroken wilderness. Within the narrow
zone of the quiet settlements old and new dwelt in close proximity.
The most feudal of American aristocracies fringed the banks of
the Hudson from Albany to Manhattan; and reaching out through
the Mohawk valley that aristocracy was laying a network of
speculative land-holdings through which a flood of Yankee pioneers
was making its way from the long-settled lands of Connecticut and
Massachusetts. The frontier was close at hand; the leveling
spirit was near neighbor to the feudal; potential economic rival-
ries were becoming actual, and the days of a static, power-proud
Dutch aristocracy were numbered. The spirit that had dominated
the commonwealth from its founding was tenacious of life, but
on January 26, 1839, died Stephen Van Rensselaer, last of the
Patroons, courteous, dignified, a worthy embodiment of the old
patriarchal virtues, who had outlived his age; and hard upon his
death came the final break-up of the traditional order. The small
men got the land they had long tilled and the influence of the Dutch
gentry slowly disintegrated. A new order was rising that had
discovered shorter roads to wealth than feudal rents. While the
more energetic of the old order, men like Gouverneur Morris and
Judge William Cooper, were deep in land speculation, in Manhat-
tan a new aristocracy of capitalism was rising. Wall Street was
losing the distinction of housing the most exclusive of the landed
gentry, to gain a greater distinction as the home of the new aris-
tocracy of credit. By 1825 the rise of industrialism, the develop-
ment of banking, the completion of the Erie Canal, the influx of
proletarian immigrants, and the drift of population to the towns
had fixed the destiny of the city. In becoming the chief reposi-
tory of the new capitalism New York had become the first and
greatest of our middle-class capitals.

Of this new Manhattan the representative citizen was a man
whose aggressive ambitions differentiated him sharply from
Stephen Van Rensselaer, and whose dramatic career of exploita-


THE NEW CAPITAL 195


tion seemed to Washington Irving to embody the romantic
potentialities of America. John Jacob Astor was to the New
York of 1825 what Robert Morris had been to Philadelphia a
generation before—an evidence of the wealth that was to be got
by those who would boldly exploit the vast resources of America.
A German immigrant who landed in America with small funds,
immediately following the Peace of Paris, Astor embarked in the
fur trade, acquired a fortune which he invested in Manhattan
land, and then laid his plans to engage in a great venture in
imperialism. Stirred by the Lewis and Clarke expedition, he
proposed to explore the virgin resources of the far Pacific North-
west. With the tacit approval of the government he undertook
the hazardous project of the Astoria settlement, sent his agent
to the Russian posts of Alaska, and by subsidizing an army of
trappers proposed to gather the peltries of the entire Northwest
for the rich Canton market. It was a grandiose conception worthy
of a feudal baron of commerce. It was knit up with dreams of
conquest; it necessarily entailed open warfare with the English
companies whose ambitions were equally grandiose; it was certain
to be attended by bitter hardships on the part of the venturesome
agents to whom it was intrusted; and the outcome was uncer-
tain as a gambler’s chance. Irving has thrown over his narrative
of the great venture a glamour of patriotism; to him it appeared as
a plan of empire building; but whether patriotism or profit was
the determining impulse in the mind of John Jacob Astor, the
settlement of Astoria suggests the romantic aspirations that were
making over the lethargic world of Dutch Manhattan, in the
venturesome days of the new capitalism. Stephen Van Rensselaer
and John Jacob Astor would have had difficulty in understanding
each other.


II


In sharp contrast with Boston, New York was wanting in intel-
lectual background and intellectual stimulus. It had never gone
to school to dogmatic theology and neither clergy nor laity had
been disciplined by a severe Puritan regimen. Gentlemen were
little given to metaphysical speculation and the subtleties of
creed never provided the staple of talk in the farmer’s kitchen.
The terrors of hell rarely troubled the sluggish imagination of the
Dutch, and the extraordinary stimulus that came to the serious-


196 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


minded New Englander from long contemplation of the ways of
God, was lacking amongst a more prosaic people. No other
stimulus supplied the want and in consequence ideas and books
were held in low esteem and the things of the mind suffered. The
English gentry commonly sent their sons to the English univer-
sities, but the Dutch by common report seem to have been in-
different to schooling and opportunities for education were sadly
inadequate. The result was a low plane of intellectual life, which
even in Coopex’s time was remarked by him. There were brilliant
and cultivated intellects, wits like Gouverneur Morris and states-
men like John Jay; yet even under the stimulus of Revolutionary
and Constitutional controversy the contribution of New York
to political theory was far slighter than that of New England or
Vigrinia. The Federalist was its single notable production, and
even in that the papers of Madison were no inconsiderable part.
As a commercial port it attracted young men ambitious to rise
in the world of affairs rather than in the world of letters. Unlike
Philadelphia it had never been a cosmopolitan meeting ground
for aspiring young intellectuals and purveyors of polite culture,
nor an important center of printers, publishers and book dealers.
Aside from Philip Freneau, who had long since established him-
self in New Jersey when he was not at sea, it had contributed
little to pure literature, or even to the political satire that deluged
Philadelphia. As a creative center it ranked far below Hartford,
Connecticut, where in the seventeen-eighties and nineties wit had
become a staple commodity for export. And yet despite its in-
tellectual lethargy it was a pleasant little town, with a note of
cosmopolitanism that rendered life amongst the upper classes
genial and urbane. The spirit of aristocracy was as yet little
weakened by alien newcomers from the more republican New
England, and city and commonwealth were ruled by a little group
of old-fashioned gentlemen who upheld the rigid Federalism of
the tie-wig school.

In the year 1800 the political leaders of the state were men of
long established reputations, Hamilton, Jay, Gouverneur Morris,
Rufus King, with whom was closely associated the brilliant lawyer
James Kent, afterward Chancellor. Only two of the five were of
the older New York stock: Rufus King was from Maine, Hamilton
from the West Indies, and Kent was of Yankee Presbyterian
ancestry. Politics were already becoming turmoiled by faction,


THE NEW CAPITAL 197


with bitter cleavages and vindictive struggles for the spoils of
office that sadly confused the logic of the earlier alignment. The
old Federalist party was led by the distinguished gentlemen
named above; the Democratic party was led by the Livingstons
and Clintons; and outside both was the ambitious Aaron Burr
who played a lone hand against the field. After the death of
Hamilton the disintegration of the old parties went forward
rapidly. The Livingstons and Clintons broke, and a fierce polit-
ical feud arose between them. The former were accounted the
true Jeffersonians, but under the name of Lewisites they drifted
towards the Federalist remnant; the Burrites went to pieces after
the disgrace of their leader; and the Clintonians remained masters
of the field, with a motley support drawn from Tammany Hall
Irish, Wall Street bankers, and odds and ends of all factions.
From this sordid situation, rendered conspicuous by the extension
of suffrage under the new constitution, emerged two master poli-
ticians, adepts in all the arts of party manipulation, who exploited
the prejudices of the voting masses in a way to justify the gloomy
fear of demagoguery that haunted the minds of the old Federalists.
Martin Van Buren and Thurlow Weed, Democrat and Whig, were
finished products of the new school of practical politicians who
held that office-holding was the great end of partisan struggle,
and that principles must not stand in the way of success.


III


Through this fierce scramble of rival politicians moved a schol-
arly figure who preserved to the last the dignity and distinction
of an earlier age. James Kent, whose long life and ripe legal
learning were devoted to upholding what he conceived to be the
ultimate principles of law and politics, was the chief political
thinker of the transition days of New York. A disciple of Locke
and Blackstone, remodeling seventeenth-century liberalism into
eighteenth-century conservatism, he was concerned to erect the
barriers of the Common Law about the unsurveyed frontiers of
the American experiment, assigning exact metes and bounds
beyond which it should not go. Like John Marshall and Joseph
Story he was expert in devising legal springes to catch unwary
democrats, and while the Jeffersonians were shouting over their
victories at the polls, he was engaged in the strategic work of plac-
ing the Constitution under the narrow custodianship of the English


198 THE. MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


law. An ardent Federalist and later an equally ardent Whig,

he reveals in his precise thinking the intimate relations that every-

where exist between economics, politics, and legal principles. With

John Adams he accepted the dictum of Locke that “the great and

chief end . . . of men’s uniting into commonwealths, and putting

themselves under government, is the preservation of their prop-

erty”; and believing that the English Common Law was the se-

curest of all agencies devised to safeguard the subject in the enjoy-

ment of his property rights, he made no difficulty in imposing that

law upon the Constitution, circumscribing the written document

by Common Law fences. Government he conceived to be a pa-

triarchal institution erected for the single purpose of coercing the

vicious, and as such it must remain in the hands of the good, the

wise and the wealthy. It did not need the authoritative pro-

nouncement of his great master to convince him that the wealthy

included the good and wise. Observation of the “barbarian

Jackson” and his rude followers was enough to convince him of

the truth of the fact. ‘All theories of government that suppose

the mass of the people virtuous,” he wrote to Webster, “and able

and willing to act virtuously, are plainly utopian, and will remain

so until the Saturnian age” (William Kent, Memoirs and Letters

of James Kent, p. 207). Profoundly distrustful of democracy, he

brought all his wide reading in the history of ancient and medie-

val republics to demonstrate the favorite Federalist conviction—

a conviction that Paulding in his Letters from the South paid his

respects to'—that democracy is only a euphemism for mob-rule
and that it must speedily conduct to anarchy and despotism.
All leveling principles he repudiated without waiting to hear

cause. Until necessity counseled otherwise he looked with sus-_
picion on the holders of liquid wealth, as likely to prove wanting

in the wisdom and goodness that came naturally to the landed |
proprietor. He would have the many ruled by the few, but those
few he would have owners of great estates.

After all, the learned Chancellor was only a transplanted Yankee :
of the Fisher Ames school, with something of the austerity and
intellectual vigor of his two Puritan grandfathers. An ardent :
admirer of Hamilton, he early broke with the more liberal faith of
his family and joined himself to the extreme Federalists. He was
advanced rapidly by Governor Jay, enjoyed for years both office

1 See Vol. I, p. 207.


THE NEW CAPITAL 199


and distinction, and ably defended the party of his choice. Fearful
of agrarian laws and the sequestration of property by the enfran-
chised poor, he fought stubbornly every proposal for an extension
of suffrage or a larger measure of self-government for the cities.
Defeated in the great constitutional convention of 1821 he soon
after lost his office and retired to write his Commentaries on Amer-
ican Law, a work that was to exercise a creative influence on the
later development of our jurisprudence. That American law came
to be deeply colored by Federalist political theory, that it upheld
from the bench principles that had been repudiated at the polls,
was due in no little measure to the legal scholarship of this last of
the New York Federalists. What a recent historian has borrowed
to describe another applies with equal felicity to Chancellor
Kent—“his pigmy hope that life would some day become somewhat
better, punily shivered by the side of his gigantic conviction that
it might be infinitely worse” (Fox, Decline of Aristocracy in New
York Politics, p. 243). As he contemplated the ways of the tri-
umphant Jacksonians, he found such consolation as he could in
turning back to an older century with its narrow outlook and sober
culture. Writing to his brother in 1835, he said:


There never was such misrule. Our Tory rich men are becoming startled
and alarmed at our downhill course. My opinion is that the admission
of universal suffrage and a licentious press are incompatible with govern-
ment and security to property, and that the government and character
of this country are going to ruin. This suffrage is too great an excitement
for any political machine. It racks it to pieces, and morals go with it. It
is probable England ‘is going the same way. We are becoming selfish,
profligate, crazy. . . . Give me the writings of Addison and Locke, and
the Presbyterianism of Dr. Ripley, Dr. Stiles, and old Dr. Rogers. (Kent,
Memoirs and Letters of James Kent, pp. 218-219.)


IV


With the extraordinary upheaval in economics and _ politics
New York unfortunately underwent no corresponding intellec-
tual revolution. The renaissance that a generation earlier had
created a new Virginia, and that was awakening in Massachusetts
a many-sided intellectual activity, touched the mind of New York
only lightly. The ground was unprepared for the new philosophies.
To Virginia, French romantic theory had come with the appeal
of a new gospel for the reason that plantation economics fell in
with the major premises of Physiocratic liberalism, and the old-


200 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


world dogmas seemed to find new-world justification. To New
England, German idealism had come likewise with the appeal of a
new gospel, after Unitarianism had broken the fetters of Calvinism
and set free its traditional idealism. But among the young men
of New York in 1825 neither France nor Germany was a deter-
mining influence. With an inadequate cultural background and
no responsive economics, they were attracted only casually to
the current European liberalisms. They were wanting in idealism
and in consequence the major intellectual and social movements
of the times influenced the form and content of the new Knicker-
bocker literature far less profoundly than was the case in New Eng-
land. New York was as insular as Charleston. That the growing
economic unrest would ultimately find expression in a controversial
or Utopian literature, was a matter of course; and that the cosmo-
politanism of the city should make for vigorous discussion, was
equally a matter of course. Nevertheless Albert Brisbane, Wil-
liam Leggett, Parke Godwin and Horace Greeley were far less rep-
resentative of the dominant literary spirit than Irving and Halleck
and Willis of the earlier group, or Stedman and Stoddard later.

The Knickerbocker movement was inaugurated by four young
men whose clever sketches caught the provincial ear of polite
society and set the new fashion in prose and verse. Irving and
Paulding in Salmagundi, and Halleck and Drake in the Croaker
Papers, were lucky adventurers whose slight crafts made the most
prosperous of voyages. Bright young fellows with a charming
literary swagger, they aspired to be wits and exploit the amusing
foibles of Broadway. Twelve years separated the two ventures,
and in the interval Byron and Scott had been supplanting Moore
and Campbell in the esteem of the Town, and the literary mode of
New York was changing. From their gay provincialism, happily
Irving and Paulding later freed themselves; Drake died at the age
of twenty-five; but Halleck retained to the end of a leisurely life
the mannerisms of the Croaker period—a crochety wit who af-
fected persiflage, a brisk young buck who gently slid into a blasé
old buck, a free lance in verse who lived in state on the income of
a small literary investment made in his twenties.

The very considerable reputation of Fitz-Greene Halleck re-
sulted in part from the literary sterility of New York in his
early days, and in part from the personal popularity of the man.
A Connecticut Yankee, descended on his mother’s side from old


THE NEW CAPITAL 201


John Eliot, he was drawn to the city as a promising field for an
accountant, and eventually found his way into the office of John
Jacob Astor by whom he was later pensioned. He accepted the
views and shared the antipathies of his Wall Street associates, but
with a certain affectation of individuality that took delight in
shocking them by whimsical pronouncements in favor of the Catho-
lic church and the monarchical system. There is perhaps a sug-
gestion of seriousness in the remark that Bryant has preserved:
“The ship of state,” so he reports Halleck as saying, “must be
governed and navigated like any other ship, without consulting
the crew. What would become of the stanchest bark in a gale,
if the captain were obliged to call all hands together and say:
“All you who are in favor of taking in sail, will please to say ay’”
(Orations and Addresses, p. 186). His political affiliations were
Federalist-Whig, and his satire exudes much of the old prejudice
against the democratic mass. The pompous long-winded DeWitt
Clinton was a fair mark for his shafts; * the demagoguery of office-
seeking politicians was a fruitful theme for his wit;# and Halleck’s
satire plays upon them with good-natured raillery. But his gayety
cannot hide a certain animus in dealing with the tousled-headed
democracy. When the labor movement was painfully getting
under way in New York Halleck contemplated the curious
phenomenon with a tolerant contempt—in something of the spirit
of a wit of pre-Revolutionary times who amused the Town with
his couplet:


Down at night a bricklayer or carpenter lies,
Next sun a Lycurgus or Solon doth rise.


As an illustration of the attitude of polite society in New York
a hundred years ago towards the aspirations of the proletariat,
Halleck’s forgotten Epistle to Robert Hogbin, Esq., Chairman of
the Committee of Working-Men, etc., deserves quotation:


Mr. Hogbin,—I work as a weaver—of rhyme—
And therefore presume with a working-man’s grace,

To address you as one I have liked for some time,
Though I know not (no doubt it’s a fine one) your face.


There is much in a name, and I'll lay you a wager
(Two ale-jugs from Reynolds), that Nature designed,
When she formed you, that you should become the drum-major
In that choice piece of music, the Grand March of Mind.


2 See Governor Clinton’s Speech. 3 See The Recorder.


202 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


A Hogbin! a Hogbin! how cheering the shout
Of all that keep step to that beautiful air,
Which leads, like the treadmill, about and about,
And leaves us exactly, at last, where we were!


Yes, there’s much in a name, and a Hogbin’s so fit is
For that great moral purpose whose impulse divine

Bids men leave their own workshops to work in committees,
And their own wedded wives to protect yours and mine! .. .


When the moment arrives that we’ve won the good fight,

And broken the chains of laws, churches, and marriages,
When no infants are born under six feet in height,

And our chimney-sweeps mount up a flue in their carriages—


That glorious time when our daughters and sons
Enjoy a blue Monday each day of the week,

And a clean shirt is classed with the mastodon’s bones,
Or a mummy from Thebes, an undoubted antique—


Then, then, my dear Hogbin, your statue in straw,
By some modern Pigmalion delightfully wrought,

Shall embellish the Park, and our youths’ only law
Shall be to be Hogbins in feeling and thought.


In Halleck’s better work there is sometimes evident a certain
critical detachment that permitted him to see both sides of his
theme. In the lines to his native Connecticut he has taken pretty
accurately the measure of the Puritan and the Yankee. He rests
under no awe in presence of the old worthies, and he throws over-
board the pious fairy-tales of Cotton Mather—‘“that slanderer
of the memory of our fathers”—only to forgive the preacher who
scolded his friends “up from earth to heaven” because of the
“sour grapejuice in his disposition.”” Unfortunately little of his
work possesses the virility of Connecticut. His most ambitious
poem, Fanny, is a feeble and discursive satire on the social clim-
ber. It was a great favorite at the time and passed through sev-
eral editions, but the sparkle is gone out of its affected jauntiness
and little has been lost in its being forgotten. Halleck’s casual
literary activity continued only for the brief period between the
years 1819 and 1828; thereafter for close on forty years he was
content to turn out an occasional jeu d’esprit, enjoy the deepening
twilight of his reputation, and watch his fellow Yankee, Willis,
invest his talents in the ephemeral. The day of the wit was past
in New York.


CHAPTER If


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS
I
WASHINGTON IRVING


ForTUNATELY the stolid New York of earlier days was not to pass
_ away without bequeathing to posterity some fragments of its
chronicles. In the midst of a pleasant society of smallclothes and
tie-wigs, of feudalism and Federalism, appeared young Washing-
ton Irving at the precise moment when Sansculottism was begin-
ning to make a stir in the land, and gentlemen were putting away
their knee-breeches to don a republican dress—a decline in taste
to which he would not easily reconcile himself. A boyish wit from
the eighteenth century, a genial loiterer in the twilight of the old,
he found himself out of humor with the ambitions that were mak-
ing over the little city he loved. The present seemed to him not so
amusing as the past, nor so picturesque. That he had any business
with the world of trade and speculation he could not believe. Its
concerns were not his. Its new Wall Street counted for less in
his eyes than the pipe of old Diedrich Knickerbocker. Its decad-
ent Federalism that was clinging to the wreck of its hopes, and
its roistering Democracy that wore greasy clothes, spoke with an
Irish accent, and was marshaled to the polls by Tammany Hall,
were of less consequence to him than the black bottle that brought
such curious adventures to Rip Van Winkle. The wit and romance
he took pleasure in were of another sort than the kind his generation
was getting drunk on—more insubstantial, less heady, picturesque
rather than profitable. ( ‘So Irving gently detached himself from
contemporary America” and detached he remained to the end of
a loitering life, untroubled by material ambitions, enjoying the
abundance of good things that fell in his way, mingling with
prosperous folk and liking everybody+-men as diverse as John
Jacob Astor and Martin Van Buren and John P. Kennedy—and
unconsciously taking the color of his environment, careful to
turn into limpid prose such romantic tales as he came upon and
achieving thereby both reputation and profit—a pleasant blame-
203


204 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


less way of living, certainly, yet curiously unrepresentative of the
America in which chance had set him and which was to claim him
as its first man of letters. ©

‘An incorrgible fla@neur, Irving’s business in life was to loaf and
invite the picturesque. ) A confirmed rambler in pleasant places,
in the many lands he visited he was a lover of the past rather than
the present, seeking to recreate the golden days of the Alhambra or
live over the adventurous mood of the fur trader. The immediate
and the actual was an unsatisfying diet for his dreams. There was
in him nothing of the calm aloofness of the intellectual that stands
apart to clarify its critical estimate, and none of the reforming
zeal of the Puritan that is at peace only in the thick of a moral cru-
sade. The duty of saving the world was not laid on his untroubled
soul. (No man of his generation was less of a rebel than Irving, and
he went his way unconcerned at things that quite upset Fenimore
Cooper’s peace of mind.) In his early days, to be sure, he broke
with the ambitious middle class—if gently drawing away can be
called breaking—because he could not bring himself to like its
ways and the devastation those ways were entailing on the leisurely
world he loved. Revolutions seemed to him somewhat vulgar
affairs. The French Revolution had brought destruction on too
many lovely things, and the industrial revolution was taking too
heavy a toll of the picturesque, to please him. He thought it
a pity that steam should drive the clipper ship from the seas and
put an end to snug posting in the tally-ho. Progress might be
bought at too dear a price. The bluff squire with his hounds, the
great hall with its ancient yuletide customs, the patriarchal re-
lations between master and man, seemed to him more worth while
than the things progress was substituting for them; so he turned
away from the new and gently ingratiated himself into the past
in order to gather up such fragments of the picturesque as progress
had not yet destroyed.

But only for atime. His dislike of capitalism rested on no more
substantial basis than its substitution of vulgar trousers for gen-
tlemanly smallclothes. It was too new to have achieved dignity
or the charm of assured position. When that time should come
and masters of finance should stand before the world as generous
dispensers of patronage, when the development of business should
have produced its new barons, Irving’s dislike would lessen and
he would associate with the new capitalism on the same easy terms


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS 205


that he associated with the old feudalism. In the meantime he
stood apart, unconcerned with praise or blame. The industrial
revolution might work itself out as it would.( The seventeen years
he spent abroad on his great pilgrimage were black years for Eng-
land. Wretchedness and poverty were all about him if he chose to
see. The “condition of England” question was rising out of the
factory smoke to challenge the conscience of England. But
he did not choose to see and his conscience was untroubled. As
he idled about the countryside or visited the hospitable manor
houses, his eye was caught by the grace of medieval spires rising
from parish churches rather than by the condition of the prole-
tariat. He saw no children working in the coalpits, for he did
not choose to visit the collieries. He sympathized vaguely with
the new social movements then getting under way, but it was not
in his nature to be partisan to a cause. He may not have been a
Tory but he had lived so long with Tories and enjoyed so frankly
the charm of upper-class society, that his outlook was unconsci-
ously determined by such intimate contacts. While Secretary
to the Legation at London in the reform years from 1829 to 1831,
he was aware of the tremendous stir all about him, but his infre-
quent references to the Reform Bill in his letters turned usually
on its disastrous effects on the publishing business. Only once
during his long residence abroad does he seem to have felt deeply
the significance of the current revolutionary unrest, and the mood
that swept him away from his habitual indifference bears the marks
of a sudden awakening. Writing from London on March 1, 1831,
he said:

We are in the beginning of an eventful week. . . . However, the great
cause of all the world will go on. What a stirring moment it is to live in.
I never took such intense interest in the newspapers. It seems to me as if
life were breaking out anew with me, or that I were entering upon quite a
new and almost unknown career of existence, and I rejoice to find my
sensibilities, which were waning as to many objects of past interest, re-
viving with all their freshness and vivacity at the scenes and prospects
opening around me. I trust, my dear Brevoort, we shall both be spared
to see a great part of this grand though terrible drama that is about to be
acted. There will doubtless be scenes of horror and suffering, but what
splendid triumphs must take place over these vile systems of falsehood
in every relation of human affairs, that have been woven over the human
mind, and for so long a time have held it down in despicable thral-
dom. (Pierre M. Irving, Life and Letters of Washington Irving, Vol. Il,


p. 199.)


206 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Irving lacked a month of being forty-nine when he wrote this
confession of interest in matters political. It marks the first ap-
pearance of liberalism in his thinking,)and the last—somewhat
vague to be sure, unduly bottomed on romantic expectations, yet
significant in so placid a life and explanatory of his course, when a
year later he returned to America to knit up once more the raveled
threads of his interests., It was as an incipient liberal that he came
back to a land jthen in the first flush of the Jacksonian victory,
eager to discover a romantic charm in the vast changes that had
come during the seventeen years he had been abroad. He plunged
into the business of re-discovery with enthusiasm. /He was in want
of new literary materials, and as he took his bearings, his creative
interest was stirred to write on American themes. He went to
Washington and for three months listened to the great debate on
Nullification. He talked with business men and politicians, with
those who were prosperous and prominent, and he drifted easily
with the tide of liberalism. | To be sure he could scarcely be called a
Jacksonian. Parties and causes did not greatly interest him even
then. An intelligent man, indeed, could hardly be less concerned
about political principles. Thirty years before, as a clever young
man about town, he had gone with the dominant Federalism of
the times, and had amused himself with political ambitions. His
brother Peter was editor of the Lewisite paper the Chronicle,
but Josiah Ogden Hoffman, with whose firm Irving was connected
during his desultory incursion into the law and to whose daughter
Matilda he was betrothed, was an old Loyalist and ardent Hamil-
tonian. His wife, to whom Irving was warmly attached, was a
daughter of John Fenno, Hamilton’s editor. Under such tutelage
it was natural for Irving to poke good-natured fun at President
Jefferson’s red velvet breeches in Salmagundi; but his venture
into practical politics proving little to his taste, he quickly gave
over such ambitions. In a letter to a clever young lady of Re-
publican sympathies, he thus announced his abandonment of
political hopes:


I am as deep in mud and politics as ever a modern gentleman would
wish to be; and I drank beer with the multitude; and I talked hand-bill
fashion with the demagogues; and I shook hands with the mob, whom
my heart abhorreth. . . . Truly this saving one’s country is a nauseous
piece of business, and if patriotism is such a dirty virtue,—prythee, no


more of it. (Life and Letters, Vol. 1, Chap. XI.)


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS 207


Years now separated him from that youthful experience. His
long absence from his native land had completely alienated him
from the fierce partisanship of contemporary America and he could
view matters political with calm detachment/ Inclined to make the
best of any government de facto, he found it easy on his return to
accept Jacksonianism, and he soon discovered a genuine liking for
Old Hickory.) “‘The more I see of this old cock of the woods,”
he wrote from Washington, “the more I relish his game qualities”
(ibid., Vol. II, p. 255). No doubt his early friend Paulding had
much to do with his ready acceptance of the new order, although
he had come in close contact with Martin Van Buren at the London
legation and was drawn to him. ‘He is one of the gentlest and
most amiable men I have ever met with,” he wrote to his brother,
“with an affectionate disposition that attaches itself to those
around him, and wins their kindness in return” (zbzd., Vol. II,
p- 220). Although distrustful of some of the “‘elbow counsellors”
of the Democracy he found little cause for criticism and soon came
to be regarded as one with them. The Jacksonians were eager to
make political capital out of his literary reputation, and he was
urged by Tammany Hall to stand for Congress and later to accept
a mayoralty candidacy. | In 1837, probably through the interven-
tion of Paulding, he was offered a post in Van Buren’s cabinet.
These partisan offers he had the good sense to decline, but when
in 1842 he was tendered the post of Minister to Spain he gladly
seized the opportunity to revisit a land he loved. / His nephew is
explicit in his statement that the offer came wholly unsolicited,
but Fenimore Cooper was of another opinion.!. Very likely Cooper
was misinformed, but whatever the truth the appointment was a
godsend to Irving. His affairs were in a bad way. The popularity
of his writings was on the wane, the panic had caught him with
much of his capital invested in unprofitable land speculations,
and the “Roost” at Tarrytown was a heavy drain, although he
wrote whimsically, ‘I beat all the gentlemen farmers in my neigh-
borhood, for I can manage to raise my vegetables and fruits at
very little more than twice the market price” (Life and Letters,


1 Writing to his wife a month afterwards, Cooper said: “By the way, Mrs.
Willing has let out the secret of Irving’s appointment. He wrote to Webster to
remember him if any good thing offered. So that instead of not asking for the office,
he asked for anything that was good. There has been more humbug practised
concerning this man than concerning any other now living” (Cooper, Correspond-
ence of James Fenimore-Cooper, Vol. II, p. 469).


208 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Vol. II, p. 320). Only a severe nature like Cooper, sorely wounded
by the angry reception of his own honest criticism, would cavil at
an appointment so honorable to the government.

A friendly nature, Irving discovered friendliness wherever he
went. His own generosity appealed to the generosity of others,
and he found it easy in consequence to take a kindly view of men
and parties. He was harassed by none of Cooper’s quick suspi-
cions and rigid principles, and it must be added he had none of
Cooper’s intuitive penetration into the secret springs of human ac-
tion that made the latter so acute a critic of contemporary America. )
The sharp contrast in moods in which the two men returned to
America from their travels, the one harshly critical of middle-class
economics and frontier leveling, the other responding naively
to the enthusiasm for speculative expansion and eager to exploit
the romance of the westward movement, sufficiently reveals the
difference between them. The one was a dogmatic Puritan with
the dictatorial ways of the quarter-deck, the other was a play-boy
of letters temperamentally incapable of critical analysis. There
was not a grain of realism in Irving’s nature. His cheerful opti-
mism was little more than the optimism of the prosperous. Wholly
ignorant of economics, he never comprehended the significance of
the revolutions in process all about him, and this naiveté blinded
him to the motive of John Jacob Astor in financing Astoria, as
it blinded him to all the major forces of the times. He was easily
brought to see the romance of the great struggle between rival com-
panies for mastery of the fur trade, but he did not comprehend how
the glamour he threw about the venture must inevitably strengthen
his patron’s investment in imperialism. Gullible as a child, he
discovered nothing more significant in the great struggle between
agrarianism and capitalism for control of government than the
ungenerous suspicions and novel theories it bred. For the out-
standing liberals of New York he had scant sympathy. | William
Leggett, Horace Greeley, Albert Brisbane, William Cullen Bryant, -
influenced his views far less than did the masters of Wall Street; _
and from the courageous movement of Locofocoism he drew back
in distrust. The one letter in which he elaborated such political
convictions as he had come to hold, is an interesting document
that deserves quotation.


As far as I know my own mind, I am thoroughly a republican, and at-
tached, from complete conviction, to the institutions of my country; but


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS 209


I am a republican without gall, and have no bitterness in my creed. I
have no relish for puritans either in religion or politics, who are for push-
ing principles to an extreme, and for overturning everything that stands
in the way of their own zealous career. I have, therefore, felt a strong
distaste for some of those locofoco luminaries who of late have been urging
strong and sweeping measures, subversive of the interests of great classes
of the community. Their doctrines may be excellent in theory, but, if
enforced in violent and uncompromising opposition to all our habitudes,
may produce the most distressing effects. The best of remedies must be
cautiously applied, and suited to the taste and constitution of the pa-
tient. . . . Ours is a government of compromise. We have several great
and distinct interests bound up together, which, if not separately consulted
_ and severally accommodated, may harass and impair each other. . .
I always distrust the soundness of political councils that are accompanied
by acrimonious and disparaging attacks upon any great class of our
fellow-citizens. Such are those urged to the disadvantage of the great
trading and financial classes of our country. You yourself know. . .
how important these classes are to the prosperous conduct of the com-
plicated affairs of this immense empire. You yourself know, in spite of
all the common-place cant and obloquy that has been cast upon them by
political spouters and scribblers, what general good faith and fair dealing
prevails throughout these classes. Knaves and swindlers there are doubt-
less among them, as there are among all great classes of men; but I de-
clare that I looked with admiration at the manner in which the great
body of our commercial and financial men have struggled on through the
tremendous trials which have of late overwhelmed them, and have en-
deavored, at every pecuniary sacrifice, to fulfill their engagements. (Life
and Letters, Vol. II, pp. 312-313.)


This persuasive presentation of the philosophy of compromise,
with its implicit defense of capitalism, marks Irving’s drift back
to the middle class with which he had long before broken./ In the
six years since his return he had watched the country react to the
great panic, and he went with it in its veering towards the Whiggery
of Henry Clay. \ The fragile bonds of his attachment to the De-
mocracy were becoming tenuous; other attachments were in-
sensibly drawing him towards the more congenial representatives
of wealth. [ He had all his life associated with the Tory classes and
it was easy for him to transfer his loyalty to the American Tories.
Under such influences began a slow rapprochement cordial to-
wards the new philosophy of progress. He was seized with the
common mania of speculation and made some unfortunate in-
vestments in wild lands and railways that seriously hampered him
later, and he commercialized his literary reputation by such money-
making ventures as Astoria and the Adventures of Captain Bonne-


210 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


ville. He discovered a new romance in the great business of ex-
ploitation, and found the hand of God in the profits of unearned
increment. In the letter above quoted from, he justified the ways
of speculation thus:


There are moral as well as physical phenomena incident to every state
of things, which may at first appear evils, but which are devised by an
all-seeing Providence for some beneficent purpose. Such is the spirit of
speculative enterprise which now and then rises to an extravagant height,
and sweeps throughout the land. . . . The late land speculations, so
much deprecated, though ruinous to many engaged in them, have forced
agriculture and civilization into the depths of the wilderness; have laid
open the recesses of primeval forests; made us acquainted with the most
available points of our immense interior; have cast the germs of future
towns and cities and busy marts in the heart of savage solitudes, and
studded our vast rivers and internal seas with ports that will soon give
activity to a vast internal commerce. Millions of acres which might
otherwise have remained idle and impracticable wastes, have been brought
under the dominion of the plough, and hundreds of thousands of industri-
ous yeomen have been carried into the rich but remote depths of our
immense empire, to multiply and spread out in every direction, and give
solidity and strength to our confederacy. All this has in a great measure
been effected by the extravagant schemes of land speculators. I am, there-
fore, inclined to look upon them with a more indulgent eye than they are
considered by those violent politicians who are prescribing violent checks
and counter measures, and seem to have something vindictive in their
policy. (Life and Letters, Vol. Il, p. 314.)


Thus did Irving become completely domesticated in the new
world that Rip Van Winkle had found so disconcerting when he
came upon it out of the quiet colonial past. The rediscovery of
America proved to be an agreeable business, and profitable in a

, professional way. His enthusiasms, which in 1831 he felt were
“S-‘‘waning as to many objects of past interest,” were stimulated by
the vast stir of the country, and the spirit of romance once more
ran briskly in his veins. The better part of a year he rambled
widely about the country, in order, as he said, to get at home “upon
American themes.” He visited Boston and the White Mountains,
then West to Ohio and St. Louis, then with an Indian commissioner
he penetrated the southwest prairies as far as the wild Pawnee
country beyond the South Canadian River, then to New Orleans
and Charleston, finally settling down in Washington to immerse
himself in politics. From there he passed over the Potomac for an
extended trip through the Old Dominion, returning to New York


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS 211


where he spent some time with Astor at Hell Gate, finally in 1835
settling at Tarrytown which was to be his home to the last./ He
had definitely determined on his new field of work. His imagina-
tion had been stirred by his visit to the prairies; the romance of the
westward expansion was beginning to find expression in the works
of Timothy Flint and James Hall; the public interest was ripe and
_John Jacob Astor was at hand to encourage him. Thus stimulated
‘Irving proposed to make the field of western romance his own, with
the result that he published in quick succession 4 Tour of the
Prairies, Astoria, and The Adventures of Captain Bonneville.

( On the whole the new venture did not prosper. / The spirt of the
West was not to be captured by one whose heart was in Spain.
In A Tour of the Prairies there is a certain homely simplicity and
straightforwardness that spring from a plain recital of undramatic
experience; and in Astoria there is an unembellished narrative of
appalling hardship and heroic endurance, with none of the tawdry
romantics that mar the work of Flint and Hall. Yet neither is
creatively imaginative, neither stirs one with a sense of high drama.
The atmosphere of Snake River could not be created in the quiet
study at the “Roost”’; it needed the pen of a realist to capture the
romance of those bitter wanderings in mountain and sagebrush.
It is journeyman work, and on every page one is conscious of the
professional man of letters faithfully doing this day’s allotment.
It is much the same with his Life of Washington. In this last great
undertaking Irving no longer writes with gusto. The golden days
of Diedrich Knickerbocker and Rip Van Winkle are long since
gone; the magic is departed from his pen; and a somewhat tired
old gentleman is struggling to fulfill his contract with his publisher.
It was a mistake to venture on the work, despite the fact that he
had long been planning it. His historical equipment was inad-
equate. He might make a pretty story out of Washington’s early
life and his days with the army, but he was far too ignorant of
politics, too credulous in judging his materials, to interpret justly
the fierce party struggles that seethed about the President. Quite
unconsciously in this last work he returned to the political prej-
udices of his youth, and wrote an account of Washington’s admin-
istrations deeply colored by his Federalist sources.

. The most distinguished of our early romantics, Irving in the end
was immolated on the altar of romanticism. \ The pursuit of the
picturesque lured him away into sterile wastes, and when the will-


hee,


212 THE MIND OF rar MIDDLE EAST


o’-the-wisp was gone he was left empty. A born humorist, the
gayety of whose spirits overflowed the brim, he was lacking in a
brooding intellectuality, and instead of coming upon irony at the
bottom of the cup—as the greater humorists have come upon it
after life has had its way with them—he found there only sentiment
and the dreamy poetic. As the purple haze on the horizon of his
mind was dissipated by a sobering experience, he tried to sub-
stitute an adventitious glamour; as romance faded, sentiment
supplied its place. So long as youth and high spirits endured, his
inkwell was a never-failing source of gayety, but as the sparkle
subsided he over-sweetened his wine. This suffices to account for
the fact that all his better work was done early; and this explains
why the Knickerbocker History remains the most genial and vital
of his volumes. The gayety of youth bubbles and effervesces in
those magic pages, defying time to do its worst. The critic may
charge the later Irving with many and heavy shortcomings, but
the romantic smoke-clouds that ascend from Wouter Van Twiller’s
pipe cannot be dissipated by the winds of criticism.


II
JAMES KIRKE PAULDING


Far more native to the limitations and hardships of American
life \and far more loyal to its homely aspirations jwas James Kirke
Paulding, | whose literary reputation came to be so deeply over-
shadowed by that of his early friend./ Sprung from plain stock—
whether English or Dutch his son remained in doubt, although
inclining to believe the former—and cradled in the fierce partisan-
ship of the Revolutionary struggle, he never abandoned his in-
herited liberalism or found his love of country growing less. ) To
the end of his life he remained a primitive American of an earlier
generation, somewhat puzzled by the ways of another age that
speculated in prosperity by running in debt, and measured a man’s
wealth by the amount he owed. His father had been an active
Whig in a Tory neighborhood who did not stint his service to the
Revolutionary cause. He was a member of the local Committee
of Safety, and acted as State Commissary to the Revolutionary
forces, a post which in the end brought him to ruin. In the dark
days of the struggle he pledged his private credit for supplies, and
was never reimbursed by a negligent commonwealth. The out-
come was financial disaster. The father was imprisoned for debt


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS 213


and his courage broken, and the family long suffered from want.
“We were not only poor,” the son wrote later, “but steeped in
poverty.” But there was excellent stuff in the awkward, dreamy
country boy. He was “built of stubborn oak,’’ he remarked
whimsically, ‘‘seasoned in the school of poverty, like an old chim-
ney-piece in a log cabin.” When at the age of nineteen he was sud-
denly plunged into the world of New York City, he was shy, un-
couth, self-educated, and felt himself an alien in Wall Street and
Broadway. For the Federalist upper class he seems to have felt
the instinctive hostility of the outsider; but through the agency of
the Irvings—an elder sister having married William Irving—he
‘was brought into the companionship of a group of clever young
-men, and under the stimulus of high talk and exuberant pranks,
the latent idealism of his nature expanded freely. This was his
university, and while it left something to be desired in the way of
discipline, suffering too free a rein to his discursive fancy, it quick-
ened his native wit, awakened his creative imagination, and put
him to school to the pleasant craft of writing. { The Salmagundi
Papers were the first fruits of the literary apprenticeship of the
group, and although Irving has come to receive the chief credit for
them, the wit of Paulding seems quite as sprightly, and his
gayety as fresh.

( That his later career in letters was less notable resulted in part
from the fact that he was an inveterate rambler by nature, and
partly from the fact that writing with him was occasional, |a pleas-
ant relief from humdrum duties, and he did not choose to lay a curb
on his vagrant ways. In letters as in life he was always discursive,
forgetful of his objective in his delight at the beauty of the country-
side, loading his pages down with nature descriptions and clogging
the action of his tales with somewhat tedious homilies. After
forty years of writing he remained still an amateur, incapable of
pruning the wilful tangle of his fancy—an essayist of the leisurely
school who ventured incautiously into the realms of verse and fic-
tion without mastering the technic of the business. There was
perhaps too much of the homespun in him to permit him to become
an artist./ The experience of his youth marked him too deeply, and
all his life he remained as conscious a son of the people as Hamlin
Garland was later, delighting to chronicle the ways of the obscure,
somewhat militant in proclaiming the excellence of homely vir-
tues. Formed in an environment that bred a spontaneous democ-


214 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


racy, he was a confirmed equalitarian, untroubled by the itch to
rise in the world or exploit his fellows. / Alone among the Knicker-
bocker group, he was a Jéffersonian in the fundamentals of his
social creed;)not in the lesser matters of Kentucky Resolutions and
the like, but in his Physiocratic leanings, in his profound distrust
of all middle-class programs and his preference for the simple
country ways over the city economy; and it was this deep-rooted
agrarianism that set him against capitalism and made him a later
Jacksonian. In him there spoke out the authentic New York, not
of Broadway merchants or Wall Street bankers, but of the plain
rank and file of the people. Untouched by foreign travel but
widely acquainted with his native America, he was fashioned out
of the wool from the fireside loom and domestic dye-pot.

A writer so consciously and completely American would find
abundant occasion to put his pen to the service of his country at
a time when every English traveler turned critic and on his return
home published a volume of truculent disparagement of ways and
things American. For the most part those volumes were a defense
of Toryism by the easy method of attacking democracy, and they
annoyed Paulding beyond measure. He would not let them go un-
answered, and from The Diverting History of John Bull and Brother
Jonathan (1812) to John Bull in America (1825), he published five
different replies, varying his attack from argument to burlesque.
Something more than loyalty to his country seems to have spurred
him on./| His dislike of England was inveterate, partly because of
the old Revolutionary feud, partly because of later antagonisms.
Almost at the hour of his birth the Paulding family had been forced
to quit their home for fear of the British and Tories who daily
threatened them; and a deep hatred of the British Tory he drew )
in with his mother’s milk. To him England was a Tory country,
reeking with social injustice, the home of ancient abuses, and
necessarily the implacable enemy of democratic America. He was
convinced that want and tyranny and subserviency dogged the
daily life of the English common people; and the English Reviews
that attacked the ways of democracy with caustic British superior-
ity, filled his honest republican heart with wrath, and he jabbed
his quill into the tough skin of John Bull with patriotic vigor.
The shame of the burning of the capitol rankled in the American
heart, and Paulding discovered fresh grievances in remembering
that from England had come the banking system and the “shin-


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS 215


plaster dynasty” that would breed in the new country the evils of
the old if they were not looked to. He was convinced that the
mother country wished ill to her offspring, and he thanked God in
successive volumes that democratic America was not what Tory
England was.

For despite the English travelers—Weld, Parkinson, Ashe, Brad-
bury, Hall, Trollope, and all the rest of the loquacious tribe—
Paulding was persuaded that America constituted the hope of the
future. Here in this land he believed that men should eventually
achieve a measure of well-being undreamed of in the old world;
already the old tyrannies had been destroyed, the ancient poverty
_ abated. From this stubborn idealism nothing could turn him aside.
It finds expression in an early poem, and it provides the theme for
his last novel. The Backwoodsman, published in 1818, is a rambling
and somewhat plethoric idyll of the West, the hero of which is
an archetype of the oppressed and exploited, who finds a generous
asylum in the free land beyond the Alleghenies, and like Créve-
cceur’s Andrew the Hebridean, expands the horizons of his mind
under the beneficent touch of freedom. The Puritan and His
Daughter, written over thirty years later, deals with a different
phase of the same general theme. It is a vivid picture of the strife
engendered in America by immigrant families who bring hither
their old-world feuds and animosities, and the curative influence
of the free environment that, in discovering the good rather than
the bad in neighbors, draws together the younger generation despite
the jealous parental authority that would keep them apart. The
bigoted fathers make trouble enough—the fanatical Puritan who
fought with Cromwell and the headstrong Cavalier who defended
divine right—wilful men whom even the common frontier perils
cannot reconcile or make tolerant; but they are powerless to thwart
the ways of nature. The son of the Cavalier discovers an attractive
woman in the daughter of the Puritan, and when love walks in the
twilight what matters theology or politics. Youth has its own no-
tions of divine right; in its creed the dogmas of John Calvin and
Robert Filmer have no place; and if the lovers are more tolerant
than the fathers it only proves that a freer environment will man-
age to soften the traditional animosities and beget a kindlier race
from the merging of classes. Such at least is the characteristic
thesis that Paulding elaborates through two volumes of discur-
sive narrative interspersed with bits of vigorous action.


216 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Of this kindly melting pot Paulding himself was a product.
He had rid himself wholly of all ties that would bind him to Europe.
He was partisan to no causé or party, literary or political, of the old
world. He was content to be American and suffer his native land
to bound his loyalties. | In his own literary practice he refused to
imitate the current English fashions and he spoke his mind freely
to the American reading public for its greedy swallowing of cheap
imported food. He did not take kindly to the English romantic
writers, and went often out of his way to have a dig at his two pet
aversions, Scott and Byron.? His amusing tale of Koningsmarke,
the Long Finne, is a good-natured burlesque of certain romantic
mannerisms of the Waverley novels, and a defense of Cooper’s
Pioneers for its homely realism. Paulding’s dislike of the “blood-
pudding” fiction that had come over from England, and that
proved so disastrous to the genius of Gilmore Simms, was in-
veterate, and in his whimsical dedication of The Puritan and His
Daughter to the sovereign people he comments on the public taste
thus:


I am not ignorant of your preference for high-seasoned dishes of foreign
cookery, most especially blood-puddings, plentifully spiced and sauced
with adultery, seduction, poisoning, stabbing, suicide, and all other sub-
lime excesses of genius. I am aware also that Your Majesty, being your-
self able to perform impossibilities, believed nothing impossible. Possess-
ing this clew to Your Majesty’s royal approbation, I solemnly assure
you I have gone as far as I could to secure it, with a safe conscience. I
have laid about me pretty handsomely, and sprinkled a good number of
pages with blood enough, I hope, to make a pudding. If I have any
apology to make to Your Majesty, it is for permitting some of my people
to die a natural death, a thing so unnatural that it has been banished
from all works of fiction aiming at the least semblance to truth. . . . But,
may it please Your Majesty, I am troubled with weak nerves, and my
great grandfather was a Quaker. I am, therefore, naturally averse to
bloodshed, and have more than once nearly fallen into convulsions over
the pages of Monsieur Alexandre Dumas, whom I consider a perfect
Guillotine among authors. In short, may it please Your Majesty, I
abjure poisoning, or smothering with charcoal, and confess myself de-
plorably behind the spirit of this luminous age, which is as much in ad-
vance of all others, as the forewheel of a wagon is ahead of the hind ones.


| Inhis politics—and as a good American of the times he took his
politics seriously—Paulding found in the popular drift towards
Jacksonian democracy an expression of his deepest convictions.


2 See Letters from the South, Vol. I, Letter XXII.


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS DAT


It was moving in the direction he had long faced, and he went with
it whole-heartedly, enjoyed some of the emoluments of office, and
eventually served as Secretary to the Navy in the cabinet of Van
Buren. With Jackson’s attack on the Bank he must have been
in deep sympathy, for his dislike of the new financial system was of
long standing. His father had suffered heavily from a depreciated
Continental currency, and he early came to distrust all banks and
banking. His political views, indeed, were pretty much deter-
mined by the Physiocratic convictions that underlay his thinking.
He had been a Jeffersonian long before the rise of Jacksonianism. )
Portions of his Letters from the South, published in 1817, seem like
excerpts from the agrarian writings of John Taylor of Caroline.
There is the same contemptuous analysis of the ‘“shin-plaster
dynasty,” the same concern at the growth of trading towns, the
same conviction that cities and poverty and low morals go hand in
hand, the same trust in the perennial wholesomeness of country
life. Such a passage as this will suffice to reveal his leanings to-
wards a Physiocratic economy:


I was saying, that we have too many people living in cities, in proportion
to our farmers, who, after all, are the backbone of every country, whence
originates its riches and its solid strength. . . . Yet our people cling to the
towns and cities, attracted by the hope of sudden wealth, and despising
the slow, yet sure, rewards of agriculture, which, without leading a man
to inordinate riches, secure him for ever from the chances of sinking into
beggary or want. The race of paupers receives no recruits from them;
for in all my sojournings, I may say with truth, that I never saw an in-
dustrious farmer forsaken, “‘or his seed begging bread.”’ One great cause
of the disproportion of numbers . . . between the agricultural and other
classes of the community, is the great system of paper money, which has
struck at the root of regular, persevering industry, whose rewards, though
slow, are always certain. For some years back, hardly a tradesman in
our cities, and of late in our little towns (each of which, however insignifi-
cant, has now its snug little bank) thinks of growing rich by his industry.
No; he must get accommodations at some bank, and plunge into specula-
tions: nor can you now go into a cobbler’s stall without seeing a bank
notice, or perhaps two or three, stuck up with an awl at the chimney-
piece, to remind the honest gentleman that he owes a great deal more
than he can pay. Thus is the axe laid to the very root of national morals,
and consequently national prosperity, and the whole American people,
farmers excepted, sunk into an abject subjection to banks and their
directors. (Letters from the South, Vol. 1, pp. 100-102.)


So confirmed an agrarian would easily arrive at agrarian con-
clusions in his meditations on the nature and functions of the


218 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


political state. Unlike Irving, who, having no political convictions,
was equally pleased with Whig or Democrat if he happened to be a
gentleman, Paulding was something of a political philosopher
with clear-cut doctrines. He was too shrewd an observer of ways
political to be caught by party cries, or to ignore the class selfishness
that would make government a party to its ends. Asa Jeffersonian
he retained an old-fashioned distrust of the political state. As
an eighteenth-century liberal he would keep the state within nar-
row bounds. Jealous for a freedom worthy of free citizens, he
wanted government to keep hands off what did not concern it.)
He would not have the state used as a cat’s-paw to pull anybody’s
chestnuts out of the fire, whether in the form of Clay’s American
System, or what not. For protective tariffs and internal improve-
ments—those grandiose schemes for hastening prosperity—he felt
an old-fashioned repugnance that found issue in amusing carica-
ture. In Westward Ho! he introduces a French publican of a
Mississippi River village who does not care for Yankee improve-
ments and describes them thus:


Diable! monsieur, another improvement; last year they assess me for
one grand public improvement! one road to go somewhere, I don’t know.
Eh bien! I pay the money. Well, this year they assess me for one other
grand public improvement—very grand—voila, monsieur, one other road,
right alongside the other, both going to the same place. Diable! I no
want to travel on two turnpike roads. Ah! monsieur le colonel, I shall be
very rich, O! very rich indeed, by these grand improvements. They take
away all my land to make room for the grand improvement; they take
away all my money to pay for him, and then they tell me my land worth
four, six time so much as before. Peste! what that to me when my land
all gone to the dem public improvement, hey? I shall be very rich then.
Diable! I wish myself gone to some country where every thing was go
backwards—what you call tail foremost, instead of forwards, for the dem
march of improvement shall ruin me at last. (Vol. I], Chapter XVI.)


Satire aimed at the new gospel of progress is not infrequent in
Paulding. In Koningsmarke he drew the picture of a politician that
was perhaps intended for a burlesque of Henry Clay.| The worthy
Wolfgang Langfanger, member of the council of Elsingburgh,) hav-
ing ‘“‘brought his private affairs into great confusion, by devoting
too much time to the public good,” began “‘to think it high time
the public good should repay some part of its weighty obligations.
He had accordingly invented, and persuaded the Heer Piper to
put into practice, a system of internal improvement, which has been


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS 219


ee from time to time, in this country ever since with great
success. ) The essence of his plan consisted in running in debt for
the present, and living afterwards upon the anticipation of future
wealth” (Book Second, Chapter VI). Big with his wonderful
idea the busy councilor projected great docks and wharves for
the commerce that was to be invited to come, a fine canal that
would cut off a full six miles for barges that were not yet on the
stocks, and a magnificent plan of new streets that led through
houses that must be pulled down and fields that must forego their
usual harvests. Such goodly improvements naturally cost money,
and to maintain the public credit taxes were levied, and still more
taxes, until, like the French tavern-keeper, the good people of
Elsingburgh were brought to doubt the wisdom of investing in
future prosperity at so high a present cost.


But the masterpiece of Langfanger’s policy was that of pulling down
an old market, and building a new one in another part of the village, in
the management of which business he is supposed to have laid down the
first principles of the great and thriving science of political economy, or
picking people’s pockets on a grand scale. He caused the people living
near the old market to pay roundly for its removal as a nuisance; and
then he caused the people that lived about where the new one was to be
built, to pay roundly for the vast pleasure and advantage of its neighbour-
hood. Thus he pinched them through both ears, and got the reputation
of a great financier. (Book Seventh, Chapter III.)


[ Koningsmarke is Paulding’s most interesting work,/and the
utter neglect that has overtaken it is far from deserved. (It is
native and original, full of shrewd comment and sly satire, and it
embodies most of Paulding’s pet theories and aversions. / Few books
of the time are more amusing than this tale of the Long Finne who
moves in a dark cloud of mystery woven by Bombie of the Friz-
zled Head, barks his sturdy shins on many a blood-curdling ad-
venture, proves a true knight to his lady, and in the end turns out
to be a very ordinary fellow who has been blown up to heroic size
by the black art of romance. Paulding must have had great fun
writing it, for his wit still preserves its freshness after a hundred
years. It is a whimsical satire on the ways of the hour, literary
and other, set against the background of an old Swedish settlement
on the banks of the Delaware; but the chief purpose of its quizzi-
cal pages is the pouring of a broadside into the picturesque hull
of contemporary fiction. It is an attack on the abundant extrav-


220 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


agance of current romance that had been inflated by “Monk”
Lewis and Sir Walter. Paulding cleverly hits off the high-flown.
and ghostly, the love of blood pudding, the snobbish contempt for
the homely and native. Written in 1823, the year of Cooper’s
Pioneers, it defends the realism of characters and setting in that
work against the charge of vulgarity and commonplace, but it
takes pains to satirize Cooper’s noble red man of the forest. ps
ing’s Indians are more like Bird’s than Cooper’s, material for bur-
lesque rather than romance, but as he runs over the names of the
warriors—‘‘the Big Buffalo, the Little Duck-Legs, the Sharp-
Faced Bear, the Walking Shadow, the Iron Cloud, the Jumping
Sturgeon, the Belly Ache, and the Doctor, all legitimate sovereigns,
with copper rings in their noses, blanket robes of state, and painted
faces’”’—amusement at their childishness is tempered by the rec-
ognition that they have been overreached and dispossessed by
the grasping white men.

In some of his later work the line between burlesque and serious
is not so clearly marked, and one hesitates to pronounce whether
Westward Ho! is a sober attempt at popular romance or a reductio
ad absurdum of the current romantic flummery. Certainly it
is a preposterous story with its melancholy hero driven mad by
fear of madness and indulging in gibberish that comes straight out
of Shakespeare, and with its ample crop of stock characters—Mas-
ter Zeno Paddock and Mrs. Judith Paddock with their prying
inquisitiveness, Colonel Dangerfield the easy-going Virginia gentle-
man who in staking his estate on a horse race embodies the plan-
tation tradition, and Bushfield the backwoodsman who cannot
live in a world that has left off its moccasins, and removes to a
place where there are no laws and no lawyers and where constables
do not visit a man who has thrashed his neighbor. Westward Ho!
is not an amusing book; it is quite lacking in local color, and its
casual bits of realism and occasional satire are too inconsequential
to signify. The Dutchman’s Fireside, written at about the same
time, is far more successful. It purports to be an account of the
Knickerbocker society in the days of the Old French war, and
it contains some lovely pictures of old times that one reads with
pleasure; but it indulges somewhat freely in adventure amongst
the Indians and in the war, and its love story is needlessly ro-
mantic. Although Paulding still protests against a blood-pudding
‘diet, he indulges occasionally in the high-flown, to the detriment of


TWO KNICKERBOCKER ROMANTICS 221


the idyllic note. Romance was all about him and he could not
wholly escape its compulsions. Too casual in his work, too undis-
ciplined in the craft of writing, he remained to the end an amusing
amateur, a homespun man of letters who never took the trouble
to master his technic. There was excellent stuff in him, solider
perhaps than in Irving, but his failure suggests the difference be-
tween the journeyman and the artist.


CHAPTER IV


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER
Critic

FEentmorE Cooper is one of the puzzling figures of his generation.
In his substantial character was embodied what may well appear
no more than a bundle of contradictions. Romancer and social
critic, feudal-minded yet espousing a republican faith, )he pretty
much baffled his own generation in its testy attempts to under-
stand him, as he has pretty much baffled later times. No other
major writer, unless it be Whitman, has been so misunderstood, and
no other offers a knottier problem to the student of American
letters. The stubborn clay of his nature was molded to a pattern
unlike that of his fellows, and the difference was long accounted
to him as a grave shortcoming. His outspoken individualism was a
constant irritant to a sensitive majority, and his aloofness from the
common enthusiasms was reckoned no better than treason to his
native land. The right of the individual to question the herd
pronouncements was a right not acknowledged by the herd,
and the more it tried to silence Cooper’s tongue the more caustic
and loquacious it became. He refused to be silenced though it
should come to open warfare. His later years in consequence
were rendered unhappy by a thousand petty vexations, and his
creative work was brought only this side of shipwreck.

How and why so great a misadventure befell him are questions
of prime importance to which little attention has been given.
That his tactlessness was at fault is commonly believed—his
tactlessness and a certain pugnacious virtue that would inculcate
righteousness by means of a broken head. But such an explana-
tion, true enough so far as it goes, does not go far enough. The
trouble lay deeper than that; it lay in the mind of Cooper himself,
‘in the doubts and uncertainties that dwelt side by side with stub-
born dogmatisms, troubling his speculations and perplexing his
plainest counsels. And that trouble must be traced to an under-
lying conflict between the man and his age, between the ideal and
the real, between high loyalties and petty fact. Fenimore Cooper

222


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 223


was the barometer of a gusty generation, sensitive to every storm
on the far horizon. No other observer of that changing genera-
tion suffered so keenly in mind and conscience from the loosening
of ancient ties, and none labored so hard to keep his countrymen
to the strait path of an old-fashioned rectitude. His busy life
covered the middle years of the great shift from an aristocratic
order to a capitalistic order, and this revolutionary change pro-
vided him ample materials for brooding speculation. At every
turn in the road fresh doubts assailed him. The perplexities and
dogmatisms that clutter so many of his later pages, playing havoc
with his romantic art, are a testimony to the confusions of a
generation in the midst of epic changes. As honest a man as
ever spoke his mind frankly, he endeavored to reconcile the
irreconcilable, and establish sure standards amid the wreck of all
standards. He could not drift. He must discover some working
agreement between the old America and the new, between the
reputed excellencies of the traditional aristocratic order, and the
reputed justice of the democratic ideal. But unfortunately for
this difficult business he was temperamentally ill-equipped. He
was always at war with himself. His loyalties and his conscience
ran at cross-purposes. His mind was packed with prejudices as an
egg with meat. He was too partisan to compromise, and too
honest to be content with the shoddy. His instinctive roman-
ticisms were always being buffeted by fact, and his troubled mind
in consequence was forever constructing laborious defense-
mechanisms.

For those deep confusions that marred his later work and brought
such bitter misunderstanding upon him, his heritage was much to
blame. A romantic at heart, he was out of sympathy with the
dominant romanticisms of his generation. Certain hold-overs
from the past held him back from hearty participation in the
present. He loved the world that was falling into decay too much
to put away its virtues with its smallclothes; he would preserve
what was excellent in the old to enrich and dignify what was
excellent in the new; he would have the young democracy learn
the decorum of a staid aristocracy. It is this fond lingering between
worlds that sets Cooper apart from his fellows. He was an English
squire of the old school turned republican, who did not quite
like the company he found himself in. He was equally puzzled
at the bumptious leveling of the coonskin democracy, and the


224 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


exploitative spirit of Wall Street Whiggery. But though he railed
at the newfangled ways with the testiness of a squire, he was too
confirmed a republican, too deeply concerned that the great
venture in republicanism should demonstrate its wisdom, to over-
look its shortcomings. He would have it be so true to its ideal that
the world would acknowledge its excellence. He could not cir-
cumscribe his duties to election-day hurrahs; he must ferret out
treason in the market place; he must be faithful in counsel though
he utter unwelcome truths. It was the very faithfulness of Cooper
to his conception of an ideal republic that brought him into
collision with his fellows and filled his later days with bitterness.

It is easy to see where Cooper got those stubborn notions that
marked him as the last of our eighteenth-century squires and left
him obsolete after the adoption of the Constitution of 1821. From
his father, from the Tory rector of St. Peter’s, Albany, who first
schooled him, from the Loyalist family of De Lancey into which
he married, from Governor Jay and the old gentry with whom he
was brought up, he imbibed certain stalwart conservatisms—
political, religious, social, economic—that mingled in his blood
and nourished the tissues of caste prejudice from which
his maturer social philosophy struggled in vain to escape. In
spite of his deliberate acceptance of the democratic principle, as
he understood that principle, he remained at heart as sturdily
eighteenth-century as any fox-hunting master of English acres.
He had early been bred in the old traditions at Otsego Hall where
he spent his boyhood. | His father, Judge William Cooper, ‘“‘a
testy and choleric gentleman easily wrought into passion,’’—whom
he idealized as Judge Templeton in The Pioneers—was an old-
school politician of high Federalist persuasion, a vigorous, not
to say truculent, embodiment of the stake-in-society principle of
statecraft.) Smitten with the common itch for large land holdings,
he had got his hands on a huge virgin tract which he managed
in the old baronial fashion. He was a real lord of the manor and
late in life he recalled that “there were 40,000 souls holding land,
directly or indirectly, under me”; and in the year 1800 “he set
up a claim to having placed the plough upon more acres than any
other man in America” (quoted in D. R. Fox, The Decline of
Aristocracy in the Politics of New York, p. 136). Otsego Hall in
Cooperstown was a frontier citadel of Federalism defending the
western marches against Jeffersonian democracy, and Judge


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 225


Cooper used his economic power over tenants with telling effect.
He “rode far and wide in the cause of Jay and later Aaron Burr,
always preaching the musty doctrine that government had better
be left to gentlemen, and that simple folk should vote as they were
told” (ibid., pp. 136-137). When persuasion failed he resorted to
threats, and in 1792 he was before the legislature on impeachment
charges. From the testimony it appears that the patriarchal
Judge used direct methods with tenants in arrears; he “had been
round to the people and told them that they owed him, and that
unless they voted for Mr. Jay, he would ruin them” (zbid., p. 140).
By such arguments it was thought some seven hundred votes had
been brought into the Federalist column by this exemplar of the
old virtues.

But Cooper had drifted with his age far from such old-fashioned
methods of class domination. In spite of his great love for his
father he seems never to have espoused the latter’s political creed.
With the disintegration of Federalism the young man went with
the country in its turning towards French romanticism. When
and why he adopted the democratic faith is not apparent, but
until middle life it would seem that he concerned himself little
with political theory. He remained a provincial American with an
intense pride of patriotism. But his long stay in Europe, lasting
from June, 1826, to November, 1833, and the Jacksonian revolu-
tion that took place during his absence, put him upon an anxious
examination of first principles, and thereafter to the end of his
life the social and political problems of America were a burden
on his conscience. ) He arrived late at a reasoned political faith,
as he arrived late at his literary art, and it is impossible to trace
the steps of his intellectual development; yet confused though his
thinking was, and shot through with narrowing prejudices, he
persistently sought for the light; and the germinal source of
his dissatisfactions was the deepening conviction that, in Frank-
lin’s phrase, the affairs of this world are preposterously managed.
From this conviction Cooper never swerved. The contrast every-
where between the real and the ideal took hold of his mind as an
obsession, and put an end to his contentment. His romantic
art suffered from the intrusion of realism; the romancer was con-
stantly impelled to turn critic. It was his travels more than
anything else that destroyed his provincial contentment. The
perturbing influence of that experience abroad has never perhaps


226 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


been adequately considered by his critics. No other American
was so unsettled by contact with European civilization. It was a
Europe in the throes of révolution and Cooper threw himself with
enthusiasm into French politics, hoping for a wise republican issue
from the overturn. / But it was a Europe also of dignified and gener-
ous culture that was a challenge to his Americanism. , It made a
critic of him and turned his mind to political and social problems.
Europe appealed to his native aristocratic prejudices, but re-
pelled his democratic; Jacksonian America appealed to his dem-
ocratic prejudices, but rode roughshod over his aristocratic. He
found himself nowhere at home. Puzzled and perturbed, he leveled
his shafts at both worlds and sought a haven of refuge in vicarious
existence, at times in the wilderness beyond the soil and smutch
of the Jacksonian frontier, at times in the Utopian world of The
Crater where an honest man could find free play for his creative
energy, until the trouble makers came upon him.

In temperament and outlook this later Cooper was another John
Adams modified by changing times. A realist in his long brooding
over social and political evils, he was at heart an idealist greatly
concerned with justice amongst men, with a romantic fondness
for dwelling on the virtues of earlier days. Like Adams he under-
stood very well that equality is a Utopian dream; that social
classes exist in every society that has accumulated property, and
that sovereignty in the long run will fall into the hands that con-
trol the social economics.!_ The problem he set himself to consider
was the problem of reconciling this universal fact with his own pre-
dilection in favor of democracy. That he regarded himself as a
democrat his emphatic assertions suffice to prove; but no more
than Emerson was he deceived by the spurious democracy of the
times. ‘‘The writer believes himself to be as good a democrat as
there is in America,” he said in the Introduction to The American
Democrat. “But his democracy is not of the impracticable school.
He prefers a democracy to any other system, on account of its com-
parative advantages, but not on account of its perfection. He
knows it has evils; great and increasing evils, and evils peculiar to
itself; but he believes that monarchy and aristocracy have more.
It will be very apparent to all who read this book, that he is not a
believer in the scheme of raising men very far above their natural
propensities.” He would lift his voice in no hurrah for the ma-


1 See the Preface to The Redskins.


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 227


jority, for he knew that the majority was very likely to be the tool
of the demagogue. He saw no peculiar virtue or special intelligence
in a coonskin cap, and he discovered no advantage in log cabins
and hard cider as a training school for statesmen. He had watched
the disgraceful campaign of 1840 with concern that gentlemen
should stoop to the demagoguery that marked that electoral
debauch; and it confirmed him in the conviction that ‘‘old-
fashioned, high principled gentlemen” of an earlier age would
never have been guilty of such traffic in votes—men like Chancellor
Livingston who devoted his later years to raising Merino sheep,
or John Jay who after filling with dignity many high offices retired
to his estate to concern himself with new varieties of melons.

Hating all humbug, Cooper made it his business to free his mind
from the several varieties of cant that were overrunning America
like pigweed. ‘‘Had a suitable compound offered,” he said of
The American Democrat, “‘the title of this book would have been
something like ‘Anti-cant.’ ” Roughly, the history of his essays in
criticism falls into two broad phases: the struggle to pull himself
out of the bog of eighteenth-century caste philosophy—from that
stake-in-society theory which his father upheld; and the struggle
to escape the fallacies of the nineteenth-century philosophy rising
about him—from the rude equalitarianism of Jacksonian democ-
racy, and the materialism of capitalistic exploitation. His abandon-
ment of the principle of gentleman-rule marks his definite break
with the philosophy of Federalism and the substitution of democ-
racy. It cost him a prolonged struggle, for the social-stake theory
ran with many of his oldest predilections, and the evidence of that
struggle is scattered broadly through the pages written in the late
thirties; but having convinced himself of the social wrong involved
in the principle, he was tireless in refutation. In The American
Democrat he laid down the principle that “A government founded
on the representation of property, however direct or indirect, is
radically vicious. . . . It is the proper business of government to
resist the corruptions of money, and not to depend on them” (On
Property, p. 141). But it is The Monikins, a strange book much
laughed at by the critics, rarely read and little understood, that
concerns itself most largely with the theory. Sadly bungled though
the satire quite obviously is, it is nevertheless a spirited at-
tack on the social-stake principle that reveals how far Cooper
had traveled from the doctrines of Hamilton and Webster, of


228 THE.MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Federalist and Whig. Both England and America—Leaphigh and
Leaplow—show meanly under his caustic analysis, the former
perhaps more meanly than the latter; their institutions, societies,
politics, manners, are an unlovely compound of cant and hypoc-
risy; and the root of the common meanness he discovers in human
selfishness. He conceives of man as a queer mixture of good and
evil from whom much is not to be expected; something nearer to
Swift’s conception than William Ellery Channing’s; with too much
of the Monikin in him to pass for a child of God; prone to error
even under a republican system; insolent, tyrannical, loving
fetishes, given to brag, too poor-spirited to be free, gilding his
fetters and belying Locke’s saying that chains are an ill wearing.
There are depths of bitterness in The Montkins that startle the
reader. It is a tale of doubt and disillusion, Gulliver-like in its
fierceness of attack, that strikes through all the shoddy roman-
ticisms of the times and reduces the current democracy to humbug.
Subjected to such analysis the old Federalist shibboleth of men of
principle and property is no more than the East wind in empty
bellies. The possession of money does not change human nature;
rich as well as poor are driven by selfish interest, and to give a
loose to property power is to invite volitical disaster.


Your social-stake system supposes that he who has what is termed a
distinct and prominent interest in society, will be the most likely to con-
duct its affairs wisely, justly, and disinterestedly. This would be true,
if those great principles which lie at the root of all happiness were re-
spected; but unluckily, the stake in question, instead of being a stake in
justice and virtue, is usually reduced to be merely a stake in property.
. . . Now, all experience shows that the great property-incentives are to
increase property, to protect property, and to buy with property those
advantages which ought to be independent of property, viz., honors,
dignities, power and immunities. I cannot say how it is with men, but
our [Monikin] histories are eloquent on this head. We have had the
property-principle carried out thoroughly in our practice, and the result
has shown that its chief operation is to render property as intact as pos-
sible, and the bones, and sinews, and marrow of all who do not possess


it, its slaves.” (The Monikins, Chapter XXVII.)


But though Cooper might deny the validity of the eighteenth-
century social-stake theory, he saw no valid reason to abandon
his eighteenth-century economics. In his preference for a social
order founded on agriculture he was as confirmed a Physiocrat as
Franklin or Jefferson; and this preference determined his judgment


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 229


on the economic revolution under way in America. A people
living close to the soil was living more wholesomely, he believed,
than a city people immersed in trade and manufacture. For the
capitalistic expansion that followed the new fiscal system of the
seventeen-nineties, he felt an instinctive repugnance. Banking
and the manipulation of credit seemed to him mean and sordid,
and the spirit of speculation that was overrunning the land he
believed was destructive of common morality. The activities of
Wall Street he looked upon with the eyes of an English squire.
To expect any sane progress from such worship of money, to assume
that a high and excellent civilization could result from such wor-
ship, seemed to him plain madness. “God protect the country
that has nothing but commercial towns for capitals,” he wrote his
wife in 1839 (Cooper, Correspondence of James Fenimore Cooper,
Vol. II, p. 404), and the comment found amplification in many a
caustic passage in his novels of criticism. A materialistic middle
class with its gospel of progress interpreted in terms of wasteful
exploitation seemed to him the hateful progeny of a period of
“moral occultation”’; and against this “Yankee” philosophy he
waged an unrelenting warfare. In The Monikins he drew a gloomy
picture of the America of the thirties when the land had come under
a great moral eclipse; and in Home as Found and The Redskins he
commented bitterly on the universal restlessness that was driving
thousands to the new West to seek their fortunes. The settlement
of the Inland Empire was no romance for him. The Great Migra-
tion seemed to imply the break-up of the older America he loved;
and the impact of the frontier spirit upon the country seemed
likely to destroy the last excellence of an earlier age. It marked
for Cooper the final triumph of the acquisitive Yankee spirit,
grasping and lawless in its crude leveling.

From these germinal sources—his love of the dignified ways of
the old manorial families, his contempt for the middle class, his
dislike of a bumptious leveling, his hatred of brag and cant and
enterprise—came those sharp contrasts in his pictures that set the
vulgar present over against the dignified past. His criticism was
in no small part the reaction of a romantic to the unlovely works
of an economic revolution. From his loyalty to the old came
that subtle romanticizing of the eighteenth century that lends a
charm to his tales, and from it came also that vindictive hatred of
the frontier that spurred him to ill-balanced criticism. He could


230 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


not like the new that was destroying the old. Like Emerson he
was a man without a party, but unlike him he sought consolation
in the past rather than the future. The excellence he yearned for
he found in that older world whose stable ways were as yet un-
settled by the romantic revolution, and from the meanness of the
present he stole away to find consolation in the dignity and worth
of honester times. The late eighteenth century became, therefore,
his romantic haven and City of Refuge to which he returned
gladly. He was always seeking to revitalize the old in an environ-
ment where, as he lamented, “the eighteenth century may be set
down as a very dark antiquity.”

That Cooper unconsciously romanticized the past is only too
evident. Too often he accepted its self-proclaimed virtues as sober
fact and created a race of squires that never existed outside his
pages. Realist though he was in certain moods, he abandoned his
realism in the presence of the tie-wig gentry. His father was as
graspingly eighteenth century as Gouverneur Morris and saw to it
that his own nest was well feathered; yet the son failed to perceive
that the dignified professions of those old gentlemen were little
more than splendid gestures. He made the mistake of taking them
at their face value. Honest himself, he attributed an equal honesty
to the older generation, and he watched with unfeigned regret the
disintegration of an order that seemed to him the repository of
much that was excellent. Fragments of its ideals he clung to; its
dignity, its concern for breeding and manners, its fine distinction.
Fragments also of its political convictions: its concern for law and
order, its belief that all just law is founded in morality, its in-
sistence that American government is one of principles and not of
men. | He put his finger shrewdly on certain fallacies of eighteenth-
century theory, but he took too many of its values at par. ) The
twilight is a mighty sorcerer and Cooper was bewitched by the
half light that lingered softly on the familiar past.

This suffices to explain the grounds of the charge of aristocratic
leanings that Cooper was persistently brought under. His bold
defense of the landed gentry gave mortal enmity to the Jack-
sonians, and the tactlessness with which he pointed out the crude
provincialisms of America—the bumptious plebeians he set over
against the priggish gentlemen—was rubbing salt on open sores.
Home as Found and The Redskins were onslaughts on the ways of
the sacred majority that America could not forgive him for. Yet


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 231


no counter criticism ever moved Cooper from his conviction that
gentlemen of an earlier generation possessed dignity, principles,
character, far beyond the speculators and politicians and “small-
potato lawyers” of the present time of “moral occultation”; and
the difference in favor of the old he traced to the economic basis
of the tie-wig gentry. Believing with John Adams that an aristoc-
racy is implicit in every established society, he frankly preferred a
landed to a capitalistic aristocracy. Gentlemen of the old school
were neighborhood patriarchs. Secure in position and possessions
they disdained to keep an ear to the ground or court a silly pop-
ularity. They were squires with a high sense of responsibility to
themselves and society. Their stake in the land was a stabilizing
influence in their lives; and their ample way of living, their well-
bred leisure, their courteous bearing learned from a cosmopolitan
experience, seemed to Cooper a desirable influence in a society
lacking refinement and exact standards. To supplant them with
the new gentry of Wall Street seemed to him plain folly, and he
watched the decay of the old families with a pathetic concern.
The Anti-Rent novels are a long defense of a thesis that comes to
final expression in such a passage as this from The Redskins:


I say that, in a country like this, in which land is so abundant as to
render the evils of a general monopoly impossible, a landed gentry is
precisely what is most needed for the higher order of civilization, including
manners, tastes, and the minor principles, and is the very class which, if
reasonably maintained and properly regarded, would do the most good
at the least risk of any social.caste known. (Chapter XXVI.)


It is not hard, indeed, to understand Cooper’s preference for
Stephen Van Rensselaer the Patroon, to John Jacob Astor the fur
trader, or Commodore Vanderbilt the ferryman; yet such preference
was charged against him as un-American.

It was this revulsion from the meanness of the present that sent
Cooper into the wilderness or out on the high seas, to seek adventure
in the company of nature’s noblemen, and forget the sordidness of
the real. Here again the French school prompted his thinking,
if only to supplement the romance of his boyish recollections.
Natty Bumppo is quite evidently man as he came from the hand
of nature, uncorrupted by the vices of the settlements; indeed one
might question whether the back-to-nature literature can show
another figure so enduringly vital as the Leatherstocking. From
this same material is fashioned Uncas and the younger Chingach-


232 THE .MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


gook-and still other lovable figures of his romances. They belong to
the free wilderness beyond the settlements, where the dramatic
flight and pursuit go on unchecked by impertinent fences. Here
their native virtues expand and their generous gifts find ample
play. They shunned the settlements as Cooper shunned them.
On the frontier, the middle ground between nature and civilization,
Cooper’s spirits flagged. He had no love for the stumpy clearings,
the slovenly cabins, the shiftless squatters; the raw devastation of
the ax grieved him and he breathes contentedly only after he has
left the last scars behind and is in the deep woods beyond the smell
of rum. Such a man obviously was unfitted to write a just account
of the frontier as it straggled westward. He hated its ways too
fiercely to do justice to it, and when he comes upon it in his tales,
when he introduces a frontier figure such as Ishmael Bush in The
Prairie or old Aaron Thousandacres in The Chainbearer, it is to
depict the unhappy state of society where the virtues of nature are
gone and the refinements of civilization not yet come. No writer
has set down a more sweeping indictment of the frontier than
Cooper, and he set it down because the frontier seemed to him the
muddy source of the vulgar leveling he hated so heartily. A
gentleman, whether Indian or squire or scout, Cooper loved to be
with; but a vulgarian he could not endure, and a rascal stirred his
Puritan wrath. In consequence there runs through his work little
of the amusing picaresque strain that the heartier nature of Gilmore
Simms delighted in, and that made him a truer chronicler of frontier
ways.

( Democrat though he professed to be, Cooper shrank from the
logical application of the democratic principle! The adoption of
manhood suffrage in New York brought in its train a sorry scramble
of demagogues to sway the popular will, a debasement of the
press, and a vulgarizing of political life that proved a sore trial
to Cooper’s faith. He was too severely moralist to enjoy the little
weaknesses of human nature, but must set himself up as custodian
of public morals. Affronted by a bumptious vulgarity, he became
the assailant rather than the critic of Jacksonian ways. The land
to which he returned in 1833 was a broad target for his shafts and
he sent them into the white. The America of log cabins and hard
cider seemed to him to have repudiated the traditional standards,
moral as well as cultural, and he attributed the disintegration to
the corruption that came from the extension of the suffrage to


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 233


classes unprepared to use it wisely. It was this that embittered
his criticism in the caustic pages of Homeward Bound and Home
as Found. He was startled and resentful at the changes. “You
have been dreaming abroad,” remarked one of the characters in
the former, ‘“‘while your country has retrograded, in all that is
respectable and good, a century in a dozen years” (Homeward
Bound, Chapter XVII). The colossal brag, the meaningless un-
rest, the abysmal provincialism, he marked as the natural by-
products of the mob mind. In throwing off its old restraints
America was coming to deny all standards of decency and excel-
lence. “What then do you deem our greatest error—our weakest
point?” asks one of his characters, and the reply is explicit:


Provincialisms, with their train of narrow prejudices, and a disposition
to set up mediocrity as perfection, under the double influence of an ig-
norance that unavoidably arises from a want of models, and of the irre-
sistible tendency to mediocrity in a nation where the common mind so
imperiously rules. (Home as Found, Chapter XXV.)


It was during the bustling decade of the forties, when the agra-
rian unrest in York State was putting in jeopardy the old
manorial system, that Cooper’s antagonism to the spirit of level-
ing became bitterest; and it was in defense of the old system that
he wrote the Anti-Rent trilogy that should always be set over
against the Leatherstocking tales. Taken together the two series
contain pretty much the whole of Cooper, his sea tales excepted;
either alone gives an inadequate and partial view. The one is a
social study, the other a romantic epic. The one gives a picture of
the changes the years have brought to a given region, the other
follows the retreating wilderness as the frontier moved westward.
The Anti-Rent novels present the reverse of the romantic picture
of the Leatherstocking tales. Their central figure is Aaron Thou-
sandacres the squatter, who has come out of Connecticut to
possess what pleases him, regardless of legal rights. Offspring
of generations of covetous, psalm-singing Puritans, he has no
difficulty in justifying his lawlessness by Yankee logic. The
devil can quote Scripture, and in this respect old Thousandacres
is the devil’s own son. When Scripture fails the easy gospel of
natural rights comes to his aid; the written law may be on the
side of the title-holder, but natural law is on the side of the


squatter.


234 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


““There’s two rights to all the land on ’arth, and the whull world over,”
the squatter replied to Chainbearer’s legal argument. “One of these
rights is what I call a king’s. right, or that which depends on writin’s,
and laws, and sich like contrivances; and the other depends on possession.
It stands to reason, that fact is better than any writin’ about it can be.” .
(The Chainbearer, Chapter XXV.)


Such lax doctrine, to Cooper, was the evil fruit of the spirit
of lawlessness that was laying a blight upon America. A retrib-
utive bullet ends the fierce career of old Thousandacres, but his
tigress wife, his rough sons and slattern daughters are driven
from their home to plunge deeper into the wilderness, there to beget
other generations of squatters whose vicious doctrines return to
plague society. No romance blends with the tale of their lives;
no sympathy softens the picture of the stern old Yankee. He
has set himself against law and order and must yield or be de-
stroyed. It is the old story of the struggle for land, a struggle that
went on for generations between speculator and squatter, between
rich and poor, with much wrong and much right on both sides;
yet Cooper’s sympathies are cold to the squatter’s plea and he
enlists God, morality, and the law, in defense of a title to forty
thousand acres wheedled from the Indians for ninety-six pounds,
York currency, spent in trinkets. Righteousness without a sense
of humor is not easy to live with.

In much of his later work Cooper’s romantic impulses are held
in check by a growing tendency towards realism. It was there
from the first but as he grew more critical it spread over more of
his pages. He tried to hold the scales of his judgment even, but
his realism was marred and distorted by his vehement nature.
A mind exuding prejudice is ill equipped to deal objectively with
material, and Cooper was too inveterate a moralist to accept the
principle of impersonal detachment. He prided himself on facing
fact, but he loved to preach; and having pointed out the wrong-
fulness of vicious morals he must follow it with a vigorous homily
on right conduct. And yet despite his gross shortcomings there is
a deal of realism scattered through his volumes. He consciously
tried to be a chronicler of manners, to depict America truly, to
recreate fairly present and past, red man and white, Dutch and
Yankee. His prejudices certainly got the better of him in dealing
with New England, and his romance certainly got the better of
him in describing the Mohicans. Yet though he might roman-


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 230


ticize Uncas he did not romanticize Saucy Nick in Wyandotté,
but drew an excellent picture of the struggle between the drunkard
and the warrior in the heart of the Tuscarora that reveals much of
the Indian nature—an analysis that holds the scales more evenly
than they are held in The Last of the Mohicans or in Bird’s Nick
of the Woods. The book as a whole, indeed, is an excellent example
of Cooper’s desire to substitute a critical for a romantic treatment
of materials. In his discriminating analysis of the motives sep-
arating families in the Revolutionary war, there is no glorification
of partisanship, no prejudiced espousal of a sacred cause, no divi-
sion of sheep and goats. Cooper will have none of the cheap ro-
mance of patriotism, but probes skillfully into the motives and
impulses that divided honest men amid the difficulties of civil war.
More than that, he makes his villain one of the patriot party who
uses the unsettlement of the times to cover his dirty tracks. It is
a characteristic document that deserves to stand beside Satans-
toe as an example of his later work.

( Politics was all about Cooper while he was writing these tales,
and his sporadic incursions into criticism led him into the field of
political theory. | So doughty a warrior must break a lance when
all America was engaged in a great political tourney. While Whig
and Democrat were loudly professing allegiance to the new doc-
trine of majority rule, Cooper was making his way back to the
principles of the eighteenth century and discovering the essence of
good government in self-restraint. The mistake of the new school,
he was convinced, lay in confusing the present will of the majority
with the rule of the people; the mistake of the old school lay in
confusing the will of the minority with the rule of the people.
Above and beyond both majority and minority is the eternal
principle of justice, and any government that flouts that principle
is bad government, no matter how sanctioned. In a republic
which foolishly believes that the voice of the people is the sole
criterion of right, the problem of justice is peculiarly difficult, for
what remedies are available in cases “in which the people themselves
happen to go astray, en masse’? It is the problem that attends
every ethical interpretation of sovereignty, and it awakened acute
concern in Cooper’s mind. He could find no solution except in the
good sense of the people, and with a vicious press and persuasive
demagogues doing their best to befuddle the public mind, the cut-
look seemed dark. It was not the people he distrusted, but the


236 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


self-seekers who set up to be leaders of the people. All the noise
was made by demagogues who proclaimed their own mouthings
to be authentic public opinion. How ineffectively Cooper strug-
gled with the problem is written down in many a passage in his
critical novels.


God help the nation [he said in The Redskins] where self-government,
in its literal sense, exists. . . . When a people that has been properly
educated by experience calmly selects its agents, and coolly sets to work
to adopt a set of principles to form its fundamental law or constitution,
the machine is on the right track, and will work well enough so long as
it is kept there; but this running off and altering the fundamental principles
every time a political faction has need of recruits, is introducing tyranny
in its worst form—a tyranny that is just as dangerous to real liberty as
hypocrisy is to religion. (Chapter XIII.)


Some observers pretend that . . . respect for law is gradually decreas-
ing among us [he argued in The Chainbearer] and that in its place is sensibly
growing up a disposition to substitute the opinions, wishes, and interests of
local majorities, making the country subject to men instead of principles.
The last are eternal and immutable; and coming of God, men, however
unanimous in sentiment, have no more right to attempt to change them,
than to blaspheme His holy name. All that the most exalted and largest
political liberty can ever beneficially effect is to apply these principles to
the good of the human race, in the management of their daily affairs; but
when they attempt to substitute for these pure and just rules of right,
laws conceived in selfishness and executed by the power of numbers, they
merely exhibit tyranny in its popular form, instead of in its old aspect of
kingly and aristocratic abuses. It is a fatal mistake to fancy that freedom
is gained by the mere achievement of a right to govern, unless the manner
in which that right is to be both understood and practised is closely in-
corporated with all popular notions of what has been obtained. The
right to govern means no more than the right of the people to avail them-
selves of the power thus acquired to apply the great principles of justice
to their own benefit, and from the possession of which they had hitherto
been excluded. It confers no power to do that which is inherently wrong,
under any pretense whatever. (Chapter XXVIII.)


_ Like Hugh Henry Brackenridge before him, Cooper was a dem-
ocrat who criticized the ways of a reputed democracy because of
his love for an ideal republic.) Too few of his kind have arisen in
America; too few who dare to speak their minds unterrified by
public opinion. An individualist of the old English breed, he could
not be intimidated or coerced in the matter of his rights by any
clamor, whether of newspapers or mobs. He had his shortcomings
in plenty, both as romancer and critic. Testy, opinionated, tact-


JAMES FENIMORE COOPER 237


less, forever lugging in disagreeable truths by the ears, he said
many wise things so blunderingly as to make truth doubly offen-
sive, and he hewed at his art so awkwardly as well-nigh to destroy
the beauty of his romance. Yet the more intimately one comes to
know him, the more one comes to respect his honest, manly na-
ture that. loved justice and decency more than popularity. His
daily life became a long warfare with his fellows, who exacted of
him a great price for his idealism; but later generations should
love him none the less for the battles he fought. That America
has been so tardy in coming to know him as a man and a democrat,
as well as a romancer, is a reflection upon its critical acumen.


CHAPTERS.
SOME CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND


Ir was the good fortune of New York to draw to the bustling city
some of the best and most vigorous minds of New England. If
the sons of Yankees flocked thither, the sons of Puritans came like-
wise, and the contributions of these latter to the idealism of a
society rather too fond of material progress must not be overlooked.
| The literature of New York in particular was heavily indebted to
New England. One need only run over a list of writers who came
from New England to realize how great was its total contribution
to the production of the New York group. | Bryant and Halleck
and Willis and Greeley and Beecher and Curtis and Tuckerman
and Parke Benjamin and Stedman and Stoddard and even, in a
sense, Melville, were products of that more serious-minded world
that was to create transcendentalism and issue in strange projects
of social reform; they were men who would easily share the ethical
enthusiasm of their Puritan fellows, and create a literature concerned
with other than aesthetic values. Not all of them were Puritan in
ideals; Halleck and Willis quite evidently not; nevertheless the
severe idealism of their work sets it apart from the productions
of the Knickerbocker school.) Perhaps not above, but certainly
apart; and this unlikeness calls for some special consideration.
Over against Irving and Paulding and Cooper may be set Bryant
and Greeley and Melville, and the sharp contrast between them will
serve to differentiate the native mind of New York from that of


New England.
I
WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT
Puritan Liberal
For upwards of half a century now too much of Bryant has been
obscured by the brightness of his early fame. Since his death a
serious injustice has been done him by the critics, who have dwelt


too exclusively on his work in the field of verse to the neglect of
238


ae


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 239


other work in fields perhaps quite as significant. The journalist
has been forgotten in the poet, the later democrat who spoke for
American liberalism has been displaced by the youthful versi-
fier who described American scenery. For this our bellettris-
tic historians, who are impatient of any incursions into matter of
fact, are to blame. Yet to ignore so much of Bryant results in
underestimating him, and this serves to explain the thin and shad-
owy quality of his present reputation. He was a much larger
man and more significant than the critics have made him out to
be. His active and many-sided life is very inadequately expressed
in the slender volume of his verse, excellent as much of that is.
The journalist and critic who for fifty years sat in judgment on
matters political and economic as well as cultural, who reflected
in the Evening Post a refinement of taste and dignity of character
before unequaled in American journalism, was of service to Amer-
ica quite apart from his contribution to our incipient poetry.
He was the father of nineteenth-century American journalism as
well as the father of nineteenth-century American poetry.) In
the columns of the Evening Post the best liberalism of the times
found a place, inspired and guided by Bryant’s clear intelligence.
The lucidity of his comment and the keenness of his humanitarian
criticism set the editor apart from shriller contemporaries, and
made him a power for sanity in a scurrilous generation. But with
his death the evanescent character of even the highest journalism
asserted itself, and with the fading of his journalistic reputation
the earlier Bryant of Thanatopsis shouldered aside the Bryant of
the Evening Post, and an unconscious distortion of his career
began, a distortion made easier by the fact that no outstanding
work of the later period remained to restore the balance. In this
he is like Jefferson. He is scattered piecemeal through his occa-
sional writings as the latter through his letters, and the task of
piecing him together and visualizing his work as a whole has not
yet been done.

It will not prove an easy task. The narrow but real genius of
Bryant is peculiarly elusive. (His was essentially a self-polleniz-
ing nature that needed few contacts with other minds. He lived
within himself, little swayed by modes of thought, slowly matur-
ing the native fruit of his speculation. ) The very tenacity and per-
sistence of his intellectual life, the rigid integrity of his thinking,
suggest the confidence of one who drew his nourishment from


240 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


within, whose life was an organic growth. It is impossible to mis-
take his origins. The roots go down to deep substrata of a
seriousness and Puritan austerity, and the fruit which they nourish
—somewhat scanty it may be but of firm texture and good keeping
qualities—possess the slightly acrid flavor of old Puritan orchards
where the care of the husbandman is pitted against harsh seasons
and a meager soil. There is no pagan luxuriance, no riot of color
or scent. The ethical idealism of New England is given stately
form if not rendered altogether lovely; the passion for righteous-)
ness is held in restraint but it retains much of its tempered acidity.
Happily there was little of the schools in Bryant, and nothing
of the intellectual play-boy. His early life in the Berkshire hills,
on his father’s farm, as student at Williams College for a few
months, and as a country lawyer, threw him upon his own intellec-:
. tual resources and made possible a normal unfolding of his mind.
He was fortunately spared a much-coveted life at Yale, where the
narrow classicism and ungenerous dogmatisms could have done
him little good. From Timothy Dwight the young Bryant could
have got little to enrich his mind, and he might have got some
disastrous checks. Left to himself he appropriated such nourish-
ment as fell in his way and went forward on the path of a |
liberalism.

That he went forward at all is sufficient testimony to his native
integrity of character.) In 1825 when he removed to New York,
the intellectual renaissance of Boston was just at the beginning,
and in his new environment he never quite kept pace with the
transcendental enthusiasms that so stimulated the New England
radicals. At Great Barrington where he had been growing more
discontented with his “shabby” profession of the law, he dis-
covered little to encourage an independent liberalism. Bred up in
an environment of intolerant Federalism and an equally intolerant
Calvinism, he had much to outgrow and little to feed on. Few
innovating ideas penetrated to the Berkshire hills where he was
brooding on life and poetry, and the training of his youth was
strong upon him. As a mere boy he had expostulated with Pres-
ident Jefferson in shrill heroic couplets, declaiming on the latter’s
reputed moral lapses and inviting him to resign his high office. He
had summoned Napoleon to the bar of Cummington respect-
ability and adjudged him guilty of high crimes against humanity;
but such rhetorical outbursts were only echoes of a narrow world |


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 241


he was soon to outgrow. The blight of the tie-wig school of
Fisher Ames did not fasten itself deeply on him, and by the time
he had reached his twenties he was moving towards the twin
goals towards which liberal New England was moving—the
Unitarianism of Channing and the democracy of Jefferson. It was
far more difficult for a Berkshire man to think his way through to
such revolutionary goals than for a Concord; yet the unschooled
Bryant who had never visited Boston till he went there in his
twenty-seventh year to read a poem before the Phi Beta Kappa
_ society at Harvard had already outstripped the Cambridge
scholastics in the great work of setting his mind free. The stage
_ through which he passed cannot easily be traced, but the fac
of his decisive break with the dogmas of his youthful world is
plain enough. During the last years at Great Barrington he put
himself upon a course of reading and thinking, and from that
provocative experience emerged the Bryant that we know. Calvin-
ism and Federalism he put away, and he went up to New York
completely new-outfitted in a fashion he never afterwards saw
reason to change. In politics and religion, as in poetry, he was a
man of few ideas, but those ideas were creative, and ie aN
all his thinking. )

For this change that was unconsciously preparing him for his
later work on the Evening Post, Bryant owed something to his
father, who had turned moderate Unitarian, but very much more
to the Berkshire family of Sedgwicks, one of whom, Catherine M.
Sedgwick, was just beginning her modest career as a “‘lady nov-
elist;”’ another, Henry M. Sedgwick, was at the head of the New
York bar, wealthy and liberal-minded; and a third, Theodore Sedg-
wick, Jr., was a trusted adviser on legal and economic matters, on
whose pen Bryant came to rely in a difficult situation. Theodore
Sedgwick seems to have been a liberal of the English school of
Bright and Cobden, a confirmed free trader, and he induced
Bryant to undertake a course of reading in political economy.

During the years 1822 to 1824 the young man turned away from
‘poetry and law to study Adam Smith, Thornton, and Ricardo, to-
gether with a number of pamphlets that issued from the Parlia-
mentary debates over free trade in 1820. The adventure proved
stimulating and definitely determined his attitude towards men and
measures at a moment when American ideas were in a state of flux.
It was therefore as an English liberal that he judged Jackson and


242 THE .MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Clay and Webster, and as an English liberal that he weighed the

Utopian programs of Greeley and Brisbane and Ripley. There

is no evidence that he read the works of the French romantics,

although the major ideas of Rousseau came to him in the guise of
Unitarianism; and this aloofness from the social enthusiasm of
) French thought, this failure to sympathize with the idealism of the

new sociology, may perhaps be accounted his greatest intellectual

shortcoming... Rousseau and Godwin and Mary Wollstonecraft

could have taught him much that he needed to know, could have

warmed his cool blood and awakened his Puritan sense of justice

to the wrongs of an exploitative order. A dash of Utopian enthu-

siasm would have made him a better poet and a better editor; but -
lacking that he found himself sometimes out of sympathy with

men and women whom he should have understood better. A

liberal might smile at the measureless zeal of Fanny Wright and

Robert D. Owen; might dislike the militancy of the Abolitionists;

he might well counsel moderation; but he should not add his shaft

to the flight sent against them. But unfortunately Bryant too

often distrusted those who outran him, and would rather attack

than restrain them.!

_As an English liberal it was inevitable that Bryant should turn
Democrat and support Jackson against Clay and Adams; and an
ardent Democrat he remained till the re-alignment over the
slavery question turned him into a free-soiler. He early supported
Lincoln for the Republican nomination—the more easily because
members of his family had removed to Illinois and there followed
the career of Lincoln sympathetically—and he accepted the Repub-
lican faith till the open alliance of the party with post-war cap-
italism aroused his opposition and weakened his allegiance.)
Democrat though he was in conviction and sympathy, Bryant
was never a Jeffersonian, perhaps not even a Jacksonian, but
rather an anti-Whig, who measured the new America of the in-
dustrial revolution and capitalistic finance by the yardstick of
eighteenth-century liberalism. As a disciple of Adam Smith,
believing in the sufficiency of laissez faire, he looked askance at
an engrossing political state that enlisted its sovereign powers on
the side of the longest purses, and he viewed with scorn the mer-
cenaries of the bench and Senate who: defended the new citadels


1 See his satire on Fanny Wright in The Evening Post, January 29, 1829, quoted b
Allan Nevins, The Evening Post, etc., pp. 126-127. ; ‘ ; 4


/


CONERIBE IONS OF NEW ENGLAND 243


of capitalism. ( Tn spite of his augmenting wealth he remained a
simple countryman at heart, never a city man, never liking the|”
ways of Wall Street, concerned with other things than money- |
making. \If he had supplemented Adam Smith with Du Pont de
Nemours he might easily have followed Jefferson into a Physio-
cratic agrarianism; if he had been bred in the frontier West he might
have discovered more sympathy for a coonskin equalitarianism
with its engrossing majority will. [As it was, he occupied a middle
ground between Jefferson and Jackson, an economic individualist
who refused to conceive of the political state as a fat cow to be
milked by whoever could lay hands on her. / He wanted no share


of the milk for himself and he saw no reason why others should


have any. He turned his back on all middle-class temptations,
refusing to speculate, not grasping at unearned increment, be-
lieving that America had a nobler destiny in store than could
be measured by exploitation. An old-fashioned liberal, he set
himself resolutely against the exploitative spirit that was clamor-
ing for internal improvements, a protective tariff, speculative prof-_
its. The bitter struggle over the Bank and the American System,
in which he was drawn to Jackson by principle as well as by admira-
tion for his courage, laid the emphasis in his mind on financial and
industrial problems and made him the outstanding journalistic op-
ponent of Henry Clay. [ From first to last Bryant was anti-Whig4
‘There were times, to be sure, when he went further than that;
times when his ingrained liberalism threw off its cool restraint
and flamed up in dangerously disturbant fashion) In the depths
of his Puritan nature was a quick sense of justice that might un-
cover strange potentialities; and associated as he was in the inti-
macies of daily work with two of the most radical spirits in New
York, William Leggett and Parke Godwin, he could not remain
untouched by their social enthusiasms. The former was a man
of immense vitality and boundless sympathies, to whom social
justice was a religion. A left-wing equalitarian democrat, Leggett
hated all tariffs, subsidies, monopolies, credit manipulation,
everything that the new capitalism represented. His sympathies
were enlisted on the side of the new proletarian movement, and
with the zeal of a knight-errant he greeted every opportunity to
do battle for the cause. A home-made radical, created out of the
native economics of the industrial revolution, he has been called
by a late historical writer “one of the most sincere and brilliant


244 THE .MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


apostles of democracy that America has ever known.” His
political leaders in the Evening Post aroused the admiration of such
different men as Whittier and Walt Whitman, and were “perhaps
the most potent force in shaping the ideas of democracy” held
by the latter (Allan Nevins, The Evening Post, etc., p. 141). His
son-in-law, Godwin, on the other hand, was a radical of the im-
ported school, an ardent disciple of Fourier, deeply concerned
with communistic experiments at Brook Farm and elsewhere, and
an assistant editor of The Harbinger, the mouthpiece of Brook
Farm after it passed from transcendental to Fourierist control.
His Democracy, Pacific and Constructive, was accounted by Horace
Greeley the best of the contemporary studies of collectivism. Less
militant than Leggett, his radicalism ebbed with the years and
growing prosperity, but it sufficed to instruct Bryant in the el-
ements of the current Utopian philosophies.

With such associates the older man was led somewhat unwill-
ngly into the thick of social struggle and his mind shifted uncon-
sciously to the left. The movement of Locofocoism in particular
absorbed Leggett and drew Bryant after him. Set on foot by a
combination of reforming economists opposed to banks, paper
money, and monopolies, and the rising proletarian movement

_then beginning its long struggle to unionize the city workers,
Locofocoism represented the extreme left wing of democratic
equalitarianism, the avowed objective of which was to take govern-
ment out of the hands of bankers and lodge it in the hands of the
producers. It was one of the first native attempts at conscious
class alignment between capital and labor. ‘‘ What distinguishes
the present from every other struggle in which the human race
has been engaged,” wrote Fanny Wright, “‘is that the present
is evidently, openly and acknowledgedly a war of class... . It
is the ridden people of the earth who are struggling to overthrow
the ‘booted and spurred riders’ whose legitimate title to work and
starve will no longer pass current” (quoted by Fox, Aristocracy
in the Politics of New York, p. 396). How the democratic radical-
ism of Leggett was received by conservative New York is thus
described by the historian of the Evening Post:


He was charged [says Nevins} with Utopianism, agrarianism, Fanny-
Wrightism, Jacobinism, and Jack Cade-ism. His writings were said to
set class against class, and to threaten the nation with anarchy. Gov.
William M. Marcy called Leggett a ‘“‘knave.” The advance of the Loco-


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 245


foco movement was likened to the great fire and the great cholera plague
of these years. When Chief Justice Marshall died in the summer of 1835,
Leggett unsparingly assailed him and Hamilton as men who had tried
“to change the character of the government from popular to monarchical,”
and to destroy “the great principle of human liberty.” . . . Ex-Mayor
Philip Hone was handed that editorial on the Albany steamboat by
Charles King, and dropped the journal with the vehement ejaculation,
“Infamous!” ‘This is absolutely a species of impiety for which I want
words to express my abhorrence,” he entered in his diary. (Allan Nevins,
The Evening Post, etc., p. 152.)


The enthusiasm of Leggett sometimes carried further than the
more tempered liberalism of Bryant could follow. He shared
Leggett’s distrust of Marshall and Hamilton, but he seems to have
been only a moderate supporter of Locofoco principles. The paper
had been brought close upon financial breakers by its attack on
the money-interests. The working classes read it eagerly, but their
indorsement could not make good the loss of advertising and pat-
ronage by the wealthy; yet even in such straits Bryant remained
true to his liberalism and joined his associates‘in upholding the
proletarian cause.) The labor union movement had aroused the
wrath of the employers and the courts were appealed to to suppress
it. In May, 1836, “twenty-one journeymen tailors who had
formed a union were indicted for a conspiracy injurious to trade
and commerce,” and after a trial the presiding judge charged the
jury to bring in a verdict of guilty. Bryant at once attacked
the judge in the Evening Post:


We do not admit, until we have further examined the question, that the
law is as laid down by the Judge; but if it be, the sooner such a tyrannical
and wicked law is abrogated the better. . . . The idea that arrangements
and combinations for certain rates of wages are injurious to trade and
commerce, is as absurd as the idea that the current prices of the markets,
which are always the result of understandings and combinations, are
injurious. (Jdid., pp. 164-165.)


When the tailors were heavily fined by the court Bryant returned
to the attack. He again pointed out the fatuousness of the legal
logic by showing how the very price current was a similar evidence
of conspiracy, and then appealed to a sense of common fairness:


Can anything be imagined more abhorrent to every sentiment of gener-
osity and justice, than the law which arms the rich with the legal right to
fix, by assize, the wages of the poor? If this is not slavery, we have for-


246 THE*MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


gotten its definition. Strike the right of associating for the sale of labor
from the privileges of a freeman, and you may as well bind him to a master,
or ascribe him to the soil. (Jbid., p. 165.)


\From defending the rights of free labor to defending the rights
le free speech, was an easy step. )When James G. Birney’s Aboli-
tionist press was suppressed by a Cincinnati mob, Bryant spoke
out vigorously. ‘“‘So far as we are concerned, we are resolved that
this despotism shall neither be submitted to nor encouraged. . .
We are resolved that the subject of slavery shall be, as it ever has
been, as free a subject for discussion, and argument, and declama-
tion, as the difference between whiggism and democracy, or the
difference between Arminians and Calvinists” (ibid., p. 171). And
when Elijah P. Lovejoy was murdered and his press thrown into —
the river, Bryant replied to those who believed that the Aboli-
tionists had got their deserts: “Whether they erred or not in their
opinions, they did not err in the conviction of their right, as citizens
of a democratic State, to express them; nor did they err in defend-
ing their rights with an obstinacy that yielded only to death”
(ibid., pp. 171-172). | From the defense of free speech Bryant
went forward to the aes of free soil, and in 1848 he bolted
Lewis Cass, the Democratic nominee, and joined the ‘“‘Barn-
burner” movement that nominated Martin Van Buren. | The terse
pronouncement of the convention, indeed, might well be taken as
an epitome and summary of Bryant’s lifelong liberalism—‘‘We
inscribe on our banner Free Soil, Free Speech, Free Labor, and Free
Men.”

A trenchant critic of the rising capitalism, delighting in ex-
posing the fallacies of the new economics and in pricking the
bladders of political reputations—suggesting, for example, that it
was scarcely god-like of the great Webster to accept a purse of
$65,000 from his high tariff friends—Bryant was perhaps the
most distinguished of the liberals created by the revolutions that
were enthroning the middle class in power. | The simplicity of his
laissez-faire philosophy,) like his admiration for “Old Bullion”
Benton—whom he rated one of the greatest. statesmen of the
| times—may seem somewhat old-fashioned today; but his ingrained
democracy, his sturdy defense of the rights of free men, his cham-
pionship of unpopular causes, his tolerance and fairness and keen
sense of justice, ought not to seem old-fashioned. He may not have
been a great poet, but he was a great American. |


«


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 247
Il
HORACE GREELEY
Yankee Radical


Horace Greeley has suffered far more disastrously than Bryant
the common fate of journalists, yet his place in nineteenth-century
America was too important and his influence on current democratic
ideals too great, to be carelessly ignored. / A Yankee radical trans-
ported to New York, he was the spokesman of the common sense
and practical intelligence of the plain people of the North, seeking
to understand the revolutionary upheaval then going forward,
and bring it if possible to some issue in elementary justice.) Far
from being the visionary he was so often accounted) he was the
most practical of menJaccepting fact and seeking to square theory
with reality; as ready to adopt new social machinery as the mill-
owner to adopt a new invention. If there were social malad-
justments, why should they not be set right? The patent confu-
sions of the times seemed to him a challenge to the common
intelligence. If civilization meant anything it ought to mean a
generous life for the producing mass, and with the abundant re-
sources of America the common well-being would never lie in jeop-
ardy if simple justice prevailed. America had not yet fulfilled
its promise; it had not yet become the haven for the poor and out-
cast its potential means allowed; nor with its growing cities where
poverty found a congenial home, and its patrimony of raw lands
flung to speculators, was it likely to become so unless greater
ingenuity were applied to the problem. The industrial revolu-
tion was driving western civilization into uncharted seas; clearly,
it was only common sense to take bearings and lay as fair a course
as possible. To accomplish this Greeley was ready to entertain
any promising suggestion. Intellectually curious, he had the wit
to understand that the older agrarian America was being destroyed
by forces that could not be stopped; they could only,be guided.
His eyes were wide open to what was taking place. (He foresaw
certain consequences implicit in the industrial revolution that
his fellows were blind to.) If it brought material advancement and
the multiplication of conveniences—things excellent in themselves
—it brought as well a sinister exploitation of the producers, as
England with her Manchester slums had learned to her sorrow.
If America were driving straight toward such dead-seas of wretch-


248 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


edness, surely only a conscienceless fool would refuse to help trim
the sails.

No more admirable Yankee than Horace Greeley ever went West
to make his fortune. | With his Yankee capacity for hard work,
his daring enterprise, his vigorous independence, he embodied
an extremely sensitive social conscience, keen sympathy for those
who do the work of the world, and a transparent honesty of mind
and purpose. ) Bred up in the narrow poverty of the Vermont hills,
remote from the culture of Boston and Cambridge, he retained the
angularities that marked his frontier origin. His ungainly and
shabby exterior was the outward, visible sign of a niggardly youth;
yet underneath the uncouth exterior was as warm a heart as ever
beat in Yankee bosom. | His early life was a bitter struggle, ag-
gravated by the succession of economic depressions that from 1819
to 1838 repeatedly brought hardship upon the country. ) Cradled
thus in the anxieties attending the transition from an’ agrarian
to a capitalistic order, nurtured in the harassing uncertainties
that followed the break-up of the old static economy,|he longed for
a more rational social system, unsoiled by the heart-breaking
wreckages that drifted into the new slums, unembittered by the
lonely tragedies that laid a blight on the frontier. He believed that
the honest worker, whether in the factory or on the farm, deserved
a better fate than commonly fell to his lot. It was a scandal that
poverty should dog his footsteps in a land potentially so rich as
America; that those who did the necessary work of society should
find themselves reduced to the status of the slave, whether black or
white; and he early determined to explore the reasons why the work-
ingman received so small an increment of the augmenting wealth
of the industrial revolution. His struggles to gain a foothold in
New York set him upon thinking, and before he was thirty he
began those speculations on ways and means of returning to the
producer a fair reward for his work, that were to occupy his mind
to the last. The farmer and the wage-earner he took to his heart,
and the furtherance of their well-being—despite the persistent
and vindictive opposition he encountered—became a major ob-
jective of The Tribune.

Greeley’s mind was as homespun as his clothes, and he never
quite outgrew certain Vermont parochialisms that retarded his
intellectual development. The environment in which he was
bred was staunchly Federalist-Whig, marked by the exuberantly


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 249


nationalistic spirit that sprang from the War of 1812; and the
seeds of his national economy were sown in those years when to
become nationally self-sufficient was the great ideal of America.
It was natural for him to accept the leadership of Clay, whom he
idolized, and to look to the Federal government for an adequate
policy of internal improvements and national development. “We
Vermonters were all Protectionists,” he said in his Recollections.
In 1828 the village of Poultney, where he was serving his appren-
ticeship, gave 334 votes for John Quincy Adams and only four
for Jackson. Starting with this back-country faith in a benevolent
paternalism, Greeley early began his speculations on an ideal
national economy; and the conclusion to which he came, and which
he never saw reason to question later, was that government must
impose an intelligent wardship upon economic forces, that, left to
themselves, tend always to the anarchy of individualism. He had
suffered in his own person from the inadequacy and uncertainty
of the financial and industrial machinery of the times; he was
impatient of all purposeless floundering; the more he read the more
rational it seemed that statesmanship must be judged by its in-
telligent eencesn to lessen the social waste and reduce the social
friction. | Laissez faire he pronounced a “suicidal” policy; it was
an invitation to anarchy; it had impoverished India, and must
impoverish America.| /From a critical study of the teachings of
the Manchester school he came to two major conclusions: {that
agriculture and manufacturing are complementary industries, and
the closer they are drawn together the better for the nation; and that
a wide national economy can result only from investing the state
with adequate regulatory powers/) Hence his approval of Clay’s
American System. The judiciou$ Antervention of government by
means of a protective tariff to foster the “infant industries,” would
secure them a domestic market that would—he allowed himself to
hope—be regulated by domestic competition, would do away with
the waste represented by transportation charges, and would re-
turn to the farmer an increase in price represented by those charges.
In his opinion, however, protection was a temporary expedient,
necessary only until American industries should get on their legs.
“Protection is the shortest way to get free trade,” he said in 1851
(The Tribune, January 23).
Greeley was never the tool of capitalistic interests that such an
| argument might seem to imply. All his mature life he persistently


250 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


fought the aggressions of capitalism; yet in this crucial matter of
protection his influence was thrown powerfully on its side, and
the ingenious argument he éxpounded was at once taken over by
the industrialists and used with telling effect. What particular
turn he gave to the older Whig statement, adapting it to the pre-
judices of a more democratic electorate, a present-day economist
has thus summarized:


The protective tariff, favored by the Whigs, was something different
in his hands. The tariff arguments of his boyhood had been capitalistic
arguments. Protect capital, their spokesman said, because wages are too
high in this country. Eventually wages will come towards the European
level and we shall not need protection. Greeley revised this plea; protect
the wage earner, he said, in order that he may rise from this present con-
dition of slavery. The only way to protect him against the foreign pauper
is to protect the price of his product. But since capital owns and sells his
product, we must needs protect capital. We know right well, he says,
that a protective tariff cannot redress all wrongs. . . . The extent of its
power to benefit the laborer is limited by the force and pressure of do-
mestic competition, for which Political Economy has as yet devised no
remedy. (John R. Commons, “Horace Greeley and the Working Class
Origins of the Republican Party,” Political Science Quarterly, Vol. XXIV,
pp- 468-488.)


The argument for protection has been little improved since it
came from Greeley’s hands in the late forties and early fifties.”
Nor, it must be added, has political economy devised the rem-
edy for the evils of competition, that Greeley was concerned
about, unless monopolistic control be regarded as such. Consider-
ing his extraordinary influence with the mass of farmers north
and west, it must be accounted a calamity to agrarian prospects
that The Tribune—a paper that Professor Commons characterized
as “‘the first and only great vehicle this country has known for the
ideas and experiments of constructive democracy’—should have
thrown its influence on the side of artificial industrial expansion.
That the mind of the northern farmer became so deeply inoculated
with protectionist views, and has since persistently remained
so, was due to Horace Greeley far more than to any other man.
The irony of it becomes apparent when the deeper spirit of Gree-
ley’s life is probed. (Though he called himself a Whig, he was in all
fundamental interests and conceptions a Jeffersonian, seeking in
the spirit of the great Virginian to fashion a new philosophy to suit


2 For his statement, see “Labor’s Political Economy,” in Hints toward Reforms.


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 251


the new times, note like him in free speculation than any other
northern thinker of the day. It needed years for him to throw off
the Federalist-Whig prepossessions of his youth, and work back to
Jeffersonian fundamentals; but in the end he did work back, and
in the end—always excepting this one matter of protection with
its corollary of state paternalism—he came by his own path to the
major conclusions Jefferson had reached a half century before.

e was a spokesman of the older America seeking a way out of the
confusions the middle class was bringing on the later America’)
In his social-mindedness that set justice above exploitation; in
his readiness to change existing institutions in order to achieve
justice; in his strong preference for an agrarian order as more
wholesome than an industrial; in his trust in the good will of the
plain people and faith in the local democracies; in his acceptance
of the principle of states rights that during the struggle over
slavery led him to advocate that the South be suffered to depart in
peace:—in such conceptions he was a Neo-Jeffersonian, seeking to
adapt the old principles to the needs of a different order. Greeley
had never read the works of the French Physiocrats; he was un-
acquainted with their doctrine of the produit net; very likely he
would not have accepted their teachings to the extent that Jeffer-
son did. Nevertheless from his own experience he had come to
agree with them in the exaltation of agriculture over other forms of
labor, as he had come to agree with them in their social-minded-
ness. Greeley may be accounted a stepson, at least, of the old
French school.

That for so long a time he should have turned aside from the
path of Jeffersonianism to immerse himself in Utopian speculations
and adventures may appear strange; and yet for so eager and hope-
ful a temperament it was the most natural thing in the world. It
marked a step in the speculations through which he passed in
pursuit of that remedy for domestic competition which the political
economists had not provided. He was twenty-nine when Albert
Brisbane’s The Social Destiny of Mankind appeared in 1840, and
on October 21, 1841, the first comment on Fourier socialism was
printed in The Tribune, then only six months old. Thereafter for
years The Tribune was the chief organ for the spread of collec-
tivistic principles in the United States, Brisbane expounding
Fourierism in the fifties, and Karl Marx contributing a weekly
letter on European movements in the sixties, while lesser men con-


252 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


tributed freely according to their special Utopian lights. With all
this Greeley was in profound sympathy. Much of the theory he
did not agree with; many of the plans and specifications seemed to
him ill conceived; but convinced of the gross evils of civilization
he welcomed free speculation as promising the only hope for their
cure. Like Jefferson and William Ellery Channing, he put his
trust in the unshackled mind, for like them he believed in the es-
sential excellenceof human nature when unperverted by vicious
institutions.

It was this romantic faith that induced him to invest heavily
in time, thought and money, in the Fourieristic foundations of
the forties, the North American Phalanx in particular offering
an opportunity for experiment on a considerable scale. In his deep
concern over the selfishness of the competitive struggle, he was
willing to turn from the bankrupt political economists to consider
the plans of the “social architects.” From Plato down those
architects had been engaged on plans of ideal commonwealths,
wherein the principle of brotherhood should supersede the principle
of competition, and he believed the time had come when the great
experiment might be tried with some reasonable hope of success.
If the principle of collectivism could be successfully substituted for
a chaotic individualism, the solution of the ancient problem of
social injustice might be in a way to be achieved. This in itself,
he believed, “would do for domestic competition what protection
would do for foreign competition” (John R. Commons, Horace
Greeley, etc.). When associationism failed, Greeley turned his
thoughts eagerly to codperation as a promising means of eliminat-
ing the waste of the middleman and destroying the wage system.?
Somehow the middleman must be got rid of, he believed, if labor
were to reap an adequate reward from its work. If one method
did not achieve the result, another must be tried. To leave off
seeking a solution was to acknowledge that society must remain a
pigsty, with the strongest hogs appropriating the swill.

Such persistent venturing into Utopian experiment made
Greeley the laughing-stock of more practical men who accepted
the acquisitive instinct as the voice of God and were busily en-
gaged in exploitation for their individual advantage; more im-
portant, it reveals how tenuous were the ties that held him to the
Whiggery he still professed. Stalwart Whigs of the Webster


3 See “The Organization of Labor,” in Hints toward Reforms.


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 253


school, middle-class bankers and industrialists, grew impatient
with such pestilent heresies as exuded from The Tribune, and denied
that Greeley was a Whig. In 1847 The Courier and Enquirer
angrily protested:


There can be no peace in the Whig ranks while the old New York Tribune
is continued to be called Whig. . . . The principles of the Whig party are
well defined; they are conservative and inculate a regard for the laws and
support of all established institutions of the country. They eschew
radicalism in every form; they sustain the constitution and the laws;
they foster a spirit of patriotism. . . . The better way for the Tribune
would be at once to admit that it is only Whig on the subject of the Tariff

. . and then devote itself to the advocacy of Anti-Rent, Abolition,
Fourierite, and Vote Yourself a Farm doctrines. (The Weekly Tribune,
August 21, 1847; quoted in Commons, Horace Greeley, etc., p. 473.)


{

The real animus of the middle-class dislike of Greeley is to be
sought in his active championship of the great exploited classes,
the farmer and wage-earner. He was always sowing the seeds of
discontent amongst them. The betterment of their condition,
he believed, was fundamental to any sound social progress. ) He
was convinced that their well-being was interrelated; that whatever
affected the one must affect the other. If the city proletariat were
prosperous, the farmer’s produce sold at better prices; and if the
farmers were prosperous, the country would draw off the surplus
labor from the towns and thereby sustain the wage scale. The
key to the situation, he came to believe, lay in the land situation.
The application of science to farm processes was a necessary pre-
liminary to agrarian improvement, and he put the great influence
of The Tribune behind the movement for scientific instruction in
crop handling. But far more fundamental and immediate was the
need of a drastic change in the Federal laws governing land sales.
Believing that the wild lands of the West were a natural refuge for
those who fled from the exploitation of the factory, he was concerned
that those lands should be made available to the poorest settler.
Greeley very well knew that the ruthless exploitation of the English
proletariat was an inevitable consequence of the enclosure move-
ment. Dispossessed of their land and lacking means to emigrate,
the peasant had been thrown like sheep to the industrial wolves.
Sunk in a hopeless wage-slavery, the Manchester factory-hand
was an object-lesson in the fate that awaits the landless, too strik-
ing for a shrewd observer like Greeley to miss; and his agra-


254 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


rian program was proof that he had taken Goldsmith’s warning to
heart:


Ill fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay.


The freeholder, whatever the hardships of his lot, was still a free
man and a free citizen, no fodder to fling to a huge-bellied in-
dustrialism.

To keep him thus free and independent, Greeley put himself
vigorously into the great agrarian movement of the forties and fif-
ties—the movement to democratize the national land policy that
eventuated in the Homestead Act of 1862. The conception of the
strategic usefulness of the western lands as a refuge for the city
proletariat he derived from George Henry Evans, who in 1828
had established The Working Man’s Advocate, was active in or-
ganization work with the mechanics of New York City, and con-
tributed to the cause numerous pamphlets, one of which, issued
in 1844, was entitled Vote Yourself a Farm. The pioneer work had
been well done when, in 1845, Greeley joined the movement, ac-
cepted the arguments, and thenceforth was tireless in spreading
the doctrine. The principle on which he should work he laid
down in The Tribune:


The freedom of the public lands to actual settlers and the limitation
of future acquisitions of land to some reasonable amount, are . . . meas-
ures which seem to. us vitally necessary to the ultimate emancipation
from thraldom and misery. What is mainly wanted is that each man
should have an assured chance to earn and then an assurance of the just
fruits of his labors. (Quoted in Commons, Horace Greeley, etc., p. 482.)


To accomplish this result Greeley introduced into Congress the
first Homestead bill, according to the proposed terms of which
any bona fide settler might file on one hundred and sixty acres of
public land, to be paid for within seven years at the rate of $1.25
an acre; all public lands not thus filed on by actual settlers were
to be listed at $5.00 an acre.* )Greeley’s bill was aimed directly
at the old scandal of favoring wealthy speculators at the expense
of the small man, a scandal that ran far back into the past. The
traditional argument had been that the government could not go
into the retail land business, but should sell in great blocks to re-
sponsible men who should in turn put settlers on the land. The


4 See Charles Sotheran, Worace Greeley, p. 255.


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 255


policy had bred huge corruption, it had aroused bitter opposition,
and had roiled the politics of more than one state holding western
lands. In the early years of the century the province of Maine
had repudiated Massachusetts Federalism and turned to the Re-
publican party by reason of discontent with the old system ® and
the fierce Anti-Rent riots in New York State were of recent occur-
rence. It was against this policy of favoritism that Greeley pro-
tested, thereby bringing on his head sharp criticism from the
respectable class, who declaimed bitterly against the demagoguery
of a man who openly advocated a ‘“‘vote yourself a farm” policy.
To pay a middleman’s price for public land, after that land had been
_wheedled from Congress in the dark of the moon, seemed to many
gentlemen the only honest and patriotic way; but Greeley was
unconvinced by such reasoning, and his concern over the problem
became acute when the railroads began to appropriate huge tracts
of the public domain. The policy of subsidizing them thus seemed
to him wasteful and vicious; it ran directly counter to his funda-
mental principle of limitation of land holdings; it was repeating
on a vast scale the ominous landlordism of the past.


Man has a natural right to produce and acquire property [he wrote],
and therefore, I condemn a system of Land Monopoly, which robs the
producer of one-half to seven-eighths of the fruits of his toil; and often
dooms him to absolute starvation on the soil which he has faithfully and
effectively tilled! The right of owning land is one thing: the right to own
thousands and even millions of acres of land is another. The problem is
learning to distinguish the one from the other. (The Tribune, April 24,


1849.)


“Settle the lands compactly and railroads will be constructed
through them rapidly and abundantly,” he said later. “The
grants do essentially interfere with the true policy of granting lands
in limited allotment to actual settlers” (zbid., March 16, 1852).
His proposed policy was far-sighted and socially just, but
it was repudiated by a speculative middle class that would not
have its unearned increment curtailed by visionaries.
Thoughtful as was Greeley’s concern for the farmer, his concern
for the city worker was even greater. The wretchedness of eh
New York slums was daily under his eye, and his honest heart was
troubled at what he saw. That he should have sympathized with
the emerging labor movement was inevitable; his conscience dic-


5 See William A. Robinson, Jeffersonian Democracy in New England, pp. 43-45.


256 THE*MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


tated his stand, but his eager mind drove him to intelligent
inquiry and vigorous support. was the first American of
wide reputation and influence to #ive serious consideration to the
effects on the working class of the industrial revolution with its
gospel of exploitation \The exploitation of natural resources was
well enough; but the éxploitation of human life was a different
matter. A material prosperity based on social injustice, a civi-
lization founded on slavery, he would have none of. That this
great matter of slavery was inadequately understood and too nar-
rowly interpreted by the Abolitionists, he was early convinced.
He agreed with William Grayson and the southern apologists,
that slavery existed in New York as well as in Charleston. “‘The
worker of the Nineteenth Century,” he said in The Emancipa-
tion of Labor, “stands a sad and care-worn man”; in America as
well as in Europe he is falling into “that train of thought which is
beginning to encircle the globe, and of which the burden may be
freely rendered thus—‘Why should those by whose toil ALL com-
forts and luxuries are produced or made available enjoy so scanty a
share of them?’”’ If Theodore Parker could have lived a few years
longer he must have shared Greeley’s concern; but amongst the
Abolitionists only Wendell Phillips joined with him in espousing
the cause of the working class. Others held aloof. When appealed
to in the middle-seventies to aid the labor movement, William
Lloyd Garrison denied the existence of wage-slavery in America,
and indignantly declined to take part in the proletarian agitation.®

Greeley’s views would be reckoned advanced even today; before
the Civil War they were regarded as incendiary, calculated to
awaken class prejudice in a country where, as all patriotic Ameri-
cans knew, classes did not exist. What, for example, could sim-
ple-minded Abolitionists make of a letter he wrote declining to
attend an anti-slavery convention in Cincinnati in 1845?


You will readily understand that, if I regard your enterprise with less
absorbing interest than you do, it is not that I deem Slavery a less
but a greater evil. If I am less troubled concerning the Slavery prev-
alent in Charleston and New-Orleans, it is because I see so much Slavery
in New-York, which appears to claim my first efforts. . . . [I would not]
undertake to say that the Slavery of the South is not more hideous in
kind and degree than that which prevails at the North. The fact that it
is more flagrant and palpable renders opposition to it comparatively easy
and its speedy downfall certain. But how can I devote myself to a crusade


6 Garrison, Life of Garrison, Vol. IV, p. 248.


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 257


against distant servitude, when I discern its essence pervading my im-
mediate community and neighborhood?

I understand by Slavery, that condition in which one human being exists
mainly as a convenience for other human beings—in which the time, the
exertions, the faculties of a part of the Human Family are made to sub-
serve, not their own development, physical, intellectual, and moral, but
the comfort, advantage, or caprices of others. .. . In short, wherever
service is rendered from one human being to another . . . where the
relation . . . is one not of affection and reciprocal good offices, but of
authority, social ascendency and power over subsistence on the one hand,
and of necessity, servility, and degradation on the other—there, in my
view, is Slavery. (‘Slavery at Home,” in Hints toward Reforms.)


Here is a definition that may well be considered Utopian; but
however transcendental his general conception, Greeley was far
too practical to pursue abstractions. Having diagnosed the com-
mon disease that infects all modern civilization, he was willing
to use remedies that came to hand. Before 1845 he opposed
labor legislation, on the ground that the evil was social; but later
he supported the movement to limit the legal working day by stat-
ute. More and more, however, he came to believe that any last-
ing betterment must come from effective organization of the work-
ers; that the salvation of labor lay in its own hands; and the great
end towards which he looked was codperation. The stumbling-
block that stood in the way of codperative effort was the common
distrust and suspicion that poisoned the minds of working men;
until they emptied their hearts of that evil, the path that labor must
follow would be flinty and its life meager and hard.

An incorrigible idealist, clearly, was this Yankee plebeian whom
Cooper believed a vulgarian, Godkin held in contempt, and
Bryant turned his back on and would not speak to—a strange,
child-like figure, with his round moon-face, eyes blinking through
spectacles and a fringe of whiskers that invited the pencil of the
cartoonist—yet carrying the sorrows of the world in his heart
and vexing his soul with all the problems of society; an idealist
who in the most sordid place in America, and after years of fruit-
less experiment, could still stand before his fellow Americans and
thus sum up his social philosophy—‘“the avocations of Life, and
the usages and structure of Society, the relations of Power to
Humility, of Wealth to Poverty, of served to servant, must all
be fused in the crucible of Human Brotherhood, and whatever
abides not the test, rejected” (Hints toward Reforms, p. 400).


258 THE-MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


In this faith—foolish it may be accounted by practical men, and
futile, but certainly not mean, not ignoble—Horace Greeley lived
and worked; to it he gave such strength and powers as were his,
and he died at sixty-one of a broken heart. He foolishly wished
to be President, but the American electorate that read his paper
refused its votes, and his hopes were destroyed by the careless
many who were untroubled about industrial pigstys.


III
HERMAN MELVILLE


Pessimist


Set down beside the austere Bryant and the plebeian Greeley,
Herman Melville seems grotesquely out of woinphapenie a
proximities may suggest, better perhaps than words, an explana-
tion of the futility of his dreams and the irony of the bitter penance
of his days. Lifelong he was lacerated by the coldly moral in
his environment, and harassed by the crudely practical; and with-
out forcing the comparison, one may feel that Bryant and Greeley
embodied in nobler form the twin forces that seized upon his bold
and rich nature, and bound it to the rocks to be fed on by eagles.
Like Jacob he wrestled all night with an angel, yet got no blessing
from the touched thigh. Instead,.his free spirit was tormented and
his adventurous heart seared with fire. Far more truly than of
De Quincey might one say of Melville: Eccovt, this little child has
been in hell! All the powers of darkness fought over him, all the
devils plagued him. They drove him down into the gloom of his
tormented soul, and if they did not conquer, they left him maimed
and stricken. The golden dreams of transcendental faith, that
buoyed up Emerson and gave hope to Thoreau, turned to ashes
in his mouth; the white gleams of mysticism that now and then
lighted up his path died out and left him in darkness. Life
could not meet the demands he made on it, certainly not life in
America in the eighteen-fifties; the malady lay deeper than Gree-
ley thought—it lay in the futility of life itself; and so after
pursuing his vain dreams to the ends of the seas, the rebellious
transcendentalist withdrew within himself while awaiting annihila-
tion. There is no other tragedy in American letters comparable
to the tragedy of Herman Melville. Bryant’s melancholy is only
the gentle pensiveness of twilight compared to the midnight of


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 259


his pessimism. Hawthorne’s gloom is no more than the skeptical
questioning of life by a nature that knew no fierce storms; Poe’s
is only the atrabilious wretchedness of a dipsomaniac.

In the presence of a nature so tempestuous and fiercely honest,
it is a rash critic who will dogmatize. There is no simple clue to
his mystery, no common pass-key to unlock his mind. Raymond
Weaver in his brilliantly creative study has perhaps done all that
the critic can to light up the darkness, and later commentators
can only follow in his footsteps. In so far as a simple explanation
may suffice, the biographer finds it in certain frustrations that
curdled the milk of his romance and turned it sour. Like Mark
Twain in later years, he recoiled savagely from the smug conven-
tions of society; but when he spoke out his views—instead of
discreetly locking them up in his safe—and found himself fiercely
assailed for unorthodoxy, he bade the world go to the devil and
would have nothing more to do with its praise or blame. A
proud sensitive nature, he took the world’s contumely au tragique,
and suffered it to mortify him. Or perhaps he was more like James
Branch Cabell than Mark Twain. An arch romantic, he vainly
sought to erect his romantic dreams as a defense against reality,
and suffered disaster. In love with the ideal, and pursuing it
in a wild adventure into the South Seas—his magic realm of
Poictesme—yet ‘‘not so much bound to any haven ahead as
rushing from all havens astern,” he found there only disenchant-
ment. Seeking his satisfactions in love of mother and wife, he
came upon utter disillusion. The austerely prim and coldly
correct Maria Gansevoort, to whom his boyish heart yielded itself
passionately, was clearly no woman to satisfy his need of intelli-
gent sympathy, and he fled moodily from the pale negations of- a
stifling environment. Even the finely loyal Elizabeth Shaw whom
he married seems only to have completed his disillusion, and he
withdrew into his study, and falling into “ Plato’s honied head,”
like Tashtego into the whale’s head, “sweetly,” or wretchedly,
“perished there.”’ It is the plague of the idealizing mind that is
forever comparing a wife in her morning kimono with the Helen
of his dreams. It is the curse of possession that plays havoc with
romance; and because Melville’s dreams were passionately beau-
tiful, because he made heavy demands on life, his disillusion was
bitter. And so like Felix Kennaston in Cabell’s Cream of the Jest,
and like Shelley in Epipsychidion, Melville fashioned his dream-


260 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


figure to love. The elusive figure of Yillah in Mardi, whom he
loves and loses and seeks, in a madly grotesque and satirical
pursuit through all the civilizations of his land of Poictesme, is
so suggestive of Cabell’s Domnei, that it perhaps may be accounted
the latter’s prototype.

Remembering the mingled strains of Melville’s ancestry, the
critic is tempted to discover in his New England blood the source
of his transcendental visions. Yet the influence is not easy to
trace. Half Dutch and half Yankee, he certainly got his vigorous
physique and hot temper from the former. His maternal grand-
father, Major General Peter Gansevoort, was a huge bulk of a
man who achieved high distinction in the Revolutionary War, and
whose traditional prowess filled the boy’s heart with pride. His
mother, Maria Gansevoort, whom the son closely resembled in
physique, was crossed in blood with that of the Van Rensselaers,
the Ten Broecks, the Van Schaicks—the proudest families of the
old Dutch régime—and was deeply imbued with the distinction
of her patroon ancestry—‘‘a cold, proud woman, arrogant in the
sense of her name, her blood, and the affluence of her forebears”
(Weaver, Herman Melville, p. 34). His debt to the New England
strain is not so easily appraised. His paternal grandfather, Major
Thomas Melville of Boston, a graduate of Princeton and wealthy
in his own name and through his wife Priscilla Scollay, was not
without his flashes of enthusiasm in early life, taking part with
Joseph Story’s father in the Boston Tea Party. But his incipient
radicalism was soon washed out of him; he turned rigidly con-
servative, and to his death in 1832 he lingered in the twilight of the
eighteenth century. As Federal naval officer of the port of Boston,
he was a familiar figure in his cocked hat and knee breeches; and
it was of him that Holmes wrote the verses, The Last Leaf.

_ He was of Scotch descent, and Melville’s father traced the family
line back to the thirteenth century, Herman Melville being
twentieth in direct descent from Sir Richard Melvill, who in
1296 was forced to swear allegiance to Edward I of England. } The
blood seems to have run somewhat thin in Allan Melville, a
conventional, pragmatic soul, who after making five trips to
Europe, at the age of thirty-two, having carefully weighed the
advantages, fixed his affections on Maria Gansevoort whom he
met at Albany, and wooed with more propriety than passion. He
entered business in New York city as an importer of French goods;


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 261


but hard times descended on “‘the greatest universal mart in the
world,” and in 1832, when Herman was thirteen, Allan Melville
died leaving Maria Gansevoort and her eight children pretty
nearly penniless. The struggle with poverty set its mark on the
cold, proud woman whose ambitions centered about the success
of affluence; and it left a mark of quite another sort on the son who
was soon to measure her ideals with devastatingly critical eyes.
The ways of mother and son were at the parting.

The volcanic passions pent up in Herman Melville’s heart, the
ardent imagination that sent him forth on long quests and brought
him home empty-handed, can scarcely be traced to any source in
Maria Gansevoort or Allan Melville. A strange, incomprehensible
child he seemed to his mother, and strange and incomprehensible
he remained in the eyes of the family—an ugly duckling of another
breed than theirs. A bitter sense of aloofness and alienation from
the intimacies of family sympathy seems early to have taken
possession of him, and he felt himself quietly thrust out of the
circle of respectable contacts. Melville’s writings are filled with
thinly veiled autobiography, and it is a careless reader who does
not see in Pierre and Moby Dick confessions as frank as Rousseau’s.
“Call me Ishmael,” is the opening injunction of the latter, and
the book closes with a glimpse of ‘“‘the devious cruising Rachel,
that in retracing search after her missing children, only found
another orphan” (Weaver, Herman Melville, p. 62). An Ishmael
Melville unhappily conceived himself to be, an outcast and
wanderer on the earth because man is an outcast and wanderer, to
whom Nirvana is the only comfort and hope; and when he returned
disillusioned from the South Seas, when he found no home by his
own fireside, when he discovered his transcendental craftsmanship
driving on the rocks of economic necessity, when the public
rejected his mystical dreams and he was inexorably “‘damned by
dollars,” he perforce turned in upon his own broodings and sought
solace in Plato. Driven by need from his hill farm in the Berk-
shires, he buried himself in the “Babylonish brick-kiln of New
York,” to pass long years pottering about the customhouse. It
was the vast futility of life as he experienced it, that sent him to
his study to find there such compensation as he might.

The stages in Melville’s progress towards Nirvana are sufficiently
marked by the four books, Typee, Mardi, Moby Dick, and Pierre.
The first is his answer to the French romantic Utopia of man in


262 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


a state of nature. That the rankling wounds in man’s heart are
poisoned, if not originally inflicted, by social institutions, he was
partly convinced, and he felt a lively concern lest western civiliza-
tion should bring its futile restlessness to the simple island people.
The kindliness and simplicity of life in the valley of Typee, the
compensating virtues of the unsophisticated primitive, he found
lovable; but as the unhappy heir of centuries of Christian con-
science, as a child of Hebraic ideals of righteousness, he could not
eradicate the deep. roots of ethical unrest. With Fayaway it was
different. ‘‘Civilization had given her no veils; Christianity had
given her no compunctions. She was neither a mystery nor a
sin” (ibid., p. 260). But he could not become a simple child of
nature had he wanted to. He could never find his Nirvana in
mere sensuousness; he could not sink into the mud of animal
existence. Even while he bathed in the languorous calm of Typee,
floating idly with Fayaway on the stream of being, his heart was
beyond the narrow hills, and a cosmic nostalgia seized upon him.
That chapter of his life ended in futility, and so he made his way
back once more to the familiar places, with expectation still
undaunted. Certain of his experiences on that return journey he
has recorded in White Jacket, the story of his cruise on a man-of-
war; and how near it brought him to oblivion is told in the episode
of the threatened flogging before the mast, when fate intervened
to save Melville from flinging himself overboard, carrying with
him the brutal captain of the Nezgersink.

Amidst the constrictions of the old world to which he had come
back, a fresh vision of happiness opened to him in his love for
Elizabeth Shaw, and he made a desperate plunge into marriage.
The post-thalamion of that thwarted romance was Mardi—a far-
ranging “pilgrimage for a lost glamour,” “a quest after some total
and undivined possession of that holy and mysterious joy that
touched Melville during the period of his courtship” (cbid., p.
279). Mardi is a vast welter of satire and idealism, formless and
wild, which in turn was no more than prologue to Moby Dick.
This colossal book, fierce as Gulliver, broad as Rabelais, with its
saeva indignatio that laughs as it rends life, is the great confession
of his defeat. “It is good to laugh,” he says in Mardi, ‘though
the laugh be hollow. Women sob, and are rid of their grief; men
laugh and retain it. Ha! ha! how demoniacs shout; how all skel-
etons grin; we all die with a rattle. Humor, thy laugh is divine.”


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 263


And the conclusion to which the philosopher comes is this: “ Beat-
itude there is none. And your only Mardian happiness is but
exemption from great woes—no more. Great Love is sad; and
heaven is Love. Sadness makes the silence throughout the realms
of space; sadness is universal and eternal” (zbid., p. 279).

After Moby Dick, what remained but to put the external world
of experience aside and turn in upon his own thwarted hopes to
analyze them? Pierre, or the Ambiguities is his spiritual autobiog-
raphy, the confession of a stricken soul. In the inconsequential
matter of plot, a story of incest and murder and suicide, in its
deeper purpose, it is a wild fierce tale of mortal passions, that
traces the élan of mystical idealism to the buried depths of pro-
creative instinct. It is the last bewildering attempt to understand
the sources of the dream that had ridden him, and it is discovered
in the passionate struggles of Enceladus, titanic offspring of the
incestuous union between Heaven and Earth, to regain the king-
dom from which he has been thrust. In Mardi the search for
Yillah had been carried on under the watchful eye of Hautia, the
temptress, whom “‘his whole heart abhorred,” yet to whom at last
he went in her bower of Flozella-a-Nina—‘“‘ The Last-Verse-of-the-
Song”’; for in “‘some mysterious way seemed Hautia and Yillah
connected.” In Pierre Hautia reappears as Isabel, likewise a child
of Heaven and Earth, who is set over against Lucy—the pure
daughter of Heaven alone; and this dark Isabel robed in the mid-
night of her hair, by appealing unconsciously to Pierre’s noblest
impulses, draws him from the safe orbit of the Gansevoort moral-
ities, and makes of him “the fool of Truth, the fool of Virtue, the
fool of Fate.” Isabel is wild, unquestioning, mysterious passion,
untouched by any Hebraisms; and this half-sister of his blood,
this lovely embodiment of his star-crossed dreams, drives him
unwittingly to destruction. Pierre learns at last that the vision
brings poison in its kisses, for the divine in the heart of Enceladus is
mingled with the clay of earth. The dream is man’s final ironical
curse; Yillah and Hautia and Lucy and Isabel—changing embodi-
ments of the same mystical idealism—bring death to their lovers—
this is the conclusion of Pierre, a conclusion that Mr. Cabell would
not take kindly to. It was a black and bitter book, like Moby Dick
“broiled in hell-fire,” to fling at an easy-going public that cherished
its Gansevoort conventions. With its fierce disillusions Pierre is
the apogee and Nirvana of the spiritual romanticisms of the day.


264 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


That Melville was the spiritual child of Jean Jacques, that the
consuming nostalgia he suffered from was mortal, the most casual
acquaintance with his passionate rebellions should make clear;
and that his pessimism was a natural end and outcome of his
transcendental speculations, once those speculations had come to
intimate contact with life, is perhaps equally clear. Transcenden-
talism in Concord village and at Walden pond, was one thing.
Emerson’s infrequent anger at the folly of men was soothed by
the perfect art with which he phrased it, and never seriously
ruffled his temperamental placidity. Thoreau’s mystical com-
munings were with the young god Pan; he was too wise to seek to
domesticate a woodland nymph, and he was fortunate in escaping
the dun twilight that gathers about the slow years of physical
decay. But transcendentalism in the forecastle of the whaler
Acushnet, transcendentalism that drove fiercely into the blood-
red sunsets of dwarfing seas, transcendentalism in the hot and
passionate heart of a man whose vast dreams outran his feet—
this was something very different from the gentle mysticism of
cooler natures and unembittered hearts where no Promethean
fires were raging.

For Herman Melville, amidst the nameless obscenities of an
alien environment, to keep his faith in the goodness of life strong
and sweet, would have needed the boundless charity and simple
paganism of Walt Whitman. But unfortunately for his peace of
mind, though he might immerse himself in Plato, Melville was no
Greek; he was Hebraic rather, out of Ecclesiastes, and Solomon and
Jesus. “Away,” he cries in Pierre, “ye chattering apes of a
sophomorean Spinoza and Plato, who once did all but delude me
that the night was day, and pain only a tickle. Explain this
darkness, exorcise this devil, ye cannot. Tell me not, thou in-
conceivable coxcomb of a Goethe, that the universe cannot spare
thee and thy immortality. . . . Already the universe gets on
without thee. . . . Thou wert but the pretentious, heartless part
of aman. Lo! I hold thee in this hand, and thou art crushed in it
like an egg from which the meat hath been sucked” (Chapter
XXII—3). From the lips of the ancient Preacher he had learned
that all is vanity—even Pan. “The truest of men was the Man
of Sorrows,” he says, ‘‘and the truest of all books is Solomon’s,
and Ecclesiastes is the fine hammered steel of woe. All is vanity.
ALL. . . . He who... calls Cowper, Young, Pascal, Rousseau,


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 265


poor devils all of sick men; and throughout a care-free lifetime
swears by Rabelais as passing wise, and therefore jolly ;—not that
man is fitted to sit down on tombstones, and break the green damp
mould with unfathomably wondrous Solomon” (Weaver, Herman
Melville, pp. 151-152). After Pierre came Clarel—years later—
in which the theological doubts and religious unrest that mark
the poetry of Arnold and Clough in England came to expression
in a world that was untouched by them.’? The abyss that lay
between Melville and America had become deeper and wider.

Like all the transcendentalists Melville was a democrat, but
his democracy sprang rather from his sympathies than from his
philosophy. It was a democracy learned rather from Ecclesiastes
than from Emerson; it sprang from his pessimism rather than
from any transcendental faith in the divinity of man. He knew
only too well how weak and foolish are the children of Adam; but
in presence of the common fate to which the indifferent years
hurry us, how stupid and callous are the social distinctions that
society erects! Why should not life be a leveler, as well as death?
His experience before the mast had taught him sympathy for the
common man; he regarded quizzically the ways of the exploiting
few and the sufferings of the exploited many; and he smiled ironi-
cally at the neat little classification that divides the human animal
into sinners and saints. {He was as comprehensive a democrat as
Whitman, of the same all-embracing school that denied the
common social and ethical categories of excellence; but alienated
from his fellows, not drawn to them as Whitman was) It was not
a sense of social aloofness that held him apart, but the isolation of
loneliness. ““When you see or hear of my ruthless democracy on
all sides,” he wrote to Hawthorne, “you may possibly feel a
touch of a shrink, or something of that sort. It is but nature to be
shy of a mortal who boldly declares that a thief in jail is as honor-
able a personage as Gen. George Washington. . . . It seems an
inconsistency to assert unconditioned democracy in all things,
and yet confess a dislike to all mankind—in the mass. But not
so”’(ibid., pp. 320-321). He then goes on: “But truth is the
silliest thing under the sun,” and does not deign to explain. ‘“‘Be-
lieve me,” he says of Pierre, “you will pronounce Pierre a thorough-
going Democrat in time; perhaps a little too Radical altogether
to your fancy”’ (ibid., p. 37).

7 See Weaver, p. 365.


266 THE MIND OF THE MIDDLE EAST


Such a man would not so much turn critic as embody criticism.
His life—even more than Emerson’s—laid upon America, was a
yardstick to measure the shortcomings of a professed civilization.
Cooper was a critic whom America could understand, and America
hated him for his unpleasant frankness. Melville it could not
understand, and it turned away and ignored him. Perhaps it was
well enough that his generation could not comprehend his devastat-
ing speculations, and called him mad; or it would have cried out
to crucify this maligner of all the tribal fetishes. He would level
every barrier against the unpleasant that his age was erecting.
He outran Thoreau in contempt for current material ideals. To
turn scornfully away from the triumphs of his fellows—from the
fruits of the industrial revolution and the romantic gospel of
progress—this was incomprehensible blasphemy! Yet what had
Herman Melville in common with middle-class America? Its
hopes and fears were not his. He was troubled about life, and not
about things. He was not concerned about politics or the political
state. He was not concerned with trade, or money-getting, or
romantic imperialisms. He was not even greatly concerned with
political democracy, although in his time he had been as hot a
republican as the best of them. The shoddy democracy of his time
made his gorge rise; and to this shoddy democracy that shrilly pro-
claimed its excellence he paid his respects in words that suggest
Lowell’s Cathedral, but with a depth of significance that Lowell
was incapable of. In the poem Clarel, into which Melville crowded
so much of his later speculations, he comments thus:


This world clean fails me: still I yearn. . .


This side the dark and hollow bound
Lies there no unexplored rich ground?
Some other world: well, there’s the New—
Ah, joyless and ironic too!


Ay, Democracy

Lops, lops; and where’s her planted bed?
The future, what is that to her

Who vaunts she’s no inheritor?

Tis in her mouth, not in her heart.

The past she spurns, though ’tis the past
From which she gets her saving part—
That Good which lets her evil last.


Behold her whom the panders crown,
Harlot on horseback, riding down


CONTRIBUTIONS OF NEW ENGLAND 267


The very Ephesians who acclaim
This great Diana of ill fame!
Arch strumpet of an impious age,
Upstart from ranker villeinage:
Asia shall stop her at the least
That old inertness of the East. .


But in the New World things make haste:
Not only things, the state lives fast—

Fast breed the pregnant eggs and shells,
The slumberous combustibles,

Sure to explode. ”Twill come, ’twill come!
One demagogue can trouble much:

How of a hundred thousand such? . . .


Indeed, those germs one now may view:
Myriads playing pigmy parts—
Debased into equality:

Dead level of rank commonplace:

An Anglo-Saxon China, see,

May on your vast plains shame the race
In the Dark Ages of Democracy. . . .


Your arts advance in faith’s decay:

You are but drilling the new Hun

Whose growl even now can some dismay;
Vindictive in his heart of hearts.

He schools him in your mines and marts
A skilled destroyer. ...


Old ballads sing

Fair Christian children crucified

By impious Jews: you’ve heard the thing:
Yes, fable; but there’s truth hard by:
How many Hughs of Lincoln, say,

Does Mammon, in his mills, to-day,
Crook, if he does not crucify?


The impieties of ‘Progress’ speak;

What say these, in effect to God?

‘How profits it? And who art Thou

That we should serve Thee? Of Thy ways
No knowledge we desire; new ways

‘We have found out, and better. Go—
Depart from us!’ And if He do?

Is aught betwixt us and the hells? . . .


For Herman Melville, at least, the barriers betwixt him and the
hells had long been gone, and only Nirvana awaited him.


Purity


ce eae a in 50a]


f . , ae se mf) oe by ek ee aty Pr wee ™
"® ‘ Y oy Vimis Bi ; ZAM a Ansa sA5
a Lome ot § re awe sie aia | Lait ow oe mee =
Pale ray ae [ors Ramey ped A: hs on tee geen aut
7 en We ot tie 2 oe || i


a) ‘ dated Ws) i Pee, 6 i Oe a

fon a ae he? sivaby Ase M
0» Shi9) Pe. Up toh

Y Nem Gade ee (AL na! :

. ye? pelea baer


a cpp Ns ‘ Uplate weonl o gets ; =
Y ; A fey eli he +18 et, wer i
es) hk ee)
ett ee
: ging > Sees Ca sah ah ee re :
yet eel eter! oe ee, 7)


| ee a ae  Gaeiv Be Suhel Set of) (eh cheta-ih oh

ai ‘ - UO th Aah deel Pe iw! 2a

S gle attie. at ae

ht) Sis tli aaa i
pals Pat ; “NOS ec; way wet ; an
u na oi Tae ( avi ES1oo> wae we , oe:
rc 5 ee ihe rl rie ge 34

+ og ae till ‘iia ‘Sadie t Oe, Megas Py =]

0 eae ee pis ih bol} > Selon Sie elle eae eee


BOOK THREE: THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


aah ii iS oa


BOOK THREE
THE MIND OF. NEW ENGLAND


Tue New England renaissance was tardy in appearing and of
brief duration, yet in the few years of its extraordinary vigor it
imparted a stimulus to American life that its historians have not
greatly exaggerated. We are now far enough from it to see that
it was the last flowering of a tree that was dying at the roots, but
in the tumultuous thirties it seemed to be a new birth of the native
New England mind, opening on new worlds and great adventures.
Though its prophecies might be little heeded at its own fireside,
and unheard in the vast stretches of the West where men were
clearing and building after quite different plans than the Concord
architects were drawing, its significance in the development of
American idealism—the ethical imprint it stamped on American
culture—endured long after it had spent its force. It was the last
and in certain aspects the most brilliant of the several attempts
to domesticate in America the romantic thought of revolutionary
Europe; and with its passing, civilization in this western world
ell into the hands of another breed of men to fashion as they saw
fit.

The revolutions in thought that lie between the eighteenth
century with its aristocratic rationalism that conceived of human
nature as evil, and the nineteenth century with its middle-class
economics that conceived of human nature as acquisitive, are
more clearly defined in New England and more sharply differen-
tiated, than elsewhere in America. The flood of romantic specula-
tion with its humanitarian emphasis on the potential excellence
of man and the equality of human rights, that in Europe had
diffused itself widely, in Massachusetts flowed into narrow chan-
nels prepared by Puritan discipline, and swept away habits of
thought that had dominated New England for two hundred years.
The intensity of the Puritan nature, once it embraced the new
conceptions, imparted to them an intellectual and emotional
unity that serves to explain the creativeness of the New England
renaissance, as it serves to explain its failure to spread widely

271


272 THE. MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


beyond the confines of Massachusetts. Appearing a generation
later than in Virginia, it drew its inspiration more largely from Ger-
many than from France; it was intellectual and ethical rather than
political and economic; and in consequence it held little in common
with the Physiocratic agrarianism of Jefferson. The latter was
sufficiently native to American economics to appeal to the common
man from Maine to Georgia; the former was native only to New
England Puritanism. Its idealism appealed only to rare souls,
disciplined by speculation and trained in ethical values, men of
strong character and fine distinction who counted for much more
than numbers.

After all it is the ethical note that marks the Puritan. That
New England has run so different a course from other parts of
America has been due chiefly to its desire to serve God even though
it might be serving self. Its material life has always been plenti-
fully seasoned with the salt of religion. It sat under the teachings
of an austere ethics, as it lived under the compulsions of a nar-
row economics; and the result was the development of a middle
class distinct from that of the West where the desire to get on was
less hampered by the desire to get to heaven. The outstanding
social figures in early New England were the minister and thé
merchant; and these twin authorities—joined after the Revolution
by the rising profession of the law—ruled in patriarchal fashion
the inarticulate mass of the yeomanry. From these traditional
leaders the policy of New England received a twofold bent: a bent
to the ethical and a bent to the practical. The two have rarely
fused in a harmonious and fruitful life, but for the most part have
dwelt side by side under a covenant of noninterference, the char-
acter of current social ideals taking its impress from one or the
other as it gained a temporary ascendency. In the three hundred
years of New England history the minister has enjoyed two periods
of intellectual ascendency: the first during the early days of the
theocracy, when the commonwealth was ruled by the laws of God
and John Calvin; and the second, between the years 1830 and
1850, when John Calvin was finally put aside and New England
was in the way of being remodeled in accordance with the plans
of God alone. Between these brief periods of ethical enthusiasm
lies the main history of New England, a history that counts for
little in our intellectual and aesthetic development, but that meant
much and ill to the cramped minds of her sons.


THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND 273


This long stretch, arid and unlovely, was dominated wholly by
the merchant. Its parsimonious thrift, relieved by few generous
impulses, was hostile to all change and to the romance that is bred
of change. There was no rapid inflow of settlers to bring fresh
energy and expansion. The exuberant growth of other parts of
America was never shared by rural New England, and in conse-
quence the harvest of unearned increment was rarely reaped from
her sterile acres. Except in the shipping towns there was little
economic development. On its secluded little farms New England
was living a narrow parochial life, cooping up its mind in a rigid
theological system and disciplining its character by a self-denying
ordinance. Public affairs were managed by the squire, for the
minister was too busy defending John Calvin against the Armini-
ans to have a care for much except morality and dogma. The
renaissance became of necessity, therefore, a movement of liberal-
ism—a vehement protest against the torpor of the dogmatist
whose mind was shut up in a dead system. It was a sudden re-
awakening of the ethical passion of Puritanism that had slept for
two centuries; a vision of a new heaven and a new earth that it
proposed to take by storm. It proposed to rid the mind of New
England of its decadent loyalties—the nightmare dreams of
Calvinism that debased human nature, and the counting-house
dreams of Federalism that conceived of man as an exploitative
animal. It had discovered anew the beauty of righteousness, and
in the name of righteousness it proposed to throw off the old
tyrannies and create a society wherein the mind should be free
and the soul enjoy its religion. The battle against Calvinism was
only preliminary to greater battles which constituted the intel-
lectual revolution that marked the renaissance.

It was the New England minister, and the spiritual heirs of the
minister—a group of intellectuals and reformers more notable
than New England had before bred—that gave to the movement
its pronounced ethical quality. It was freedom for individual
righteousness that they sought; not freedom for intellectual
epicureanism, for romance, for aesthetic or pagan beauty. The
transcendentalists and reformers had little time to amuse them-
selves with such things.. They were too eager for the coming of the
kingdom to dawdle over fiction or patronize the playhouse. They
had been bred from their youth up on printer’s ink; they came of a
race that had long respected the printed page. Literary men by


274 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


inheritance, they esteemed themselves stewards of a great cause.
In rejecting their fathers’ hell they became the more zealous to
make a heaven of this world; and although the more practical
Yankee was skeptical of their plans and would not suffer them to
turn Boston into a. transcendental Utopia, they succeeded in
making such a stir as New England had never before known.
For a brief time, at least, liberal ideas found a welcome in homes
where they had hitherto been strangers; for a brief time the in-
tellectual and not the merchant dominated New England.


PART ONE: THE TWILIGHT OF FEDERALISM


CHAPTER I
THE PASSING OF THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL


I
OLD BOSTON


THE year 1815, that brought to a close the unfortunate American
venture into the maelstrom of the Napoleonic wars, may be con-
veniently taken to mark for New England the transition to the
ineteenth century. With the rise of Unitarianism and the devel-
_frrment of the new industrialism, a ruder and more vigorous age
entered Boston. It met with a somewhat chilly reception. The
patriarchal eighteenth century still clung to its warm chimney
corner, not liking to be dispossessed by heirs of whom it testily
disapproved. The old order stood on its dignity, tenacious of
its habitual authority. It lived quietly in an aristocratic past,
unregardful of the vigorous commonwealths rising beyond the
Appalachian mountains, and contemptuous of the new political
philosophy that preached the rights of man. A persistent conti-
nuity of temper marked the ruling class, a continuity little disturbed
by the tumultuous revolutions of the past two generations. Al-
though nearly half the voters of Massachusetts, in the year 1800,
were Jeffersonian republicans, the knowledge of that fact only
stiffened the backbones of the regnant caste. It colored their
minds with a virtuous pessimism, but it edged their temper with
the zeal of righteousness. The Boston mobsters, it would appear,
were republican, and when the present custodians of the ark of
decency were gathered to their fathers, very likely evil days would
come upon the land; but while the righteous lived they would
be faithful to their stewardship. Their own households, at least,
they would keep clean of all democratic pollution; and so Boston
and New Haven and Hartford—the capitals of New England
culture—drew about them the garments of Federalist righteous-
ness. Since the Revolution of ’76 a new authority had risen on
the ruins of the old Tory authority, but in spite of the change of
275


276 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


personnel and outward political forms, the spirit of respectable
New England remained pretty much what it had always been.
John Quincy Adams and Fisher Ames and Josiah Quincy were
little different in character and aims from Thomas Hutchinson
and Joseph Sewall and Daniel Leonard—they were common
chips from the tough old New England oak. High-minded yet
narrow; devout yet not emotionally religious; thrifty yet generous
in approved causes; engaged in overseas commerce yet oddly
parochial—they were men fashioned by a rugged environment into
vigorous stock, that would hold tenaciously to what they had got
and would tolerate no insubordination on the part of their social
inferiors.

With its twenty-five thousand inhabitants Boston ranked fourth
in size among American cities. Philadelphia, the social capital
of America, was nearly three times as large; New York nearly
two and a half times; and even Baltimore had lately come to ex-
ceed her in population. The economic forces that make for lib-
eralism had become largely impotent. Free land had long since
been exhausted in Massachusetts and social lines were fixed. The
northern frontier of Maine and New Hampshire was rugged and
uninviting, and York State lay to the West. Except in the Con-
necticut valley the soil was thin and farming unproductive, and
in consequence the more ambitious turned to commerce and manu-
facture which the physical conditions of the country invited.
The dominant interest of Boston was commercial, and the ruling
coterie of merchants and lawyers was narrowly Whiggish. They
had modified their pre-Revolutionary political philosophy no fur-
ther than to substitute the word republican for monarchical. The
aristocratic temper dominated the town meetings, and the prin-
ciple of property rule was commonly accepted as the essence of
political wisdom. In substituting Federalism for Toryism there
was no easing of the restrictions on rebellious plebeians. Quite
repudiated were the rude leveling ways of the great Revolu-
tionary adventure. Boston gentlemen had come to understand
too well the danger of encouraging the mob, for as Fisher Ames
pointed out in 1787, “The people have turned against their
teachers the doctrines, which were inculcated to effect the late
revolution” (Works, p. 11). Boston had had enough of revolutions —
since Daniel Shays had got up one of his own aimed at the Boston
purse, and French Jacobins had let loose their devastating


_THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 277


ideas upon a gullible world. Revolutions that were not made in
Boston, by Boston gentlemen, were quite certain to be wicked and
seditious; and Boston had definitely gone out of the revolution
business. It wanted above all things to undo the mischief that
had already been done, and take back into safe hands the politi-
cal power which in the days of revolutionary enthusiasm had been
seized by the agrarian democracy.

In the last decade of the eighteenth century the intellectual
isolation of New England was sharply accentuated and the con-
sequent intellectual stagnation became more disastrous. In other
portions of America French revolutionary theories of man and
society were spreading widely and shouldering aside the outworn
past. A romatic equalitarianism, based on the doctrine of hu-
man perfectibility, was displacing the traditional economic real-
ism, established on the dogma of total depravity. The leveling
movement, in consequence, was provided with a persuasive ideal-
ism that awakened troublesome aspirations in the disfranchised
majority and gave a strong impetus to the democratic movement.
But New England leaders stood resolutely apart, accounting all
equalitarianism sheer romantic folly. The old stubborn realism
held its ground, interpreting political principles in terms of ec-
onomics, and dogmatically maintaining the sacred rights of prop-
erty. Boston Federalism refused to have anything to do with
‘atheistic France,” the fruitful mother of Jacobin follies. Pol-
lution, it was convinced, must result from any commerce with
infidel and innovating ideas. Gunpowder that was played with
might explode, and New England wanted no blowing up of her
excellent society. Virginia had lent credulous ears to the voice
of France, and the result was the atheist Jefferson and the rabble
of his licentious followers. Massachusetts was not gullible and
it would tolerate no Jeffersonian atheisms. And so instead of
adapting French romantic philosophy to new world needs, seizing
upon its social idealism to leaven the crude American lump—
as Jefferson and Colonel Mason and John Taylor and many
another Virginia gentleman had done—Boston Federalism re-
jected French ideas in the mass, dubbed French idealism Jaco-
binism, and turned back upon a stubborn reaction.

The disastrous consequences of that rejection upon the mind of
New England cannot easily be measured. It is clear enough,
nevertheless, that the renaissance was delayed a full generation,


278 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


and when it came it assumed certain provincialisms that greatly
lessened its permanent influence upon the rest of America. The
impress of its contribution upon our national thought has been far
less permanent than that of Virginia, that came a generation ear-
lier and was primarily economic and political. It is a suggestive
fact that in the work of adapting the new Federal Constitution
to democratic ends, New England contributed no creative leader,
none in any way comparable to Jefferson; but on the contrary
her most representative leaders—and in particular Webster—
followed the eighteenth-century tradition in combating the equal-
itarian advance in the interest of economic groups. Some ex-
planation of this fact may be found, perhaps, in the selfish
isolation of New England Federalism, that closed the door on the
liberal thought of France.

In consequence of such isolation Boston became the recognized
home of the philosophy of a stake-in-society. If it clung tena-
ciously to an old-fashioned Federalism after it had been abandoned
elsewhere, it was because Boston was more middle-class than
Charleston, and had not learned from experience with Jackson-
ianism how easily the majority will may be shaped and controlled
to particular ends. It inherited the old Tory contempt for democ-
racy and relied on the old stock arguments to combat it. Its
habitual tone was one of virtuous arrogance. The one great and
ever-present fear that haunted the pillows of worthy Boston mer-
chants and turned their dreams to nightmares, was fear of the
mob getting out of hand; and democracy, for them, was only a
euphemism for the mob—the ever-present menace to sober and
decent government. In the judgment of Theodore Dwight,
brother of Timothy, ‘‘there could be nothing more dreadful this
side of hell.’”’ Nowhere else in America did the reaction against
the democratic ideal carry so far as in Boston. The church and
the merchant associations joined with polite society to cry it down,
and upon the head of the democrat fell the most extravagant
vituperation. For a generation few respectable New Englanders
raised their voices in defense of democracy, but gentlemen of prin-
ciple and property followed the lead of the little clique that was
driving straight towards the Hartford Convention—blind sailors
navigating the Dead Sea of Federalist pessimism.

All this was before the reputed time of plain living and high
thinking. Intellectual Boston was as parochial as political Boston.


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 279


The lights whom Bostonians regarded as the torch-bearers of
New England culture have long since been extinguished and their
names forgotten even in Beacon Street. Amongst the literati
of the little Boston of 1800 the historian need concern himself
with no more than two or three: Fisher Ames (1758-1808), the
Federalist lawyer-wit, and Robert Treat Paine (1773-1811), es-
teemed the ninth wonder of the Boston world. Other figures
there were, of course, in addition to the literati: Harrison Gray
Otis, the eloquent voice of Faneuil Hall, and Josiah Quincy,
whom Lowell likened to an old Roman of the elder virtuous days,
and who during a long life of ninety-two years was an example of
stalwart and antiquated Federalism. Old Boston bred dignified
figures in plenty, men admirably equipped to be college presi-
dents, ambassadors, orators on formal occasions, purveyors of
cultivated inutilities and polished commonplace—men like Ed-
ward Everett, whom all Boston praised while they lived and forgot
when they were dead; but it bred no thinkers or men of letters
who count in the larger history of America. Boston was still
parochial, content with little things.


II
FISHER AMES
The Oracle of the Tie-Wig School


Of this testy little world that clung to its smallclothes and tie-
wig, refusing to adopt the Jacobin innovation in dress and manners
and politics, declining to temper its prejudices to the gusty whims
of a leveling age, Fisher Ames was the universal counselor and
oracle. A vivacious little gentleman to whom politics was the
breath of life, he achieved so tremendous a reputation in his
short lifetime that all New England looked to him for leadership
and Harvard College wanted to make him its president. He
came of vigorous stock, prone to consult its own will and speak
its opinions with no squeamish concern for a neighbor’s views.
His brother, Dr. Nathaniel Ames, was as violent a Republican
as Fisher was a Federalist, a hater of all lawyers whom he ac-
counted the “ pettifogging interest’’; and when the two members of
the family came together at dinner the talk must have been worth
hearing. Diverse worlds and hostile philosophies faced each other
over the roast, and the sauce no doubt was well spiced. Dr.


280 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Nathaniel had a pretty gift himself in the way of pungent speech,
and Fisher’s wit was the admiration of all New England. When
Gouverneur Morris—reputed the greatest wit in America—visited
Massachusetts, Fisher Ames was pitted against him, and Boston
believed that the honor of the Bay State was worthily upheld.
His pet hobby was the inherent tyranny of all democracies, and
when he once got astride his wooden horse and dug in the spurs,
the onset was tremendous. The letters that have come down to
us are a gold mine of picturesque vituperation, from which one may
dig a wallet of choice nuggets. The vivacity of his anathemas is
delightful, and one would give much to have heard Dr. Nathan-
iel’s retort militant.

There are the solidest grounds for regarding Fisher Ames as
the representative citizen of Boston in the year 1800. He was the
cleverest and most intelligent spokesman of a social and po-
litical circle quite untouched by the new French liberalisms,
content with the habitual and familiar, and mightily concerned
that the future should be as like the past as one generation of
oysters is like another. A lawyer who shared the strong prop-
erty consciousness of the Boston merchant, and a churchman
who accepted the moral leadership of the Calvinist clergy, he
offered stout and uncompromising resistance to innovation.
“A change, though for the better, is always to be deplored by
the generation in which it is effected,” he said. ‘‘Much is lost
and more is hazarded”’ (Works, p. 15, edition of 1809). The new
gospel of progress that came in with French romanticisms, he
would have none of. In the face of a noisy Jacobinism that threat-
ened to carry all before it, he fought a spirited fight, turning
pamphleteer when his broken health removed him from Congress,
counseling and scolding his fellow Federalists with his last breath.
Others might truckle and compromise, but not Fisher Ames. His
faith was founded on the solid granite of Yankee prejudice.

The very solidity of that prejudice made him the trenchant
spokesman of the older Boston conservatisms—that and the vi-
vacity of his prose style which is approved Augustan, uncorrupted
by what he dubbed “‘pompous Johnsonian affectation.” His con-
temporary reputation was enormous. Accounted a great orator,
he was accounted an even greater political philosopher, and his
pamphlets were appraised by President Kirkland of Harvard
as “the light of genius and wisdom darted athwart the gloom of


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 281


our political chaos.” ‘In the character of Mr. Ames,” said the
Harvard president, “the circle of the virtues seemed to be com-
plete, and each virtue in its proper place” (Works, Introduction,
p. xxvil). Yet in spite of so authoritative a pronouncement,
Fisher Ames does not seem today so great a man as he seemed to
his own generation. From the data collected in a stout volume
published soon after his death as ‘‘a voice of instruction and warn-
ing to his country,” and from the letters published by his son in
1854, it is plain enough that this ‘‘ powerful and original genius”
was a retailer of somewhat shopworn goods, a complete Federalist
Tory after the current Boston fashion. To Fisher Ames Federal-
ism, as understood in New England, was a religion. He defended
it with the ardor of the moralist, convinced that it included all
the political virtues, and that whoever rejected it was a child of
the devil. Whenever he considered the unpromising state of the
country—which luxury he often indulged—whether in the midst
of Shays’s Rebellion or of the Jeffersonian revolution, he fell into
black pessimism. He grew hot from fires of his own kindling, and
the gloomier he became the more vigorously he blew the bellows.

To the sinful publican self-conscious virtue is peculiarly irri-
tating, and since Fisher Ames accounted most of his generation
political publicans, he was at odds with all but a scant remnant
of Federalist saints. From this isolation, from the defeat that
overwhelmed his party in the great election of 1800, and from ag-
gravating ill health, which beginning when he was thirty-seven
incapacitated him three years later for public life, he fell into a
state of chronic political despondency that extracted a grim pleas-
ure from the contemplation of democratic follies and the anarchy
towards which the country was hastening. During his last years
his wit became acid; his letters are filled with caustic comment to
sharpen the temper of those on the fighting line. Of these racy
comments, so characteristic of Federalist spleen, a few examples
must serve to convey the spirit: “Our country is too big for union,
too sordid for patriotism, too democratic for liberty.” “‘We are
in the hands of the philosophers of Lilliput.” “I have as loyal and
respectful an opinion as possible of the sincerity in folly of our
rulers.” ‘“‘As to liberty, we are to have none—democracy will
kindle its own hell, and consume in it.” “‘ Democracy is a troubled
spirit, fated never to rest, and whose dreams, if it sleeps, present
only visions of hell.” In his last years Fisher Ames had become a


’


282 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


shrill Jeremiah crying in the gates of an Israel that mocked the
old prophets.

His political philosophy was simple, yet so native to Calvin-
ist-Yankee New England, and historically so characteristic, that
it provides a useful candle to throw light into the old New England
garrets. In certain aspects it is close kin to the Whiggery of Locke
and Pitt, particularly in its concern for the sacred right of prop-
erty rule—a principle that he casually recognizes in his frequent
assertion that “‘the mass of the federalists are the owners of the
commercial and monied wealth of the nation” (Works, p. 426).
But in post-Revolutionary Boston, suffering from the acute fright
inflicted by Daniel Shays, this English Whiggery had come to as-
sume a particular native form that differentiated it from its orig-
inal. In the primitive Calvinist-Yankee world political theory
had been shaped by the theocratic conception of stewardship,
by which was meant an authoritative leadership reposing in the
best and wisest, yet subject to the will of God as revealed in the
Bible. Minister and magistrate, therefore, professed to justify
their acts, not by expediency or interest, but by absolute ethical
standards. From this early practice developed the pronounced
ethical temper of New England political thought that set it apart
from the Virginia school, a temper that persisted after the transfer
of authority from Puritan minister and magistrate to Tory mer-
chant and lawyer. With the growth of the aristocratic spirit in
the middle eighteenth century, the squirearchy assumed unchal-
lenged political leadership, and it was from the remnant of the old
gentry remaining after the expulsion of the Loyalists, strengthened
by a new generation of merchants and lawyers, that Boston Fed-
eralism drew its personnel. It professed republicanism, but it was
instinctively aristocratic. It was true to its Puritan origins in
expounding its political philosophy in terms of an absolute moral-
ity, and true to its aristocratic origins in assuming to be the special
custodians of law and order. It no more questioned its special
right to rulership in the state than it questioned its social position;
and in both politics and society it professed the ancient doctrine of
stewardship.

The kinship between the political philosophy of Fisher Ames and
John Adams is quite evident. They are cut out of the same Puri-
tan-Yankee cloth, but the former is a more careless tailor. Founded
on less adequate analysis and lacking the wide historical appeal


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 283


of Adams, assuming rather than proving the fact of a universal
property aristocracy, and the economic origins of political power,
the philosophy of Ames postulates the same ideal of justice as
the end of government, discovers in faction the dragon to be slain,
and concludes that only a static division of powers can insure
political stability. Nevertheless the difference between the two
men is enormous. John Adams was a philosopher, and Fisher
Ames was only a lawyer-politician. The ideal of justice which the
former postulated was fundamentally noble, whereas the ideal
of justice which the latter assumed was narrowly legal. Both
accepted the Puritan doctrine of human wickedness—a doctrine
derived from medieval Toryism—and from it deduced the neces-
sity of a coercive sovereignty; but Fisher Ames went further and
assumed that the Puritan doctrine of the elect and the Yankee
doctrine of the successful were one and the same, and that God’s
remnant in Israel was no other than the prosperous merchants
and lawyers of Boston. All the great multitude of the unprosper-
ous, by the same doctrine, were the mass of the unregenerate, con-
demned for the good of society to be ruled by a rod of iron.

The noble doctrine of justice, therefore, became for Fisher
Ames little more than the divine right of the minority to coerce
the majority, in the name and through the agency of laws and
statutes. In his view justice was little more than a drab realist
in a lawyer’s wig, adjudicating title deeds, and delivering its find-
ings out of law books. Its one concern was to safeguard what had
been got, rather than to secure just and equal rights. It dreaded
all rude and tumultuary innovation, and would tolerate no change
that was not implicit in legal principles. Its golden rule was due
process of law. Love of one’s neighbors was, no doubt, an excel-
lent private virtue, but it was impractical, if not immoral, in the
state. Concern for the improvident sinners must not influence
government to impair the rights of the thrifty saints; for govern-
ment was instituted and exists to safeguard established things.
“The chief duty and care of all governments,” he argued, “is
to protect the rights of property and the tranquillity of society”
(Works, p. 125). Hence to Fisher Ames government was the com-
mon policeman and judge, whose function was to arrest the turbu-
lent and bring them to the bar of the Common Law. Its beginning
and end was the Tory principle of coercion. Its sovereignty was
arrogant and domineering, taking no account of the democratic


284 THE. MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


principle of good will. ‘The motives to refuse obedience to govern-
ment are many and strong,” he explained; ‘‘impunity will multi-
ply and enforce them. Many men would rebel, rather than be
ruined; but they would rather not rebel, than be hanged” (Works,
“Lucius Junius Brutus”). With government thus conceived of,
naturally he desired that it should be strong; that it should im-
pose its will ruthlessly upon the rebellious. Naturally also he
regarded every idealist, the Rousseaus and Paines and Jeffersons—
all the mischievous hosts of “democratick babblers”—as a dan-
gerous enemy of law and order, desperately bent on overturning
the rights of vested interests and the tranquillity of society. This
is sufficient to explain the vindictiveness of his assault upon Shays
and his followers, as “‘bankrupts and sots, who have gambled or
slept away their estates’””—while in the Revolutionary army—and
were now engaged in the business of treason against the common-
wealth, and the characteristic conclusion that he draws—‘“‘the
certainty of punishment is the truest security against crimes”
(Works, “Lucius Junius Brutus,” p. 3). To Fisher Ames and
Daniel Shays, justice seems to have had very different aspects.

To the uncritical there is a certain persuasive dignity in the
philosophy of Boston Federalism. Gentlemen like Fisher Ames
were careful to appear well in public; they liked to be regarded
as faithful stewards of the common weal. Concern for the res
publica they professed so heartily that it seems ungracious to
question their motives. How excellently they could make out a
case for themselves will appear from the following exposition of
Fisher Ames’ philosophy, as it was understood by a Harvard presi-
dent:

Mr. Ames was emphatically a republican. He saw that many persons
confounded a republick with a democracy. He considered them as essen-
tially distinct and really opposite. According to his creed, a republick is
that structure of an elective government, in which the administration
necessarily prescribe to themselves the general good as the object of all
their measures; a democracy is that, in which the present popular passions,
independent of the publick good, become a guide to the rulers. In the
first, the reason and interests of the society govern; in the second, their
prejudices and passions. The frame of the American constitution supposes
the dangers of democracy. . . . [The constitutional checks] are contri-
vances and devices voluntarily adopted by the people to restrain them-
selves from obstructing, by their own mistakes or perversity, the attain-


ment of the publick welfare. They are professed means of insuring to the
nation rulers, who will prefer the durable good of the whole to the transient


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 285


advantage of the whole or a part. When these provisions become in-
effectual, and the legislator, the executive magistrate, and the judge be-
come the instruments of the passions of a people, or of the governing ma-
jority, the government, whatever may be its form, is a democracy, and
the public liberty is no longer safe. True republican rulers are bound to
act, not simply as those who appoint them would, but, as they ought;
democratick leaders will act in subordination to those very passions which
it is the object of government to control. . . . Then it is, that men, not
laws, govern. (Works, Introduction, pp. xxiv-xxv.)


“The durable good of the whole” is an excellent phrase; but
when the skeptical critic asks for more exact plans and specifications,
the only answer is a request for a vote of confidence. The rep-
_ resentative is presumed to be wiser and more patriotic than his
constituents—quite above passion or interest—and may safely
be intrusted with “the publick good.” ‘‘The love of country,”
Fisher Ames was fond of insisting, “‘is the morality of politics,”
and the Federal Constitution he believed to be so happily balanced
that partisan selfishness must transmute itself into patriotism.
But when we dismiss these amiable generalities—which reveal to
what straits gentlemen were reduced in their contest with democ-
racy—and examine the political principles that lie behind them,
they do not appear so amiable. They imply as necessary corol-
laries a continuous aggrandizement of the political state, the prin-
ciple of coercion, and the psychology of fear. It is no other than
the old Tory arrogance, new-modeled to suit republican taste.
Fisher Ames seems to have had no faith in the principle of good
will or the expediency of compromise; his contempt for the opposi-
tion was as frank as Hamilton’s.


Government does not subsist by making proselytes to sound reasons
or by compromise and arbitration with its members; but by the power of
the community compelling the obedience of individuals. If that is not
done, who will seek its protection, or fear its vengeance. (“Lucius Junius
Brutus,” Works, p. 5.)


For let it be remarked, that a feeble government produces more factions
than an oppressive one; the want of power first makes individuals legisla-
tors, and then rebels. Where parents want authority, children are want-
ing in duty. It is not possible to advance further in the same path; the
one will conduct us first to anarchy, and next to foreign or domestick
tyranny; the other, by the wise and vigorous exertion of lawful authority,
will lead to permanent power, and general prosperity. I am no advocate
for despotism; but I believe the probability to be much less of its being


286 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


introduced by the corruption of our rulers, than by the delusion of the
people. (“ Camillus,” Works, p. 17.)

A weak government, Ames argues insistently, is no other than a
hotbed of faction, and faction is the fruitful mother of democratic
anarchy. Again and again he returns to an exposition of the famil-
iar eighteenth-century dogma that found its classic exposition
in the tenth number of The Federalist; and his argument takes
on darker colors from the Calvinist background of his mind. To
those who have been reared on the sour doctrines of reprobation
and election, the children of Adam become a major political
concern. If God has cast off and denied the mass of the unregener-
ate, how shall the political philosopher hope to redeem them?
If divine wisdom has granted them no part in the congregation
of the righteous, what rights have they in the republic of the
patriotic? To Fisher Ames town and village and farm showed
plentiful examples of those whom the devil had marked for his
own, and if they were gathered into a numerical democracy with
the saints, how should the minority of the latter safeguard the Ark
of the Sanctuary? How should the durable good of the whole be
provided for? Thrift and godliness were not exactly synonymous
terms to the Calvinist-Yankee, but it was clear that the godly
will practice thrift, and those who have thriven, have ipso facto
made out a case for their godliness. In this uncertain world two
things seemed reasonably clear: that the poor are in a more doubt-
ful state than the rich; and that in a moral world only the elect
may be expected to serve the cause of morality. The wicked in-
cline to democratic faction, but the prosperous serve the durable
good of the whole.

To one cradled in such prejudices, the current phrase, “gentle-
men of principle and property’’—a phrase that provides the chorus
to his thought—lacked the savor of cynicism that it suggests to
modern ears. It was compounded of the ideals of Puritan and
Yankee, and Fisher Ames seems never to have questioned its
adequacy, or doubted its finality. To gentlemen of principle
and property he looked to provide a bulwark against the immoral
multitude; they were the stewards of society, on whom devolved
the duty of protecting the whole from democratic faction. They
had erected the Federal Constitution, which Jacobins were seeking
to destroy; and in defense of that Constitution he brought forth his
heaviest artillery. He contributed nothing new to the discussion;


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 287


but he repeated the familiar arguments with the gusto of a dog-
matist. “Simple governments,” he asserted, “are despotisms;
and of all despotisms, a democracy, though the least durable, is
the most violent” (Works, “American Liberty,” p. 382). The mor-
tal weakness of all democracies he discovered in their immorality.
A democracy will make every people “thoroughly licentious and
corrupt.” ‘The known propensity of a democracy is to licen-
tiousness, which the ambitious call, and the ignorant believe to be
liberty.”


The great object, then, of political wisdom in framing our constitution,
was to guard against licentiousness, that inbred malady of democracies,
that deforms their infancy with grey hairs and decrepitude. (Jbid.,


p- 384.)
There is universally a presumption in democracy that promises every-


thing; and at the same time an imbecility that can accomplish nothing,
not even preserve itself. (Works, “Falkland,” p. 151.)


“Politics should have no passions,” this caustic old Federalist
professed to believe, yet his bitterness against the Jeffersonians
who threatened to overturn the funding law, the national bank,
the midnight judicial appointments, and other measures of the best
Federalist minds, was almost unseemly. It would appear that
“the durable good of the whole”’ flew out at the window, when dan-
ger to commercial interests came in at the door. To erect a strong
government and then lose control of it was a disaster indeed. With
the political state in the hands of atheistic democrats, Fisher Ames
was prepared to welcome the coming of anarchy, and his pessi-
mism throve on the prospect. But that no warning might be lack-
ing he laid down the whole theory of government in plain terms,
that even Jefferson might understand:


But the essence, and almost the quintessence, of good government is,
to protect property and its rights. When these are protected, there is
scarcely any booty left for oppression to seize; the objects and the mo-
tives to usurpation and tyranny are removed. By securing property,
life and liberty can scarcely fail of being secured: where property is safe
by rules and principles, there is liberty. (Works, “Phocion,” p. 181.)


This is pure Federalism, stripped of all cant, speaking out frankly.
It is the philosophy of John Locke brought in to serve the rising
capitalism of New England, threatened by a Physiocratic agra-
rianism. The dogma of political morality has yielded to economic


288 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


realism. The stake-in-society principle is the reply of the Puritan-
Yankee to the democratic romanticism of Jefferson and Madison
—a principle which, fortunately, “‘these apostles from the race-
ground and the cock-pit”’ paid little heed to.

To a sophisticated generation, long familiar with the political
ways of gentlemen of principle and property, Fisher Ames appears
as a caustic little gentleman, vivacious and intolerant, who nodded
his tie-wig dogmatically, and spoke his opinions oracularly. He
quite evidently relished his ample store of old-fashioned prejudices,
cherished them carefully, and prided himself on the wit with which
he set them forth. If he was not the repository of all political wis-
dom that he believed himself to be, he was at least no demagogue,
and in honoring him the Boston of the year 1800 was but painting
its own portrait. It would be ungracious, perhaps, to add that
Fisher Ames and Boston Federalism, defeated in their cherished
projects, were both suffering from an extraordinarily aggravated
case of the political spleen.

II
ROBERT TREAT PAINE, JR.
Wit

Young Tom Paine, who took his brother’s and his father’s name—
partly because a certain other Tom Paine had achieved a fame that
Boston did not regard as enviable—shared with Fisher Ames the
literary renown of the New England capital, a renown so great
that Boston paid him quite astonishing sums for such couplets
as his indolence suffered him to turn off. The popularity. of his
wares was a notable instance of the working of the law of supply
and demand. ‘The patriotism of Boston preferred domestic to
imported goods, and he offered his verses to a public not very
critical of quality. Boston had never had a poet of her own, while
Connecticut with her Hartford Wits was the envy of all New Eng-
land. Certain poetesses to be sure, had tried with ‘‘hallowed
hands” to “attune Columbia’s lyre”—to quote Paine’s eulogy
of Mrs. Sarah Wentworth Morton, “blest Philenia, noblest of
the choir” (Works, ““Menander to Philenia,” p. 129)—but their
sentimentality was a bit cloying, and when genius appeared in the
person of a Harvard graduate, graced with wit and adomed with
all the learning of the schools, Boston was quick to acclaim him
as her own. ‘


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 289


The young man thus seized upon, and as it were raped by fame,
was the last of the eighteenth-century wits, the most dashing prod-
uct of a generation that patched its verse with tags of the classics
and called it lisping in numbers. In temper and manners he be-
longed wholly to the tie-wig school that swaggered till the War
of 1812 and then became obsolete overnight. As a young man
about town he displayed the latest London clothes and set him-
self up as the very glass of fashion. Although he wore his own hair,
he clung to smallclothes and like an honest Federalist refused to
adopt Jacobin trousers. He was indisputably clever and he culti-
vated a pretty wit as assiduously as any Augustan. He talked

in epigrams, and a convivial evening—of which he was quite too
fond for his own good—was a failure that did not produce a bon
mot to run through the town. His biographer has preserved a
number of such for the amusement of posterity, and one at least
deserves to be remembered by our younger critics. When the
prohibition against the theater was repealed in 1793, he remarked,
“The Vandal spirit of puritanism is prostrate in New-England.”’
In cleaving to wit and abandoning Puritanism, Paine broke with
sober Boston convention, and soon all respectable folk began to
shake their heads. A thriftless fellow, he played with the devil
openly in the eyes of all Boston. He drank too much, he gambled,
he haunted the theater and was a favorite of the greenroom, he
became the first dramatic critic born and bred in New England,
and when he married the daughter of an English actor, his
father disowned him. Quite naturally he came to poverty,*
dissipated his strength, suffered many a humiliation, and died
at the age of thirty-seven, leaving his widow and young children
to be provided for by a public benefit at his beloved Federal
Street theater.

Little of his wit, unfortunately, found its way into his verse,
which, modeled ostensibly on Dryden and Pope, lacks their vigorous
common sense, and laboring to be sublime succeeds in being heavy.
His couplets swell sonorously, but his thought does not keep pace
with his rhetoric. He follows his recipe carefully; adjectives duly
support the nouns; the caesuras are justly spaced and the balance
of the parts is as nice as if weighed in an apothecary’s scales.
He seasons the whole with the staples of personification and poetic
diction; everything has been provided for, and yet the cake is fallen
that he takes from the oven. Something is lacking to lighten the


290 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


sodden mass. A contemporary critic, viewing the finished product,
expressed his judgment thus:


Of Mr. Paine, as an author, we cannot speak in terms of unmingled
praise. His verse, indeed, seldom loiters into prose; but it must be con-
fessed, that his prose is here and there “‘tricked and frounced, till it out-
mantles all the pride of verse.” His numbers are, perhaps, never feeble
or faultering, but a wild and frolic imagination, occasionally, wantons
through his periods, and sometimes displays itself in contemning the
chaster elegancies, and sometimes in neglecting the severer decencies of
thought and diction. (Works, Introduction, p. Ixxviii.)


It is certainly a partial eye that discovers a wild and frolic imagi-
nation in these lumbering imitations of Pope, or in the occasional
excursions into the languorous fields of Della Cruscan sentiment.
When Paine ceases to be a wit he becomes an offense. To his
admiring contemporaries his poetry seemed to be pure metal,
but to later generations it is only plate, with the brass showing
through the worn spots. The Ruling Passion, delivered before
the Phi Beta Kappa Society in 1797, is perhaps the first poem of
Paine’s that is much more than vacuous and turgid rhetoric;
and this is redeemed, in spite of liberal helpings from Pope, by a
certain vivacity of satire, phrased with Augustan smartness. Such
couplets as these still preserve a jaunty literary swagger for later
ears; how they tickled the more susceptible ears of our grandfathers
must be imagined:


Where you send genius, send a fortune too;
Dunces by instinct thrive, as oysters woo!
For ne’er were veins of ore by chymist found,
Except, like Hebrew roots, in barren ground!


Paine early grew old, and before he had reached his thirties
his mind had taken a rigid conservative bent. His affections
were fixed upon a past that was visibly falling into decay, and
its ways were endeared to him in the measure that they decayed.
It was a matter of personal pride with him to embody in his own
manners the aristocratic bearing of pre-Revolutionary times.


Mr. Paine [says his biographer] attached great consequence to manners.
. . . He was modelled upon the old school. Without being familiar, he
was easy among friends, and courtly to strangers. In colloquial discus-
sions, he rigidly adhered to the law of politeness; and in mixed society, he
neither courted the high, nor avoided the jow. . . . He frequently de-
plored a supposed decay of manners. With concern, he used to inquire


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 291


“In manners, where is the successor of Gen. Knox to be found?” It was
with him a constant topick of complaint, that ‘“‘ The old, genteel, town
families, had been elbowed out of house and home, by newcomers:” that
“instead of the polished manners of a city, we should soon exhibit that growth
of gentility, which is produced by ingrafting dollars upon village habits and
low employments.’ (Works, Introduction, p. Ixix.)


Affecting an aristocratic bearing, Paine was as complete a Tory
as the republican environment permitted. If he despised the
new, pushing middle class that had risen since the Revolution,
he held in contempt the numerous company of those he dubbed
the yokel, the peasant, the hind, or the plow-tail. Under the
‘circumstances the best that he could do politically was to tum
Federalist, and he embraced the principles of Fisher Ames. with
genteel conviction. “In politics,’ says his biographer, “Mr.
Paine was a disciple of the old federal school. He understood
the constitution, as Washington administered, and as Hamilton
had expounded it” (zbid., p. Ixxvii). During his undergraduate
days he had dabbled in French revolutionary philosophy, and ‘‘the
fanatic Atheism of France, decorated in all the meretricious charms
of eloquence and philosophy, took a transient possession of his
mind” (ibid., p. Ixxvili). At graduation in 1792, he read a poem
entitled The Nature and Progress of Liberty, in which he eulo-
gized ‘‘liberal thought,” proposed to follow “‘Reason,” declared
that “‘the rights of man” are a gift from heaven, proffered the
hand of fellowship to France—


May struggling France her ancient freedom gain,
May Europe’s sword oppose her rights in vain—


and launched a devastating couplet at the great English opponent
of the Revolution—


The fame of Burke, in dark oblivion rust,
His pen a meteor—and his page the dust.


Three years later, on proceeding Master of Arts, he presented
a poem in very different vein. Three years were a generation in
those stirring times, and by 1795 the penetrating vision of this
genius of twenty-two had discovered the atheist poison in the cup
of French democracy. The Invention of Letters rises to a climax
in a satirical elaboration of a line from the poem of 1792—“Li-
centious morals breed disease of state.” Having learned his les-
son from Fisher Ames, the sapient young Federalist announces


292 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


that democracy is the mother of faction, and faction leads on to
anarchy. In this poem for the first time Paine’s wit runs freely,
and certain lines are as jaunty as he ever penned.


For place or power, while demagogues contend,
Whirled in their vortex, sinks each humbler friend.
See Crispin quit his stall, in Faction’s cause,

To cobble government, and soal the laws!

See Frisseur scent his dust, his razor set,

To shave the treaty, or to puff Genet!

In doubtful mood, see Mulciber debate,

To mend a horse-shoe, or to weld the state!

The whip’s bold knight, in barn, his truck is laid,
To spout in favour of the carrying trade!

While Staytape runs, from hissing goose, too hot,
To measure Congress for another coat;

And still, by rule of shop, intent on pelf,

Eyes the spare cloth, to cabbage for himself !


Envy, that fiend, who haunts the great and good,
Not Cato shunned, nor Hercules subdued.

On Fame’s wide field, where’er a covert lies,

The rustling serpent to the thicket flies;

The foe of Glory, Merit is her prey;

The dunce she leaves, to plod his drowsy way.
Of birth amphibious, and of Protean skill,

This green-eyed monster changes shape at will;
Like snakes of smaller breed, she sheds her skin;
Strips off the serpent, and turns—Jacobin.


In view of the fact that Governor Samuel Adams, chief of the:
New England Jacobins, was to occupy the stage, President Willard.
had diplomatically struck from the manuscript the ten lines last :
quoted; but Paine had the audacity to re-insert them in speaking, ,
and the tumultuous applause was sufficient proof that it was not:
from a Harvard audience that Sam Adams got the votes that:
annually returned him governor. 1

Verse imposed some slight restraint on Paine’s rhetoric, but:
in prose when he was in full career—as in the grotesque eulogy '
of Washington which stirred the patriotism of Boston Federal--
ists—the reins are on the neck of his eloquence, and he takes all!
barriers with fiery abandon. Fact troubles his wild and frolic:
imagination not at all, but like any plebeian demagogue—whose:
factional appeals he so furiously condemned—he blew the bellows:
_of Federalist partisanship with extraordinary vigor, stoking his:


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 293


fire with rumor and misrepresentation and party spleen. No slan-
der was too gross, no lie too palpable to serve his end. He baited
the democrats quite shamelessly, and aroused the mob of Boston
gentlemen like a true Tory. One of his political orations has been
preserved by his editor in the collected edition of his works, for
the enlightenment of posterity—an oration delivered in 1799, “at
the request of the young men of Boston,” on the theme of France
and democracy. In this extraordinary composition Paine seems to
have been quite ravished by his own rhetoric, that flashes in many
a feint and parry before it impales its victim. It is a Federalist
philippic, designed to destroy the good name of all who have quitted
the sacred Federalist tribe. Words could hardly go further; dis-
regard for truth could scarcely be more brazen. Paine’s delight
in clever antitheses overweighs any scruples in regard to just
statement. “The French Republick,” he asserted, “‘has exhibited
all the vices of civilization, without one of the virtues of barbar-
ism.” One or two bits from this tremendous oration, that in “‘the
glow of feeling, the swell of language, and the brilliancy of senti-
ments” has “‘very seldom been surpassed,” and that was “received
with rapturous and enthusiastic applause,’’ must suffice to il-
lustrate the justice of the Federalist claim to the custodianship
of political good manners. “Politics should have no passions,”
Fisher Ames asserted—which excellent principle young Robert
Treat Paine exemplified thus:


Political Empiricism has never attained, in any age or nation, so univer-
‘sal an ascendency, as at the present day in the “Illuminated Republick.”’
Unfettered by the fear of innovation, and unshackled by the prejudice of
ages, the modern Frenchman is educated in a system of moral and religious
chimeras, which dazzle by their novelty those volatile intellects, which
prescriptive wisdom could never impress with veneration. Every French-
man, who has read a little is a pedant; and the whole race of these horn-
book Philosophers is content with the atheism of Mirabeau . . . the
absurd philanthropy of Condorcet, and the visionary politics of Rousseau.
- These are the boundaries of their literary ambition, of their political
science. Hence it is, that they pretend to be too enlightened for belief,
too virtuous for government.

The feculence of party is not yet drained of its rankest sediment. The
worshippers of democracy, though their altars are thrown down, are not
yet converted from their devotions. The frozen snake has still some sparks
of animation; and, if placed by compassion near your hospitable fires, he
will revive with exasperated venom, and sting the hardy fool that fostered
him. Deal therefore with these ferocious demoralizers, as our crafty


294 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


mariners trade with the savages of the Indian ocean—with your men at
their posts, your guns loaded, and your slow matches burning. (Works,


P. 319.)


For all democrats Paine had the hearty contempt of an honest
man for a rogue, but for the intellectuals who expounded the new
romantic philosophy his indignation was measureless. “The legit-
imate plebeian democrat,” he asserted, is ““an enemy to all govern-
ment, under which he holds no office”’; but fling him a bone from
the public table and “he becomes the very scavenger of adminis-
tration.” The “Illuminated Jacobin,” on the other hand, “‘never
changes his principles.”


His whole science is directed to unhinge society, his whole ambition
to plunder it. He is too ravenous to be content with a system of order
himself; and too selfish to permit its enjoyment by others. Like a hog
in a flower-garden, he sets no value on the variegated foliage he destroys,
and seems only desirous to root out every twig of vegetation, that can
satiate his voracity. (Jbid., p. 321.)


To such fustian was he reduced when his wit left him. That a
gentleman could talk like that, and other gentlemen applaud, is
a sad commentary on the intellectual honesty of partisanship,
even amongst decent Federalists. Fustian was the order of the
day, and Paine was merely baying with his pack. If only he had not
professed such virtues his extravagance might be forgiven; but
extravagance ill becomes a distinguished repository of political
wisdom. Once, indeed, his vivacity got him into a nasty mess.
While editor of The Federal Orrery, he accepted in 1795 a polit-
ical poem entitled The Jacobiniad, the satire of which Paine
“‘new-pointed and new-edged” before printing. The democrats,
at whom it was directed, were vastly incensed, and a mob
gathered before his lodging but was dispersed. Later the
son of one of the victims challenged him to a duel. Paine
declined but armed himself with an unloaded pistol. Accidentally
meeting his challenger in the street, he drew his weapon, but the
young fellow, standing in no awe of a favorite of the muses, struck
the pistol down and proceeded to give Paine a sound drubbing.
To such base treatment may genius come, when wit forgets that
a sally of the tongue may invite a counter sally of the fists.
And so we leave him in the dust of the street, ignobly laid low
by the strength of that vulgar democracy which was to bring


THE TIE-WIG SCHOOL 295


down so many things held dear by Boston Tories. His was, very
largely, a wasted life—wasted by sheer indolence and feeble will.
He was a fellow of some parts, and a sentence from one of his
dramatic criticisms may not inaptly apply to him: “The character
is not a sot, but his humor has a mellower tilth for having been
husbanded and manured by ‘the excellent endeavor of drinking.’”


CHAPT ER II


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE
I


Into the complacent little Boston of Fisher Ames and Robert
Treat Paine came the Embargo, the War of 1812, and the indus-
trial revolution to upset its static order and destroy its snug pro-
vincialism. The old Federalism with its Hartford Convention
and plans for New England secession went the way of mortal-
ity, carrying with it to the grave the old pessimism and the old
spleen. The jealous isolationist policy was quietly forgotten in
Boston; the gospel of secession was preached no more; George
Cabot and Timothy Pickering gave way to other leaders; and pro-
vincial Boston joined with Kentucky and Tennessee in extolling
a romantic nationalism. It sent to Washington a new spokesman,
who joined with Henry Clay in a paternalistic program of national
expansion, and took command of the forces combating the rising
separatism of the South Carolina school. By the year 1830 Bos-
ton had traveled far from the times of the Hartford Convention.

The sufficient explanation of so striking a change is to be found,
of course, in the changing economics of Massachusetts. The Em-
bargo had proved a major disaster to New England shipping; and
the Boston merchants, counting their losses from idle and dismasted
ships, water-logging at the wharves, found just cause for hating
the policy of the administration. But if the shipping business was
brought face to face with tragedy, the manufacturing interests
stumbled upon unexpected prosperity. With British imports cut
off, the home market offered a tempting opportunity to Yankee
enterprise. The familiar story of the swift rise of New England
industrialism need not be recounted here. It is enough to remark
that with the growth of domestic manufactures a new group of
economic leaders appeared, and the policy of New England shifted
from pro-mercantilism to pro-industrialism. It was a difficult
choice at first between the antagonistic claims of the Boston mer-
chant and the Lowell manufacturer; between the carriers of for-
eign goods who demanded free trade, and the makers of domestic
goods who demanded a protective tariff. The traditional view of

296


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 297


New England was strongly for free trade. In 1807 a Federalist
lawyer asserted it to be “an unalienable right,” and in 1820 Judge
Story asked, ““Why should the laboring classes be taxed for the
necessaries of life?” + The tariff bill of 1824 got only one vote from
Massachusetts; but in the four years between the passage of that
act and the “Tariff of Abominations” of 1828, Massachusetts went
over definitely to industrialism. Thenceforth she was to be the
leader in the movement looking to governmental paternalism,
substituting the expansive Federalism of Hamilton for the re-
strictive Federalism of Fisher Ames, and becoming in consequence
whole-heartedly nationalistic.

Equally significant, though less observed, was the changed at-
titude of Massachusetts towards the great republican experiment.
Gone was the older generation, with its face turned to the past and
its heart bound up with the patriarchal ideals of a decadent squire-
archy. Gone also were the disturbant fears of democracy. The
menace of Daniel Shays, that had put the old Federalists in a rage
at democracy, was long since forgotten; and the nervous panic
over French Jacobinism, that had upset New England for a dec-
ade, had subsided. In the light of longer experience with its ways
democracy was seen to be far from terrifying. The hobgoblin of
faction that had benightmared the dreams of Fisher Ames was
discovered to be only a bogey to frighten naughty boys. Massa-
chusetts had kept off the agrarian reef, despite war and eco-
nomic unrest, and with her new constitution of 1820 property inter-
ests were as secure as any old Federalist could have wished.
Gentlemen of principle and property were still in control of the
state; and if less emphasis was laid on principle and more on prop-
erty—if less regard seemed to be paid to gentlemen of breeding and
manners, and more to assertive self-seeking—business was no less
secure than in the good old days, and its profits were greater. And
so, master of its looms and a growing home market, New England
industrialism regarded genially the great western movement,
fostered by a benevolent paternalism, confident of extending its
markets with every mile of westward expansion. To encourage
the development of the West and South by a Federal policy of
internal improvement became, therefore, common business fore-
sight, provided of course that the Constitution should follow pop-


1Quoted in Theodore Parker, Daniel Webster: Additional Speeches, Vol. I, p. 195.
Considerable information will be found in this excellent study.


298 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


ulation and safeguard business interests against local agrarian-
ism and the menace of particularism.

By the year 1830 both dangers lay black against the political
horizon. The triumph of Jackson had enthroned the agrarian
menace at Washington and produced such a scrambling of fright-
ened interests—such a rattling among the old bones of Federalism
and scurrying among the young limbs of industrialism—as the
country had not seen for many a year. Henry Clay appealed to his
followers in the West, and Webster marshaled his adherents of the
East, and from the coalescing of these incongruous elements
emerged the Whig party to do battle with Old Hickory. It was a
patchwork army at best. In the hour of peril, principles go by the
board. The Whig party was lineal heir of the old Federalism, but
it denied its philosophical patrimony. It substituted expediency
for the old economic realism, and began and ended intellectually
bankrupt. Its bitter and unseemly squabbles over the Bank and
tariff, its platitudes of patriotism and its pose of disinterestedness,
the venom of its personal attack upon Jackson, were the ear-
marks of a policy of shallow opportunism that failed to make use
of such victories as fell to its lot, for the simple reason that it could
never agree on what to do. Such cohesive power as held it to-
gether—aside from petty antagonism to Jackson—was the vague
assumption that the well-being of the American people was
dependent on governmental patronage; the belief that each
economic group and section must receive its special favor, and
that through tariffs and bonuses and internal improvements the
country as a whole must prosper. Of this principle of special
favors—a return to the seventeenth century from which eighteenth-
century liberalism was a reaction—the American System of Henry
Clay was the chief expression, and it remains the most significant
bequest of the Whig party to our political history.

The Whig party was the first attempt of our rising middle class
to erect a political platform in accordance with middle-class ideals,
and its failure was due to the fact that the time was not ripe for
undisputed middle-class control. The merchant aristocracy of the
North was overthrown, but the planter aristocracy of the South
was still to be reckoned with; and its particularistic ambitions in
the end wrecked the Whig coalition of the West and East. By
1820 a revolutionary change had taken place in the political
philosophy of the plantation school. From an ardent nationalism


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 299


Calhoun was leading his followers back to the earlier doctrine of
states rights; and New England industrialism found itself con-
fronted with the doctrine which the Hartford junto had played
with, but now with far more drive behind it. The slave economy
was entertaining imperialistic dreams, and to effect its ends was
building up a new constitutional philosophy. Southern writers
had long been at work, and the weight of their authority was
behind the new particularism. Razwle on the Constitution, a states-
rights exposition, was the official textbook on civics at the United
States Military Academy, and from it, while a student at West
Point, Jefferson Davis declared that he first imbibed states-rights
principles. Other authoritative southern works that were widely
read were John Taylor’s two studies: Construction Construed and
Constitutions Vindicated (1820), and New Views of the Constitution
of the United States (1823); some years later came Henry St. George
Tucker’s Lectures on Constitutional Law (1843); and these were
only preliminary to Calhoun’s searching exposition in his Dis-
quisition on Government and An Inquiry into the Nature of the
Constitution of the United States.

To meet this theory of particularism there was need of a resur-
gent Federalism, with a new nationalistic interpretation of the
Constitution. The compact theory of the Federal state must be
refuted by the organic theory; the conception of federated com-
monwealths must yield to the conception of a coalescing sov-
ereignty. The old battle must be fought over again with fresh
arguments. The sanctity of the Constitution must be asserted,
but that sanctity must be thrown over a nationalistic rather than a
particularistic interpretation. It must be shown that despite the
vehement protestations of southern loyalty, a particularistic
Constitution was a denial of loyalty and must end in the de-
struction of the national union. For this difficult business New
England was as yet unprepared. The old Federalist arguments
were obsolete, and many of those Federalists had been deep in
the Hartford Convention. The new industrialism must provide its
own theory, and it was fortunate in discovering two men whose
combined learning and eloquence proved equal to the task.


II


The name of Webster has been so closely associated with the
movement of constitutional nationalism as to overshadow the


300 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


just fame of one who has many claims to be regarded as the in-
tellectual leader of the school. Joseph Story was a Salem lawyer
whose reputation, considerable as it is, is scarcely commensurate
with his influence on our later constitutional development. Of the
same Harvard class with William Ellery Channing, he dabbled in
polite letters as a young man, but went into the law, entered
politics, became Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, and for a
time was Dane professor of law at Harvard. He came of radical
stock. His father, a physician at Boston till he removed to Marble-
head, was a militant Revolutionary Whig, one of the score or so of
Indians who made up the Boston Tea Party, and a leader amongst
the group of Sons of Liberty who seized and gagged the sentinels
and carried off two brass fieldpieces from the Common where the
British commander had posted them to overawe the town. The
son grew up an ardent republican. As avery young man he became
an outstanding leader of the unfashionable party, then in the
minority, and suffered certain humiliations on account of his
political opinions; on one occasion, according to Theodore Parker,
being ‘“‘knocked down in the street, beaten, and forced to take
shelter in the house of a friend, whither he fled, bleeding, and cov-
ered with the mud of the street” (Additional Speeches, Vol. I,
p. 178). Of these youthful heresies few indications appeared in his
later life. Republican though he might be, he was utterly devoid
of any radical tendencies, and when he took his seat on the Supreme
Court bench he was speedily drawn into the powerful orbit of John
Marshall, shared the latter’s views on all major constitutional
questions, and turned Whig. He became a close friend of Webster
and from 1816 to 1842 he was his chief adviser on knotty legal,
constitutional, and international questions. “From that deep and
copious well of legal knowledge,” Parker asserts, Webster drew
freely ‘‘whenever his own bucket was dry” (ibid., p. 170).

This shift from Republican to Whig came about quite naturally.
New England liberalism, it must be remembered, produced no
intellectual leaders till late, and no clear-cut political philosophy.
Though it nominally accepted the leadership of Jefferson it never
was won over to the Physiocratic economics or states-rights prin-
ciples of the Virginia school. Story was at no time a Jeffersonian,
but rather an eager and avowed disciple of Washington, “‘little
infected with Virginia notions, as to men or measures.” In his
Autobiography he wrote:


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 301


The republican party then and at all other times embraced men of
very different views on many subjects. Nay, a Virginia republican of that
day, was very different from a Massachusetts republican, and the anti-
federal doctrines of the former state then had and still have very little
support or influence in the latter state, notwithstanding a concurrence
in political action upon general subjects. I was at all times a firm be-
liever in the doctrines of General Washington, and an admirer of his con-
duct, measures and principles. . . . I read and examined his principles,
and have made them in a great measure the rule and guide of my life. I
was and always have been a lover, devoted lover, of the constitution of
the United States, and a friend to the union of the states. I never wished
to bring the government to a mere confederacy of states; but to preserve
_ the power of the general government given by all the states, in full exercise
and sovereignty for the protection and preservation of all the states.
(Story, Life and Letters of Joseph Story, Vol. I, p. 128.)


That he had as little sympathy with the Physiocratic economics
of Jefferson is apparent from his early activities in furthering the
new paper system. While a member of the Massachusetts legisla-
ture, as a young man, he was active in pressing for bank franchises,
and upon the establishment of the Merchants’ Bank of Salem he
became its president. Like Washington and Marshall he espoused
the new gospel of capitalism, with none of the agrarian prejudices
of the landed gentry to hold him back. He was the political twin
of the great Chief Justice, and a Whig in spirit long before Webster.
“‘T seem to myself,” he remarked late in life, “‘simply to have stood
still in my political belief, while parties revolved about me; so that,
although of the same opinions now as ever, I find my name changed
from Democrat to Whig, but I know not how or why” (ibid.,
Vol. I, p. 546). Though somewhat naive the comment is just.
Anti-federalism in Massachusetts would seem to have been largely
a capitalistic protest against the narrow tie-wig Federalism; and
while Joseph Story sat upon the Supreme Court bench, adapting
legal principles to the new needs of business, the country was
moving forward to the middle-class philosophy that he had early
come to hold.

In the year 1833 he published his Commentaries on the Constitu-
tion, the fruit of long labors, which was at once accepted through-
out the North as a classical authority, and which has held its
ground pretty well since. In method and temper, as well as objec-
tive, the exposition of Story stands in sharp contrast to that of the
southern school. In its particularism the latter appealed to the
history of the Constitution in the making, and to French romantic


302 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


philosophy; whereas the former followed English constitutional
theories to nationalistic ends. Story was steeped in the Common
Law and his thinking reveals the strong influence of Blackstone.
In passing through the mind of the great Tory commentator,
English constitutional theory had received a pronounced Tory
bias, and something of this remains after filtering through the
mind of Story. The ideal of a strong and efficient political state,
with its corollaries of a coercive sovereignty, of the duties of a
subject rather than the rights of a citizen, of loyalty to govern-
ment rather than concern for political justice, derives immediately
from English theory and practice. Much likewise he took from the
older Federalists: their fear of an encroaching legislative power;
their concern at faction; their faith in checks and balances to
restrain the majority will. But his chief inspiration came from the
spirit of the Common Law—that subtle influence that Jefferson so
greatly feared. His legalism was inveterate; the final, authoritative
answer to all questions he discovered in the decision of the courts.
Against such a mind, deeply read in the law and with scanty knowl-
edge of economics and political theory, the waves of liberal and
romantic thought broke impotently. His reasoning may be con-
vincing to a lawyer, but to the historian his exposition is often
weak, his data inadequate, and his conclusions not infrequently
contrary to fact.

In building his argument Story drew his materials freely from
The Federalist, from the writings and decisions of Marshall, and
from Blackstone. The backbone of the work is Hamilton and
Marshall, from whom he quotes constantly, supplemented by a host
of decisions by Federalist judges. With its pronounced bias The
Commentaries must be regarded as a partisan document, which
like The Federalist has grown in authoritativeness with the triumph
of its party principles. Its surprising weakness on the historical
side has come to be overlooked since the downfall of southern
particularism, but during the debates that preceded the Civil War
the work was sharply handled by southern historians, and in his
Constitutional View of the War between the States Stephens quite
demolished Story’s feeble attempt at an historical justification of
the anti-compact theory. The weight of historical evidence, to
present-day students, would seem to be on the side of the states-
rights argument, although in certain aspects both sides were in-
novators: Story in overleaping the period of French ascendency


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 303


when the Constitution took shape, and going back to the older
English tradition; and the compact school in reasserting the com-
pact theory at a time when the spirit of nationalism was under-
mining it. Story seems to have been conscious of his weakness,
for he expressly repudiates the method of interpreting the work in
the light of contemporary testimony at the time of its formulation.
In so doing he not only violates the principle that a document is to
be construed in the light of the common understanding when it
was drawn; but with naive inconsistency, he constantly appeals to
The Federalist, pretty much ignoring the opposition pamphlets,
and interprets the Constitution in accord with its commentary.
But for the most part he clings to the strict letter of the document.
He lightly brushes aside the whole compact argument by assert-
ing dogmatically that the phrase, ‘‘We the people of the United
States,’ must be understood in its simple literal sense, and that
thus interpreted, the Constitution is seen to derive immediately
from the individual citizens acting in their sovereign capacity with-
out the intermediation of the state governments. The dispute
long waged furiously about this point and Story’s analysis touches
only the fringe of the argument.

Very likely it is presumptuous for one who is not a lawyer to
express an opinion, yet these celebrated Commentaries seem today
very little more than a new-modeled Federalism, adapted to chang-
ing conditions. Underneath the somewhat crabbed and narrow
legalism is a common-sense realistic political philosophy, an em-
bodiment of English constitutional tradition as it grew up under a
Tory régime, that reveals scant sympathy with French romantic
theories. The work is an unconscious testimony to the tenacious
hold of the English Common Law on the legal mind of America,
as well as to the rising spirit of nationalism. It did much to
strengthen both. It was a triumph of the lawyer over the historian
and political philosopher, and it marks the beginning of the lawyer’s
custodianship of the fundamental law. In spite of its somewhat
petty legalism and prosaic common sense, a note of veneration for
the great document runs through the tedious pages, constituting
the work at once both a commentary and a eulogy.


304 THE. MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


III
DANIEL WEBSTER
Realist and Constitutionalist


A far solider mind, strongly realistic and broadly philosophical,
acute in analysis and with great powers of imagination, was the
mind of the distinguished leader of the New England Whigs. Not
the equal of Story as a lawyer, he was far superior as a political
thinker. No man more richly endowed in mind and person has
played a part on the stage of our public life, and in spite of gross
shortcomings in character and the betrayal of his own promise,
Webster retains an aura of the heroic about him. He was a great
man, built on a great pattern, who never quite achieved a great
life.

In Emerson and Webster were completely embodied the diverse
New England tendencies that derived from the Puritan and the
Yankee: the idealistic and the practical; the ethical and the ra-
tionalistic; the intellectual revolutionary, ready to turn the world
upside down in theory, planting at the base of the established order
the dynamite of ideas, and the soberly conservative, understanding
the economic springs of political action, inclined to pessimism,
neither wishing for Utopian change nor expecting it. The physical
contrast was as striking as the mental. The child of the Puritan
was slender, nervous, with a lambent energy that played freely
in a rarefied atmosphere; the child of the Yankee was massive,
solid, somnolently heavy till an idea awakened his faculties, a
lover of the fleshpots, careless of conventional morals, rankly
physical, and yet with an assured stateliness of manner, a slow
imagination that expanded majestically and a rich eloquence that
moved forward by regular stages to a great objective. Emerson
was the child of a long line of ministers, and ministerial in his
unworldliness; Webster was a Yankee squire, the descendant of
some fox-hunting master of broad English acres, who by a freak
of fortune had got born into the family of a New Hampshire
yeoman. No Englishman was ever more English than he. He
loved the substantial things of life: his Marshfield farm; his cattle
and horses and crops; his rides afield and the return to good din-
ners and rich wines. Nothing is more characteristic or more
likable—more redolent of the natural Webster—than his concern
for agricultural improvements. His homely talk on The Agricul-


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 305


ture of England, filled with facts that had come under his observant
eye, reveals a side that is too little known. It is an English country
squire talking to his neighbors about the homely things they all
care for; and when after long years and disappointed ambition
and utter weariness, he returned to his Marshfield farm to die,
it was his cattle and his fields that offered a last solace to the
broken man.

Webster’s intellectual development falls into distinct and rather
sharply defined periods. Before 1825 his mental processes were
still under the dominion of the solid, rationalist eighteenth century,
_ with its realistic politics and its laissez faire economics. With
the emergence of the constitutional disputes at the end of the
twenties, when the lawyers and historians were busy at their
commentaries, he came increasingly to take a legalistic view of
government. During the acrimonious forties, with slavery divid-
ing the country into hostile camps, he was bitten deeply by presi-
dential ambitions, and thenceforth to the end of his life he was little
more than a politician—a rdéle for which he was singularly ill-
fitted, and which brought bitterness and disillusion to his last days.
Since his death both earlier and later phases of his career have fal-
len into the background, and the middle period of constitutional
interpretation has stamped itself indelibly upon his fame. Yet
in many respects the solid reasoning of the political philosopher
is more valuable than the stately but somewhat ill-grounded dec-
lamation of the defender of the Constitution; and his just fame
is increased rather than lessened by recalling his earlier contribu-
tion to our institutional development.

Webster was a sound political scholar, if not an outstanding
creative thinker. He was of the distinguished line of political
realists, from Harrington through Locke and Burke, to Hamilton,
Madison and John Adams. He derived equally from seventeenth-
century liberalism and eighteenth-century Federalism. He was
widely read in the political classics, and his vigorous mind laid
hold upon major principles and examined them closely. His
intellectual master was the acute thinker of the English Common-
wealth period, James Harrington, whom he pronounces “one of
the most ingenious of political writers,” and to whose suggestive
doctrine of economic determinism he returns persistently. That
Harrington was not the originator of the doctrine he was well
enough read to have discovered; but he pays him high tribute as the


306 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


thinker who gave the doctrine form and currency. It is the sub-
stantial realism of the Oceana that appealed to a mind thoroughly
indoctrinated with political realism, before the rise of manhood
suffrage and the spread of equalitarianism had brought a change
in American political theory. Both his major premises and his
mode of reasoning bear the impress of the classic English school.
In the year 1820, within a single week, he made two speeches,
which as expositions of his political philosophy are the most il-
luminating he ever uttered, and which should stand side by side:
the Basis of the Senate, delivered before the Massachusetts Constitu-
tional Convention, and the Plymouth speech on The First Settle-
ment of New England. They supplement each other and together
give an admirable elucidation of the stake-in-society principle
that embodied a conviction henever abandoned. They are compact
of Harrington, Montesquieu and John Adams—the last authentic
expression of the old Federalism, before the democratic storms had
driven it into new roadsteads and whipped its flag from the hal-
yards where it had long waved.

In his admirable argument Webster accepts as axiomatic the
theory of division of powers, with the attendant machinery of
checks and balances. He accepts equally the familiar view of
eighteenth-century liberalism, that the legislature as the self-con-
scious custodian of the popular will is certain to prove the engross-
ing member of government whose ambition is most to be feared.
To expect a stable balance between Senate and House when their
characters are undifferentiated by diverse modes of selection—
a result that must follow from choosing both on the numerical
majority principle—seems to him the judgment of political in-
experience. The wiser method, he believed, was to-seek counsel
of the philosophers and the clear teachings of history. The first,
Webster insisted, have rightly laid down the principle of a stake-
in-society as the true measure of political justice:


I take the principle to be well established, by writers of the greatest
authority. In the first place, those who have treated of natural law have
maintained, as a principle of law, that, as far as the object of society
is the protection of something in which the members possess unequal
shares, it is just that the weight of each person in the common coun-
cils should bear a relation and proportion to his interest. Such is the
sentiment of Grotius, and he refers, in support of it, to several institutions
among the lesser states. (“The Basis of the Senate,” in Works, Vol. III,
pp- 13-14.)


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 307


At the basis of the stake-in-society principle is the doctrine of
economic power as the controlling factor in determining the form
and scope of the political state. In support of this doctrine of
determinism Webster appeals to Harrington:


It is his leading object, in his Oceana, to prove, that power naturally
and necessarily follows property. He maintains that a government
founded on property is legitimately founded; and that a government
founded on the disregard of property is founded in injustice, and can only
be maintained by military force. ‘If one man,” says he, “be sole land-
lord, like the Grand Seignior, his empire is absolute. Ifa few possess the
land, this makes the Gothic or feudal constitution. If the whole people
be landlords, then it is a commonwealth.” “It is strange,” says an in-
genious person in the last century, “that Harrington should be the first
man to find out so evident and demonstrable a truth as that property
being the true basis and measure of power.” In truth, he was not the first.
The idea is as old as political science itself. It may be found in Aristotle,
Lord Bacon, Sir Walter Raleigh, and other writers. Harrington seems,
however, to be the first writer who has illustrated and expanded the
principle, and given to it the effect and prominence which justly belong
to it. To this sentiment, Sir, I entirely agree. It seems to me to be plain,
that, in the absence of military force, political power naturally and
necessarily goes into the hands which hold the property. In my judgment,
therefore, a republican form of government rests, not more on political
constitutions, than on those laws which regulate the descent and trans-
mission of property. .. .

The English Revolution of 1688 was a revolution in favor of property,
as well as of other rights. It was brought about by men of property for
their security; and our own immortal Revolution was undertaken, not
to shake or plunder property, but to protect it. The acts which the
country complained of were such as violated the rights of property. An
immense majority of all those who had an interest in the soil were in favor
of the Revolution; and they carried it through, looking to its results for
the security of their possessions. (“The Basis of the Senate,” in Works,
Vol. III, pp. 14-16.)


ce


Harrington’s principle that “if the whole people be landlords,
then it is a commonwealth,” Webster justified by appeal to Ameri-
can history. The spontaneous birth of republican institutions
out of colonial experience he attributed to the wide diffusion of
property. The land tenure of primitive New England was the
creative source of her popular government.


Their situation demanded a parcelling out and division of the lands,
and it may be fairly said, that this necessary act fixed the future frame
and form of their government. The character of their political institutions
was determined by the fundamental laws respecting property. . . . The


308 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


property was all freehold . .. alienation of the land was every way
facilitated, even to the subjecting of it to every species of debt. The
establishment of public registries, and the simplicity of our forms of con-
veyance, have greatly facilitated the change of real estate from one
proprietor to another. The consequence of all these causes has been, a
great subdivision of the soil, and a great equality of condition; the true
basis, most certainly, of a popular government. “If the people,” says
Harrington, “hold three parts in four of the territory, it is plain there can
neither be any single person nor nobility able to dispute the government
with them; in this case, therefore, except force be interposed, they govern
themselves.” (“The First Settlement of New England,” in Works,


Vol. I, pp. 35-36.)


Wholly English then, after the soundest English liberal tradi-
tion, was Webster’s political philosophy in the year 1820, compact
of sober eighteenth-century realism, quite unaffected by French
romantic equalitarianism. The great principle to which he ad-
hered was the principle that government to be stable must be
founded in men’s interests; thus founded no cause is given for
revolutionary upheavals. ‘‘The disastrous revolutions which the
world has witnessed, those political thunder-storms and earth-
quakes which have shaken the pillars of society to their very deep-
est foundations, have been revolutions against property.” Such
were Webster’s convictions on the eve of those two great upheav-
als, the rise of Jacksonian democracy and the rejuvenation of
the slave economy, that unseated the authority of the old school
of political realism, and turned him aside from the plain path to
lose himself in a tangle of constitutional legalism.

English also was his economic theory, to which, like Franklin
before him, he gave close thought. In the year 1820 he was a
frank disciple of Adam Smith and the Jaissez faire school. Mer-
cantilism he derided as exploded;? and Physiocratic agrarianism
seemed to him unduly hostile to commerce. He never concerned
himself, like Franklin, with humanitarian ends. His sympathies
went strongly for free trade, individual initiative, and a competi-
tive order—sympathies which to the end of his life he never wholly
outgrew. In those early days the mercantile interests commanded
his loyalty far more readily than the manufacturing interests.
Next to his Marshfield farm he loved a full-rigged ship, and the
thought of Yankee skippers plowing the seven seas in well-
freighted bottoms fired his imagination and kindled his patriotism.


2 See “The Tariff,” in Works, Vol. III, pp. 118-122.


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 309


But if in the background of his thought he remained Jaissez faire,
with the necessary implications of a diminished political state and
reliance upon the law of supply and demand above tariffs, boun-
ties, and political regulations, unfortunately in the foreground of
expediency were the loud demands of his constituents for protec-
tive tariffs, internal improvements, and a policy of governmental
paternalism. His economics came into collision with politics, and
under the drive of necessity he went reluctantly along the path
which Hamilton had marked out a generation before.

The change came between the years 1824 and 1825. In the
earlier year he aroused himself to a strong defense of laissez faire
economics in opposition to Clay’s clever campaign cry, the Ameri-
can System; in the later year he endeavored half-heartedly to defend
New England interests in the game of subsidies. He was honestly
ashamed of the whole mess; to Webster any tariff was a “‘tariff of
abominations”; but his mouth was stopped by the clamor of the
Lowell textile masters. But having chosen his side, thereafter he
defended his course vigorously, and joined forces with Clay in
extolling the principle of protection. The same dubious shift is
revealed in his changing attitude towards public finance. In 1815
he was an old-fashioned Federalist in his preference for a metallic
currency and his belief that the public credit must rest on the
public income; bank paper, stocks, bonds, and other agencies of
the new finance he distrusted as likely to encourage speculation.+*
Twenty years later he was the outstanding champion of the Bank
in its mortal quarrel with Jackson. In defending his public career
before his constituents in Faneuil Hall in 1842, he said: “The
subject of currency has been the study of my life, in preference to
all other public topics”; and the result of those studies had made
him a confirmed bullionist. Nevertheless when “Old Bullion
Benton” proposed to restore a metallic currency, Webster derided
the plan on the ground that bank money was necessary; and when
the subtreasury system was established he denounced it bitterly.®
He was a partisan to the cause of the Bank, and as its attorney
he defended its case before the American public, as he defended its
cases before the Supreme Court. He was no longer a free man but
was deep in the subsidies of financial interests; nevertheless his old


3 See his “Apology and Defense,” in Works, Vol. V, pp. 146, 240.
4 See “The Bank of the United States,” Works, Vol. pase
5 See “Speech in Wall Street,” in Works, Vol. II, p. 55.


310 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


realism convinced him—as it had convinced Hamilton—of the
necessity of shaping the public policy to the desires of the bankers.
He justified it not only on the grounds of economic determinism,
but by professing to discover in business the strong friend of na-
tional unity. The planters and farmers were local and sectional in
outlook, but the ‘‘mercantile classes, the great commercial masses
of the country, whose affairs connect them strongly with every
State in the Union and with all the nations of the earth, whose
business and profession give a sort of nationality to their char-
acter’’—these men, he argued, gave solidity and stability to
government—they were the cohesive force that bound the whole
together.® In serving such clients he was but serving a greater
cause.

After 1824 the earlier Webster with his solid understanding, his
frank realism, his honest exposition of fundamental principles,
slowly gave way to the lawyer, the politician, the opportunist of
the unhappy later years. With the change the last authentic voice
of the eighteenth century was silenced; the break with the old
English tradition was complete. Immediate, domestic issues
muddied his thought, and Webster and America plunged into a
bitter partisanship produced by the new alignments of an equalita-
rian agrarianism, a capitalistic industrialism, and a feudal slavoc-
racy. Federalism was dead and in its stead was the Whig party,
patched together of odds and ends, devoid of principles, seeking
only, expediency; and of this party Webster became an outstanding
spokesman. It was an ignoble time, and his great abilities were
not substantial enough to save him from the common meanness.
Whoever wishes to understand how great was his fall need only
compare the speech of 1820 on “‘The Basis of the Senate” with the
“Declaration of Whig Principles and Purposes” of 1840 (Works,
Vol. II, p. 41).

To his contemporaries, however, his position was secure. His
reputation was extraordinary, and he seemed as fixed and brilliant
as the north star. After the reply to Hayne, his fame as the
defender of the Constitution was in every mouth. That celebrated
speech, perhaps the most celebrated in our congressional history,
was delivered on the January 26, 1830, and awakened an amazing
response. Men were moved to tears by its eloquence, and its
circulation in pamphlet form exceeded that of any other pamphlet

6 See “The Landing at Plymouth,” in Works, Vol. II, pp. 204-205.


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 311


since the founding of the government. It is not a great constitu-
tional argument, but it better served the purpose of inspiring in the
public a grandiose conception of national unity under the organic
law, than any reasoned statement could have done. For political
purposes rhetoric was more effective than historical argument, and
its sonorous sentences, and in particular the stately conclusion,
vastly appealed to the taste of the generation. Three years later
Webster applied himself more closely to the subtleties of the
question. Calhoun’s masterly argument with its exposition of the
theory of concurrent majorities could not be answered by rhetoric,
and on February 16, 1833, Webster spoke on ‘‘The Constitu-
tion not a Compact between Sovereign States” (Works, Vol. III,
p- 449). His argument is strictly legal and rests on four theses:
that sovereignty inheres in the people; that as individuals acting
collectively in their sovereign capacity, they ordained and estab-
lished the Constitution; that the Constitution thus established is the
supreme law of the land, acting immediately upon the individual
citizen and recognizing no intermediary sovereign state; and that
as an “‘executed contract” it is irrevocable and final, with the
necessary functions to construe its powers and execute its will.

Of these four theses, two may be regarded as Webster’s chief
contribution to the great debate: the doctrine of immediacy, and
the doctrine of an executed contract. The latter, quite obviously,
is no more than Burke’s theory of the British constitution as
founded on a compact entered into following the Revolution of
1688, and as such, by analogy from the Common Law, inviolable
without the consent of both parties to the instrument. As devel-
oped by Burke the theory is somewhat tenuous, but as applied by
Webster to the interpretation of a written document it is extraor-
dinarily plausible to the legal mind. The doctrine of immediacy,
on the other hand, would seem to have been derived from Judge
Story. The argument of Webster in expounding the principle of
immediate contact between the individual citizen and the Consti-
tution follows the argument of Story’s Commentaries too closely to
escape comment. Theodore Parker explicitly states that Webster
got his argument from Story, and circumstances bear out his
assertion. The two men had long been close friends. Webster’s
speech was delivered a month after the Commentaries was finished.
In his earlier speeches such principle found no place, and it is
reasonable to suppose that, confronted by the Calhoun resolutions,


312 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Webster should have turned to the materials gathered by his
learned friend and frequent adviser. Here was his reply ready to
hand, a mass of legal fact and constitutional exposition, together
with a clear and simple theory. Nearly a month elapsed before
Webster rose to speak, and then he threw Story on the Constitution
at Calhoun’s theory of compact. Whether such an interpretation
is reasonable or not, the speech added greatly to Webster’s reputa-
tion as an expounder of the Constitution.

In 1833 he stood at the meridian of his renown; thereafter the
westering sun of his fame went slowly down. He had come to
evil times when opportunism and compromise—so imperative
if the country were to hold together at all—seemed immoral to
men who insisted that righteousness be legislated upon America,
and weakness to men who demanded their pound of flesh. The
black shadow of slavery fell across his path, and despite his wish
to avoid all controversy on the subject, he could not evade the
issue. It drove him into a corner, and the sword of the Constitu-
tion that he sought to defend himself with was turned in the end
against him. Webster’s antipathy to slavery was of long standing
and he gave frank expression to it in his speeches. The position
which he finally came to assume, in face of the growing abolition
sentiment in Massachusetts, was taken deliberately and was
worthy of a lawyer. He would oppose the extension of slave
territory, but he would not interfere with slavery in the old slave
states. The Constitution, he argued, recognized slavery as exist-
ing in certain commonwealths by virtue of state laws, but those
laws did not run beyond the confines of the state. The territories
were under Federal law, and no injunction was laid upon Congress
to extend the laws or institutions of any state or group of states
over the territorial domain. In his speech on ‘‘Exclusion of
Slavery from the Territories,” on August 12, 1848, he stated his
position thus:


It will not be contended that this sort of slavery exists by general law.
It exists only by local law. I do not mean to deny the validity of that
local law where it is established; but I say it is, after all, local law. It is
nothing more. And wherever that local law does not extend, property
in persons does not exist. Well, Sir, what is now the demand on the part
of our Southern friends? They say, ‘We will carry our local laws with
us wherever we go. We insist that Congress does us injustice unless it
establishes in the territory in which we wish to go our own local law.”
This demand I for one resist, and shall resist. It goes upon the idea that


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 313


there is an inequality, unless persons under this local law, and holding
property by authority of that law, can go into new territory and there
establish that local law, to the exclusion of the general law. (Works,
Vol. V, p. 309.)


It was the unfortunate Seventh of March Speech that proved
Webster’s undoing—this and the Fugitive Slave Bill in which he
was deeply implicated. The situation was desperately critical,
Webster was pessimistic, and this was a last gesture of reconcilia-
tion with the South. Presidential ambitions and runaway slaves
were stewing in a common political pot with Abolition societies and
northern mercantile interests. Webster was puzzled, hesitated,
emptied another glass of the wine of the Constitution, and went for
the Fugitive Slave Bill. It was a tragic political mistake. To be
sure a tremendous address was presented to him, signed by the most
respectable persons in Boston and Cambridge, but it was an empty
honor. Webster’s influence was gone, never to be regained. There
is something pathetic in his futile attempt to stifle the New Eng-
land conscience by ramming the Constitution down its throat:


Sir, the principle of the restitution of runaway slaves is not objection-
able, unless the Constitution is objectionable. If the Constitution is
right in that respect, the principle is right, and the law providing for carry-
ing it into effect is right. Ifthat be so, and if there is no abuse of the right
under any law of Congress, or any other law, then what is there to com-
plain of? (“Speech on the Compromise Measures,” in Works, Vol. V,


P- 433-)


And there is something pathetic also in the hurt vanity of the old
man that his judgment should be questioned. His self-pride was
offended when the Abolitionists rejected his legal dogmatisms, and
set up their own dogmatisms. He regarded them as mischief-
makers. “I am against agitators, north and south,” he exclaimed
petulantly. He recognized no higher law than the Constitution
and Blackstone, and he would suffer no popular interference with
Congress.


Then, Sir, there are the Abolition societies, of which I am unwilling to
speak, but in regard to which I have very clear notions and opinions. I
do not think them useful. I think their operations for the last twenty
years have produced nothing good or valuable. . . . They have excited
feelings. . . . I cannot but see what mischiefs their interference with the
South has produced . . . everything that these agitating people have
done has been, not to enlarge, but to restrain, not to set free, but to bind


e


314 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


faster, the slave population of the South. (‘‘ Seventh of March Speech,”
in Works, Vol. V, p. 357.)


I desire to call the attention of all sober-minded men at the North, of
all conscientious men, of all men who are not carried away by some fanati-
cal idea or some false impression, to their constitutional obligations. I
put it to all the sober and sound minds at the North as a question of morals
and a question of conscience. What right have they, in their legislative
capacity or any other capacity, to endeavour to get around this Con-
stitution, or to embarrass the free exercise of the rights secured by the
Constitution to the persons whose slaves escape from them? None at
all; none at all. Neither in the forum of conscience, nor before the face
of the Constitution, are they, in my opinion, justified in such attempt.
(Ibid., p. 355.)


If the later Webster had no message for the conscience of New
England, neither had he any for the intelligence of New England.
The realistic Federalism that had listened to him in 1820 was gone,
submerged by the flood waters of the renaissance; and the current
transcendentalism seemed to him insubstantial and dangerous.
The rising liberalism of the forties left him wholly untouched; it
could not leaven the heavy materialism of his nature. He was
quite unacquainted with the new Massachusetts that was coming
to expression; he had lived too long with ‘‘the lawyers, the pol-
iticians, and rich merchants and manufacturers,” to understand
the greater world of Concord. While he had been living on the
subsidies of State Street, and contracting his mind to the compass
of a banker’s, the intellect of Massachusetts had become liberal.
And in becoming liberal it aroused him from indifference to hostil-
ity. Writing to a friend in explanation of his refusal to visit Con-
cord in his later years, he said:


Many of those whom I so highly regarded in your beautiful and quiet
village have become a good deal estranged, to my great grief, by abolition-
ism, free-soilism, transcendentalism, and other notions which I cannot but
regard as so many vagaries of the imagination. (Quoted in Sanborn,
Life of Thoreau.)


But if he was scarcely acquainted with the little group of think-
ers and liberals—Emerson, Thoreau, Channing, Parker, Garrison,
Phillips, Edmund Quincy, Whittier, Lowell, Higginson, Harriet
Beecher Stowe, Margaret Fuller—they were well acquainted with
him and took his measure exactly. The intellect of Massachusetts
—so long ignored by Webster—had its revenge. Its voice carried


WINDS OF POLITICAL DOCTRINE 315


farther than his, and it painted his portrait in no flattering strokes.
The fierce storm that suddenly beat upon him broke the old man’s
spirit. He had fed too long on adulation to endure censure. No
doubt that censure was severe, but it was far juster than the
earlier adulation had been. Whittier’s Ichabod is familiar to every
American schoolboy. Lowell, then in his liberal mood, char-
acterized him as ‘“‘a statesman who had communicated no impulse
to any of the great ideas of the century, as a statesman whose
soul had been absorbed in tariff, banks, and the Constitution,
instead of devoting himself to the freedom of the future.” Emer-
son, who had long studied him critically, gave an extraordinarily
just analysis of his character:


Mr. Webster is a man who lives by his memory, a man of the past, not
a man of faith or of hope. He obeys his powerful animal nature;—and


his finely developed understanding only works freely and with all its


force, when it stands for animal good; that is, for property. He believes,
in so many words, that government exists for the protection of property.
He looks to the Union as an estate, a large farm, and is excellent in the


,completeness of his defence of it so far. He adheres to the letter. .
‘What he finds already written, he will defend. Lucky that so much had


got well written when he came. For he has no faith in the power of self-
government. Not the smallest municipal provision, if it were new, would
receive his sanction. In Massachusetts, in 1776, he would, beyond all
question, have been a refugee. He praises Adams and Jefferson, but it
is a past Adams and Jefferson, that his mind can entertain. A present
Adams and Jefferson he would denounce. So with the eulogies of liberty
in his writings,—they are sentimentalism and youthful rhetoric. He can
celebrate it, but it means as much from him as from Metternich or Talley-
rand. This is all inevitable from his constitution. All the drops of his
blood have eyes that look downward. (“The Fugitive Slave Law.”’)


To the transcendental mind Webster’s economic realism was
peculiarly repugnant, and it was this which inspired Theodore
Parker’s critical analysis of Webster’s career—the most scathing
and explicit of all contemporary estimates. What Parker dis-
covers most hateful in Webster’s career was his adherence to the
principles of Federalism, from the “Basis of the Senate” speech in
1820, to the New York speech on November 18, 1850. The
persistence of his economic realism was an affront to the liberals
of the humanitarian school that had moved far from the position
of Fisher Ames. Webster might do lip service to humanitarian
ideals, Parker asserted, but always he came back in the end to his
polar conception—“‘The great object of government is the protec-


‘


316 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


tion of property at home, and respect and renown abroad” (Works;
Additional Speeches, Vol. I, p. 220).

It was this same persistent realism that made Webster so useful
to the rising capitalism. His work in the Senate was supplemented
by his work in the court room. He was the greatest corporation
lawyer of the day, certain to be found defending vested interests,
never on the side of the leaner purse. Probably more than any
other man except John Marshall, he contributed to the work of
bringing the Constitution under the sovereignty of the judiciary.
His most significant contribution, certainly, was his argument in
the celebrated Dartmouth College case, delivered before the
Supreme Court in 1818, which resulted in one of the foundation
decisions on which later has been erected the solid structure of our
corporation law.’ By engrafting upon the Constitution the
principle that a contract lies beyond the reach of legislative power
to annul, the decision assured greater security for private property
than exists under any other judicial system in the world. Alexan-
der Hamilton could not have asked for more.

It was the singular ill fortune of Webster to have been born too
late to profit from the old mercantile Federalism to which his
affections were always attached, and too early to profit by the
industrial Federalism that came to greatness after the Civil War.
If fate had been kinder to him, and he had appeared on the political
horizon a generation earlier or a generation later, he would have
reaped in far greater abundance those high civic honors he so


» foolishly coveted. The economic groups whom he served would


have been in position to reward a servant so conspicuously able
and useful. As a contemporary of John Adams he might have
become a notable political philosopher—provided always that he
had not turned Tory as Emerson suggested. But unhappily for his
fame he was launched between tides on a stormy sea and his
stately bark foundered in the squall of Abolitionism.


7 Theodore Parker denied Webster credit for the argument, pointing out that
“the facts, the law, the precedents, the ideas, and the conclusions of that argument,
had almost all of them been presented by Messrs. Mason and Smith in the previous
trial of the case” (Additional Speeches, Vol. 1, p. 171). The statement is confirmed
by Beveridge.


PART TWO: THE RISE OF LIBERALISM


CHALLER \I
THE RENAISSANCE


To write a history of Massachusetts, I confess, is not inviting to an
expansive thinker. . . . From 1790 to 1820 there was not a book, a speech,
a conversation, or a thought in the State. About 1820, the Channing,
Webster, and Everett era begun, and we have been bookish and poetical
and cogitative since. (Emerson, Journals, Vol. VIII, p. 339.)


In such summary fashion in the year 1852, Emerson recorded his
judgment on half a century of intellectual life in Massachusetts.
It was the comment of an exacting critic. In its characterization
of the extraordinary ferment of thought that marked the decades
of the thirties and forties, it is quite inadequate; but in its contemp-
tuous dismissal of the age of Fisher Ames and Robert Treat Paine
it was scarcely unjust. The utter sterility of those old times
Emerson understood only too well. It was the world of his own
youth, whose pale negations he had come to hate. The creative
impulse was stifled, the mind had grown stale from tedious it-
eration. But at last the old barriers gave way, and into this nar-
row illiberal world, that had long fed on the crusts of English
rationalism and Edwardean dogmatism—dry as remainder biscuit
after voyage—broke the floods that had been gathering in Europe
for years, the waters of all the streams of revolution that were
running there bank-full. Before this inundation the old provin-
cialisms were swept away, and for the first time in its history, and
the last, the mind of New England gave itself over to a great
adventure in liberalism.

Quite evidently the renaissance resulted from the impact of the
romantic revolution upon the Puritan mind, and it issued in a
form native to New England experience. Animated by the com-
mon spirit of Utopianism, its dreams were unlike those of Virginia
or the West, founded on a different economics and seeking different
ends. Massachusetts had discovered a particular road leading to
Utopia by way of the industrial revolution, and the textile mills
on the Merrimac began weaving a new pattern of life for New

317


318 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


England. The old static agricultural order was broken in upon,
and with the social disruption came naturally an intellectual dis-
ruption. The mind of that older New England had been held in the
close keeping of the church, and the movement of intellectual
emancipation became therefore at the outset a movement leveled
at theological conservatism; it was concerned first to rid New Eng-
land of the incubus of Calvinistic dogma. The Calvinists were of
tough fiber and tenacious of opinion, and to turn their flank was
no summer campaign. The result was a long battle of ideas, a
fierce struggle between the old deterministic theology and the new
romantic philosophy, with victory slowly inclining to the latter.
This major struggle gave to the renaissance its profoundly ethical
spirit that set it off sharply from the earlier renaissance of Vir-
ginia; and not the least important of the results of the movement
was the liberation of the New England conscience from its long
bondage to dogma, setting it free to engage in a larger work in the
world. What that conscience accomplished in the brief period of
its freedom; what causes it espoused and what reforms it carried
through—how it quickened a humanitarian zeal in New England
and imparted a militant spirit to its culture—these are phases of the
total movement not to be neglected by the historian.

In the realm of ideas the renaissance was largely dominated by
old-world thought. From the abundant stores of European
revolutionary doctrine the New England liberals drew freely—
more freely perhaps from German idealism than from French
Utopianism. Germany meant much to the awakening mind of
New England, by reason of its spiritual and intellectual kinship.
Plato was their common father, a transcendental mysticism their
common experience. Philosophical idealism with its indwelling
Godhood that exalted man to the divine and transformed a mechan-
ical universe into the dwelling place of divine love—this was a
dynamic faith, appealing to men long nurtured in faith, more
seductive to the children of Puritanism than any political or
economic romanticisms. It opened to them new heavens when the
old were closed and encouraged them to go forth on great ventures.

But the renaissance was very much more than a transplanting of
German idealism. France had a shaping hand in it, and England.
Jean Jacques came before Hegel, and Unitarianism before tran-
scendentalism. It was social and literary as well as philosophical.
In so far as that which was essentially one may be divided, the


THE RENAISSANCE 319


movement involved three major strands: the social Utopianism
that came from revolutionary France; the idealistic metaphysics
that emerged from revolutionary Germany; and the new culture
that spread with the development of literary romanticism. To
distinguish these three strands is one thing; to endeavor to separate
them is quite another. They interweave and blend in varying
patterns; they are but different, new-world phases of a com-
prehensive European movement that runs far back into the
preceding century—a movement that in transferring economic
and political mastery from the aristocracy to the middle class, in
destroying the worm-eaten feudal order and clearing the way for
the new capitalistic order, laid open a broad path into the nine-
teenth century. The extraordinary appeal of this vast movement
to the liberal mind of America resulted from the fact that an
identical revolution was under way here. In New England,
perhaps more dramatically than elsewhere in America, the day of
the middle class was dawning, aristocratic ideals were disin-
tegrating, and the hopes of men were running high. To humanize
this emerging society, to awaken it to a nobler faith in human
destiny, to further the cause of social justice, to create a democ-
racy of the spirit—this was the deeper romantic purpose, however
vaguely comprehended, that was fermenting in the New England
renaissance, and it was this that gave to it a spirit so warmly
ethical.

Now quite evidently a movement so extraordinarily complex
would appeal diversely to different minds, and in its develop-
ment it drew to itself a singularly various following. To the sons
of respectable Federalism it was the new romantic culture that
appealed; to the militant conscience of Puritanism it was the
inspiration of social Utopianism; to the emancipated intellectuals
it was the metaphysical idealism. Its many-sidedness was both
confusing and stimulating. How shall we explain a movement
that embraced such different men as Everett and Channing and
Parker and Garrison and Whittier and Emerson and Longfellow
and Holmes; men often mutually repellent, sometimes sharply
critical of each other? No single mind sums up the whole—the
theological, humanitarian, mystical, critical, and cultural aspira-
tions of the awakening—as perhaps Goethe may be said to have
done for Germany. Emerson, Thoreau and Parker possibly
embodied it most adequately; they were transcendental individ-


320 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


ualists, intellectual revolutionaries, contemptuous of all meanly
material standards. But quite evidently Everett would not travel
far along the transcendental path they pointed out, nor Holmes,
nor Longfellow. These latter expected no romantic Utopias, wanted
no such Utopias. Cambridge and Boston satisfied their hopes; they
found the world not such a bad place for those who knew how to
meet it on its own terms. Yet they too were children of the
awakening, and in following their individual paths they contributed
in their own way to the disintegration of the old authoritarian
order that had long held the mind of New England in subjection.
Each in some measure and after his own fashion was a rebel,
and their total rebellions made up the sum of New England’s be-
quest to a more liberal America. Yet in this eager and somewhat
vague liberalism to which the renaissance was dedicated in spirit,
the note that runs through the several programs is a note of re-
action from the aspirations of the middle class. It was an ethical
protest against the harsh and unjust realities of the industrial
revolution that was so ruthlessly transforming the old order of
life in New England; and it took the form of a return to a simpler
life. To struggle free from the chains of the eighteenth century,
only to be bound in new chains, was an ignoble ending to the
emancipation that free men could not envisage with satisfaction.


CHAPTER II
LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM


Tue first stirrings of new life were felt within the church, the re-
pository of such learning as Harvard College disseminated through
the Massachusetts villages. For two hundred years the dog-
mas of Calvin had lain as a heavy weight on the mind of New Eng-
land. Revolutions had taken place in English and continental
theology, but New England Calvinism had kept closely within the
narrow confines of its creed, annually turning over the exhausted
soil and reaping an ever scantier harvest. Since the days of Ed-
wards there had been abundant speculation and much exercise in
syllogisms, but no scrutiny of major premises. Such an examina-
tion was long overdue, with the romantic revolution under way
in France, and new theories of human nature and the relation of
man to society and the state, spreading widely. But unfortunately
the odium which New England conservatism quickly fastened
upon the French school frightened the orthodox. The stigma
of atheism was put upon every harmless bantling of the numerous
French brood, and in the terror of reaction the pulpit, following
the lead of the reactionary pew, aroused itself to cleanse the church
of every innovation. English Arianism, even worse things, it
was discovered, had stolen into Congregational pulpits during the
relaxed period of the Revolution; a dangerous spirit of liberal-
ism had spread silently through the tidewater churches, capturing
the strongholds of Boston orthodoxy.

By the year 1800 it was high time for the old Congregational-
ism of Jonathan Edwards to take counsel with itself. “Let us
guard against the insidious encroachments of innovation—that evil
and beguiling spirit which is now stalking to and fro in the earth,
seeking whom it may devour,” exclaimed Jedidiah Morse, the
arch reactionary, in the days when French ideas were knocking
at the doors of New England. And by innovation the doughty
Jedidiah meant any idea that had been stumbled on, new since the
days of the great Edwards. To go back to the pure Edwardean
doctrine, to purge the church of incipient Arminianism and Arian-

321


322 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


ism and Socinianism—together with such other innovations as
might show their faces anywhere—became thenceforth the chief
business of the devout New England of 1800. To timid souls the
ideas of their grandfathers seemed far safer than the ideas of their
fathers; and so theology followed politics in turning its back upon
the freer, more generous world that beckoned.

Nevertheless French liberalism slowly won its victories. It
needs high walls to keep out ideas. Excluded from the drawing-
rooms and counting-houses, ostracized in society and politics,
romantic philosophy slipped quietly into Boston by the door of
theology, and took lodgings in the homes of the first families. To
those who enjoy the little ironies of history, the easy subjugation
of respectable Boston by that very Jacobinical heresy against
which Boston was so bitter is too amusing to be overlooked.
Changing its name and arraying itself in garments cut after the
best Yankee fashion, the gospel of Jean Jacques presently walked
the streets of Boston and spoke from its most respectable pulpits,
under the guise of Unitarianism. The heretical doctrines of the
excellence of human nature and the perfectibility of man were
preached to Federalist congregations so persuasively that instead
of repudiating them and asserting the total depravity of their
neighbors, simple-minded merchants approved the doctrines and
cheerfully paid their pew-rent. It was a respectable and bloodless
revolution. Under its discreet disguise Unitarianism accomplished
for New England what Jeffersonianism had accomplished for the
South and West—the wide dissemination of eighteenth-century
French liberalism. It opened the New England mind to fresh
ideas. Out of Unitarianism was to come the intellectual renais-
sance, with its transcendental philosophies and social reforms, its
enlarged conception of democracy and its Utopian dreams, which
made New England count so effectively in the developments of
the half century.

The twenty-five years between 1790 and 1815 were the nascent
period of Unitarianism, when it was reéxamining the old Calvinist
dogmas in the light of the new liberalism, weighing the doctrines
of election and reprobation in the scale with the doctrines of God’s
beneficence and man’s excellence, and coming definitely to reject
them as blasphemy against God and defamation of human nature.
And it was during these critical years that the upholders of the
traditional orthodoxy were most actively concerned to provide


LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM 323


a defense for the sacred dogmas of their grandfathers. The liberal
advance produced a conservative reaction, and the lines of battle
were sharply drawn. The capture of Harvard College by the
Unitarians in 1805, and the founding of Andover Theological
Seminary by the Calvinists in 1808, were dramatic events in a
long intellectual and legal struggle that aroused much bitterness
and bequeathed to the churches a rich legacy of unchristian
animosities. Good men on both sides—to recall a contemporary
witticism—were quite too ready “to fight for the glory of God
as if the very devil were in them.”

The traditional Calvinism defended itself with spirit, asserting
so vehemently that it was still a living faith, that the corpse was
not yet an authentic corpse, that it succeeded at least in postpon-
ing its own burial. It was deeply entrenched in the inertia of cus-
tom, but intellectually it was in really desperate straits. It was
slowly disintegrating from dry-rot with which both minister and
theology were stricken. With its major premises tacitly denied
by Yankee experience, it was unfortunate in being defended by as
humorless and ungainly a breed of theologians as ever quarreled over
the loving-kindness of God. Clinging to the defenses which Jona-
than Edwards had erected against the incursion of old-world ideas,
it declaimed its dogmas and damned the human race with tedious
iteration. Over-threshed straw makes poor fodder, and after a
two-hour battle with potential infidelities, many a good minister
descended from his pulpit lamenting that his exhortations had
been wasted on ‘‘a sermon-proof, gospel-glutted generation.”
Yet he went faithfully back to his study to consume the day in
argument with a suppositious Arminian, and in spinning cobweb
systems between the worm-eaten rafters, quite oblivious to the
common-sense world without his walls. The difficulties in which
those old Calvinists found themselves very likely seemed tragic
to them; but to later generations, endowed with some saving grace
of humor, the situation was not without its spice. The good men
were undeniably caught in a distressing dilemma. They were
laboring prodigiously both to sit tight in the old dogma of deter-
minism and yet wriggle out; to maintain election and reproba-
tion and yet insert somehow the thin edge of personal responsi-
bility; to prove to the satisfaction of the pew that man is both
bound and free. It was a hard necessity to be under, to damn man
by predestination, and “‘yet worry out enough freedom for him


324 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


to be decently damned on,” as a late critic has remarked;! to
send him to hell by divine decree, yet prove that he went of his
own accord. Yet they must do that impossible thing if they were
to justify their theology to common-sense congregations that were
drifting into indifference.

The whole thing was monstrously unreal and it resulted in
hatching such a brood of tenuous subtleties as we have difficulty
in comprehending today. Theological fame in Massachusetts
came to be measured by the skill with which the logician made
out to stand on both sides of the fence at the same time. Had it
not been for Jonathan Edwards New England Congregationalism
would have drifted comfortably with the tide of liberalism; but
his uncompromising spirit held it anchored. This masterly spinner
of theological systems bequeathed to his successors an unfinished
work; but he had clearly envisaged the problem and suggested a
line of attack. In his great inquiry into the nature of will he had
hoped to provide an infallible means of reconciling the irreconcil-
able by arguing that the will is dependent on desire. The natural
man, according to the Edwardean logic, is free to serve God as
the highest good if he desires, but he lacks the desire unless God
reveals himself as that highest good, and such revelation rests
with God’s pleasure. ‘‘Moral responsibility lies in the choice, not
in the cause of the choice.” 2 With this distinction suggested be-
tween natural and moral freedom, Calvinistic speculation went on
hopefully till it attained its culminating triumph in Nathaniel
Walker’s ingenious doctrine of certainty with power to the con-
trary. Walker was a pupil of Timothy Dwight’s, and one of the
foundation professors of the new Yale Divinity School, established
to combat Unitarian heresies. A tremendous rattling of the bones
of the Connecticut churches followed his pronouncement that
man’s acts are not necessitated by a rigid law of cause and effect,
but that his choices are so connected with antecedent conditions
of soul and environment, that to God’s perception it is certain
what they will be, although he possesses full power of contrary
choice.’

As we contemplate those old theological abstractions, dead now
as Lot’s wife, the universe of our fathers shrinks to a petty compass,


1See Fenn, Religious History of New England: King’s Chapel Lectures, p. 130.

2 See Williston Walker, 4 History of the Congregational Churches in the United
States, p. 283.

3 Thid., p. 356.


o
eS


LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM 325


not much larger than the snug little state of Connecticut, curiously
egocentric, curiously anthropomorphic. Obviously such grotes-
queries could not endure indefinitely. Presently there must ap-
pear the common-sense housewife with her broom, and the dusty
cobwebs would disappear. English Arianism, emerging out of
English Presbyterianism, and long under suspicion of the New
England fathers, first opened the windows and let a little fresh
air into the New England churches. But back of Arianism was the
total body of eighteenth-century rationalism, with its theology
rooted in new political and social philosophies, and its doctrines
derived from conceptions of God and man hostile to Calvinistic
determinism. There could be no reconciling them. Calvinism
must extirpate English rationalism or be disintegrated by it.

But rationalism refused to be extirpated. Here and there
in Massachusetts pulpits appeared a new order of preachers,
young men who had broken with the old dogmas and were plainly
bitten with the English distemper. Of these the most notable
was Jonathan Mayhew, from 1747 to 1766 pastor of the West
Church, and the freest-spoken minister in Boston. Mayhew was
a thoroughgoing liberal, not to say radical, an intimate friend of
Otis and John Adams, and chief clerical leader of the opposition
to the English ministry. He had broken through the narrow
parochialism of Boston; he corresponded with the intellectual
leaders of English dissent, and while still a young man was on the
highroad to Arianism. He seems to have been a brilliant fellow,
bold and frank in speech, with great and popular powers as a
preacher, and his early death alone prevented him from antici-
pating some of the work of Channing.* A like fate abruptly
terminated the work of another able young man, Lemuel Briant,
pastor of the Braintree church from 1745 to his death in 1753.
Briant was John Adams’s pastor and, like Mayhew, an Arian, with
a ready wit that his adversaries must have found disconcerting.
“T have always tho’t,” he remarked apropos of the familiar
dilemma, “‘that so far as any Man is pure (let it be in a greater or
lesser Degree) he is not filthy.” ® But the coming on of the
Revolutionary disputes and the disturbance of war put a stop to
the normal development of the movement; and the general reac-
tion following the treaty of peace gave encouragement to the
Calvinistic reaction and temporarily strengthened the Edwardean


4 [bid., pp. 276-277. DT bidsy Da 272.


326 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


school. Nevertheless the liberal doctrines of Mayhew and Briant,
falling in with the French: philosophy, prepared the way for the
conscious Unitarian revolt at the end of the century.

That revolt was fundamentally ethical rather than theological,
and the name Unitarian, which the liberal movement accepted
somewhat reluctantly from its opponents, very inadequately
describes its special genius. The term derives from the middle
eighteenth century, before religious thought had come under the
influence of the new social philosophy; and it suggests a primary
theological bias in a movement that was far more significantly
ethical and social. The early liberals, forerunners of Unitarianism,
were theologians given to probing in rationalistic spirit, the
mystery of the Godhood. Now, denial of the Trinity has been
common to all Unitarians, although individually they might
profess an Arian or a Socinian interpretation of the nature and
role of Jesus; but what is more important, they have been from the
first close Scripturists, disliking exact theological systems and
setting biblical authority above human. By the time the name
had come to be generally accepted—about the year 1815—it had
already lost much of its earlier significance, for emphasis had
shifted from the mystery of the Godhood to the problem of the
relations existing between the children and the Father. On the
one hand supernaturalism tended to disappear in morality, and
on the other religion tended to seek an authoritative basis in
idealistic philosophy and justify itself by intuitionism. ‘The
soul,” argued Channing, in his exposition of a later Unitarian
theology, “is the spring of our knowledge of God.” ‘“‘Here is our
primitive teacher and light.” “‘The only God, whom our thoughts
can rest on, and our hearts can cling to, is the God whose image
dwells in our own Souls” (Works, Vol. VI, Introductory Remarks,
p. 21). Unitarianism, in other words, reversed the thought process
of Calvinism. Instead of debasing man to a mean creature,
subject to a God of wrath, it professed to discover a loving Father
in the human heart of love. Here was a revolution indeed, a
revolution in which were the seeds of transcendentalism, of social
Utopias, of pretty much the entire intellectual awakening of
New England. The old Calvinism had no weapons to meet such
an attack; the new creed lay outside its realm of thought. What
that creed finally came to be, under Channing’s influence, is thus
stated by a recent historian:


LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM 327


Man is God’s child, made in His image and object of His love; his reason
and conscience are divine witnesses to truth and light, and when governed
by them he walks in the ways of God, safe in his Father’s love and care.
The God in whom their opponents believed—a God of election and rep-
robation, capable of dooming an entire race because its ancestors dis-
obeyed a God of arbitrary will and discriminating grace—seemed to them
simply an immoral being and they frankly said so. (Fenn, Religious
History of New England, etc., p. 125.)

In its noblest expression Unitarianism became essentially a
humanistic religion, rational, ethical, individual, yet with deep
and warm social sympathies. In Channing’s excellent phrase, it
discovered the apotheosis of religion in ‘“‘the adoration of good-
ness.” It issued in conduct because it developed character. The
highest testimony to the excellence of the faith is the noble com-
pany of men and women who subscribed to its creed. And yet
after all, Unitarianism was rather an attitude of mind than a
creed. It was the recovery of the original principle of New Eng


land Separatism, lost during the Tong years of orthodox conform-
ity—the principle of the open mind and free inquiry. Let each
devout soul, each group of fellow believers, Unitarianism an-
nounced, seek the truth where it may be found; let each give to it
such outward form‘as best reveals its divine nature; not seeking to
impose a particular interpretation upon others, but each taking
upon himseif full responsibility for his spiritual welfare. Authority
it regarded as the prop of the weak; dogma, as the body of a faith
that is dead. As free souls, mature and self-reliant, the Unitarians
would be their own authority, would fashion their own creed. The
Scriptures lie open and the heedful eye will discover God’s revela-
tion in their pages. The deeper spirit of Unitarianism is not
inadequately embodied in the text, “Search the Scriptures, for they
are they which testify of me.” No abler or more devout Scrip-
turists ever preached in America than the Unitarian ministers, and
if bolder souls like Theodore Parker went further than others, if
their free handling of old interpretations gave offense to the timid,
that fact provided no sanction to coerce or stifle free inquiry.
Toleration of differences, respect for devout free thought—this
return to the position of Roger Williams two centuries before was
the vital principle of Unitarianism. Like him, the Unitarian was a
seeker, open-minded and free. Others might be intolerant, others
might regard themselves as the sole custodians of truth, but not he.

But if the Unitarians who followed Channing were liberals


328 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


in religion, they were conservatives in well-nigh everything else.
Amongst the laity the adoration of goodness was sufficiently
tempered by Yankee thrift to keep it from interfering seriously
with the practical business of getting on in the world; and in
consequence the new faith gathered its supporters from amongst
the prosperous rather than the needy, from Federalists rather than
Democrats. The commercial dominated the intellectual and
emotional in their prim and somewhat cold congregations. ‘‘The
Unitarians,” it was commonly said, “were the cult of the arrived.”
As successful men, these Boston merchants and manufacturers did
not believe that they were the sons of Adam, children of iniquity.
They thought better of themselves and of God than Calvinism
permitted them to think; ‘‘one who was born in Boston,” the cur-
rent jest put it, “had no need to be born again.” Generous in all
approved philanthropies these Unitarian laymen might be, but
emotionally religious they were temperamentally incapable of
being. Until the infusion of the rich sap of transcendentalism, that
gave it new life and brought it to bloom, Unitarianism was in
grave danger of dying at the root. But with the spread of the
philosophy of intuitionalism, the negative individualism of Uni-
tarianism became positive, broke with the respectable conservatism
of commercial congregations, and overflowed in a rich and generous
faith. Authority, dogma, creed, were swept away by this new
faith in an indwelling divinity, with its intuitive sanctions, and
Unitarianism merged in the larger movement of the renaissance.


I
WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING


To the austerely spiritual Channing the guiding principle of
Unitarianism was identical with the spirit of primitive New Eng-

OS ‘land separatism—the principle of freedom in religious matters,
——sthe individual speaking his mind frankly, shepherd and flock feed-
ing as they would, without fear and without coercion. The soul is ©
responsible to itself and its own conscience; there are no orthodoxies

and no heterodoxies, but a duty is laid upon the individual to seek

truth with an open mind and be steadfast in its service. It was this
spirit of open-minded liberalism that led him along the path of
unmilitant individualism, seeking freedom only to the end of
righteousness, and counting righteousness the fine flower of free-
dom; desiring peace and universal fellowship; loath to found a


LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM 329


sect; yet driven by those who denied freedom to themselves as
well as others to become the champion and leader of a great
schism that sundered the traditional unity of Congregationalism,
and erected a new faith on the altars of the old.

Channing’s heritage was drawn from the deepest wells of New
England idealism; and filtered through his finely ethical mind it
emerged pure and limpid, the living waters of the new faith. His
noble preéminence was due to the simple spirituality of his nature.
Intellectually, he was neither great nor original. In scholarship
he was distinctly inferior to academic theologians like Andrews
Norton and to omnivorous students like Theodore Parker. Almost
wholly introspective he was influenced slowly by world-currents of
thought, and such alien ideas as found lodgment in his mind took
on a native form and color from his own convictions. Nevertheless
though his meditations revolved about the pole-star of his own
experience, his theology cautiously took shape under the pressure
of two ideas that came to him from the latter years of the eight-
eenth century—the ideas of God’s beneficence and of man’s excel-
lence. Once lodged in his mind, those ideas led to quite revolu-
tionary consequences, not only in their disintegrating effect upon
the Calvinistic dogmas in which he had been reared, but in the
generous romanticism which they bequeathed to Unitarian theol-
ogy. His intellectual development was late and halting, yet that
he liberated himself at all was remarkable considering the world
that bred him—Newport, frequented by wealthy planters and
enriched by the slave trade, Cambridge and Boston then in the
stagnancy of Federalist complacency. Of the same generation
with Robert Treat Paine and Josiah Quincy, only a few years older
than Rufus Choate and Edward Everett, as a boy sitting under
_ the preaching of Samuel Hopkins—the rugged expounder of the
Hopkinsian doctrine of willing to be damned for the glory of God,
a doctrine so repugnant to the major tenets of Channing’s theol-
ogy—he belonged by temperament and training to the parochial
world that accounted Fisher Ames a great orator, and looked with
suspicion on the new century that was crowding in on its com-
fortable preserves.

From the deep New England ruts Channing pulled himself with
incredibly difficulty. His frequent reactions almost kept pace with
his progress. For years he oscillated between freedom and dogma,
now dominated by the Hopkinsian influence and thrown back


330 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


upon a morbid Calvinism by ill health; then resolutely casting off
the evil spell; until the year 1815, when the conservative wing
declaring war upon the liberals, he was drawn into the controversy
and took upon himself the burden of defending the liberal cause.
He was then thirty-five, but it was not till four years later, in the
celebrated Baltimore sermon at the ordination of Jared Sparks,
that he offered a definitive statement of the new theology. The
sermon brought him wide fame and fastened upon him the leader-
ship of the Unitarian movement. Comment upon the new doc-
trines was widespread, and the circulation of the sermon in pam-
phlet form, according to a late biographer, “was not exceeded by
any American publication until in 1830 Webster made his memo-
rable reply to Hayne’? (John White Chadwick, William Ellery
Channing, p. 147). The creative influence of that sermon in clari-
fying certain doctrines of Unitarianism and integrating the society
should not blind us to the fact that it embodies only a portion of
Channing’s theology—the idea of God’s beneficence. It is a
reasoned attack upon Trinitarian Calvinism, upon those dogmas
which reveal—in Channing’s expressive phrase—“‘how mournfully
the human mind may misrepresent the Deity”; but it takes no
account of the idea which later he came to place first—the idea of
man’s excellence.

Finer than the Baltimore sermon in its restrained eloquence—
an eloquence that burns with an intensity rare in Channing—and
in its dramatic exposition of the doctrine of the atonement, is the
sermon entitled Unitarian Christianity most Favourable to Piety,
delivered in 1826 at the dedication of the second Unitarian church
in New York City. In this sermon Channing made use of a daring
comparison which startled his friends and gave mortal offense to
orthodox Calvinists. It is probably the most dramatic passage
to be found in his writings, and it so well exemplifies the temper of
the controversy that it deserves quotation. After discussing the
Edwardean philosophy of infinite punishment.and the nature of
atonement, he proceeded:


Let me, then, set it before you, in new terms, and by a new illustration;
and if in so doing, I may’ wound the feelings of some who hear me, I beg
them to believe, that I do it with pain, and from no impulse but a desire
to serve the cause of truth—Suppose, then, that a teacher should come
among you, and should tell you, that the Creator, in order to pardon his
own children, had erected a gallows in the centre of the universe, and had


LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM 331


publicly executed upon it, in room of the offenders, an Infinite Being, the
partaker of his own Supreme Divinity; suppose him to declare, that this
execution was appointed, as a most conspicuous and terrible manifestation
of God’s justice, and of the infinite woe denounced by his law; and suppose
him to add, that all beings in heaven and earth are required to fix their
eyes on this fearful sight, as the most powerful enforcement of obedience
and virtue. Would you not tell him, that he calumniated his Maker?
Would you not say to him, that this central gallows threw gloom over
the universe; that the spirit of a government, whose very acts of pardon
were written in such blood, was terror, not paternal love; and that the
obedience which needed to be upheld by this horrid spectacle, was nothing
worth? Would you not say to him, that even you, in this infancy and
imperfection of your being, were capable of being wrought upon by nobler
motives, and of hating sin through more generous views; and that much
more the angels, those pure flames of love, need not the gallows and an
executed God to confirm their loyalty? You would all so feel, at such
teaching as I have supposed; and yet how does this differ from the popular
doctrine of atonement? (Works, Vol. III, pp. 197-198.)


In seeking an explanation of Channing’s break with New Eng-
land orthodoxy—a breach that widened greatly with years, coming
to embrace politics and economics as well as theology, alienating
many of his own congregation and bringing acute grief to him—
one can scarcely over-emphasize the influence of his Virginia
experience. During the twenty-one months that he spent on the
southern plantation, painfully isolated and lonely, he grappled
seriously with a body of thought from which the environment of
his youth had pretty much shut him away. Virginia in 1798 was
ardently Jeffersonian, and French romantic philosophy was a
commonplace in Virginia libraries. While Channing never went
over wholly to Jeffersonianism, but retained certain Federalist
prejudices after the old foundations had turned to quicksand under
his feet, he there began a long process of speculative brooding that
was to carry him far from the political principles of Boston. French
revolutionary thought provided his chief intellectual stimulus
during the critical Virginia period. Rousseau he read with pro-
found interest, together with Godwin’s Political Justice and Mary
Wollstonecraft’s Rights of Woman. The Physiocratic economics
that sanctioned the agrarian bias of Jeffersonian democracy seems
to have made no appeal to a mind primarily ethical in outlook, yet
he went so far as to dabble in communistic theory, and for a time
contemplated joining a communistic community. From France,
moreover, he derived the idea of the excellence of human nature


332 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


and the perfectibility of man, ideas which became the mainspring
of his later thinking, creatively determining both his theology and
his social philosophy, and transforming his whole intellectual world.

In July, 1800, eight months before it took formal possession of the
White House, ‘‘French infidel philosophy” made its appearance
in New England in the person of a slight, health-broken youth, who
returned to his quiet theological studies, quite unmindful of the
gunpowder he had brought back in his intellectual luggage. It
was long before a spark was to strike home, but the powder was
there and would do its work eventually. In passing through Chan-
ning’s mind, the contributions of French romanticism merged with
the native heritage of New England idealism, and supplemented
by contributions from English Arian thought, slowly assumed defi-
nite form that came to issue in three dominating ideas, namely:
God is love, man is potentially noble, religion is an excellent life.
Enveloping these master ideas, in which they were carried as in a
medium, was a pervasive ethical spirit that colored all his think-
ing and eventually took form in that striking phrase into which
all of Channing is compressed, “‘the adoration of goodness—this is
religion.” This constituted his reply to the Edwardean theology
that debased man to the sole end of exalting a monstrous God—
the doctrine of “‘sweetness and light’ was set over against the
dogmas of reprobation and election.

With his profound sense of justice, Channing could not follow
“the adoration of goodness”’ into an aloof and mystical pietism.
The temptation was strong, for his finely aristocratic and hesitant
nature prompted him to stand apart from all turmoil and partisan
struggle. He disliked controversy and distrusted all dogmatists.
The world of economics and politics was exceedingly distasteful
to him; he would gladly stop his ears against the clamor of organ-
ized groups and strident parties. The Abolitionists, with whose
purpose he deeply sympathized, seemed to him intolerant and
their tactics vulgar. There is a measure of justice in Garrison’s
comment after Channing’s death: “His nerves were delicately
strung. The sound of a ram’s horn was painfully distressing to
him. He was firmly persuaded that nothing but a silver trumpet
was needed to cause the walls of Jericho to fall; and he did his best
upon his own.” ® And yet, however unwillingly, he was drawn in-


8 Compare a fuller estimate in Garrison, William Lloyd Garrison, Vol. III,
pp. 239-242.


LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM 333


evitably into an agitation that touched both his religion and his
humanity; and between 1835 and 1837 he issued three notable con-
tributions to the controversy: Slavery, a reply to the Southern
apologists; The Abolitionists, an open letter to James Birney, whose
Abolition press had been wrecked by an Ohio mob; and a noble ap-
peal to Henry Clay against the annexation of Texas. In the latter
year he spoke in Faneuil Hall at a turbulent meeting called to
protest against the murder of Lovejoy, the meeting at which
Wendell Phillips made his dramatic first appearance on the Aboli-
tion platform.

The point of view from which Channing approached the problem
of slavery is clearly set forth in his Introductory Remarks, written
in 1841 for a collected edition of his works, and which constitutes
his apologia pro vita sua.’ In this extraordinarily lucid and just
statement he reduces the master passions of his life to two—respect
for human nature, and reverence for human liberty—passions
which were inseparable in all his thinking. Of the first he says,
“The following writings will be found to be distinguished by
nothing more than by the high estimate which they express of
human nature. A respect for the human soul breathes through
them.” This attitude he elaborates at length:


An enlightened, disinterested human being, morally strong, and exert-
ing a wide influence by the power of virtue, is the clearest reflection of
the divine splendour on earth. . . . The glory of the Maker lies in his
work. . . . Those men glorify God most, who look with keen eye and
loving heart on his works, who catch in all some glimpses of beauty and
power, who have a spiritual sense for good in its dimmest manifestations,
and who can so interpret the world, that it becomes a bright witness to the


Divinity.
I have also felt and continually insisted, that a new reverence for man
was essential to the cause of social reform. . . . There can be no spirit


of brotherhood, no true peace, any farther than men come to understand
their affinity with and relation to God and the infinite purpose for which
he gave them life. As yet these ideas are treated as a kind of spiritual
romance. . . . The reception of this plainest truth of Christianity would
revolutionize society, and create relations among men not dreamed of at
the present day. . . . Men would know the import of the word Brother,
as yet nothing but a word to multitudes. None of us can conceive the
change of manners, the new courtesy and sweetness, the mutual kindness,
deference and sympathy, the life and efforts for social melioration, which


7 In the Glasgow edition of 1844 it prefaces the sixth volume.


334 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


are to spring up, in proportion as man shall penetrate beneath the body
to the spirit, and shall learn what the lowest human being 1s.


Out of this reverence for human nature flowed his “‘reverence
for Liberty, for human rights; a sentiment which has grown with
my growth, which is striking deeper root in my age, which seems
to me a chief element of true love for mankind, and which alone
fits a man for intercourse with his fellow-creatures.”


It is because I have learned the essential equality of men before the
common Father, that I cannot endure to see one man establishing his
arbitrary will over another by fraud, or force, or wealth, or rank, or super-
stitious claims. It is because the human being has moral powers, be-
cause he carries a law in his own breast and was made to govern himself,
that I cannot endure to see him taken out of his own hands and fashioned
into a tool by another’s avarice or pride. It is because I see in him a great
nature, the divine image, and vast capacities, that I demand for him
means of self-development, spheres for free action—that I call society
not to fetter, but to aid his growth.


In such humanitarian idealism did French romantic philosophy
come to flower in the generous mind of this son of New England.
He was no longer narrowly Unitarian; he had become a social
revolutionary with Utopian dreams. The minister’s wealthy
parishioners might worship the common Father complacently
under the shadow of slavery, black or white, but the minister
could not; he had caught a glimpse of the Promised Land and
would lead his flock towards it. Unhappily, the vast abyss of
negro slavery lay between, and Channing considered it with grow-
ing concern. In his examination of the problem he was broadly
philosophical rather than narrowly partisan. He rested his case
against slavery on an ethical adaptation of the natural-rights
theory. Since man is both rational and moral, he argued, he
cannot be deprived by law or custom of the essential preroga-
tives of personality. The inalienable rights of man are in es-
sence no other than the rights of personality—the right to exercise
his reason, to seek light of his conscience, to enjoy the fruits of
his labor, to enter into domestic relations, in short to be free to
live as a man in a state of civilization. To treat man as property
is the grossest denial and violation of that which by its nature is
inviolable and inalienable. Channing pushed his argument further
and asserted that the institution of slavery was not only irrational


8 For a brief discussion, see Merriam, American Political Theories, pp. 217-221.


LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM 335


and immoral, but a fundamental denial of democracy. It must
end in perverting the political state to its own evil. The southern
conception of a Greek democracy resting on black slavery he
looked upon as the final prostitution of the democratic ideal.
“Those who tell us that slavery is a necessary condition of a re-
public, do not justify the former, but pronounce a sentence of
reprobation on the latter.”’ For those text-mongerers who pro-
fessed to justify slavery by Scripture, he had only scorn. By such
methods polygamy might as readily be justified.

Inquiry into the nature and scope of individual rights brought
- Channing face to face with the problem of the political state and
the duties of citizenship. Here his break with Boston Federalism
was final and complete. He judged men and institutions by ethical
standards; State Street judged them by economic standards. By
his own path he went back to the eighteenth century, and inter-
preting the functions and province of government in the light of
Godwin’s Political Justice, he arrived at the conception of a con-
stantly diminishing political state that should eventually dis-
appear. The dogma of political sovereignty he denied: “The state
is equally restrained with individuals by the Moral Law” (“‘Sla-
very,” in Works, Vol. II, p. 37). The expediency of some re-
straint upon individual action he accepted, but with the proviso
that it be exercised only to the end of the common well-being.
“The authority of the state to impose laws on its members I
cheerfully allow; but this has limits, which are found to be more
and more narrow in proportion to the progress of moral science”
(ibid., p. 38). “That government is most perfect, in which Policy
is most entirely subjected to Justice, or in which the supreme and
constant aim is to secure the rights of every human being” (zbid.,
p. 38). To such a government loyalty will be given gladly; but
in the event that expediency should prevail over justice, and the
state should prostitute its power by exploiting one class for the
benefit of another, then must loyalty be transferred from the
state to the higher law. “Justice is a greater good than property,
not greater in degree, but in kind.” ‘‘The good of the individual
is more important than the outward prosperity of the State”
(ibid., pp. 40, 44). In such doctrines Channing paid his respects
to the political philosophy of Webster.

The final outcome of his political thinking was a close approxi-
mation to the position of Jefferson. His distrust of power grew


336 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


more apprehensive as he reflected on the common abuse of power,
and the cheap and paltry appeals by which the unthinking are
swayed. Before the organized power of the mass, the individual
is helpless. In the Introductory Remarks he went further than he
had done in earlier writings in analysis of the state, and such a
passage as this might have been penned by John Taylor of Caroline
County. It is pure Jeffersonianism.


So fearful is the principle of which I have spoken, that I have thought
it right to recommend restrictions on power and a simplicity in govern-
ment beyond what most approve. Power, I apprehend, should not be
suffered to run into great masses. No more of it should be confided to
rulers than is absolutely necessary to repress crime and preserve public
order. A purer age may warrant larger trusts; but the less of government
now the better, if society be kept in peace. There should exist, if possible,
_ no office to madden ambition. . . . One of the tremendous evils of the
world, is the monstrous accumulation of power in a few hands. .. . Is
any man pure enough to be trusted with it? Ought such a prize as this
to be held out to ambition? Can we wonder at the shameless profligacy,
intrigue, and the base sacrifices of public interests by which it is sought,
and, when gained, held fast? Undoubtedly, great social changes are
required to heal this evil, to diminish this accumulation of power. Na-
tional spirit, which is virtual hostility to all countries but our own, must
yield to a growing humanity, to a new knowledge of the spirit of Christ.
Another important step is, a better comprehension by communities that
government is at best a rude machinery, which can accomplish but very
limited good, and which, when strained to accomplish what individuals
should do for themselves, is sure to be perverted by selfishness to narrow
purposes, or to defeat through ignorance its own ends. Man is too ig-
norant to govern much, to form vast plans for states and empires. Hu-
man policy has almost always been in conflict with the great laws of social
well-being, and the less we rely on it the better. The less of power given
to man over man the better. (Works, Vol. VI, pp. 26-27.)


Channing had evidently read his Political Justice to good effect,
for the spirit of eighteenth-century liberalism had passed into
his thought and given shape to his political philosophy. In his
hatred of war, his pacifism, his humanitarian concern, his social-
mindedness, his repudiation of all coercive centralizing power, he
proved himself a child of Godwin. He would have no tyranny,
whether by the organized state or by the unorganized mass. He
extended to all men the right of free thought and free speech. In
no other cause did he speak more vehemently than in defense of
this democratic right. When the Abolitionists were mobbed and
their presses broken he rejoiced in their refusal to be silenced.


LIBERALISM AND CALVINISM 337


“From my heart I thank them,” he wrote. “I am myself their
debtor. I am not sure, that I should this moment write in safety,
had they shrunk from the conflict, had they shut their lips, imposed
silence on their presses, and hid themselves before their ferocious as-
sailants. . . . I thank the Abolitionists, that in this evil day, they
were true to the rights which the multitude were ready to betray.”
Then follows a passage that is perennially true, considering how
hardly won and easily lost is the right of free speech:


Of all powers, the last to be entrusted to the multitude of men, is that
of determining what questions shall be discussed. The greatest truths are
often the most unpopular and exasperating; and were they to be denied
discussion, till the many should be ready to accept them, they would never
establish themselves in the general mind. The progress of society de-
pends on nothing more, than on the exposure of time-honored abuses,
which cannot be touched without offending multitudes, than on the
promulgation of principles, which are in advance of public sentiment and
practice, and which are constantly at war with the habits, prejudices,
and immediate interests of large classes of the community. Of conse-
quence, the multitude, if once allowed to dictate or proscribe subjects
of discussion, would strike society with spiritual blindness, and death.
The world is to be carried forward by truth, which at first offends, which
wins its way by degrees, which the many hate and would rejoice to crush.
The right of free discussion is therefore to be guarded by the friends of
mankind, with peculiar jealousy. It is at once the most sacred, and the
most endangered of all our rights. He who would rob his neighbor of it,
should have a mark set on him as the worst enemy of freedom. (‘‘The
Abolitionists,” in Works, Vol. II, p. 161.)


High-minded and generous was this child of Puritan idealism
who had gone to school to French infidel philosophy—never un-
true to the principle of free inquiry which in demanding for him-
self he willingly granted others. He calmly accepted the fact of
disintegration which is implicit in all liberalism—the denial of
traditional authority and ancient custom—partly because he be-
lieved the old ways were bad, but in part also because he held
strongly to his faith in human nature. Despite failure and discour-
agement he clung to his cardinal belief—‘My one sublime idea,
which has given me unity of mind, the greatness, the divinity of
the soul.”” He broke the more willingly with an ungenerous past
because he envisaged a nobler future. An intuitive individualist,
he was a forerunner of transcendental individualism, and he
found himself in hearty accord with Emerson’s doctrines in the
Divinity School address. With the later rationalistic phase of


338 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Unitarianism which began with Theodore Parker’s memorable
South Boston sermon On.the Transient and Permanent in Chris-
tianity, in May, 1841, he found himself only partly in intellectual
sympathy. He remained a supernaturalist after the younger
generation had rejected supernaturalism; but his sturdy adherence
to the principle of liberalism would not suffer him to join in the
Unitarian hue and cry raised against the young radical. Uni-
tarianism turned: orthodox, and bent on erecting new dogmas,
seemed to him treasonable to every liberal hope. ‘As to Mr.
Parker,” he wrote, “‘I wish him to preach what he thoroughly
believes and feels. I trust the account you received of attempts
to put him down was in the main a fiction. Let the full heart pour
itself forth!’ (John White Chadwick, William Ellery Channing,
p- 357.) Sixteen months after he penned those words Channing
was dead, but the spirit of his life was embodied in the great fer-
ment that was rising about him when he died. “Let the full
heart pour itself forth” —to many sober Bostonians it seemed that
New England had taken that injunction quite too literally and
was pouring forth disturbant and gusty heresies, but Channing
would scarcely have disapproved.


CHAPTER III
LIBERALISM AND THE SOCIAL CONSCIENCE


I
THE SOCIAL MIND


UNITARIANISM was generous in its bequests to New England, and
_ amongst its contributions to a nobler life not the least valuable
was its warm social sympathy. Channing’s tender social conscience
sprang directly from his humanitarian religion. Not from the
hard old Calvinism did he get this fine flower of a humane life, but
from the new French philosophy. Not from bounding his ethics
by the Decalogue, or hating sin more than he loved generosity,
did he break the hard shell of Puritan righteousness; but by
metamorphosing the sinner into a child of God and sharing with
him the divine promise. Other-mindedness came naturally to a
religion established in a God of love. The social conscience could
not remain indifferent to injustice visited upon the children of a
common Father. Yet other-mindedness was a virtue practiced too
little in Calvinist New England. That old world had been more
concerned with hopes of individual salvation, with propitiating an
angry God, than ‘with its present obligations to its neighbors.
Hard doctrine—which the old Puritan loved—was likely to make
hard characters, and an ascetic society was likely to breed close-
fisted natures: The conscience was tender in New England, but
it was tender chiefly as the guardian and monitor of the Ten Com-
mandments; it gave itself too little concern about the new com-
mandment which Jesus laid upon his disciples. It disciplined men
and women in personal righteousness, it created self-reliant char-
actors, it scrutinized narrowly the neighborhood conduct; but its
social issues were likely to be mean and petty. The righteousness
of which it professed to be guardian and monitor too often fell
far short of generous manly stature.

From this hardness of the old religion came the hardness of the
social conscience. When the Yankee was driven by brutal fact
to admit that he was his brother’s keeper, he usually took care to
get a few honest pennies out of his brother’s board and lodging.

339


340 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


The village poor were provided for by farming out, as the taxes
were farmed out. The town meeting haggled narrowly over the
terms, and substantial deacons underbid each other. Though the
price might be low, some profit might still be got from the pauper’s
keep. It was a cold, hard, unsympathetic world for the social
unfortunate, whether pauper, debtor, or idiot; and it was harsh
as well to the children of all but the wealthy. The hours of toil
were long, and the public schools about which the historians have
bragged rather too loudly, were poor affairs, starved by the com-
mon niggardliness, ill taught and ill provided. The academies and
colleges that professed to keep the torch of learning aflame were
largely perquisites of the gentry. It is beside the point to assert
that public schools existed in New England long before Virginia
had any, and that poor boys stinted and starved their way through
Harvard and Yale. Well known as such facts are, they do not
testify to a high social sense in a people supposed to have been
tender of conscience. The Calvinist was taught to fear God rather
than to love him. It was a strong man’s business to save one’s
soul and make a decent living; and in the social code of New Eng-
land the weakling must take his chance.

There was helpful neighborliness of course in old New England,
and much honest kindliness. Some of the hardest of dogmatic
Calvinists were the most considerate and gentlest of men. Old
Samuel Hopkins of slave-running Newport was a generous soul
who preached the gospel of love to one’s fellows, and practiced
the virtues of apostleship to the poor and outcast. He denounced
the slave trade to parishioners who knew all the inlets of the West
African coast, and got himself well disliked. His congregation
preferred his hard theology to his inconvenient humanitarianism,
and kept him poor all his days. The dogmatic Timothy Dwight
scathingly attacked slavery in his Greenfield Hill, denounced the
injustice done the negro, and even protested against the extension
of capital punishment. Yet for all such protests the common
conscience was untouched. The Yankee was always standing in the
way of the Puritan’s righteousness. Respectability was founded
on property, and respectability was mightier in New England
than even John Calvin. It was the brutal debtor laws that brought
on Shays’s Rebellion, which Federalist church members put down
and denied the grievances. It was no tender conscience that ex-
tinguished slavery in Massachusetts, for long after it became un-


LIBERALISM AND THE SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 341


profitable there the Yankee skipper was still in the slave trade.
Dignified Tory Row on what is now Brattle Street, Cambridge,
was built by gentlemen who drew their wealth from West Indian
slave plantations. William Lloyd Garrison’s offense in Balti-
more, for which he was thrown into jail, lay in publishing the
name of a Massachusetts shipmaster from Newburyport—Gar-
rison’s native town—who was engaged in the coastwise slave
trafic.” In the year 1830 there were somewhat more than a
hundred Abolition Societies in the United States, not one of which
was in New England; and in the first number of the Liberator
Garrison wrote, probably without exaggeration, that he found
“contempt more bitter, opposition more active, detraction more
relentless, prejudice more stubborn, and apathy more frozen,”
in New England, “than among slave owners themselves.” ? The
old Puritan conscience might be tender, but it refused pretty
steadily totake on any larger job than Sabbath-keeping and dogma-
saving. It was inquisitorial rather than humanitarian, and the
sins which it hunted down were theological rather than social.

The bridge between this older world and the later was thrown
across by Unitarianism. With its shift of emphasis from a God of
wrath to a God of love came the entering wedge that was to split
away the egoism of the old theology—its thralldom to the con-
ception of personal sin—and lay bare an inner core of altruism.
It was another sort of conscience that Unitarianism discovered, a
conscience that welcomed the new social thought of romantic
Europe, and applying it to the facts of life in America created the
new humanitarianism which bit so deeply into the New England of
the forties. From this movement the intractable nature of the
Yankee held him back, but the Puritan speedily transformed the
hard theological conscience into a tender social conscience, that
bewildered the conventional morality with its sweeping program
of reform.

The awakening of the new spirit may perhaps be held to date
from the growing opposition to war that was an aftermath of the
Napoleonic period with its huge debts and vast social suffering.
The inhumanity of war profoundly impressed thoughtful minds
that had come under the influence of the sociological movement,


1See T. W. Higginson, Old Cambridge, p. 149.

2See Garrison, William Lloyd Garrison, Vol. I, Chapter VI. The court held
that it was libelous to seek to bring into disrepute an action that was legal.

Quoted by S. E. Morison in Harrison Grey Otis, Vol. II, p. 263.


342 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


and when Channing in 1812 preached his first anti-war sermon
the new humanitarian spirit found expression. In his espousal
of pacifism Channing was following in the footsteps of the social
revolutionaries of the preceding century. He fell short of Tom
Paine in analysis of the economic and dynastic sources of war,
and in appreciation of its social consequences; nevertheless his
denunciation was significant of a changing social attitude. From
this early attack to the rise of the Garrisonian Non-Resistance
Society of the late thirties and early forties, the spread of the pacif-
ist movement was rapid. Transcendentalism was eloquently
anti-militaristic, and Emerson, Alcott and Parker were outspoken
in denunciation of the war spirit. To the war against war soon
was added the war against drink, and with the establishment in
Boston in 1826 of the National Philanthropist, under the patronage
of the ‘‘Massachusetts Society for the Suppression of Intem-
perance”—a paper of which Garrison was editor for a few months—
began the long agitation for the suppression of the liquor traffic.
From such feeble beginnings the ardor of reform grew and spread
swiftly, enlarging its program to embrace anti-slavery, woman’s
rights, 4 prison reform, repeal of the harsh debtor laws, vegetarian-
ism, associationism, until it caught the contagion of the perfection-
ist and transcendental movements and issued in a comprehensive
program of universal reform. The golden age of New England
was quite as much the golden age of the New England conscience
as of the New England mind.


II


The fame of transcendentalism has too much obscured the con-
temporary movement of perfectionism, a movement which marked
the extreme expression of the new conscience, the most revolution-
ary of its aspirations, the apotheosis of ethical radicalism. Its
want of literary skill narrowed its appeal and the archaic quality
of its enthusiasm lessened its following; yet in spirit it was native
to Puritan idealism, and it enlisted the active sympathy of many
of the finer souls of New England. How greatly reform was fur-
thered by the movement of perfectionism is not easily determined,

4This was an outgrowth of the anti-slavery movement and emerged from the
conservative opposition to women’s appearing on the abolition platform. The
reply of the Quakeress, Angelina Grimke, to Elizabeth Beecher’s Essay on Slavery
and Abolitionism, with reference to the Duty of American Females, in 1837, marks the


definite beginning of the movement. See Garrison, William Lloyd Garrison, Vol. II,
Pp. 133-134.


LIBERALISM AND THE SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 343


but it is clear that its influence permeated much of the revolutionary
activity of the times. Scratch an ardent Abolitionist and you
were likely to find a potential perfectionist.

The doctrine was first elaborated by John Humphrey Noyes, a
young Vermont mystic, who, under the influence of the revivalist
excitement of the early thirties, elaborated a social creed that re-
embodied much of the teaching of the extreme left wing of English
Commonwealth thought. Noyes was a primitive religious nature,
with the tenderest of consciences, vastly troubled over current
materialisms; and his speculations reveal a curious throw-back to
- early English Puritanism. He was a Yankee Fifth Monarchy man.
Two hundred years of Yankee experience slipped from his mind,
and he walked and talked with the old millennial spirits, the Dig-
gers and Levelers of Commonwealth times. A devout Scripturist,
he took literally the injunction of Matthew, “‘Be ye therefore per-
fect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.”” A prim-
itive Christian, he proposed to re-order society with the naive
simplicity of the apostle Eliot. In his mystical speculations,
social, political, and religious radicalisms were stirred in a common
pot and simmered down to what may be called spiritual anarchism.
Noyes was a Yankee “root and branch” man, a single-minded
apostle of “thorough.” He would not strain at gnats and swallow
camels, but he rejected the camels first and then proposed to get
rid of the gnats. In 1834 he established a small monthly paper
called the Perfectionist, which was very probably as revolutionary
a sheet as was ever printed in America. He made converts, in-
cluding Garrison, Edmund Quincy, son of Josiah Quincy, the
Grimké sisters, Henry C. Wright and other Abolitionists, and
made an increasing stir in the world, to the great concern of respect-
able folk who swallowed their camels without a grimace.

Some notion of the main doctrines of this seventeenth-century
creed may be gained from a letter of Noyes to Garrison, written
in 1837, from which the following is taken:

I have subscribed my name to an instrument similar to the Declaration
of ’76, renouncing all allegiance to the government of the United States,
and asserting the title of Jesus Christ to the throne of the World. .. .
When I wish to form a conception of the government of the United States
. . . | picture to myself a bloated, swaggering libertine, trampling on the
Bible—its own Constitution—its treaties with the Indians—the petitions


of its citizens. . . . I have renounced active co-operation with the op-
pressor on whose territories I live; now I would find a way to put an end to


344 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


his oppression. But he is manifestly a reprobate: reproof and instruction
only aggravate his sins. I cannot attempt to reform him, because I am
forbidden to “‘cast pearls befére swine.” I must therefore either consent
to remain a slave till God removes the tyrant, or I must commence war
upon him, by a declaration of independence and other weapons suitable
to the character of a son of God.


He then lays down seven reasons for choosing to make war upon
the state, amongst which are the following:


1. As a believer in the Bible I know that the territory of the United
States belongs to God, and is promised ... to Jesus Christ and his
followers. ... ;

6. The Son of God has manifestly, to me, chosen this country for the
theatre of such an assault—a country which, by its boasting hypocrisy,
has become the laughing-stock of the world, and by its lawlessness has
fully proved the incapacity of man for self-government. My hope of the
millennium begins where Dr. Beecher’s expires—viz., AT THE OVERTHROW
OF THIS NATION.

I have stated to you only . . . the principal things which God has
urged upon me by his Spirit, and by which he has moved me to nominate
Jesus Christ for the Presidency, not only of the United States, but of the
world. Is it not high time for abolitionists to abandon a government
whose President has declared war upon them? I cannot but think that
many of them hear the same great voice out of heaven which has waked
me, saying, “Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins and of her plagues.” . . . Allow me to suggest that you will set
Anti-slavery in the sunshine only by making it tributary to Holiness; and
you will most assuredly throw it into the shade . . . if you suffer it to
occupy the ground, in your mind or in others, which ought to be occupied
by UNIVERSAL EMANCIPATION FROM SIN. All the abhorrence which now
falls upon slavery, intemperance, lewdness, and every other specific vice,
will in due time be gathered into one volume of victorious wrath against
unbelief. I wait for that time as for the day of battle . . . I counsel you,
and the people that are with you, if you love the post of honour—the
forefront of the hottest battle of righteousness—to set your face towards
perfect holiness. (Garrison, William Lloyd Garrison, Vol. II, pp. 145-148.)


This curious appeal brought forth its fruit in a Peace Conven-
tion, held in 1838, which published a Declaration of Sentiments ®
that was quite as extraordinary a pronouncement—one that serves
to explain the utter bewilderment of prosaic souls at the strange
progeny of the times. It was only one of many strange conventions,
marked by an ebullient faith of which Emerson remarked, “‘The core
of the comet did not seem to be much, but the whole air was full of
splendors” (Journals, Vol. VII, p. 5), and on which Josiah Quincy

5 Written by Garrison; see ibid., Vol. II, pp. 230-234.


LIBERALISM AND THE SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 345


commented, “Such a mass of free mind as was brought together I
have never seen before in any one assembly. . . . There was much
talent and a great deal of soul.”’ Men who take their Biblical
teachings literally are likely to be curious fellows. Righteousness
may prove a potent drink for them that love it, begetting its own
particular intemperance; and a conscience that has slipped its
leash of the practical will run many a mad chase. If it followed
its logic this perfectionism must make short shrift of political
parties, of loyalty to government, of the political state itself, and
set up instead a social order in which familiar things would be
topsy-turvy, with the just sitting in high places and the rich and
great of earth brought low; and this is precisely what Noyes did
in the Oneida Community— the most successful of the contemp-
orary ventures in communism—of which he was the founder. In
spite of his taste for the wine of new vintages Emerson was some-
what taken aback at certain of its ebullitions, and when the
sabbatarian Charndon Street Convention in 1840 gathered together
the choicest repositories of New England holiness, he shook his
head dubiously. His humorous catalogue of the miscellaneous
enthusiasts suggests more than a spice of criticism.


Madmen, madwomen, men with beards, Dunkers, Muggletonians,
Come-outers, Groaners, Agrarians, Seventh-Day Baptists, Quakers,
Abolitionists, Calvinists, Unitarians, and Philosophers,—all came suc-
cessively to the top, and seized their moment, if not their hour, wherein
to chide, or pray, or preach, or protest. (‘The Charndon Street Con-
vention,” in Works, Vol. X, p. 374.)


And even the catholic-minded Edmund Quincy, who was one of
the callers of the Convention, confessed that “‘It was the most
singular collection of strange specimens of humanity that was ever
assembled.” The wine of perfectionism was in high ferment in
New England in 1840.

It was a curious anachronism in the midst of the industrial
revolution—this revival of the religious Utopianism of 1650, this
April renaissance of the faith of a dead saeculum theologicum. It
was in no sense a by-product of transcendentalism—no lunacy
fringe of metaphysical speculation. It owed nothing to French
romanticism or German idealism, not in origin at least. It was far
more primitive and native, and its affinities run back to Roger
Williams and the Fifth Monarchy millennialism, rather than to
Rousseau and Kant and Jacobi. It was a breaking through of the


346 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


submerged New England spirituality, a volcanic release from
sterile conformity; and it.summoned the awakening soul to go
forth and conquer the world for righteousness. Millennialism is the
prophetic hope of a primitive faith. To its disciples it is certain of
fulfillment because God’s promises are certain; but to practical
minds, unconvinced that Biblical phrases are authentic divine con-
tracts, any expectation of the speedy coming of the Kingdom of
God seems grotesque. The millennial enthusiast is a fair butt of
ridicule, and the perfectionists came in for a large share. It was
Lowell who leveled at the militant godliness of the new sects the
wittiest attack. Forgetting his English history he found himself
puzzled, and being puzzled he allowed himself to become ill-
natured. His clever sentences explode smartly about his subject,
but there is no light in them.®


III


Upon another venture in Utopianism, and one far better known,
the years have laid a pleasant, idyllic haze, softening the prosaic
outlines and clothing them with romance. Brook Farm has been
singularly fortunate in the posthumous fame that has dealt with
it so tenderly as to transmute it into poetry. By virtue of the
light reflected upon it by the transcendental illumination and the
literary skill it commanded, the little communal settlement at
West Roxbury has come to be regarded as a homely Yankee pas-
toral, a sort of May Day adventure in brown holland tunics, an
inspiring quest of the ideal amongst furrows and manures. It
is a social poem fashioned out of Yankee homespun. No hint of
rude social leveling is associated with its aims; even its com-
munism suggests no stigma. Of the dozens of communistic experi-
ments which marked the first half of the nineteenth century in
America, few were native in origin or ventured upon in New Eng-
land. They were mostly undertaken by old-world groups, chiefly
German, who sought cheap land and a free environment for primi-
tive religious experiments. But Brook Farm was true Yankee,
using the familiar dialect to clothe its unfamiliar thoughts, and
escaping the prejudice that confronts the uncouth and alien; and
in consequence the vagaries that all New England once laughed at
have become enshrined as a cherished New England possession.

Perfectionism and Brook Farm embodied diverse phases of the


6 See the essay on Thoreau.


LIBERALISM AND THE SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 347


renaissance and made appeal to different temperaments. Fellow- :
ship founded on common ownership and communal labor was
an ideal that left the religious mystic cold, whereas the anarchistic
holiness of perfectionism seemed to the Brook Farmers grotesque.
Present economic maladjustment appeared to the latter the
fundamental problem of the times. They were deeply concerned
for the future that must emerge from the chaotic individualism
of the present. Unless society were brought back to a wiser under-
standing of values, they foresaw only chaos; and so in a small way
they set about a great experiment. Brook Farm grew out of the
impact of the industrial revolution upon the social conscience of
New England. Industrialism and social speculation were con-
temporary developments. The first cotton mill in New England
was established at Lawrence in 1822, and the following year the
Merrimac Mills were established in the newly founded city of
Lowell. By absorbing the vast Irish immigration the factory
system brought increasing wealth to Beacon Street homes, but it
brought other consequences in its train which Beacon Street care-
lessly overlooked. How those consequences affected more sensitive
and intelligent minds—men like William Henry Channing, Theo-
dore Parker and George Ripley—is suggested by their eager talk
of mutualism, association, codperation, as potential cures for the
growing evils of competition, discussions never before heard in
New England. Describing the state of mind of the Boston group
of social thinkers, John Weiss offers the following explanation:

A mutualism to secure culture and material welfare was consistently
desired by those who believed in a community of the sources of moral and
spiritual welfare. The social evils which result from the struggles of
competitive labour seemed to outweigh all its benefits. Modern civiliza-
tion was thought to be the culmination of isolated selfishness, madly
struggling from bread to luxury and refined delights, which the strongest
and least scrupulous only could acquire. Prisons and punishments were
the defences of this artificial system, to repress instincts that were moral
till they become illegal. Hospitals and benevolent institutions were also
mere defences to absorb as much misery as possible ere it became malicious,
to get the social gangrene reduced to limits. The providential impulses
of the human being were forced to act in subversive ways and directions,
when they might all be harmonized by their own inherent laws, and the
blessing of mutualism succeed to the bane of antagonism. Each man
ought to be the guarantee to all men against disorder; the carefully ad-
justed elements of a selfishness which threatens continually to blow the
social fabric to atoms, would become not only innoxious but salutary in
its proper combination; and a new civilization might arise in fair propor-


348 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


tion from the serial development and movement of all possible human
tendencies. Then all men and women might labor and be happy; all
might earn with a minimum of toil a competence of culture. Property
would be the ally of the whole instead of the oppressor of the many; and
crime would disappear, because the instincts would no longer have mo-
tives to be criminal. (Life and Correspondence of Theodore Parker, Vol. I,
pp. 106-107.)


The transcendental basis of such social speculation is evident
enough. The new social thought was transcendental thought.
A common belief in the excellence of human instincts drew these
idealists together; but when it came to the vexing problem of
reconciling individualism and mutualism, creating an economic
fellowship out of electric personalities, the more ardent tran-
scendentalists took fright and prudently kept without the gates
of Brook Farm. Organization seemed to them the fatal poison
in the bottom of the cup. When a community was planned in
Massachusetts in 1841, by liberal Christians of the Universalist
sect, a writer in the Dial subjected the proposal to sharp criti-
cism:

A true community can be founded on nothing short of faith in the uni-
versal man, as he comes from the hands of the Creator, with no law over
his liberty but the eternal ideas that lie at the foundation of his being. . . .
The final cause of human society is the unfolding of the individual man,


into every form of perfection, without let or hindrance, according to the
inward nature of each. (Quoted by Frothingham in Transcendentalism,


étc., ps ¥57:)


Such a view is anarchistic rather than collectivistic, and as
embodied in Alcott’s Fruitlands, it may be regarded as the tran-
scendental type of Utopia. Towards all systems of socialism the
transcendentalists were instinctively hostile, as implying an indus-
trial regimentation; and in planning Brook Farm, Ripley rejected
industrialism and reduced regimentation to a minimum. With the
agrarian background of Brook Farm the transcendentalists were in
hearty sympathy, quite oblivious of the fact that agrarianism could
offer no solution for industrialism; but they balked at the principle
of task allotment as a hindrance to the unfolding of. individual
differences. Upon the later introduction of the Fourier Phalanx
their doubts grew into certainty, and they lost their faith in
the experiment. Of all the transcendentalists William Henry
Channing was clearly the most confirmed associationist, except


LIBERALISM AND THE SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 349


perhaps Ripley; to the end of his life he remained a socialist, active
in collectivistic movements and clinging fondly to his memory of
Brook Farm as a “great college of social students.” But few of
his fellow transcendentalists shared his faith.

This growing skepticism of organization is clearly shown in the
comments of Emerson’s Journals. In October, 1840, he set down
his first reaction to the plan as follows:

Yesterday George and Sophia Ripley, Margaret Fuller and Alcott
discussed here the Social Plans. I wish to be convinced, to be thawed, to
be made nobly mad by the kindlings before my eye of a new dawn of
human piety. But this scheme was arithmetic and comfort; this was
a hint borrowed from the Tremont House and United States Hotel; a
rage in our poverty and politics to live rich and gentlemanlike, an anchor
to leeward against a change of weather; a prudent forecast on the probable
issue of the great questions of Pauperism and Poverty. And not once
could I be inflamed, but sat aloof and thoughtless; my voice faltered and
fell. It was not the cave of persecution which is the palace of spiritual
power, but only a room in the Astor House hired for the Transcendental-

ists. I do not wish to remove from my present prison to a prison a little
larger. I wish to break all prisons. I have not yet conquered my own
house. It irks and repents me. Shall I raise the siege of this hencoop,
and march baffled away to a pretended siege of Babylon? It seems to
me that so to do were to dodge the problem I am set to solve, and to hide
my impotency in the thick of a crowd. (Journals, Vol. V, pp. 473-474.)


In January, 1844, noting the spontaneity of life at Brook Farm,
he drew the conclusion ‘“‘that in the arrangements at Brook Farm,
as out of them, it is the person, not the communist, that avails”’
(ibid., Vol. VI, p. 492). With the introduction of Fourierist
organization he became sharply critical. Neither in Fourier nor
in Owen did he see any hope.

Fourier learned from him [Owen] all the truth he had, and the rest of

his system was imagination, and the imagination of a banker. The Owen
and Fourier plans bring no a priori convictions. They are come at merely
by counting and arithmetic. All the fine apergus are for individualism.
The Spartan broth, the hermit’s cell, the lonely farmerx’s life are poetic;
but the Phalanstery, the “Self-supporting Village,” are culinary and mean.
([bid., Vol. VIII, pp. 134, 135.)
And a few days later he gave his final judgment, “ Dear heart, take
it sadly home to thee, that there will and can be no codperation”—
a judgment that explains the clever phrase with which he demol-
ished Brook Farm, ‘‘It is the Age of Reason in a patty-pan.”

The transcendentalist with his Puritan conscience could under-
stand and sympathize with the perfectionist zeal for universal


350 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


righteousness; but collectivistic systems of economy seemed alien
and a community of goods uncongenial to his Yankee individ-
ualism. Albert Brisbane, the American apostle of Fourierism,
might bring George Ripley, the least individualistic and most
prosaic of the transcendental group, to his views of organization;
but he got on badly with the others who were quite too fluid to
take a mechanical set. In consequence it was not at Brook Farm
but at the North American Phalanx that the French system found
its fairest experiment and met with its solidest success.


IV


With the awakening interest in social problems the conscience of
New England could not longer remain indifferent to slavery. The
incoming of French humanitarianism, the spread of idealistic
sociology under the teachings of Unitarianism, above all the
stimulus of English Abolitionism that provided argument and
example in the freeing of slaves in the British West Indies, wore
away the indifferentism that had calloused the mind of New Eng-
land; and with the decay of her provincial particularism the
conscience of New England slowly roused itself. The arrogance
of the slave party nowhere else stirred such deep resentment.
Southern steel, striking the flinty Yankee character, threw off
sparks that would fire whatever combustible stuff lay near; and
such combustible stuff was provided in plenty by the Utopian
enthusiasts who gathered in conventions, each with a plan of
universal reform in his waistcoat pocket. Little conflagrations
were started in many an obscure Yankee soul, and the noise of the
crackling spread over New England, to the anger of the South and
the vast concern of respectable Boston merchants. Sooner or
later Abolition sentiment was bound to make a tremendous stir
amongst the children of Puritanism; and when that time came it
was bound to arouse tremendous antagonism amongst the sons of
Yankees. The dominant commercial group would not tolerate a
movement that was certain to alienate its southern customers.
A mighty collision between the conscience and the self-interest of
New England was inevitable; and in that collision of flinty char-
acters, arguments were likely to be countered with blows.

The New England Abolitionists, men and women, were an
extraordinarily interesting group. They were good fighters, out-
spoken and tenacious of opinion, unsparing in attack, refusing to


LIBERALISM AND THE SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 351


be browbeaten, resilient and tough as seasoned hickory. In them
the Yankee Tory met his match; against them coercion and
intimidation, all the usual Tory weapons, failed as earlier they
had failed with the primitive Quakers. They were daily charged
with being social incendiaries. The commercial newspapers
thundered against them as atheists, Sabbath-breakers, socialists,
anarchists; the absurdest myths were given circulation; the public
mind was skillfully poisoned against them. Yet as a matter of
sober historical fact, they were the kindliest of men, with generous
sympathies and disinterested motives. No blackguard was ever
an Abolitionist—no ward-heeler, or mob-inciter, or purse-patriot;
all such convenient tools of power were found amongst the baiters
and mobsters in the commercial opposition. John Brown was the
only direct-action Abolitionist and what befell him is well known
among men. There was no money to be made, no place of honor or
power to be got by espousing Abolitionism, but only self-sacrifice
and social ostracism. Ambitious men, self-seekers, went with the
dispensers of social favors. It was the remnant in Israel that
gathered to the cause, few in numbers but the best New England
had. And what an excellent company they were: Garrison,
Samuel J. May, Edmund Quincy, Jonathan Sewall, Theodore
Parker, Lydia Maria Child, Mrs. Chapman, Wendell Phillips,
Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Whittier, Henry Ward Beecher,
Sumner, Maria White and the young Lowell—such a fighting
phalanx as the New England conscience had never before mustered,
nor has since. To them were gathered heroic souls from other
states: Arthur and Lewis Tappan and Gerrit Smith from New
York, James Birney from Kentucky, Lucretia Mott from Philadel-
phia, the Grimké sisters from South Carolina. Harriet Martineau,
who knew the group intimately, has left on record her judgment of
them: “A just survey of the whole world can leave little doubt,”
she wrote in 1838, ‘‘that the abolitionists of the United States are
the greatest people now living and moving in it” (Carpenter, John
Greenleaf Whittier, p. 107). They gave New England and the
country no peace. From their persistent agitation came the
Emigrant Aid Society, Sharp’s rifles, and the bloody struggle in
Kansas; and from it came the temporary overwhelming of the
Tory minority in Massachusetts. For a few brief years New Eng-
land threw off the stifling grip of the commercial mind and was the
home of American humanitarianism.


CHAPTER IV
CERTAIN MILITANTS


I
WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON


Tue flintiest character amongst the New England militants,
curiously enough, was the son of an immigrant family, brought to
Newburyport and abandoned by a shiftless father. William Lloyd
Garrison was not an offspring of generations of New England
Puritanism, but a waif thrown by chance on the bleak shores of
Massachusetts, and left to shift pretty much for himself. Born in
Newburyport, half English and half Irish, with a heritage that
promised ill, he was disciplined in the sternest of schools. His
capable Irish mother had a bitter time providing for her three
fatherless children, and the son suffered the privation and found
the help that were the mixed portion of the destitute of old New
England. Like Horace Greeley he ate the bread of poverty and
grew strong on it. There was iron in his nature, and the narrow
means that drove his father to drink and desertion, that sent his
brother adrift, that broke his mother and killed his sister, only
strengthened his will and toughened his fiber. As a lad he was put
to the cobbler’s bench to learn the trade that Whittier was learning
at Haverhill; later he was apprenticed to a carpenter and cabinet-
maker. In both trades he was unhappy, and it was not till a
freak of fate turned him over to a friendly printer that he found
himself. For seven years he stuck to his case, and at the end of the
apprenticeship he was not only a first-rate practical printer, but
with some little knowledge of books and master of a vigorous and
serviceable prose style. With the amazing capacity for self-
training so characteristic of the Yankee, he had picked up a sort
of education and was ready to do whatever work in the world
should come to hand.

Chance threw in his way the job of village editor, and inclination
plunged him into politics. His political opinions, which he em-
braced more ardently than intelligently, were faithful reflections of
current Massachusetts partisanship. He was quite ignorant of
political principles and the economics that determined political

352


CERTAIN MILITANTS 353


parties, and with unconscious naiveté he espoused the cause of
Boston commercialism. He was a dogmatic, unquestioning Whig.
Clay was his idol, General Jackson his abomination; and his first
political speech was in support of Harrison Gray Otis, the dis-
credited boss of the old Federalist machine. But this was only a
vagary of youthful hero worship. Enthusiasm for reform was
already setting up a ferment in his ardent soul and preparing him
for quite other alliances. The unhappy fate of his father was a
lesson that he took home, and he interested himself in the tem-
perance movement then just getting under way, serving for a time
as editor of a small temperance paper. Shortly thereafter he
stumbled upon his life work. Benjamin Lundy, a homespun hero
of the Society of Friends, had long been publishing intermittently
his Genius of Universal Emancipation, and in the itinerant work of
begging support he fell in with Garrison. The two discovered
kindred interests and they entered into a compact to go forth
together to fight the dragon of slavery. They sought out the den
of the beast in Baltimore and delivered their blows lustily; with
the result that Garrison was indicted by the grand jury for printing
the name of a Newburyport merchant who was picking up some
honest dollars in the coastwise slave traffic, and spent seven weeks
in jail. On his release he returned to Boston to replenish a lean
purse, and January 1, 1831, he issued the first number of The
Liberator, a little paper that was to make a mighty stir in the world
during a long period of hand-to-mouth existence.

Never was there a more foolhardy venture, judged by the
wisdom of this world. With no following, no weapon but a bor-
rowed font of type in a mean little print-shop, no money or credit,
he flung his defiance at the entrenched enemy with the courage of
uncalculating youth. A prospectus issued in the fall of 1830 thus
set forth the purpose of the venture:


I shall assume, as self-evident truths, that the liberty of a people is a
gift of God and nature:—That liberty consists in an independency upon
the will of another:—That by the name of slave we understand a man
who can neither dispose of his person or goods, but enjoys all at the will
of his master:—That no man can have a right over others, unless it be by
them granted to him. . . . That that which is not just is not law; and
that which is not law, ought not to be in force:—That he who oppugns
the public liberty, overthrows his own. . . . That there is no safety
where there is no strength, no strength without union, no union without
justice, no justice where faith and truth are wanting:—That the right


354 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


to be free is a truth planted in the hearts of men, and acknowledged so
to be by all that have hearkened to the voice of nature. . . . Vide Alger-
non Sidney's Discourses on Government—the Declaration of American
Independence—the Constitutions and Bills of Rights of the several States,
etc., etc. (Life of William Lloyd Garrison, by his Children. Vol. 1, p. 200.)


This pronouncement was amplified in the salutatory address in the
first number, as follows:


‘


Assenting to the “self-evident truth” maintained in the American
Declaration of Independence, “that all men are created equal, and en-
dowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights—among which are
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,” I shall strenuously contend
for the immediate enfranchisement of our slave population. ... I am
aware that many object to the severity of my language; but is there not
cause for severity? I will be as harsh as truth, and as uncompromising
as justice. On this subject, I do not wish to think, or speak, or write,
with moderation . . . urge me not to use moderation in a cause like the
present. I am in earnest—I will not equivocate—I will not excuse—I
will not retreat a single inch—AND I WILL BE HEARD. (Jdid., Vol. I, pp.
224-225.)


The young man just turned twenty-six who thus marked out
the path he was to follow for thirty-five years was an extraordi-
narily single-minded and rugged character. His like has too rarely
appeared in America. Arrogant, dictatorial, intolerant, he might
be, as his warmest friends admitted; but it is a foolish judgment
that will dismiss him thus. Unyielding as granite, sheer Yankee
will driven by a passionate energy, he was born for hazardous
leadership. He was a man utterly unacquainted with fear. Lied
about daily, threatened, bullied, charged with every sin in the
Decalogue and every crime on the statute-book, he could not
be coerced nor intimidated nor turned aside from his purpose.
An ascetic who cared nothing for ease or preferment; a pacifist
who fought only with the sword of the spirit; a stern moralist
prophesying wrath upon a nation of mockers, and pronouncing
doom upon a people that had forgotten God, he was an agitator
fashioned after the ancient Hebraic pattern. The stature of such
a man cannot be measured by conventional standards. Outwardly
a somewhat prosaic Baptist, deeply religious and in his younger
days bigotedly orthodox, he was in reality a spiritual child of the
Old Testament, a modern Puritan on whom had fallen the mantle
of the Prophets. New England Calvinisn never bred so Puritan
a soul. Hebraism was in his marrow—its noble austerity, its


CERTAIN MILITANTS 355


consuming passion. He daily walked with righteousness and
communed with conscience. He carried God’s scales into the
market place. He would not accept his law of men. Constitutions
and statutes were vain and foolish pronouncements to him if he
judged them to be contrary to the divine enactments. He counted
property in negroes and cotton as nothing when weighed in the
balance of justice. A human soul, whether in black skin or white,
was of far greater worth in his eyes than all the warring kingdoms
of this world. As fully as John Humphrey Noyes he reémbodied
the root-and-branch righteousness of English Commonwealth
times. Others might lash the sins of his generation with whips;
he would scourge them with nettles and scorpions. He would
raise such a clamor about men’s ears that the drowsiest must
awake. He would light such a fire in the slave market of America
that the evil thing should be consumed as stubble in the white
flame of righteousness.

Such primitive Hebraism, quite evidently, is calculated to make
troublesome citizens who are certain to get themselves heartily
disliked by those who approve of the world as it is. Any invasion
of the devil’s realms will create an uproar, for the devil is prompt
to defend his own. Righteousness may prophesy in the gates, but
the buying and selling of the poor goes on as usual. Amongst
comfortable folk conscience is rarely at home when justice knocks
at the door; it is gone a-visiting, or is busy, or is waiting upon
Caesar, or is gone forth to pray. Comfortable folk do not like
clamor, even from the prophets, and are content to leave justice
to God with the hope that He will not disturb business. If the
tithes are duly paid, it is a mean and censorious God that will ask
how the money was got. Hence comfortable folk, north as well as
south, did not like Garrison; and not liking him they were zealous
to damn him. He was made out to be a bogy man, busily en-
gaged in stirring up Nat Turner insurrections, inciting peaceful
and contented slaves to discontent, flouting the Constitution and
seeking to disrupt the Union. His righteousness was so great
a stumbling-block that he was held to be an atheist by eminent
formalists who knew of righteousness only by hearsay, and learned
of God only from report. It was reckoned to him a major sin that
he forgot his manners, for must not the Lord’s work be carried on
in seemly fashion, and the money-changers be scourged from the
temple politely? ‘‘The first movement here at the North, was a


356 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


rank onset and explosion,” said the eminent Dr. Bushnell. “The
first sin of this organization was a sin of ill manners. They did not
go to work like Christian gentlemen. . . . The great convention
which met at Philadelphia drew up a declaration of their senti-
ments . . . by which they willfully and boorishly cast off the whole
South from them” (Garrison, William Lloyd Garrison, Vol. I,
p- 132, Note). What could be done with a fellow who insisted that
the devil is rarely put in a quake by courteous treatment, and who
had never learned that the Hebrew prophets bore themselves
like Christian gentlemen? That he spoke with plebeian directness
was unquestionably true.


These are your men of “caution,” and “prudence,” and “‘judiciousness”
[he exclaimed in a speech at Philadelphia, May 14, 1838]. Sir, I have
learned to hate those words. Whenever we attempt to imitate our great
Exemplar, and press the truth of God, in all its plainness, upon the con-
science, why, we are very imprudent; because, forsooth, a great excite-
ment will ensue. Sir, slavery will not be overthrown without excitement,
a most tremendous excitement. (Jd7d., Vol. II, p. 215. Note.)


If clerical gentlemen disliked Garrison, gentlemen of State
Street disliked him much more heartily, and being the responsible
custodians of law and order, they upheld existing institutions in
their own way. Your Tory is always a Fascist at heart, and the
Boston Tories naturally adopted the principle of direct action.
Unpleasant things happened to Garrison in consequence. He was
denounced at a most respectable meeting in Faneuil Hall, “at
which Washington was cheered for being a slave-holder.”” He was
mobbed in his print-shop by “‘gentlemen of property and standing
from all parts of the city,” and was thrown into jail by a timid
mayor to save his life. Not since the days of Tom Paine had such
unmeasured vituperation been poured out on the head of an Ameri-
can. It would seem that it was a perilous business to defend the
downtrodden or to remind church-members of the injunction
“to undo the heavy burdens and let the oppressed go free.” When
conscience throws down the gauntlet to economics it is certain to
get some hard knocks. It is ill-trained for a rough and tumble
contest; its scruples will not permit it to hit below the belt. But
the Tory suffers no handicap of scruple and plants his blows where
he can. On the occasion of an Abolition convention announced
to be held within the shadows of Wall Street, Bennett’s New York


CERTAIN MILITANTS 357


Herald exemplified the sweetness and light of the commercial
mind in such pronouncements as this:


What business have all the religious lunatics of the free states to gather
in this commercial city for purposes which, if carried into effect, would
ruin and destroy its prosperity? . . . Public opinion should be regulated.
These abolitionists should not be allowed to misrepresent New York. . . .
When free discussion does not promote the public good, it has no more
right to exist than a bad government that is dangerous and oppressive
to the common weal. It should be overthrown. On the question of the
usefulness to the public of the packed, organized meetings of these aboli-
tionists, socialists, Sabbath-breakers, and anarchists, there can be but
~ one result arrived at by prudence and patriotism. They are dangerous
assemblies—calculated for mischief, and reasonable in their character
and purposes. ... That half-a-dozen madmen should manufacture
opinion for the whole community, is not to be tolerated. (bid., Vol. III,


pp. 283-284.)


«


In consequence of which appeals to “‘prudence and patriotism”
the meeting was broken up, public opinion was judiciously regu-
lated, and the Bible and Constitution vindicated by a Bowery mob
under the leadership of a ward-heeler. It was from the impact of
such ruthless opposition that Garrison’s strategy took form; and it
was direct and uncompromising and outspoken—as sternly logi-
cal as Calhoun’s. There were no shades in his thinking but only
black and white, righteousness and sin. Expediency was not in his
vocabulary. He was as narrow as he was intense. The catholic
intellectual interests of the times touched him but little. Tran-
scendentalism lay quite outside his world of thought. He was a
religious soul rather than a speculative intellect, and he measured
all things by the principles of primitive Christianity. As a young
man he preferred the Calvinism of Lyman Beecher to the Uni-
tarianism of Channing, but later he came to perceive the intimate
relation between the major premises of Unitarianism and his so-
cial ideals. It is idle to seek a political philosopher in a Hebrew
moralist. His somewhat naive political conceptions were an
amalgam of French equalitarianism and Yankee perfectionism.
The Declaration of Independence was his one political textbook,
in the light of which he judged Congressional enactments and in-
terpreted the Constitution. With Channing he assumed an ethi-
cal sanction for natural rights, and this assumption conducted
straight to the doctrine of the higher law. As early as 1830 his
conscience was prepared to appeal from laws and statutes to ethics,


358 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


on the principle that “that which is not just is not law.” By 1837
he had accepted the philosophy of spiritual anarchism as set forth
in the new gospel of perfectionism, and from this flowed naturally
the doctrines of Nullification and disunion.

With amazing frankness Garrison published his views to friends
and enemies, bringing all the hornets of conservatism about his
ears. A furious discussion arose within the Abolition ranks on
the question of loyalty to the political state, and the scandal of
Garrison’s Fifth Monarchy doctrine spread far. What that doc-
trine was he was at great pains to make clear. Writing to Henry
C. Wright on the Quaker doctrine of non-resistance, he insisted on
the sinfulness of all force whether in a private or public capacity,
and then asserted:


’


Human governments will remain in violent existence as long as men are
resolved not to bear the cross of Christ, and to be crucified unto the world.
But in the Kingdom of God’s dear Son, holiness and love are the only
magistracy. It has no swords, for they are beaten into ploughshares—
no spears, for they are changed nto pruning hooks—no military academy,
for the saints cannot learn war any more—no gibbet, for life is regarded
as inviolate—no chains, for all are free. And that kingdom is to be es-
tablished upon the earth, for the time is predicted when the kingdoms of
this world will become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. (Gar-
rison, William Lloyd Garrison, Vol. I, p. 149.)


From such premises he deduced the conclusion that government
is a cross that God permits men to endure as punishment for their
sins. When they shall voluntarily quit their sins political govern-
ment will cease.


Human governments “are the results of human disobedience to the
requirements of heaven; and they are better than anarchy just as a hail-
storm is preferable to an earthquake, or the small-pox to the Asiatic
cholera.” From the silence of the Bible as to the form of such govern-
ments, he inferred not that each might claim a divine sanction, “but that
the kingdom which Christ has established on earth is ultimately to swal-
low up or radically to subvert all other kingdoms.” . . . “Shall we, as
Christians, applaud and do homage to human government? or shall we
not rather lay the axe at the root of the tree, and attempt to destroy both
cause and effect together?” Foolish are the speculations about the best
form of human government: “What is government but the express image
of the moral character of a people?” (Lbid., Vol. I, pp. 150-151.)


This is of course undiluted perfectionism, in which Garrison was
the most ardent of believers. Prosaic political theory had lost all
significance for him; he had got himself drunk on the new wine


CERTAIN MILITANTS 359


and was in no mood to listen to the counsels of expediency. Like
John Humphrey Noyes he declared war upon the existing political
state. He voluntarily disfranchised himself. He raised the banner
of “disloyalty” in the Liberator, and summoned the Abolitionists
to separate themselves from the unclean government that pro-
tected the sin of slavery. That the Constitution recognized the
hateful system was sufficient proof to Garrison that the Constitu-
tion itself was unclean. Let it be consumed by its own iniquity.
In 1843 he began an uncompromising attack upon it by nailing to
the masthead of the Liberator his famous phrase, “A Covenant with
' Death and an Agreement with Hell,”’ to which he soon added the
words, “No Union with Slaveholders.”” He broke with many of
his oldest friends, with Whittier and Gerrit Smith and James
Birney, assailing them bitterly for meddling with third-party move-
ments in the hope of curing the evil by political action. There
followed, in consequence, a whirlwind and tempest of debate that
brought a disastrous schism upon the Abolition movement. Cries
of disloyalty and sedition filled all ears; but Garrison was indiffer-
ent to the storms that gathered about his head. He would go for-
ward though he went alone. With every advance of the slave
power his hatred of the Constitution, under cover of which its
advances were made, grew more bitter. He outran southern
fire eaters in advocacy of Nullification and secession. It became
his daily work to undo the labors of Webster and bring the funda-
mental law into common contempt. ‘The doctrine of no compro-
mise with sin made no account of the complexities of social prob-
lems—the immediate, root-and-branch eradication of slavery or
immediate dissolution of the Union, were his alternatives. ‘‘We
dissolved the Union by a handsome vote, after a warm debate,”
wrote Edmund Quincy in 1843; “the question was . . . wrapped
up by Garrison in some of his favorite Old Testament Hebra-
isms by way of vehicle, as the apothecaries say” (ibid., Vol. III,
p. 88).

It was at a Fourth of July meeting, following the Anthony Burns
affair of 1854, that Garrison made use of the striking appeal that
attests his extraordinary boldness and skill as an agitator. After
contrasting the principles of the Declaration of Independence and
the present state of the Republic, he went on:


He should now proceed to perform an action which would be the testi-
mony of his own soul, to all present, of the estimation in which he held the


360 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


pro-slavery laws and deeds of the nation. Producing a copy of the Fugi-
tive Slave Law, he set fire to it, and burnt it to ashes. Using an old and
well-known phrase, he said, “‘And let all the people say, Amen”; and
a unanimous cheer and shout of “Amen” burst from the vast audience.
In like manner Mr. Garrison burned the decision of Edward G. Loring
in the case of Anthony Burns ... the multitude ratifying the fiery
immolation with shouts of applause. Then, holding up the U. S. Con-
stitution, he branded it as the source and parent of all the other atroc-
ities, —‘a covenant with death and agreement with hell’’—and consumed
it to ashes on the pot, exclaiming, “So perish all compromises with tyr-
anny! and let all the people say, Amen!” A tremendous shout of “Amen”
went up to heaven in ratification of the deed, mingled with a few hisses
and wrathful exclamations from some who were evidently in a rowdyish
state of mind, but who were at once cowed by the popular feeling. (Jbid.,


Vol. III, p. 412.)


In such fashion did this disciple of the gospel of peace carry the
war into Macedonia. The law of conscience had come into collision
with the law of the land, and he followed conscience. For Garrison
majority votes held no mandate. Hehad come to regard the polit-
ical state as the mother of all mischiefs; for behind this thing of
shreds and patches he saw unscrupulous politicians whose profes-
sion was the deceiving of simple minds, befogging moral issues with
their myths and cults—their appeals to patriotism and the Consti-
tution—and bringing the law of God into contempt. It was the
spiritual bondage of the North that held the negro in slavery,
Garrison had come to believe, and to free the conscience of the
North was the great duty devolving upon the Abolitionists. With
his intense single-mindedness he saw no other duty, and in doing
that duty he would use no other weapon than the sword of the
spirit. It is fortunate, perhaps, that the prophet knows so little
of the resourcefulness of the market place on which he pronounces
judgment, or his zeal might suffer abatement. Slavery was not
destroyed by the conscience of Massachusetts, but by the econom-
ics of free labor. The free-soilers were more dangerous to it for
they fought with material weapons; and old John Brown of Os-
sawatomie, more Hebraic even than Garrison, was a sterner realist,
who took care to load his Sharp’s rifle while girding on the sword
of the spirit. From the prophet to the soldier is but a step, from
the sword of the spirit to musket and ball, from conscience to the
Emancipation Proclamation. Single-minded men—the Garrisons
and John Browns—marshaling the discontent of their generation,
sometimes do succeed in removing mountains; but unfortunately


CERTAIN MILITANTS 361


they leave a great scar, and the débris litters the whole country-
side. Other mountains may even arise from the waste of the
leveling. After the Emancipation Proclamation came the Four-
teenth Amendment, and out of that came the triumphant gospel
of “due process of law.’’ The devil understands the ways of the
world too well to become discouraged at a temporary set-back, for
if righteousness succeed in breaking the bonds that bind a genera-
tion, he knows that the market place carries an ample stock of
new cords to replace those that are broken.


I
JOHN G. WHITTIER
Puritan Quaker


If Garrison was the flintiest character amongst the militant
Abolitionists, Whittier was certainly the gentlest. Among many
lovable men he was perhaps the most lovable. Bred in a faith that
had never been dominant in New England, he escaped the indura-
tion that was the price the New England conscience paid for its
hard dogma. No thick shell of Calvinism incrusted for him the
soul of humanitarian religion. In the Society of Friends righteous-
ness was not daily twisted into unloveliness, nor the beauty of
holiness forgotten; and in consequence, it was easier for him than
for his Calvinist neighbors to fashion his life upon the principles
of the New Testament, and set Christ above the Prophets.

Whittier’s family escaped many temptations by following quiet
paths to their own ends. Prosperity had never wooed the Massa-
chusetts Quakers away from the simple life, as it had done with so
many Philadelphia Friends, but a narrow domestic economy and
social non-conformity had nourished their religion of peace and
good will. Long before Channing discovered the religion of love
in the teachings of French humanitarianism, the early Quakers had
found that primitive gospel in the byways of Carolinian England,
and had brought it to the new world. There they had borne
testimony in their daily lives to the excellence of Christian fellow-
ship, and there they had suffered the reproaches and the blows of
bigoted conformists. Their faith had been tried in the fires of
persecution, and the Society of Friends had justified its use of that
most excellent of sectarian names. In the sincerity of their equali-
tarian fellowship the Quakers were the friends of humanity, of


362 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


the poor and the outcast of this world. Their religion was of the
week-day as well as the Sabbath. With its mystical doctrine of
the inner light—of the Holy Spirit that speaks directly to the soul
without the intermediation of priest or church—it unconsciously
spread the doctrine of democracy in an autocratic world. It
interpreted literally the principle that members of the Christian
fellowship are equals in the sight of God and in each other’s eyes—
that on earth there is neither high nor low but a common brother-
hood in Christ. It quietly set aside the pretentions of priestly
hierarchies, and substituted the principle that religion is a matter
that lies with the individual and God. Naturally a “hireling
ministry” could not look with favor on such doctrine, and the sharp
hostility it aroused in theocratic New England, sprang from the
realization that the ideals of the Quaker fellowship were dangerous
to the ideals of a priestly theocracy. The autocratic rulers of
Massachusetts Bay could see little good in the democracy of the
Friends.

As became a Quietist, the master passion of Whittier’s life was
ethical. He was neither a transcendental nor a Utopian visionary,
but a primitive Christian, an apostle of good will and a friend of
justice. Sprung from a long line of New England yeomen, wholly
of the soil, simple in wants, quietly independent, he was the last
lineal expression in our literature of the primitive faith, the last
authentic echo of the spiritual democracy of the seventeenth
century. A thorough Yankee in character, the Yankee never
dominated him. As a young man, to be sure, he temporized with
his Quakerism and dreamed fond dreams of worldly ambition.
The stirrings of youthful romance awakened the desire to be a
Byronic poet, and a Yankee knack with politics led him to meddle
with the hope of representing his district in Congress. He was
hand-in-glove with the time-serving Caleb Cushing, and the temp-
tations of political intrigue almost led to his backsliding; but he
soon put the devil behind him and gave security for his better
behavior by coming out for the cause of Abolitionism. That was
the end of his hopes of political preferment, and the more surely to
burn his bridges he published in 1833, at his own cost, a little
Abolition tract entitled Justice and Expediency, which was re-
issued by Lewis Tappan in a great edition and scattered broadcast.
The same year he attended as delegate the National Anti-Slavery
Convention at Philadelphia, and subscribed his name to its pro-


CERTAIN MILITANTS 363


nouncement. Thenceforth for over thirty years he gave his best
strength to the cause, writing abundantly in prose and verse, serv-
ing as editor of Abolition publications, and suffering the unpleasant
experiences common to the group, at one time being hunted by a
mob and stoned.

This deliberate alignment with an unpopular cause, this calm
response to the summons of conscience, was the fruit of his Quaker
training. It was no new experience for the Quaker to dissent.
The Whittier family had been Come-outers for generations, sacri-
ficing material well-being for their faith, and he had grown up in
dissent. The long struggle for democratic freedom in Massachu-
setts was a familiar story to him. The record had come down by
word of mouth and stories of early persecutions were fireside tales
in the Whittier household. His ancestors had lived in the hard old
Puritan theocracy, and yet detached from it; and this detachment
had rendered them shrewdly critical and sensitive to injustice.
With their quiet dissent from what the Quaker conscience re-
garded as unrighteous, and their practical nullification of unjust
authority, Whittier was in full sympathy. His intimate knowledge
of early Massachusetts history had taught him certain things which
official historians had overlooked, the chief of which was that
dissent had been the ally and friend of freedom in New England.
From his youth up he had been a loving student of the old annals,
of those intimate narratives that preserve the voice and manner of
the past; and as he discovered how often persecution had left its
stain on the record, he was drawn to consider the superstitious
aberrations of a people supposedly devout. In middle life he
gathered up in Leaves from Margaret Smith’s Journal of Massa-
chusetts Bay, 1678-79, materials that he had long been collecting,
and which, interpreted by a sympathetic imagination, provides a
surprisingly vivid account of life in New England in the second
generation.

All in all, it is Whittier’s most notable achievement in prose.
Pieced together out of old records, it is authentic as the yellow
documents from which it was drawn. The soft light of romance
lies upon its pages, sobered by historical fact and tempered by
creative sympathy. Loving yet critical, quite devastating at
times in its implications, it is an amazingly intimate narrative.
The mind of Puritan New England is uncovered in these unpre-
tentious pages, and it does not show to advantage. There was


364 THE. MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


many a knot and seam in the old Puritan life, much that was mean
and ugly woven into the honest web. The Puritan proneness to
Quaker-baiting—aggravated to be sure by the ill manners of the
Ranters; their vulgar credulity that encouraged witch-hunting;
their callous treatment of the Indian and negro; their hardness
of nature that made them grasping and censorious: such knots
and seams in the Puritan character did not escape Whittier’s eye,
but they appear in the sketches of avaricious deacons, sour women,
intolerant magistrates—the Deacon Doles and Goody Lakes and
Roger Endicotts, whose bigotry tyrannized over the better natures
of the community. Whittier sifted his materials carefully to
gather up what good wheat there might be, yet the showing it
must be confessed is but paltry. Honest Robert Pine who will
have none unjustly treated, good Mr. Russ who counsels modera-
tion in dealing with the unhappy victims of mob suspicion, Captain
Samuel Sewall who speaks up bravely for the outcast—these are
the remnant in Israel, the generous minority that cannot leaven
the dour and credulous mass. Yet even they are not heroic figures
to Whittier. His heroes are the Come-outers, and in particular
Peggy Brewster—reminiscent evidently of his great-grandmother,
the Quakeress Mary Peaslee, who married Robert Whittier in
1694—who is the good Samaritan of the Puritan neighborhood,
and whose loving-kindness wins a reluctant good will that stops
short of toleration of her non-conformity.

Such intimate studies in the psychology of persecution were a
liberal education, and Whittier would have been no Quaker had
he not learned his lesson. He was justified in not thinking well
of the social conscience of respectable New England. Religious
conformity, he had come to understand, had not kept alive the
torch of freedom in Massachusetts, nor had Puritan righteousness
befriended justice. Not the great of earth but the simple may be
counted on to do God’s work. So taking his lesson to heart he
quietly put aside ambition, and like Peggy Brewster numbered
himself among the remnant. Like her he would be a Come-outer
and bear his testimony against the uncleanness of the American
people in this matter of negro slavery. Not with musket and ball
would he fight, like old John Brown; but with the sword of the
spirit. The solution must lie with the conscience of the American
people. As a Friend, a man of peace, he would not deal harshly
with the supporters of slavery; he would not counsel violence.


CERTAIN MILITANTS 365


But as a Yankee with a gift for politics, he would use political
means to jog a slothful conscience and marshal its forces. And so
Whittier became the politician amongst the Abolitionists. He
proved himself a skillful lobbyist. He was active in getting up
petitions to Congress. He supported John Quincy Adams and put
pressure on the slippery Caleb Cushing. He advocated the policy
of boring from within the old parties, but when such methods
proved futile he became an active leader in the third party move-
ment. He wasan early supporter of the Liberal party—that in 1844
drew enough votes from Clay in New York to defeat him for the
Presidency—of the Free-Soil party, and later of the Republican
party.

It was this insistence upon the use of political methods that
brought about the unhappy break with Garrison. Immediately
it was no more than a difference over tactics, but it was embittered
by a wide cleavage of political theory. With Garrison’s conversion
to spiritual anarchism the Abolition movement was sundered by
a division between the perfectionists and the political actionists.
The principle of non-voting and of refusing allegiance to the Con-
stitution aroused strong opposition, and Whittier went with Birney
and Gerrit Smith, with Jonathan Sewall, John Pierpont and the Tap-
pans in rejecting the perfectionist policy. His political common
sense turned naturally to political agencies to accomplish his ends.
“Moral action apart from political’? seemed to him an “absurdity.”
But when he applied the Quaker principle of Come-outism, and ad-
vocated separate party alignment, Garrison attacked him with his
habitual intolerance. The latter feared a third party movement as
certain to provide a rallying cry for the commercial interest to mus-
ter the mob to its support, and overwhelm the minority with the un-
thinking and selfish mass. “All political minorities,” he argued,
‘are more or less liberal,” and by throwing the Abolition strength
to such organized minorities, the movement would be “‘feared and
respected by all political parties” (Garrison, William Lloyd Garri-
son, Vol. II, pp. 310-311). The wisest strategy, he believed, was
to seek to hold the balance of power between the old parties—
rewarding friends and punishing enemies—while laboring to
arouse the conscience of America, for ballots without conscience
were the enemies of justice.

Whittier was no such root-and-branch spirit as Garrison, and
in the political field he was a practical, somewhat prosaic Yankee,


366 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


little given to abstract speculation, skillful in minor strategical
skirmishes, inclined to opportunism. He belonged to no school of
political thought. His equalitarianism came as a heritage from his
Quaker religion rather than from political theory. To prepare
himself for his work he read Milton and Burke. The pamphlets
of the great Puritan appealed to him as the voice of the moral
fervor of a heroic age, but Milton’s aristocratic republicanism he
seems to have examined no more critically than Burke’s Whiggish
legalism. Neither held anything in common with Quaker equali-
tarianism. Rousseau and Tom Paine and Jefferson, with whom he
certainly would have sympathized, he seems not to have been ac-
quainted with. In Whittier’s New England they were in ill repute,
and the young Whittier was as naively provincial in his political
partisanship as was Garrison. Economics had no part in his
thought, and the economic interests that divided Federalism and
Anti-Federalism he seems never to have understood. Though
sprung from six generations of farmers who tilled the same acres, he
reveals no sympathy with agrarianism. He swallowed Clay and
the American System without a qualm, and as a young editor
he wrote with pride of the developing industrialism of Massa-
chusetts. Neither in politics nor in economics was he a rebel-
lious soul. He was conscience rather than intellect. He felt
rather than thought. Only a moral issue could draw him into
strife, and even in such contests he was ill equipped to lead
the prosaic debates. His moral indignation found its natural
expression in verse, and he early took his place as the poet of
the Abolition movement, distilling into ready lyrics the emotion
of the moment.

A great, even a noteworthy poet, Whittier certainly was not.
Compared with Whitman he is only a minor figure. Among the
better known American poets Bryant alone is so narrow in range
and barren in suggestion. His austere and meager life bred too
little sensuousness of nature and too few intellectual passions.
An over-frugal watering of the wine of paganism had left the New
England character thin. The sap of humor that ran so boister-
ously through the veins of the West, exuding a rough wit from Davy
Crockett to Mark Twain, was quite gone out of the Yankee blood.
His homely imagination was unquickened by a hearty village life
as was the case with the English Bunyan and the Scotch Burns.
He had become a bundle of Yankee nerves, responding only to


CERTAIN MILITANTS 367


moral stimuli. The comment of Whitman sums up the Quaker
poet adequately:


Whittier’s poetry stands for morality . .. as filtered through the
positive Puritanical and Quaker filters; is very valuable as a genuine
utterance. . . . Whittier is rather a grand figure—pretty lean and ascetic
—no Greek—also not composite and universal enough (doesn’t wish to
be, doesn’t try to be) for ideal Americanism. (Carpenter, Life of Whitman,


p- 293.)


Never a great artist, rarely a competent craftsman, he wrote for
the most part impassioned commonplace, with occasional flashes
that are not commonplace.

The high-water mark of lyric indignation was reached in the
lines to Webster. Written at white heat, they have the passion-
ate directness of Thoreau’s prose. Like other Abolitionists, Whit-
tier had clung to his hopes of Webster in spite of frequent signs of
the latter’s backsliding. He did not sufficiently appreciate the
economic alliances that tied Webster to State Street, and he under-
rated his presidential ambitions. But when the blow came with
the Seventh of March Speech, it staggered him—not alone the
defection of Webster, but the demonstrative approval of his
wealthy constituents. For having “convinced the understanding
and touched the conscience of a nation,’’ Webster was formally
thanked by some seven hundred addressers from the most respect-
able circles of Massachusetts—great men like Rufus Choate,
George Ticknor, W. H. Prescott, President Jared Sparks and
Professor Felton of Harvard, Moses Stuart and Leonard Woods
of Andover Theological Seminary. It was an hour of profound dis-
couragement that laid bare what colossal difficulties stood in the
way of Abolitionism. ‘The scandalous treachery of Webster and
the backing he has received from Andover and Harvard,” wrote
Whittier to Garrison, “show that we have nothing to hope for
from the great political parties and religious sects” (William
Sloane Kennedy, John G. Whittier, p. 113).

The scathing lines of Ichabod were read throughout the North,
and they must have rankled in Webster’s heart. Even Whittier
was troubled by their severity and thirty years later he wrote a
second Webster poem which he set beside Ichabod in his collected
works. The Lost Occasion is a testimony to the kindliness of Whit-
tier’s Quaker heart that did not love to offend; but no kindliness
of memory could change or soften the just verdict of the lines:


368 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Of all we loved and honored, naught
Save power remains;

A fallen angel’s pride of thought,
Still strong in chains.


All else is gone; from those great eyes
The soul is fled:

When faith is lost, when honor dies,
The man is dead!


Then, pay the reverence of old days
To his dead fame;

Walk backward, with averted gaze,
And hide the shame!


If Whittier was ill acquainted with the Boston of State Street
and the Back Bay, and the Cambridge of Harvard culture, he knew
intimately the Massachusetts of the village and the farm, and
the overwhelming repudiation of Webster and the Whig party,
following the Seventh of March Speech, would seem to have jus-
tified his lyric confidence expressed in the vigorous heptameters of
Massachusetts to Virginia. For those who lived in the social world
of Commissioner Loring—professor of law at Harvard—and Rufus
Choate, it was hard not to think that Massachusetts had come to
degenerate days. The fine old-school Federalist, Josiah Quincy,
commenting on the Boston that watched Sims returned to slavery,
wrote:


When the [Fugitive Slave] law passed, I did think the moral sense of the
community would not enforce it; I said that it never would be. But now
I find that my fellow-citizens are not only submissive to, but that they are
earnestly active for, its enforcement. The Boston of 1851 is not the
Boston of 1775. Boston has now become a mere shop—a place for buying
and selling goods; and I suppose, also, of buying and selling men. (Garri-
son, William Lloyd Garrison, Vol. III, p. 328.)


And Lowell, living in the same mean atmosphere, wrote:


Massachusetts, God forgive her,
She’s akneelin’ with the rest,
She, thet ough’ to ha’ clung ferever
In her grand old eagle-nest.
(Biglow Papers, Part I, 1.)


But Whittier professed to think better of the conscience of New
England. A strong pride of the commonwealth runs through the


CERTAIN MILITANTS 369


lines that name over the towns of Massachusetts, from “free, broad
Middlesex,” westward and northward to the hills of Hampshire:


And sandy Barnstable rose up, wet with the salt sea spray;

And Bristol sent her answering shout down Narragansett Bay!

Along the broad Connecticut old Hampden felt the thrill,

And the cheer of Hampshire’s woodmen swept down from Holyoke Hill.


The voice of Massachusetts! Of her free sons and daughters,
Deep calling unto deep aloud, the sound of many waters!
Against the burden of that voice what tyrant power shall stand?
No fetters in the Bay State! No slave upon her land!


When at last the long controversy was over and release from the
struggle came to Whittier, his poetry grew richer and mellower.
He was not made to be a fighter, and it was with a sigh of relief
that he turned to the Elysian fields he had dreamed of, while he
was turning with his plow the rough stubble of a cause. Looking
back upon those arduous days, he sketched half whimsically his
own portrait in The Tent on the Beach.


And one there was, a dreamer born,
Who, with a mission to fulfill,
Had left the Muses’ haunts to turn
The crank of an opinion-mill,
Making his rustic reed of song
A weapon in the war with wrong,
Yoking his fancy to the breaking-plough
That beam-deep turned the soil for truth to spring and grow.


Too quiet seemed the man to ride
The wingéd Hippogriff Reform;
Was his a voice from side to side
To pierce the tumult of the storm?
A silent, shy, peace-loving man,
He seemed no fiery partisan
To hold his way against the public frown,
The ban of Church and State, the fierce Mob’s hounding down.


For while he wrought with strenuous will
The work his hands had found to do,
He heard the fitful music still
Of winds that out of dream-land blew.
The din about him could not drown
What the strange voices whispered down;
Along his task-field weird processions swept,
The visionary pomp of stately phantoms stepped.


370 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


The common air was thick with dreams,—
He told them to the toiling crowd;
Such music as the woods and streams
Sang in his ear he sang aloud;
In still, shut bays, on windy capes,
He heard the call of beckoning shapes,
And, as the gray old shadows prompted him,
To homely moulds of rhyme he shaped their legends grim.
Many excellent things he did in those quiet later years; old time
pictures like Snowbound, with its homely fireside economy long
since buried under the snows of forgotten winters; vigorous tales
like Abraham Davenport; ballads like Skipper Ireson’s Ride, that
have something of the spirit of the primitive. He had given
thirty years of his life to the cause of social justice, and surely
none would grudge him in old age his rambles in pleasanter fields.
It was well that he could turn to the past, for the America of the
new exploitative age, the New England of Lowell and Lawrence,
he never understood. Black slavery he understood, but wage
slavery he comprehended no more than did Garrison. To the
end he remained a primitive soul, ill equipped to understand a
mate#ialistic philosophy of society. There is something pathetic
in his Songs of Labor. His economics, like his democracy, was of
a bygone time, having no kinship with a scrambling free-soil-
ism or a rapacious capitalism. There is scant room in this world
for the Friend with his unmilitant dream of the fellowship. With
his passion for freedom, established in the gospel of righteousness,
the Quaker Whittier was fast becoming an anachronism in indus-
trial New England that was concerned about very different things.
How old-fashioned he had become is suggested by certain lines that
phrase his greetings to later times. Spare, somewhat halting in
rhythm, yet transparently sincere, they constitute an apologia
that New England need feel no shame for.
Yet here at least an earnest sense
Of human right and weal is shown;
A hate of tyranny intense,
And hearty in its vehemence,
As if my brother’s pain and sorrow were my own.


O Freedom! if to me belong
Nor mighty Milton’s gift divine, «
Nor Marvell’s wit and graceful song,
Still with a love as deep and strong
As theirs, I lay, like them, my best gifts on thy shrine!


CERTAIN MILITANTS 371


III
HARRIET BEECHER STOWE


A Daughter of Puritanism


No more Puritan mind than Mrs. Stowe’s ever contributed to
the literature of New England. Her remarkable native gifts were
unconsciously given specific shape by a rigid environment. For
years the artist in her struggled to subdue the moralist, and never
quite succeeded. Before she dipped her pen in ink her mind had
taken its set. She could not hope to escape being a preacher.
- Daughter of a minister and wife of a minister, with brothers and
sons ministers, she lived all her life in an atmosphere of religion.
She was baptized in creeds and prattled the language of sermons as
the vernacular of childhood. Born at a critical time for the old New
England faith, her youth was passed amid the storm clouds of the
Unitarian controversy, in an atmosphere charged with electricity.
Connecticut was the very citadel of the Edwardean orthodoxy, and
Litchfield was as rugged in its faith as the hills it nestled among;
and when the old-school Calvinism of Boston was in danger of
utter rout, it naturally turned to a Connecticut Daniel to save the
venerable cause. Stout old Lyman Beecher was a host in himself.
Son of a Connecticut blacksmith and himself brought up at the forge
before he quitted it to seek learning at Yale College under Timo-
thy Dwight, able, kindly, practical, with pronounced literary tastes
and a capable pen, he was a stalwart Edwardean, militantly con-
servative, who damned our perverse human nature with incontro-
vertible logic. Harriet was eight years old when Channing preached
his Baltimore sermon, and fourteen when her father was summoned
to Hanover Street Church, Boston. Her childish heart had already
been given to Baxter’s Saint’s Rest, and her imagination awakened
by Cotton Mather’s Magnalia Christi Americana. Theocratic
New England lay enveloped for her in a haze of romance, more
fascinating than any Sir Walter had woven about the Scottish
Highlands; she had discovered there noble figures and heroic
deeds to kindle an ardent hero worship. At fourteen she was con-
verted—too easily it seems, for she could not demonstrate to the
satisfaction of her spiritual counselors that she had been sufficiently
under conviction of sin. Thereafter to the end of her life the great-
est of all dramas for her was the drama of the soul concerned with
the great business of salvation.


372 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


The surest clue to Mrs. Stowe’s literary secret is to be found in
her sympathetic understanding of the spiritual life of Puritan
New England. She was a lifelong student of New England psy-
chology, with its “profound, unutterable, and therefore unuttered
melancholy” that resulted from open-eyed contemplation of grim
fact. The past that lay bleak and stern behind the sober present
she understood as few others did. Before her sympathetic eyes it
fell into just proportions, and quite naturally she became the his-
torian of her people. The autobiographical material that fills her
later work—her husband’s recollections in Old-Town Folks, and her
own in Poganuc People—is much more than autobiography; it is in-
timate history of New England, written by one who in distilling her
own experience was writing the chronicle of a race. In a brilliant
chapter of the former work she gives a remarkable analysis of the
intellectual development of Puritan New England, and provides
the setting against which her own intellectual life should be placed.
To overlook it is to miss the most suggestive commentary on her
work that has ever been written.

This daughter of Puritanism traces her intellectual antecedents
back to the long struggle of Puritan rationalism with feudal cus-
tom and medieval ideas. The old English Puritans, “by nature the
most reverential and most loyal portion of the community,” in
destroying the divine-right sovereignty of King Charles, were
impelled to transfer that sovereignty to a higher King. In pulling
down the temporal, they erected a divine sovereignty; and their
passionate attachment to the new Sovereign was the natural
response to “the pleading and yearning within them of a faculty
robbed of its appropriate object, and longing for support and ex-
pression.” But the theologies to which they yielded intellectual
allegiance were a “legacy from past monarchical and medieval
ages.” To free themselves from this unhappy legacy, and create
a democratic theology, was an arduous work that needed two hun-
dred years to accomplish; and not until the Revolution spread a
new social philosophy through America, did the work go forward
rapidly. Wanting such a democratic philosophy Puritan New Eng-
land wandered in the old theological fogs. It was Jonathan Ed-
wards who first turned the New England mind to rationalism, and
began that long “controversy” that was to unsettle so much.
But unhappily the rationalism of Edwards was turned aside to
reactionary ends, and his Treatise on True Virtue was “one of


CERTAIN MILITANTS S16


the strongest attempts to back up by reasoning the old monarchical
and aristocratic ideas of the supreme right of the king and upper
classes.” Nevertheless he set all New England to rationalizing,
and it was this severe discipline that carried her people soberly
through the Revolutionary War, and preserved them from the ex-
cesses which followed the Revolution in France. And it was this
same discipline that prepared them for the eventual re-discovery
of the humanity of Jesus and the democracy of his religion. New
England had been struggling towards democracy through the bog
of its feudal theology; it became consciously democratic with the
- appearance of the new theology (Old-Town Folks, Chapter XXIX).

This rationalistic bias of eighteenth-century New England
suffices to explain for Mrs. Stowe the stern temper and angular
individuality of the old Puritan Yankee. Her particular hero and
saint was Jonathan Edwards, and her lesser hero and saint was
Samuel Hopkins; and in both it was the courageous rationalism
that appealed toher. Inthem, and more particularly in the former,
she discovered the creative force that quickened a religion that was
falling into dead formalism, that gave it fresh vitality and made it
the central fact of everyday New England life. Across the world
of her youth lay the shadow—or the light—of the great Edwards,
and the great Hopkins was his intellectual heir. In another chap-
ter of Old-Town Folks she sketches the Edwardean influence in
bold outline.


The ministers of the early colonial days of New England, though well-
read, scholarly men, were more statesmen than theologians. Their minds
ran upon the actual arrangements of society, which were in great measure
left in their hands, rather than on doctrinal and metaphysical subtleties.
They took their confession of faith just as the great body of Protestant
reformers left it, and acted upon it as a practical foundation, without
much further discussion, until the time of President Edwards. He was
the first man who began the disintegrating process of applying rational-
istic methods to the accepted doctrines of religion, and he rationalized
far more boldly and widely than any publishers of his biography have
ever dared to let the world know. He sawed the great dam and let out
the whole waters of discussion over all New England, and that free dis-
cussion led to all the shades of opinion of our modern days. Little as he
thought it, Waldo Emerson and Theodore Parker were the last results
of the current set in motion by Jonathan Edwards. (Chapter XIX.)


In this flood let loose by the metaphysical saw of Jonathan
Edwards, Mrs. Stowe found the material for her New England


374 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


tales. In no other pages does one realize so fully the tremendous,
vital significance of religion to the children of Puritanism, nor
appreciate how narrow a course their lives ran between the farm
and the meeting-house. A domestic economy and a parochial
theology absorbed their energies, and they took on sharp and an-
gular imprints from a severe routine. It was a school of discipline
that created individual character, and Mrs. Stowe possessed a
loving eye for the odd and original. She delighted in emphasizing
the theological differences that ran through Yankee families,
giving little twists to character, and rising to the tongue in scraps
of confirmatory Scripture. Large-hearted, motherly Grandmother
Badger, in Old-Town Folks, was a stern Calvinist who daily threw
predestination in the face of her easy-going Arminian husband,
and exchanged syllogisms in a Sabbath-day “battle of the Infin-
ities’ with her son from Yale. Theology provided the staple
of talk in the farmer’s kitchen; it was the axis on which turned the
simple country life. Old-Town Folks and Poganuc People are
cross sections of old New England, with its lingering prejudices
in favor of rank,! its Arminian Parson Lothrop in wig and gold
cane, and its Calvinist Dr. Cushing hostile to all democratic
Jacobinism, its country yokels, its stubborn yeomen who parade
their independence by voting the democratic ticket openly in the
face of gentlemanly Federalists, its sharp contrasts of a stately old
order and a somewhat bumptious new, yet with the hard New Eng-
land granite snugly laid up and bonded with the mortar of religion
—a strange dead world that emerges distinctly through the haze
of Victorian sentiment. For Mrs. Stowe was a child of her own
romantic generation as well as a daughter of Puritanism, and it
was easy for her to discover suggestions of Utopia in a world where
minister and people mingled theology with their corn-huskings and
apple-bees.

Between these sketches and the Abolition novels stands The
Minister’s Wooing, with its Puritan heroine bleached into pure
holiness under the cold sunshine of Hopkinsian theology, and its
unworldly minister who demonstrated the sincerity of his creed
of disinterested benevolence—of willing to be damned for the glory
of God—by voluntarily yielding his betrothed to an earlier lover.


1“ Te’s a hard struggle for our human nature to give up titles and ranks, though,”
said Miss Mehitable. “For my part, I have a ridiculous kindness for them yet.
I know it’s all nonsense; but I can’t help looking back to the court we used to have
at the Government House in Boston.” (Old-Town Folks, Chapter VI.)


CERTAIN MILITANTS 375


It is a love story without sex, as befits the wooing of a Puritan nun
by her spiritual father, set against a Yankee background of capable
housekeeping and dignified tea-drinking, subdued to proper de-
corum by religion, and touched with tragedy by the shadow of
damnation that falls on the unregenerate—a world in which the
beauty of holiness is somewhat pale and austere, and where dis-
interested benevolence finds a thin and obdurate soil to strike
root in. Mrs. Stowe was drawn to the theme, very evidently, by
the impulse of her two Utopian enthusiasms, her interest in Aboli-
tion and her affection for the ways of old New England. Such ro-
mance as blossomed under those bleak skies she loved to gather
into a Yankee nosegay, and in her sympathetic hands the old slave-
running Newport becomes almost lovable and human. She might
find the theology hard, but she forgave the sermon out of love for
the preacher. As the historian of the human side of Calvinism she
tempered dogma with affection. In unsympathetic print those old
sermons were almost unbelievably harsh and ungainly; as theolo-
gians those bewigged preachers were dry as the chips of last year’s
woodpile; but as husbands and fathers and neighbors, they were
usually kind and unselfish and helpful. Her father Lyman Beecher
was an arid dogmatist on the Lord’s Day, but on week-days he
fished and hunted rabbits and went nutting with his sons, made
garden or smoked hams, or helped a neighbor with plowing or
haying, and was an unusually capable and cheery member of a
busy little world. In the light of such domestic exegesis the bleak-
ness of his theology was softened, and the dogmatic theologian
became a very human person.

Thus instructed Mrs. Stowe found no difficulty in discovering
the human side of Dr. Samuel Hopkins, or understanding how
the hard doctrine might cover the gentlest of souls—that the very
intensity of devotion to the logic of a stern creed betokened a depth
of religious sincerity that would find issue in generous deeds. A
thinker who can dig from the harsh soil of Calvinism the doctrine
of disinterested benevolence will discover a tender conscience in
his own bosom. One might hazard a guess, indeed, that the story
of Samuel Hopkins was an unconscious defense of the New England
ministers against the sharp charges of the Abolitionists that the
clergy were half-hearted in the cause or openly hostile. With her
conviction of the unselfish nobility of their lives, Mrs. Stowe
must have taken a secret pleasure in revealing the good Doctor


376 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


as a forerunner of the Abolitionists, and in pointing out that the
crabbed logician of the Edwardean school, the theologian immersed
in the abstractions of a grotesque system, was nevertheless a
light set upon a hill, a primitive Christian with heart overflowing
with loving-kindness, who understood the iniquity of slavery and
turned shepherd to the outcast to his own hurt. The figure of the
unworldly minister is drawn with loving hand and his angularities
made less rugged. His noble spirituality shrivels and consumes the
mean excuses of his slave-running parishoner; it spreads quietly
over the countryside, and his daily life is a sermon that quickens
hearts that his theology leaves cold. There is preaching aplenty
in the book—quite too much for later stomachs; but it scarcely
detracts from the significance of the story as a document of Pu-
ritan New England, revealing how a tender conscience was stirring
beneath the crabbed exterior of the old Calvinism.

In the light of such antecedents and such training Mrs. Stowe’s
passionate concern over slavery becomes easily comprehensible.
Her Puritan conscience was quickened by her warm human sym-
pathies. She had come close to the hateful thing during the years
spent at Cincinnati, where the Abolition sentiment of the Lane
Seminary students aroused such bitter opposition that President
Lyman Beecher was forced to approve the decision of the trustees
to forbid any discussion of slavery, with the result that so great a
hegira of students took place from Lane to Oberlin that the sem-
inary was forced to close. Only the fact that two miles of Ohio mud
provided defensive outworks saved the building and the houses
of the teachers from the hands of the Cincinnati mob. She had
visited in Kentucky; she had been to the slave markets; she had
seen her father and brother aid runaway slaves by means of the
underground railway. A profound sense of the iniquity of the
system oppressed her, and when the Fugitive Slave Bill came to
fill up the measure of her wrath, she poured out her heart in Uncle
Tom’s Cabin. Despite its obvious blemishes of structure and sen-
timentalism it is a great human document that stripped away the
protective atmosphere from the sacred institution, and laid bare its
elementary injustice. It brought the system home to the common
feeling and conscience. The strong religious coloring emphasized
the Abolition argument that slavery trafficked in Christian souls,
and rendered it hateful to every humanitarian instinct. It was
noble propaganda, and the humor and pathos, the passion for


CERTAIN MILITANTS 377


social righteousness, still linger in its pages to make a later genera-
tion wonder that our fathers should so long have tolerated this
evil thing.

Five years later she published Dred, A Tale of the Great Dismal
Swamp, a thoughtfully elaborated statement of the complex
problem, with a suggested solution that only thrust into relief the
fact that it had indeed become an irrepressible conflict—the same
solution that had been hinted at thirty years before in Kennedy’s
Swallow Barn, namely, a system of paternalistic emancipation,
based on the historical analogy of the extinction of English vil-
leinage, the slaves to be treated as wards, by the masters and
educated for gradual emancipation. It was a feudal solution of a
feudal problem, but it took higher humanitarian ground than
human nature can, and Mrs. Stowe recognized the complex of
passion and interests in which the problem was involved, by re-
moving her southern emancipationist to Canada to try his exper-
iment. More striking, perhaps, is the shift from the Christian
pacifism of Uncle Tom’s Cabin to the economics of Dred. The
former had made appeal to the humanitarianism of the North; the
latter proposed to appeal to the self-interest of the South. The
slave states, Mrs. Stowe’s heroine argued, were being ruined by
slavery, and if they were to expect a sane economic future, they
must destroy the wasteful system. The contrast between Yankee
thrift under free labor and plantation shiftlessness under slave
labor had been pointed out by Whittier in his Justice and Expe-
diency as early as 1833 and by Caruthers in his Kentuckian in New
York in 1834—statements that perhaps drew Mrs. Stowe’s atten-
tion to the economic phases involved; nevertheless the recogni-
tion of the complexity of the problem, and the attempt to deal with
it adequately, lessened the popular appeal of Dred. The book is
more skillfully done than Uncle Tom, it is far richer in background
material—in vivid sketches of poor whites, of revivalist preachers,
of plantation life—it provides in Old Tiff a delightful study of the
negro servant and it suggests the perennial fear of a negro uprising;
but it lacks the singleness of appeal that makes for telling prop-
aganda. It was not its melodrama that hindered its success.
The public had swallowed that in Uncle Tom with a hearty ap-
petite. It was rather the dissipation of dramatic interest, the
want of a striking figure to capture the imagination and sympathy.
It is a better sociological study but a weaker story.


378 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


It was hard for the New England conscience to quit the pulpit
and turn artist; and it was particularly hard for Mrs. Stowe with
her ardent nature and multiplying domestic cares. She could
bring her soul under discipline but not her art. She never trained
herself in craftsmanship, never learned restraint, but suffered her
pen to range freely as her emotions directed. The creative instinct
was strong in her but the critical was wholly lacking. Richly
endowed though she was her work has suffered the fate that pur-
sues those who forget that beauty alone survives after emotion
subsides.


PART THREE: THE TRANSCENDENTAL MIND


CHAPTER I
THE GENESIS OF TRANSCENDENTALISM


From the doctrine of the open mind that was the core of Unita-
rianism, came the transcendental movement that marked the full
flowering of the New England renaissance. It was the native
response of the mind of New England to the summons of rev-
olutionary romanticism, and its ardor was the greater for being so
long delayed. Creatively influenced though it was by French
Utopianism and German mysticism, its manners and mode of
thought received a particular impress from an environment long
preparing and that was natively congenial. ‘Practically,’ says
its most penetrating historian, transcendentalism “‘was an asser-
tion of the inalienable worth of man; theoretically it was an asser-
tion of the immanence of divinity in instinct, the transference of
supernatural attributes to the natural constitution of mankind.””!
It was the glowing expression of philosophic Utopianism, the
flaring up of-old-fires of idealism, before the scientific and mate-
rialistic reactions destroyed its romantic dreams. It accepted
kinship with the social idealism of the Declaration of Independence;
it accepted the dynamic principle of equalitarianism; but it sought
to go farther and provide a sure defense and justification of an
idealism that it professed to find established in human nature, by
establishing it in metaphysics.

The explanation of this curious throwback to earlier times in
the mind of transcendental New England is clear enough to any-
one acquainted with the history of Puritan thought struggling
with the mystical element of Christian experience. Since the far-
off days of Roger Williams—the seeker and mystic who was so
great a puzzle to his realistic brethren—idealism had been starved
in New England. Its mystical aspirations had been repressed by
dogma, and its elusive dreams brought to nothing. Jonathan
Edwards struggled life-long to hold his idealism in subjection to
theology, and ended in abortive reaction; a potential Emerson,

1See Frothingham, Transcendentalism in New England. Chapter VI.
379


380 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


another Berkeley, he re-welded the bonds of dogma on the mind
of New England, putting off for two generations the day of its
release. Even in the freer minds idealism suffered from the repres-
sions of the common rationalism; with Locke and Hume in the
ascendancy the mystic found the times uncongenial to his needs.
The dawn of a new day seemed to be breaking with the shift of
interest from theology to politics, during the stirring days of the
Revolution. The submerged idealism of New England came to
expression in the dreams of homespun democrats like Sam Adams,
and expanded in the sunshine of French Utopianism; but unfor-
tunately Boston Federalism reasserted the old dogmatisms and
put a speedy end to the movement. It shut the door upon all
democratic aspiration and bade it go about its business. It was
from such a narrow environment that the rising movement of
Unitarianism received its impress. From a sterile rationalism, a
respectable close-fisted conservatism, it could not escape; and in
consequence the new movement of liberalism was taken over by
Federalism and became a new orthodoxy. ‘The pale negations of
Boston Unitarianism”—to use Emerson’s well-known phrase—
provided little nourishment for transcendental hopes.
Nevertheless Unitarianism carried within it the seeds of the
new faith—in its intellectual attitude, if not in its philosophy.
“The Unitarians as a class,” remarks Frothingham, “belonged to
the school of Locke, which discarded the doctrine of innate ideas,
and its kindred beliefs. . ... Unitarianism ... has rarely, if
ever, been taught or held by any man of eminence in the church
who was a Platonist” (Transcendentalism in New England, Chap-
ter VI). But in spite of its eighteenth-centuty nurture—because
of it, indeed—Unitarianism was a profoundly liberalizing move-
ment. It was a narrow and local phase of a world-wide revolution;
the special contribution of Boston to the great work of disintegrat-
ing the past to make ready for the future. It loosened the grip of
dogma on the Puritan mind and widened the field of reading and
thinking. But it did very much more—it recovered the original
principle of Protestantism, the principle of individual responsibil-
ity, that had been tacitly denied by Calvinistic orthodoxy. It
asserted the essential decency of human nature—men may not
be the children of God but they are assuredly not children of the
devil; and it summoned this decent human nature to live decently
in accordance with its nature. It would not coop up the mind in


GENESIS OF TRANSCENDENTALISM 381


dogma; it would not close all roads to heaven but one. The
Unitarians might be instinctively conservative, as was natural to
prosperous persons, but they at least acknowledged ‘“‘themselves
to be friends of free thought in religion.” Their doctrine was not a
creed but an attitude of mind. If they themselves were not Seek-
ers, they professed a willingness for others to become Seekers.
Very likely few of them measured up to the full stature of such
liberalism; nevertheless they “honestly but incautiously professed
a principle broader than they were able to stand by, and avowed
the absolute freedom of the human mind as their characteristic
faith” (bid., Chapter VI).

All this was excellent, but it was not enough. It remained to
see what the free mind should discover in its venturesome quest
into the unknown. Intellectually emancipated, with the bleak
dogmas of election and reprobation put away, with the God of
wrath dethroned and the God of love lifted up, and with the
dynamic principle of freedom of inquiry in their possession, the
younger generation of New England intellectuals naturally opened
their eyes to discover what winds of new doctrine were blowing in
the world. They were pretty much all Unitarians—the young
transcendentalists—and largely clergymen; their primary interest
was metaphysical and they had already abandoned Locke for
Plato. The rationalistic eighteenth century was dead to them and
they set forth to discover another age. Hints and suggestions of
that better age had come to them from overseas—from Words-
worth and Shelley, from Cousin and Madame de Stael, from
Coleridge and Carlyle; and the fresh beauty of that new poetry,
the enormous stimulus of that new metaphysic, fired them with a
desire to seek this inspiration at its source and drink from the
living waters. And so they discovered romantic Germany where
the new idealism had quite routed the philosophy of sensationalism,
and a great school of transcendental thinkers was in triumphant
possession of the field. It was a profoundly stimulating discovery,
and from it dated the rise of New England transcendentalism.

The immediate creative influence of the new contact with Ger-
many was to strengthen the incipient Platonism of the rebellious
intellectuals, and provide it with an added sanction. Transcenden-
talism, it must always be remembered, was a faith rather than a
philosophy; it was oracular rather than speculative, affirmative
rather than questioning; and it went to Germany to find confirma-


*


382 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


tion of its faith, not to reéxamine its foundations. Faith preceded
metaphysics, and if the metaphysics had been lacking intuition
would have supplied its place, poetic inspiration would have
sufficed the needs of transcendental minds. They had found God
for themselves before the philosophers justified them; they took
to Germany what they sought there. Nevertheless it was a
tremendous experience to come upon their own philosophy there,
erected into a system, supported by a complete metaphysic; a
philosophy that had put to rout the fashionable skepticism of
Voltaire and Condillac, established on the sensationalism of Locke,
and offering justification for faith in God and man—faith in a
divinity indwelling in nature and the individual soul—by a
masterly dialectics. That experience determined the development
of New England transcendentalism. The metaphysic of Kant,
the mysticism of Jacobi, the idealistic egoism of Fichte, the tran-
scendentalism of Schleiermacher—the new gospel of the renascent
German spirit—these were the living waters of truth to the thirsty
minds of the New England intellectuals, from which they drank
eagerly, never doubting their sufficiency. They were poets and
prophets; they were young and strong in faith; others might con-
cern themselves with the dialectics of idealism, they would apply
it in their daily lives.

In essence this new transcendental faith was a glorification of
consciousness and will. It rested on the rediscovery of the soul
that had been dethroned by the old rationalism; and it eventuated
in the creation of a mystical egocentric universe wherein the
children of God might luxuriate in their divinity. The Unitarians
had pronounced human nature to be excellent; the transcenden-
talists pronounced it divine. They endowed it with great poten-
tialities; made of it a dwelling place of the Most High; discovered
the secret voice of God in the buried life that men call instinct;
refused to heed any other command save this inner voice of God.
With ebbing faith men may deny their own divine nature, but the
divinity is not destroyed; the music of the indwelling Godhood
murmurs in the shell till the tide returns to flood it again. The
one great miracle is the daily rebirth of God in the individual
soul; every day is a new day; every act is a fresh wonder; faith,
hope, trust, accompany man in his adventurous journeyings.
Why, therefore, demanded the transcendentalist, should he not
trust himself? Why should he not walk confident in his own high


GENESIS OF TRANSCENDENTALISM 383


purpose? Why should he doubt and question the buried compul-
sions that urge him forward? If he is indeed a child of God, let
him live as unto God; and if it should turn out that there has been
some mistake in the premises and he proves to be a child of the
devil, then let him live as unto the devil. Better so than not to
trust himself.

Quite obviously they were arch-romantics—these young poets
of the new faith; children of an age given over to new hopes and
disintegrating revolutions; inexperienced prophets of a world in
flux, before the scientific spirit had stripped them of their wings.
The fascinating book of nature and of man had been newly opened
to them, and like Miranda they were ready to exclaim,


O wonder!
How many goodly creatures are there here!
How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,
That has such people in ’t!


They could see only God because in their thinking God had filled
their minds. No evil lurked in the secret places of their hearts to
whisper doubts concerning the goodness of life; no ominous clouds
veiled the divine light that wrapped their universe about. After
two hundred years of discipline in righteousness the old dog-
matic pessimism was dissipated, leaving not a rack behind. The
evil was gone and God remained; and in this new world the sons of
God were to be henceforth heirs of the kingdom, free to fulfill that
good which is the final reality. Arch-romantics, they were dream-
ing a transcendental dream, as other arch-romantics were dreaming
their Jacksonian dream, their imperialistic dream, their Utopian
dream. Romanticism comes to different issues in different men
and different times: Emerson and Jefferson were unlike enough,
as their worlds were unlike; but they were both romantics and
their idealism was only a different expression of a common spirit.

Years after the transcendental ferment had subsided, one of the
lesser prophets of the movement offered a statement of the faith


that deserves to be recalled:


Transcendentalism [he said] relies on those ideas in the mind which are
laws in the life. Pantheism is said to sink man and nature in God; Ma-
terialism to sink God and man in nature; and Transcendentalism to sink
God and nature in man. But the Transcendentalist at least is belied and
put in jail by the definition which is so neat at the expense of truth. He
made consciousness, not sense, the ground of truth... . Is the soul


384 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


reared on the primitive rock? or is no rock primitive, but the deposit of
spirit—therefore in its lowest form alive, and ever rising into organism
to reach the top of the eternal circle again, as in the well one bucket goes
down empty and the other rises full? The mistake is to make the ever-
lasting things subjects of argument instead of sight. . . . Our soul is
older than our organism. It precedes its clothing. It is the cause, not
the consequence, of its material elements; else, as materialists understand,
it does not exist. . . . What is it that accepts misery from the Most
High, defends the Providence that inflicts its woes, espouses its chastiser’s
cause, purges itself in the pit of its misery of all contempt of His commands,
and makes its agonies the beams and rafters of the triumph it builds?
It is the immortal principle. It is an indestructible essence. It is part
and parcel of the Divinity it adores. It can no more die than he can. It
needs no more insurance of life than its author does. Prove its title? It
is proof of all things else. It is substantive, and everything adjective
beside. It is the kingdom all things will be added to. (C. A. Bartol, quoted
by Frothingham in Transcendentalism in New England, Chapter XIV.)


This is sheer mysticism, and mystics in greater or less degree all
the transcendentalists were—isolated and lonely in the midst of
men, seeking always a larger fellowship, awaiting those fleeting
moments of illumination that should light up the meaning of life.
‘“‘Mine is a certain brief experience,” says Emerson, “‘which sur-
prised me in the highway or in the market, in some place, at
some time,—whether in the body or out of the body, God knoweth,
—and made me aware that I had played the fool with fools all
this time, but that law existed for me and for all; that to me be-
long trust, a child’s trust and obedience, and the worship of ideas,
and I should never be fool more” (The Transcendentalist). Fleet-
ing and incommunicable are such illuminations, yet like the clear
sunlight to eyes that are open. “If you do not need to hear my
thought, because you can read it in my face and behavior, then I
will tell it you from sunrise to sunset. If you cannot divine it,
you would not understand what I say” (ibid.)._ And because the
realist found himself quite incapable of such understanding, the
transcendentalist turned away from him to live by himself. “They
feel that they are never so fit for friendship, as when they have
quitted mankind, and taken themselves to friend.”

Such an attitude of mind may easily become the father of criti-
cism. Communing with the ideal rarely begets complacency; the
actual seems poor and mean in comparison with the potential.
Hence the transcendentalists, willingly or not, were searching
critics of their generation. They were impatient of any falling


GENESIS OF TRANSCENDENTALISM 385


short of the ideal, and their lives in consequence became an open
indictment of a Yankee world given over to materialism. “By
their unconcealed dissatisfaction,” said Emerson, “they expose our
poverty, and the insignificance of man to man.” ‘Their quarrel
with every man they meet, is not with his kind, but with his degree.
There is not enough of him,—that is the only fault... . They
make us feel the strange disappointment which overcasts every
human youth. So many promising youths, and never a finished
man!” (The Transcendentalist.)


As to the general course of living, and the daily employments of men,
they cannot see much virtue in these, since they are parts of this vicious
circle; and as no great ends are answered by the men, there is nothing
noble in the arts by which they are maintained. Nay, they have made
the experiment, and found that, from the liberal professions to the coarsest
manual labor, and from the courtesies of the academy and the college to
the conventions of the cotillion-room and the morning call, there is a
spirit of cowardly compromise and seeming, which indicates a frightful
skepticism, a life without love, and an activity without aim. (Jdzd.)


Idealists though they were, they could not escape meddling with
the real which encompassed them on all sides—with institutions,
laws, society, with the state itself. They were far more interested
in God than in Cesar, and they found it impossible to divide loyal-
ties that too often clashed. When Cesar essayed to impose his
will upon theirs, when he put their ideals in jeopardy by demanding
allegiance to laws they did not approve, they quietly denied him
sovereignty and followed their own paths. With such men nothing
could be done; their very lives were a criticism and a judgment on
New England and America. Transcendentalism may have run into
its follies, but foolish in its critical judgment—blind to the gap be-
tween profession and reality—it was not. It might be severe, but
it was honest and intelligent, and honest intelligent criticism
America stood greatly in need of.


CHAPTER II
RALPH WALDO EMERSON


Transcendental Critic


Ar the age of thirty-six the man who was to become the most
searching critic of contemporary America expressed his concep-
tion of his mission in the following passage:


What shall be ‘the substance of my shrift? Adam in the garden, I am
to new-name all the beasts of the field and all the gods in the sky. I am
to invite men drenched in Time to recover themselves and come out of
time, and taste their native immortal air. I am to fire with what skill I
can the artillery of sympathy and emotion. I am to indicate constantly,
though all unworthy, the Ideal and Holy Life, the life within life, the
Forgotten Good, the Unknown Cause in which we sprawl and sin. I am
to try the magic of sincerity, that luxury permitted only to kings and
poets. I am to celebrate the spiritual powers in their infinite contrast to
the mechanical powers and the mechanical philosophy of this time. I
am to console the brave sufferers under evils whose end they cannot see,


by appeals to the great optimism, self-afirmed in all bosoms. (Journals,
Vol. V, p. 288.)


Seven days before Emerson set down this transcendental pro-
nouncement, he had written in his journal a different comment:


A question which well deserves examination now is the Dangers of Com-
merce. This invasion of Nature by Trade with its Money, its Credit, its
Steam, its Railroad, threatens to upset the balance of man, and establish
a new, universal Monarchy more tyrannical than Babylon or Rome.
Very faint and few are the poets or men of God. Those who remain are
so antagonistic to this tyranny that they appear mad or morbid, and are
treated as such. Sensible of this extreme unfitness they suspect them-
selves. And all of us apologize when we ought not, and congratulate
ourselves when we ought not. (Jbid., Vol. V, pp. 285-6.)


In such comments and others scattered plentifully through his
Journals, Emerson essayed to make clear to himself the function
of transcendental criticism as he felt himself called to practice
it. It was to be no trivial or easy duty. In the midst of a boastful
materialism, shot through with cant and hypocrisy and every in-
sincerity, fat and slothful in all higher things, the critic proposed
to try the magic of sincerity, to apply the test of spiritual values

386


RALPH WALDO EMERSON 387


to the material forces and mechanical philosophies of the times.
His very life must embody criticism; his every act and word must
pronounce judgment on the barren and flatulent gods served by his
countrymen. He must be a thinker and as such he must summon
to the bar of a nobler philosophy the current standards of value and
conduct. Men of the greatest reputation must not be spared;
he must “‘issue a guo warranto and revoke the characters of fame,”
overruling the verdict of newspaper editors and the acclaim of
the electorate. Here was a revolutionary business indeed, that
the critic was proposing to himself; and the calm serenity with
which he set about it was disconcerting. A thinker loose in the
America of Daniel Webster, a thinker who proposed to test men and
measures by the magic of sincerity, was likely to prove an unpleas-
antly disturbant factor in a world of pretense. Measured by such
standards the current philosophies must bate and dwindle, and
the common ideals shrink to the mean and paltry. The life of an
honest thinker laid on the America of 1840 would reveal how far
short it came from the stature of intellectual manhood.

Emerson the critic has been too much obscured to common view
by Emerson the brilliant dispenser of transcendental aphorisms.
The oracular Essays with their confident wisdom—the senten-
tious expression of the middle period of a life that came to late
maturity—interpose themselves between the young priest whose
intellectual interests quietly detached themselves from Unitarian
orthodoxy, and the mature critic whose loyalties quietly detached
themselves from the gods of his generation. The very brilliancy
of the Essays conceals the laborious processes by which their
abundant wisdom was distilled. One must go to the Journals
for that—to those intimate records that reveal how patiently he
sought for truth and how honestly he followed it. Wisdom did not
come to him of its own accord; it was painfully groped for.. As an
introspective Puritan youth he began early to keep a diary of his
intellectual life, gathering into successive journals the savings
from his discursive readings./ For years as a quiet student he lived
in a world of moral aphorisms, a cold, thin atmosphere where
gnomic phrases bloomed and ancient oracles uttered judgment.
This was the seedtime of his mind. He was making acquaintance
with the noble dead, gathering their utterances to make for himself
a new testament. ‘‘No man could be better occupied,” he said
later, “than in making his own bible by harkening to all those


388 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


sentences which now here, now there, now in nursery rhymes, now
in Hebrew, now in English bards, thrill him like the sound of a
trumpet.” Asa young man he made this his chief concern. His
early journals are an ample nursery where cuttings from all philos-
ophies are set out, there to grow into such plants as circumstance
should permit. The ancestral cult of the book was in his blood,
and living as he did under the threat of ill health, none too confident
that the years would lengthen out before him, he forced himself to
a severe intellectual regimen. To invest his days wisely was his
single purpose,” He wanted only the best securities for his invest-
ments, and what he got he carefully deposited, together with the
increments of his own thought, to draw upon at later need. There
were no wastrel forays in his intellectual life, no unpruned riot of
growth, but the very odds and ends of his meditation were care-
fully treasured to be used when other materials were lacking.
Fortunately the stuff was of good quality that outlasted many
makings-over, till finally he got the cut to his liking. From this
discipline of years came his superlative mastery of the sententious
sentence; his brilliant utterances are rich with the thought he has
crammed into them.

, The cheerful serenity that never deserted him was a triumph of
will over circumstance. It was a singularly cheerless world that
bred him, subsisting by sheer will power, eating its heart out with
heroic ambitions, too grimly earnest to enjoy what it got so la-
boriously—the lean aftermath of two centuries of asceticism. The
business of plain living and high thinking was a joyless manner of
life, and the young Emerson got little pleasure from it. A nature
less insulated must have broken under the strain. It was a world
stricken with tuberculosis. Of the five brothers one was mentally
defective, another burnt up his vitality and went to the West In-
dies to die, a third of brilliant powers succumbed to consumption,
his first wife died of the same scourge, his second wife and Emerson
himself were long affected with incipient tuberculosis. To ease
such anxious lives there was need of a great solace, and that solace
was sought in religion. The ascetic youth ran as naturally to
religious meditation as a normal child to play. No call to conver-
sion ever came to him; the natural man postulated in Calvinistic
dogma was washed out of him before he was born. The earlier
jottings in the journals, before philosophy came to soften the
inherited asceticism, and a transcendental revulsion from the


~


RALPH WALDO EMERSON 389


common pessimism had turned him into a serene optimist, often
are as bleak and austerely introspective as those morbid human
documents that fill the old libraries of Puritanism. Such medita-
tions are thin gruel for the nourishment of a vigorous life, and
Emerson must have suffered from innutrition if he had not come
upon more substantial food.

Fortunately the old Puritan anchors were already dragging, and
Emerson was pretty well adrift when the romantic surge caught
him and sent him far along new courses. The Puritan moralizer
became the transcendental seeker; the curious-minded loiterer
in the gates of the temple, who had studied the moral winds by
watching the tiny straws of circumstance—erecting unconsidered
trifles into ethical signposts—calmly quitted the church and set
forth on his intellectual quest. The ties had long been loosening,
but it was his year abroad where he discovered ways of thinking
unknown to Concord and Boston, that effectively liberalized his
mind and released him from the narrow Yankee provincialisms.
On that momentous trip Goethe, Landor, Coleridge, Wordsworth,
Carlyle, set him speculating on new themes, stimulating afresh
the love of Plato, in whom he had long found inspiration. Conti- .
nental idealism with its transcendental metaphysics refashioned
Emerson and put him upon his life-work.

Speaking of the intellectual revival of New England later in life,
he remarked that “Goethe was the cow from whom their milk was
drawn”; but it would seem that the influence of Wordsworth
proved more immediately stimulating, for on his return home
Emerson set about the systematic contemplation of nature which
left so considerable a deposit in his mind. / Before this he had
been too intent on his soul to consider the sunshine on the fields,
but thereafter he made his pilgrimages into the country with the
seriousness of one conducting a novel experiment. In this new
concern for nature there was a deliberate self-consciousness. In
temperament he was a bookish recluse, in love with the printed
page. He was not a Thoreau to love his Walden Pond for its own
sake, and it needed an effort of the will to send him as far as Auburn
wood, to lie on his back and translate nature into metaphysic.
But he had come to the point where his developing philosophy
must send him into the fields. He had looked within himself and
discovered the divinity of the individual soul; but he had not
probed the non-self, the great encompassing universe of matter


pe is


390 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


by which the individual is circumscribed and of which he is a part.
To discover there the diffused presence of God, to feel his kinship
with man, to understand that the soul is a microcosm, were neces-
sary preliminaries to the unfolding of his transcendental philoso-
phy, and he went about the work with painstaking thoroughness.
From this creative contact with nature emerged the Emerson we
know, radiant with idealism, glad of life; and this radiant gladness
he put into his maiden essay, Nature.

This was in 1836 when Emerson was thirty-three years of age.
In the next two years he published The American Scholar, quintes-
sence of transcendental individualism, and the Divinity School
Address, the bible of transcendental religion. With the appearance
of the second series of Essays, six years later, the major ideas of his
philosophy were fully elaborated. Stripped of its idealistic phrase-
ology, of its beauty and fervor, the master idea of the Emersonian
philosophy is the divine sufficiency of the individual. In accepting
himself he accepted his fellows, and he accepted God.) The uni-
verse he conceived of as a divine whole, whereof each man is his
own center from whom flows the life that has flowed in upon him,
perennially fresh, perennially a new creation. The law for things


, is not the law for mind; man is unkinged in acknowledging any
_ lesser sovereignty than the sovereignty of self. Statutes, con-
| stitutions, governments, schools, churches, banks, trade—the


coercing sum of institutions and customs—these things do not
signify; they are only idols with clay feet that blind men worship.
The true divinity dwells elsewhere, in the soul of man; and that
divinity must rule the world and not be ruled by it. The apothe-
osis of individualism—such in briefest terms was the gospel of
Emerson; new only in its radiant dress and idealistic sanctions, the
final transcendental form of a doctrine spread widely by the
French romantic school. It was the same revolutionary conception
that Channing had come upon, that Jefferson had come upon, that
Rousseau had come upon—the idea which in the guise of political
romanticism had disintegrated the ancien régime, and in the form
of philosophical romanticism had disintegrated eighteenth-century
rationalism—the idea that was breyane Utopian dreams for an
ebullient democratic faith.

Thus equipped with a philosophy Emerson was prepared to
begin his work as a critic. The ideal he had drunk of was a peren-
nial condemnation of the material. The mean and ignoble ends


RALPH WALDO EMERSON 391


pursued by a mean and ignoble society were a challenge to the
serenity of his faith, and he must set himself to analyze the causes
of the low estate to which the potential sons of God had fallen.
Lesser revolutions in thought were implicit in this greater one,
revolutions which Emerson was bound to go through with. Despite
the jaunty optimism of which he was often accused, his eyes were
never blind to reality; to see, and measure, and judge, was to be-
come his life business./ He did not shrink from the ugliest fact, and
the unhappy condition he discovered men to be in would have
discouraged a less robust faith. At times even he doubted. At
times he seems half persuaded, with Cotton Mather, that the
potential children of light are “‘strangely and fiercely possessed
of the devil.” ‘“‘Human nature is as bad as it dares to be,” he
commented in his journal; and at another time, “If it were pos-
sible to repair the rottenness of human nature . . . it were well”
(Journals, Vol. VIII, p. 259).

In seeking an explanation of the tragic gap between the real and
the ideal, he came to attribute a large measure of the cause, like
the eighteenth-century romantics, to pernicious social institutions
which stifle the nobler impulses and encourage the baser; and he
became convinced likewise that the work to which the critic was
called was the work of liberation, setting the mind free from false
and ignoble loyalties that it might serve the true! He prepared
therefore to lay his transcendental yardstick on the little world
of Yankee reality and judge how far short it came of its potential
divinity. New England had never been scrutinized so searchingly,
measured so justly. Serene, imperturbable, he set the ideal in one
pan of the scales, and all the New England realities in the other,
and bade his neighbors see how the balance tipped. For a genera-
tion he was the conscience of America, a pricker of inflated balloons,
a gauger of the national brag and cant and humbug. With keen
insight he put his finger on the mean and selfish and the great and
generous. He surveyed his world with the detachment of posterity
and anticipated the slower judgment of time. His penetration
was uncanny and few of his judgments on men and measures have
suffered reversal in the court of final jurisdiction.

So shrewd a critic must concern himself greatly with the Jack-
sonian revolution that was hurrying America towards the ac-
ceptance of political equalitarianism. By every compulsion of
his transcendental philosophy Emerson was driven to accept the


<


392 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


abstract principle of democracy. He understood well what hopes
for human betterment were.awakened by the principle of majority
rule, and as he followed the noise and tumult of the political
cainpaigns he was driven to definition. In 1834 he commented
in his journal:


The root and seed of democracy is the doctrine, Judge for yourself.
Reverence thyself. It is the inevitable effect of the doctrine, where
it has any effect (which is rare), to insulate the partisan, to make
each man a state. At the same time it replaces the dead with a living
check in a true, delicate reverence for superior, congenial minds. ‘How
is the King greater than I, if he is not more just?” (Journals, Vol. III,


p- 369.)
Somewhat later in the same year he suggested:


Democracy, Freedom, has its root in the sacred truth that every man
hath in him the divine Reason, or that, though few men since the creation
of the world live according to the dictates of Reason, yet all men are
created capable of so doing. That is the equality and the only equality
of all men. To this truth we look when we say, Reverence thyself; Be
true to thyself. (Jbid., Vol. III, p. 390.)


When I . . . speak of the democratic element, I do not mean that ill


»/ thing, vain and loud, which writes lying newspapers, spouts at caucuses,


and sells its lies for gold; but that spirit of love for the general good whose
name this assumes. ‘There is nothing of the true democratic element in
what is called Democracy; it must fall, being wholly commercial. I beg
I may not be understood to praise anything which the soul in you does not


honor, however grateful may be names to your ear and your pocket.
(Lbid., Vol. IV, p. 95.)


His deepening concern over the state of politics in America—
the property-mindedness of the Whigs and the mob-mindedness
of the Democrats—drew him into an analysis of political parties
and the nature of the political state. He was little read in the
political classics, and although he professed a mild approval of
Montesquieu and was never tired of praising Burke, he was little
influenced by either. The latter’s political theory, indeed, was so
fundamentally hostile to Emerson’s major convictions—so legal-
istic in its reverence for government from the grave, so explicit
in denial of new-born rights—that it is a fair assumption that
Emerson never took the trouble to understand him but was content
to enjoy his glowing rhetoric. Later commentators are too much
given to glossing over Emerson’s political theory, not approving
its implications; or explaining it away by appeal to certain com-


RALPH WALDO EMERSON 393


ments jotted down when his nerves were tried by enthusiasts; !
but there is no explaining away a theory that was the logical ex-
pression of his transcendental philosophy, unless his whole philos-
ophy be explained away. Emerson knew very well where his
political theory led, and he had no timid compunction about fol-
lowing it through.

In his speculations on the nature and functions of the ideal
republic—a theme that was much in his mind—he elaborated
what we may call the transcendental theory of politics, a theory
closely akin to philosophical anarchism. All the elaborate machin-
ery devised by political thinkers like Montesquieu and John Adams,
with their schemes of checks and balances to preserve the status
quo, he calmly throws overboard; constitutions he is not interested
in, nor the complicated props of coercive sovereignty. The
single, vital, principle on which the true republic must found itself,
he insists, is the principle of good-will. Since “governments have
their origin in the moral identity of men,’’ the recognition of a
common human nature with common interests must induce rational
men to enter a common political brotherhood; and until men be-
come wise enough voluntarily to codperate to the common well-
being, no good government is possible. The history of govern-
ments hitherto is a history of the tragic failure of men to achieve
a rational political state. ‘“‘The idea, after which each community
is aiming to make and mend its law,” he suggests in the Essay on
Politics, following Carlyle, “‘is the will of the wise man. The wise
man, it cannot find in nature, and it makes awkward but earnest
efforts to secure government by contrivance.” But he does not -
push his “wise man” theory to the patriarchal absolutism of
Carlyle; with Channing he postulates an ethical sovereignty above
the instrument. “Absolute right is the first governor; or, every
government is an impure theocracy.”

'The doctrine of good-will establishes government in “moral
identity”; it ‘‘separates the individual from all party, and unites
him at the same time to the race”; and in so doing it accepts the
sovereignty of the ethical absolute. This major conception of
Channing’s Emerson took over and made his own. He is explicit
in his assertion of the need of a moral interpretation of the doctrine
of natural rights. The doctrine of an ethical sovereignty, he
asserts,

1See, for example, Journals, Vol. VII, p. 221.


394 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


. . . promises a recognition of higher rights than those of personal free-
dom, or the security of property. A man has a right to be employed, to
be trusted, to be loved, to be revered. The power of love, as the basis of
a State, has never been tried. . . . There will always be a government of
force where men are selfish; and when they are pure enough to abjure the
code of force they will be wise enough to see how these public ends of the
post-office, of the highway, of commerce and the exchange of property,
of museums and libraries, of institutions of art and science can be an-
swered.

Every man’s nature is a sufficient advertisement to him of the character
of his fellows. My right and my wrong is their right and their wrong.
Whilst I do what is fit for men, and abstain from what is unfit, my neighbor
and I shall often agree in our means, and work together for a time to one
end. But whenever I find my dominion over myself not sufficient for me,
and undertake the direction of him also, I overstep the truth, and come
into false relations to him. I may have so much more skill or strength than
he that he cannot express adequately his sense of wrong, but it is a lie, and
hurts like a lie both him and me. Love and nature cannot maintain the
assumption; it must be executed by a practical lie, namely by force. This
undertaking for another is the blunder which stands in colossal ugliness


in the governments of the world. . . . For any laws but those which men
make for themselves are laughable. . . . This is the history of govern-
ment,—one man does something which is to bind another. . . . Hence


the less government we have the better,—the fewer laws, and the less
confided power. The antidote to this abuse of formal government is the
influence of private character, the growth of the individual . . . the
appearance of the wise man; of whom the existing government, is, it must
be owned, but a shabby imitation. . . . To educate the wise man the
State exists, and with the appearance of the wise man the State expires.
The appearance of character makes the State unnecessary. The wise
man is the State. (Essay on Politics.)


Thus in transcendental fashion does Emerson range himself on
the side of Jefferson, in opposition to a coercive sovereignty. A
strong and energetic government he feared as an efficient instru-
ment of tyranny; and of the several contrivancies by which it
enforced its will, he considered the police power the stupidest.
As a sensible man he bore with the state; he would pay his taxes;
he would not strain at gnats; but as a free man he would not suffer
the state to coerce him; he would destroy it first. There is a passage
in his journal, written at the time of the declaration of war against
Mexico—when Alcott and Thoreau refused to pay their taxes—
that states his position with whimsical directness:


The State is a poor, good beast who means the best: it means friendly.
A poor cow who does well by you,—do not grudge it its hay. It cannot


RALPH WALDO EMERSON 395 .


eat bread, as you can; let it have without grudge a little grass for its four
stomachs. It will not stint to yield you milk from its teat. You, who are
a man walking cleanly on two feet, will not pick a quarrel with a poor
cow. Take this handful of clover and welcome. But if you go to hook
me when I walk in the fields, then, poor cow, I will cut your throat.


(Journals, Vol. VII, p. 220.)


With equal emphasis he rejected the economic interpretation
of politics. As a child of the romantic revolution he understood
quite clearly how the waves of humanitarian aspiration broke on
the reefs of property rights, how economic forces were in league
against the ideal republic. There could be no true democracy till
this matter of economics was put in subordination to higher values.
Both the political parties, the respectable Whigs and the voluble
Democrats, he was convinced, were debauched by it; the one
served property openly, the other secretly. ‘‘From neither party,
when in power, has the world any benefit to expect in science, art,
or humanity, at all commensurate with the resources of the nation.”
Emerson did not deny the fact of the universal appeal of economics.
He could not, of course, accept the theory of economic deter-
minism; but he was convinced that the whole matter must be
probed deeply:


The philosophy of property, if explored in its foundations, would open
new mines of practical wisdom, which would in the event change the face
of the world; would destroy the whole magazine of dissimulation, for so
many ages reckoned the Capital art of Government. It would purge that
rottenness which has defamed the whole Science until politic has come to
mean cunning. . . . It would go deep into ethics and touch all the rela-
tions of men. (The Present Age.)


Pending such exploration it was clear to Emerson that the Federal-
ist-Whig theory of a stake-in-society, or rulership by persons of
principle and property, was wholly vicious:


The theory of politics which has possessed the minds of men, and which
they have expressed the best they could in their laws and in their revolu-
tions, considers persons and property as the two objects for whose pro-
tection government exists. Of persons, all have equal rights, in virtue of
being identical in nature. This interest of course with its whole power
demands a democracy. Whilst the rights of all as persons are equal, in
virtue of their access to reason, their rights in property are very unequal.
. . . Personal rights, universally the same, demand a government framed
on the ratio of the census; property demands a government framed on the
ratio of owners and owning. . . . That principle no longer looks so self-


396 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


evident as it appeared in former times, partly because doubts have
arisen whether too much weight had not been allowed in laws to property,
and such a structure given to our usages as allowed the rich to encroach
upon the poor, and keep them poor; but mainly because there is an in-
stinctive sense, however obscure and yet inarticulate, that the whole
constitution of property, on its present tenures, is injurious, and its in-
fluence on persons deteriorating and degrading; that property will always
follow persons; that the highest end of government is the culture of men.
(Essay on Politics.)


In such suggestions as he offered touching the form of the ideal
republic, where ‘‘every child that is born must have a just chance
for his bread,’”’ Emerson reveals a pronounced bias in favor of the
Physiocratic theory of society. He was at one with Jefferson in
preferring an agrarian to an industrial order. Manchester econom-
ics—the doctrine of the economic man, of the iron law of wages,
and other obscenities of the school—he quite frankly loathed. He
did not, he said, “‘look with sour aspect at the industrious manu-
facturing village, or mart of commerce”’; but he would not glorify
the machine, nor reduce man to a factory hand. He questioned
the sufficiency or finality of the division of labor. There is more than
a suggestion of William Morris in the doctrine elaborated in Man
the Reformer; that the industrial revolution with its factory system,
must be judged in the light of its effect upon the workingman,
that the true function of work must be explored and every man
ply his tool to his own good. The suggestion that “‘a man should
have a farm or mechanical craft for his culture,” was an implicit
denial of industrialism in the days of its first triumphs—a denial
that Morris would have indorsed.


We must have a basis for our higher accomplishments, our delicate
entertainments of poetry and philosophy, in the work of our hands. We
must have an antagonism in the tough world for all the variety of our
spiritual faculties, or they will not be born. Manual labor is the study of
the external world. The advantages of riches remains with him who
produces them, not with the heir.

I should not be pained at a change which threatened a loss of some of
the luxuries or conveniences of society, if it proceeded from a preference
of the agricultural life out of the belief, that our primary duties as men
could be better discharged in that calling. . . . But the doctrine of the
Farm is merely this, that every man ought to stand in primary relations
with the work of the world, ought to do it himself, and not to suffer the
accident of his having a purse in his pocket, or his having been bred to
some dishonorable and injurious craft, to sever him from those duties;
and for this reason, that labor is God’s education; that he only is a sincere


RALPH ‘WALDO EMERSON 397


learner, he only can become a master, who learns the secret of labor, and
who by real cunning extorts from nature its sceptre. (Man the Reformer.)


In all this—in the doctrine of the minimized state, of the sacred
rights of the individual, of the wholesomeness of an agricultural
life; in his concern for social justice and his tenderness for the poor
and exploited among men—Emerson proved himself a child of the
romantic eighteenth century, who by his own transcendental path
had come upon the Utopia that an earlier generation had dreamed
of, and which he sketched in the lovely poem prefacing the Essay
on Politics. Much of Emerson is compressed in these lines:


Fear, Craft, and Avarice,
Cannot rear a State.

Out of dust to build

What is more than dust... .
When the Muses nine

With the Virtues meet,

Find to their design

An Atlantic seat,

By green orchard boughs

Fended from the heat,

Where the statesman ploughs
Furrow for the wheat;

When the Church is social worth,
When the state-house is the hearth,
Then the perfect State is come,
The republican at home.


The contrast between such Utopian conceptions and the realities
of America in the forties was calculated to edge the critical judg-
ment with a certain asperity. The older agrarian simplicity of
New England was being submerged by the industrial revolution,
and in the midst of the change Emerson quietly pronounced
judgment upon the new idols of his generation, upon State Street
and Beacon Street, upon Webster and Clay and Douglas, upon
Everett and Choate, upon black slavery and white, upon the
Mexican War and the Fugitive Slave Bill, upon the stolid poor
and the callous rich. His judgment was severe but it was never
unjust. His later journals are a rich storehouse of critical com-
ment, keen, illuminating, disastrous in its analysis of all cant and
humbug. At times—in his comment on Webster, in his hatred
of State Street, in his criticism of the common materialism—he
is almost savage; at other times he is consumed with a vast sym-


398 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


pathy for the long-suffering, exploited mass of the people. “Alas,
for the majority,” he exclaimed, ‘“‘that old, inevitable dupe and
victim. What a dreary Iliad of woes it goes wailing and mad
withal. Some dog of a Cleon or Robespierre or Douglas is always
riding it to ruin” (Journals, Vol. VIII, p. 449). When the Fugitive
Slave Bill passed he wrote: ‘‘This filthy enactment was made in
the nineteenth century, by people who could read and write.
I will not obey it, by God” (ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 236). In smug and
prosperous Boston he found no comfort—the Boston that ap-
plauded when ‘“‘Thank-God Choate thanked God five times” in
denouncing “the trashy sentimentalism of our lutestring en-
thusiasts.””’ Emerson would have none of Boston:


In Boston is no company for a fine wit. There is a certain poor-smell in
all the streets, in Beacon Street and Mount Vernon, as well as in the
lawyers’ offices, and the wharves, and the same meanness and sterility,
and leave-all-hope-behind, as one finds in a boot manufacturer’s premises.


(Ibid., Vol. VIII, p. 363.)
With Theodore Parker he judged Boston to be the home of Hun-


kers, of that “cotton aristocracy”’ that Webster served. It grov-
eled servilely before State Street; how should the homely moralities
get a hearing in such a place. Even Harvard College he charged
with being a tool of the Boston counting-houses.?

It was the crass materialism of America, of the Democrats
equally with the Whigs, of the northern capitalists equally with
the southern planters, that drove him to exasperation, and tem-
pered his optimism. There is no jaunty optimism in a passage
written during the panic days of 737:


. Society has played out its last stake; it is checkmated. Young men
have no hope. Adults stand like day-laborers idle in the streets. None
calleth us to labor. The old wear no crown of warm life on their gray
hairs. The present generaTion is bankrupt of principles and hope, as of
property. I see man is not what man should be. He is a treadle of a
wheel. He is the tassel at the apron-string of society. He is a money-
chest. He is the servant of his belly. This is the causal bankruptcy, this
the cruel oppression, that the ideal should serve the actual, that the head


2 “Harvard College has no voice in Harvard College, but State Street votes it
down on every ballot. Everything will be permitted there which goes to adorn
Boston whiggism; . but that which it exists for,—to be a fountain of novelties
out of heaven, a Delphi uttering warning and ravishing oracles to elevate and lead
mankind,—that it shall not be permitted to do or to think of. On the contrary,
every generosity of thought is suspected, and gets a bad name.” (Jbid., Vol. IX,


1s Quo)


RALPH WALDO EMERSON 399


should serve the feet. . . . Pride, and Thrift, and Expediency, who
jeered and chirped and were so well pleased with themselves, and made
merry with the dream, as they termed it, of Philosophy and Love,—
behold they are all flat, and here is the Soul erect and unconquered still.
What answer is it now to say, It has always been so? I acknowledge
that, as far back as I can see the widening procession of humanity,-the
marchers are lame and blind and deaf; but to the soul that whole past
is but one finite series in its infinite scope. Deteriorating ever and now
desperate. Let me begin anew; let me teach the finite to know its master.


(Journals, Vol. IV, p. 242.)


To be a critic rather than a fighter, and a critic because he was a
poet and philosopher—this was the duty laid upon Emerson; and
yet he was sorely troubled when men from the skirmish line of
social conflict reported to him the need of leaders. Why should he
be privileged to remain in his study when slaves were abducted on
the streets of Boston and John Brown was fighting at Harper’s’
Ferry? With the extremest reluctance he was drawn into the
struggle—it was not his fight.

I waked at night [he recorded in his journal] and bemoaned myself,
because I had not thrown myself into this deplorable question of Slavery,
which seems to want nothing so much as a few assured voices. But then,
in hours of sanity, I recover myself, and say, ‘God must govern his own
world, and knows his own way out of this pit, without my desertion of
my post, which has none to guard it but me. I have quite other slaves to
free than those negroes, to wit, imprisoned spirits, imprisoned thoughts,
far back in the brain of man,—far retired in the heaven of invention, and
which, important to the republic of Man, have no other watchman, or


lover, or defender, but I.” (Jdid., Vol. VIII, p. 316.)


But always in the end he was drawn in, and none spoke wiser or
braver words to a careless generation. He never faltered, never
compromised; the prophet of the ideal faced the real and told the
truth about it, serenely and with clear insight. His heroes were not
the heroes of State Street; Horace Greeley, Theodore Parker,
Horace Mann, Henry Ward Beecher, he accounted the great
Americans of his day, and not Everett and Webster and Clay and
Calhoun. A friend of civilization, he was partisan only to the
ideal; to justice, truth, righteousness. A Yankee of the Yankees,
a Puritan of the Puritans, he had emancipated himself from all
that was mean and ungenerous in the one and harsh and illiberal
in the other. A free soul, he was the flowering of two centuries of
spiritual aspiration—Roger Williams and Jonathan Edwards come
to more perfect fruition.


CHAPTER III
HENRY THOREAU


Transcendental Economist


*“Wispom crieth in the streets and no man regardeth her’’; yet
“she teacheth temperance and forethought, justice and fortitude;
than which men can have in their life nothing more profitable.”

The single business of Henry Thoreau, during forty-odd years of
eager activity, was to discover an economy calculated to provide a
satisfying life. His one concern, that gave to his ramblings in
Concord fields a value as of high adventure, was to explore the
true meaning of wealth. Honest, fearless, curiously inquisitive—a
masterless man who would give no hostages to fortune—he proved
his right to be called a philosopher by seeking wisdom as a daily
counselor and friend, and following such paths only as wisdom
suggested. Out of his own experience, tested in the clear light of
the Greeks, he wrote a transcendental declaration of independence
that may be taken as the final word of the Concord school touching
the great issues of practical living. Walden is the handbook of an
economy that endeavors to refute Adam Smith and transform the
round of daily life into something nobler than a mean gospel of
plus and minus.

It was the common opinion of his neighbors that Henry Thoreau
was a queer fellow who had somehow got all his values topsy-turvy.
And yet the more thoughtfully one considers him, the more doubt-
ful it appears whether the queerness lay with him or with his
critics. Unfortunately a wholly honest and original man is so
rare as to fall under common suspicion. To the inmates of Bedlam
a sane man will appear queer. In a society of serfs a masterless
man will be accounted an outlaw. To the Concord farmers
Thoreau appeared strange only because he applied in his daily
life a truth they assented to on the Sabbath. The principle that
life is more than the meat and the body than raiment was familiar
enough to the Sunday doctrines of Concord; but that a man should
seriously apply it on week-days; that he should propose to regulate
his mid-week activities by the economy of the Sermon on the

400


HENRY THOREAU 401


Mount, passed the comprehension of practical Yankees who
followed quite another economy. It was Thoreau’s conduct that
perplexed them, rather than his philosophy.

From first to last that conduct was serenely logical. To this
disciple of the ancient wisdom, Sabbath and week-day were one,
and in seeking to square his daily life with the ancient precept,
Thoreau became the arch-rebel of his group, the most individual
amongst the “lunatic fringe’? of the transcendental movement,
the one who escapes elusively from the grip of an adjective. He
slips out of all phrases devised to imprison him. ‘A bachelor of
nature,” Emerson, with his gift for cryptic phrase, called him;
“poet-naturalist,’ Ellery Channing who knew him intimately,
chose to call him. “I am a poet, a mystic, and a transcenden-
talist,” Thoreau said of himself, disregarding his nature writings.
Yet none of these phrases, true as they are, quite adequately sums
him up. At the risk of committing a fresh futility, one may per-
haps suggest that he was a Greek turned transcendental economist.
His life seems to have been a persistent experiment in values.
A philosopher of the open air who kept his mind clear and his
nerves robust by daily contact with wind and weather; a mystic
who pried curiously into the meaning of nature and was familiar
with Hellenic and Oriental systems of thought; a Yankee, skilled
in various homely crafts, yet rather interested in proving for him-
self what things were excellent and taking nothing on hearsay—
Thoreau’s chief business would seem to have been with life itself,
and how it might best be lived by Henry Thoreau; how a rational
being, in short, might enjoy the faculties God has given him,
following the higher economy and not enslaving himself to the
lower, so that when he came to die he might honestly say, I have
lived.

Amongst the members of the transcendental school Thoreau
was the one Concord man, born and bred there, literally of the soil
and loving the things of the soil. His tireless rovings were com-
monly bounded by the familiar Concord horizons. His life had
taken deep root in the Concord fields, and he refused to join the
restless multitude of the déracinés, who seek novel experiences in a
succession of transplantings. No English peasant ever clung to
the home-acres with more loving tenacity. He was a countryman
in instinct, distrusting the great city twenty miles away that dis-
seminated its virus through the outlying villages and farms. The


402 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


city was wedded to the economy of industrialism and exploitation.
But as a child of Jean Jacques, Thoreau chose to believe that the
road to heaven ran through the fields and not over the cobble-
stones of Boston; he discovered an honest integrity of character
oftener in the country than in Lowell mills, yet none too often
there. It was easier to be free there, yet even in Concord village
the herd mind was always laying springes to catch the unwary;
and Thoreau would not be caught. He was poet and philosopher
as well as countryman, and he weighed his own life and the life of
his neighbors in the scales of Hellenic thought. He was surveyor
of broader fields than his neighbor’s wood-lot; was acquainted
with other mysteries than the mystery of pencil-making. He
desired other ends than those his shopkeeping, farm-tending
neighbors served; he would not be encumbered as they were. He
could not carry such gross impedimenta in his pack and be a free
man; the pack was too heavy; and he proceeded to lighten it with
a thoroughness that startled Concord. He “‘signed off” from Dr.
Ripley’s church; with Alcott, he refused to pay his poll tax: he
severed his allegiance to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
and the Federal government; he rid himself of all concern at what
Concord thought of his ways; he spoke out his honest convictions
in the village Lyceum—convictions about John Brown and slavery
and Massachusetts’ part in sending negroes back to their masters—
quite careless of the disapproval of Judge Hoar and other Concord
dignitaries. Such a man had never before walked the village
streets, and the spectacle filled his neighbors with amazement.

With so much useless luggage got rid of, Thoreau was ready to
set about the high business of living. To outward appearance a
somewhat angular Yankee, practical and capable, he was at heart
a Greek, with the delight in the simple round of the seasons and a
responsiveness to natural beauty that belonged to the older civi-
lization. Brought up under the “pale negations” of Dr. Ripley’s
theology, he emerged a pagan. He was the most widely read in
Greek literature of the Concord transcendentalists; had translated
Prometheus Bound, and much of Pindar; and was completely
at home in the clear Greek atmosphere. Who but a Hellenist
could utter such words as these which serve as his apology for the
Walden experiment?


I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only
the essential facts of life, and to see if I could learn what it had to teach,


HENRY THOREAU 403


and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not
wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practice
resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck
out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to
rout all that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive
life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms, and, if it proved to be
mean, why then to get the whole and genuine meanness of it, and publish
its meanness to the world; or if it were sublime, to know it by experience,
and be able to give a true account of it in my next excursion. (Walden,


“What I Lived For.’’)


To seek Pan in a tired world and recover joys that have long been
forgotten is a business that only a romantic will engage in; yet
Thoreau set out on the quest with a clear-eyed purpose:


. . . My Good Genius seemed to say,—Go fish and hunt far and wide
day by day,—farther and wider,—and rest thee by many brooks and
hearth-sides without misgiving. Remember thy Creator in the days of
thy youth. Rise free from care before the dawn, and seek adventures.
Let the noon find thee by other lakes, and the night over-take thee every-
where at home. There are no larger fields than these, no worthier games
than may here be played. Grow wild according to thy nature, like those
sedges and brakes, which will never become English hay. Let the thunder
rumble; what if it. threaten ruin to farmer’s crops? that is not its errand to
thee. Take shelter under the cloud, while they flee to carts and sheds.
Let not to get a living by thy trade, but thy sport. Enjoy the land, but
own it not. Through want of enterprise and faith men are where they are,
buying and selling, and spending their lives like serfs. (Jbid., ‘Baker
Farm.”)


If the day and the night are such that you greet them with joy, and life
emits a fragrance like flowers and sweet-scented herbs, is more elastic,
more starry, more immortal,—that is your success. All nature is your
congratulation, and you have cause momentarily to bless yourself. . . .
The true harvest of my daily life is somewhat as intangible and indiscern-
ible as the tints of morning or evening. It is a little star-dust caught, a
segment of the rainbow which I have clutched. (Jdid., “Higher Laws.’’)


To save one’s soul has always been accounted in New England
a matter worthy of a man’s best effort, and Thoreau’s days were
given over to it with a single-heartedness without parallel even
in New England. The Puritan, he believed, had suffered his high
spiritual mission to be sacrificed to the economic; he would recover
that mission by sacrificing the economic to the spiritual; but he
would interpret the spiritual as a Hellenist rather than a He-
‘braist. The Christian other-worldliness seemed to him unduly
regardless of the loveliness of this world. “Christianity,” he says


404 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


in the Week, “only hopes. It has hung its harp on the willows, and
cannot sing a song in a strange land. It has dreamed a sad dream,
and does not yet welcome the morning with joy.”


I am not sure but I should betake myself in extremities to the liberal
divinities of Greece, rather than to my country’s God. ... In my
Pantheon, Pan still reigns in his pristine glory, with his ruddy face, his
flowing beard, and his shaggy body, his pipe and his crook, his nymph
Echo, and his chosen daughter Iambe; for the great God Pan is not dead,
as was rumored. Perhaps of all the gods of New England and of ancient
Greece, I am most constant at his shrine. (The Week, “Sunday.”’)


His extraordinarily frank evaluation of the New Testament, and
of Calvinistic New England that had too long chewed the cud of
conscience—‘“‘they did not know when to swallow their cud, and
their lives of course yielded no milk’’—is the work of a pagan from
whom all creeds slip easily. Few more searching sermons have been
preached in Massachusetts than the sermon that composed itself
as Thoreau’s boat floated down the Concord River, past the Bil-
lerica meeting-house where the honest villagers were worshiping
the God of New England—a sermon that with fine irony summons
minister and congregation to consider the deeper teachings of
their sacred book.


I know of no book that has so few readers. There is none so truly

strange, and heretical, and unpopular. To Christians, no less than Greeks
and Jews, it is foolishness and a stumbling-block. There are, indeed,
severe things in it which no man should read aloud but once. “ Seek first
the kingdom of heaven.” —“ Lay not up for yourself treasures on earth.”—
“Tf thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor,
and thou shalt have treasure in heaven.” —“ For what is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul?” —Think of this, Yankees! .
Think of repeating these things to a New England audience! thirdly,
fourthly, fifteenthly, till there are three barrels of sermons! Who, without
cant, can read them aloud? Who, without cant, can hear them, and not
go out of the meeting-house? They never were read, they never were heard.
Let but one of these sentences be rightly read from any pulpit in the land,
and there would not be left one stone of that meeting-house upon an-
other.

. . When one enters a village, the church, not only really but from
association, is the ugliest-looking building in it, because it is the one in
which human nature stoops the lowest and is most disgraced. Certainly,
such temples as these shall ere long cease to deform the landscape. .
Really, there is no infidelity, now-a-days, so great as that which prays,
and keeps the Sabbath, and rebuilds the churches. (The Week, “Sunday.”)


HENRY THOREAU 405


As Thoreau understood the problem of economics there were
three possible solutions open to him: to exploit himself, to exploit
his fellows, or to reduce the problem to its lowest denominator.
The first was quite impossible—to imprison oneself in a treadmill
when the morning called to great adventure, to burden oneself
with useless fardels when the pack must be kept light, was the
folly of a slave mind. He had observed his neighbors closely and
found little good in their way of self-exploitation.


I have travelled a good deal in Concord; and everywhere, in shops,
and offices, and field, the inhabitants have appeared to me to be doing
penance in a thousand remarkable ways. . . . How many a poor im-
mortal soul have I met well-nigh crushed and smothered under its load,
creeping down the road of life, pushing before it a barn seventy-five
feet by forty, its Augean stables never cleansed, and one hundred acres
of land, tillage, mowing, pasture and wood-lot. . . . The better part of
the man is soon ploughed into the soil for compost. (Walden, “ Economy.”)


To exploit one’s fellows seemed to Thoreau’s sensitive social
conscience an even grosser infidelity. The leisure of a slave driver,
got by imprisoning his fellows in a treadmill, was an ignoble lei-
sure from which came the empty vulgarity of modern life. “If
I devote myself to other pursuits and contemplations,” he said,
“J must first see, at least, that I do not pursue them sitting upon
another man’s shoulders. I must get off him first, that he may pur-
sue his contemplations, too.” Freedom with abstinence seemed
to him better than serfdom with material well-being, for he was only
giving up the lesser to enjoy the greater, as was the privilege of
the philosopher.


To be a philosopher is not merely to have subtle thoughts, nor even to
found a school, but so to love wisdom as to live according to its dictates,
a life of simplicity, independence, magnanimity, and trust. It is to solve
some of the problems of life, not only theoretically, but practically. . . .
When he has obtained those things which are necessary to life, there is
another alternative than to obtain the superfluities; and that is, to ad-
venture on life now, his vacation from humbler toil having commenced.


(Walden, “Economy.”)


It was the reply of the arch-individualist to the tyrannous com-
plexities of society, and it set him apart even in the world of
transcendentalism. Other members of the group professed to have
found a better way out of the dilemma—the way of Brook Farm and


406 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Fruitland; a richer life was to be achieved not by espousing pov-
erty but by codperation.. But Thoreau could not adopt the
codperative solution; he must either accept society as it was
or remove. Convinced that it was not worth accepting—that one
made a foolish bargain in selling oneself to it—he was content
to remove to Walden pond. “I came into this world,” he said,
“not chiefly to make this a good place to live in, but to live in it,
be it good or bad.” ‘I desire to speak impartially on this point,
and as one not interested in the success or failure of the present
economical and social arrangement.” He did not advocate that
other men should build cabins and live isolated. He had no wish
to dogmatize concerning the best mode of living—each must settle
that matter for himself. But that a satisfying life should be lived,
that the fox should somehow get free even though he left his tail
in the trap, he was vitally concerned about. ‘‘The youth may
build or plant or sail, only let him not be hindered from doing
that which he tells me he would like to do.”” Let him at least rid
himself of the false gospel of creature comforts, which men pay too
high a price for.

The story of Thoreau’s emancipation from the lower economics
is the one romance of his life, and Walden is his great book. More
restrained than the Week and lacking the exuberant beauty of
the latter—its noble talk and scathing criticism—it is “informed
by a more explicit unifying philosophy.” It is a book in praise
of life rather than of Nature, arecord of calculating economies that
studied saving in order to spend more largely. But it is a book of
social criticism as well, in spite of its explicit denial of such a pur-
pose, and in its speculations much of Carlyle and Ruskin and
William Morris crops out. In considering the true nature of econ-
omy he concluded, with Ruskin, that “the cost of a thing is
the amount of what I will call life which is required to be exchanged
for it, immediately or in the long run.’”’ Conceive of life as cheap,
a poor thing to be exploited, and the factory system becomes the
logical economic order; but conceive of it as dear, and the common
happiness the great objective of society, and quite another sort
of industrialism will emerge. Thoreau did not look with approval
on the rising city of Lowell, with its multiplying spindles and in-
creasing proletariat, and he did not understand why Americans
should boast of a system that provided vulgar leisure for the
masters at the cost of serfdom for the workers.


HENRY THOREAU 407


Where is this division of labor to end? [he asks] and what object
does it finally serve? I cannot believe that our factory system is the
best mode by which men may get clothing. The condition of the
operatives is becoming every day more like that of the English; and
it cannot be wondered at, since, as far as I have heard or observed, the
principal object is, not that mankind may be well and honestly clad,
but, unquestionably, that the corporations may be enriched. (Walden,
“Economy.”)


The whole middle-class philosophy of exploitation was hateful
to him, the middleman equally with the manufacturer. ‘‘Trade
curses everything it touches; and though you trade in messages
from heaven, the whole curse of trade attaches to the business.”
Men have been deceived by a false economy—lured by the bog
lights away from the open fields to flounder in the miasmic marshes.
While Ruskin was still pottering over Turner, Thoreau was elabo-
rating in Walden the text: The only wealth is life.

In other bits Walden is curiously like Hopes and Fears for Art,
and the drift of the whole is one with the revolutionary teachings
of Morris, that the abiding satisfactions are those which spring
from free creative work. This Yankee Greek had learned that
it is a beautiful life back of the tool that creates beauty, and
that if the work of our hands is ugly, it is because our lives
are mean and sordid, affording no outlet for the free creative
spirit. In New England, Puritan and Yankee alike had conspired
against beauty, and the gods had taken revenge by clothing life in
drab.


Before we can adorn our houses with beautiful objects the walls must
be stripped, and beautiful housekeeping and beautiful living be laid for
a foundation: now, a taste for the beautiful is most cultivated out of doors,
where there is no house and no housekeeping.

What of architectural beauty I now see, I know has gradually grown
from within outward, out of the necessities and character of the indweller,
who is the only builder,—out of some unconscious truthfulness, and noble-
ness, without ever a thought for the appearance; and whatever additional
beauty of this kind is destined to be produced will be preceded by a like
unconscious beauty of life. The most interesting dwellings in this country,
as the painter knows, are the most unpretending, humble log huts and
cottages of the poor commonly; it is the life of the inhabitants whose
shells they are, and not any peculiarity in their surfaces merely, which
makes them picturesque; and equally interesting will be the citizen’s
suburban box, when his life shall be as simple and as agreeable to the
imagination, and there is no straining after effect in the style of his
dwelling. (Walden, “‘Economy.”)


408 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Thoreau needed only to have lived in a world that honored crafts-
manship to have opened fully the vein of gold that Morris dug his
philosophy from; he had the instinct of the craftsman but not his
training. His turning from the workshop to the fields, hearing no
call in the humdrum village economy to develop a_ beautiful
craftsmanship, was an implied criticism of the common sterility
of labor in every-day Concord; yet the honest sincerity of his na-
ture led him to the conclusion that lies at the heart of the philoso-
phy of the great English craftsman:

None have so pleasant a time as they who in earnest seek to earn their
bread. It is true actually as it is true really; it is true materially as it is
true spiritually, that they who seek honestly and sincerely, with all their
hearts and lives and strength, to earn their bread, do earn it, and it is
sure to be very sweet to them.

In short, I am convinced, both by faith and experience, that to main-
tain one’s self on this earth is not a hardship but a pastime, if we will live
simply and wisely; as the pursuits of the simpler nations are still the
sports of the more artificial. It is not necessary that a man should earn


his living by the sweat of his brow, unless he sweats easier than I do.
(Walden, “Economy.’’)


At Walden Pond and on the Merrimac River Thoreau’s mind
was serene as the open spaces; but this Greek serenity was rudely
disturbed when he returned to Concord village and found his
neighbors drilling for the Mexican War, and when authority in
the person of the constable came to him with the demand that
he pay a due share to the public funds. The war to him was a
hateful thing, stupid and unjust, waged for the extension of the
obscene system of negro slavery; and Thoreau was brought sharply
to consider his relations to the political state that presumed to
demand his allegiance, willing or unwilling, to its acts. Under the
stress of such an emergency the transcendentalist was driven to
examine the whole theory of the relation of the individual to the
state. He was not political-minded; he had concerned. himself
little with political theory; he would gladly let the government
alone if government would let him alone; he was even prepared to
make excuses for government. But he would not compromise
with his conscience; and when the state applied the principle of
coercion, he applied the counter principle of passive resistance.
It was while he was domiciled in Walden cabin that the hand of
the law seized him and thrust him into Concord jail. He went
with the constable quietly, but there was a dangerous contempt


HENRY THOREAU 409


in his heart. It seemed absurd that a man could not go to the
cobbler’s for a pair of mended boots, but he must be interfered
with by a neighbor playing the rédle of constable. Constable,
jailer, the magistrate on the bench, all the elaborate machinery of
the law, Thoreau contemplated quizzically and judged his neigh-
bors fools to have exchanged their freedom for such masquerades.
Those who got anything from such instruments—lawyers and prop-
ertied men—might think well of them, but they were a mere
impertinence to Thoreau who wanted to go huckleberrying. When
they let him out he went quietly after his berries, and discovered
there was “‘no state in sight among the berry bushes.” “I saw,”
he remarked casually, “that the state was half-witted, that it was
as timid as a lone woman with her silver spoons, and that it did
not know its friends from its foes, and I lost all my remaining
respect for it and pitied it.”

But Thoreau was not done with the comedy. It set him upon
thinking, and the result was the essay, Civil Disobedience. Taken
by itself alone, it is a somewhat astonishing performance. This
Yankee transcendentalist quite evidently has turned philosophi-
cal anarchist. But read in the light of Emerson’s Journals, or
in the light of Godwin’s Political Justice, it is easily comprehensible.
It is no more than transcendental individualism translated into
politics, with all comfortable compromises swept away. Its
sources run straight back to eighteenth-century liberalism with its
doctrine of the minimized state—a state that must lose its coer-
cive sovereignty in the measure that the laws of society function
freely. Very likely Thoreau had never read Godwin, yet his
political philosophy was implicit in Political Justice. In Godwin’s
thinking the problem of man in society is the problem of a volun-
tary adjustment of the individual to the state; and it is only by
establishing economics and politics on morality, that political
justice is possible. The moral law is the fundamental law, superior
to statutes and constitutions; and to it the citizen is bound to ren-
der allegiance. ‘‘The object of the present state of society is to
multiply labor,’’ asserted Godwin; “in another state it will be to
simplify it.”” ‘The only adequate apology of government is neces-
sity.” “Government however reformed” is “little capable of af-
fording solid benefit to mankind.” ‘Give us equality and justice
but no constitution. Suffer us to follow without restraint the
dictates of our own judgment, and to change our forms of social


410 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


order as fast as we improve the dictates of our own judgment.”
“The pretense of collective wisdom is the most palpable of all
impostures.” “The true reason why the mass of mankind has so
often been the dupe of knaves, has been the mysterious and com-
plicated nature of the social system. Once annihilate the quackery
of government, and the most homespun understanding will be
prepared to scorn the artifices of the state juggler that would
mislead him.”

By his own path Thoreau came to identical conclusions. There
is little in Civil Disobedience that is not in Political Justice. To
neither thinker is there an abstract state, society or nation—only
individuals; and to both, the fundamental law is the law of moral-
ity. Political expediency and the law of morality frequently clash,
and in such event it is the duty of the individual citizen to follow
the higher law. Thoreau went even further, and asserted the
doctrine of individual compact, which in turn implied the doctrine
of individual nullification; no government, he said, can have any
“pure right over my person or property but what I concede to it.”


I heartily accept the motto,—‘‘ That government is best which governs
least”; and I should like to see it acted up to more rapidly and systemat-
ically. Carried out, it finally amounts to this, which also I believe,—
“That government is best which governs not at all’’; and when men are
prepared for it, that will be the kind of government which they will have.
Government is at best but an expedient; but most governments are usually,
and all governments are sometimes, inexpedient.

A government in which the majority rule in all cases cannot be based
on justice. . . . We should be men first and subjects afterwards. It is
not desirable to cultivate a respect for the law, so much as for the right.
. . » How does it become a man to behave toward this American govern-
ment today? I answer, that he cannot without disgrace be associated
with it. I cannot for an instant recognize that political organization as
my government which is the slave’s government also. . . . There is but
little virtue in the action of masses of men. . . . It is not a man’s duty,
as a matter of course, to devote himself to the eradication of any, even the
most enormous wrong; he may still properly have other concerns to engage
him; but it is his duty, at least, to wash his hands of it, and, if he gives
it no thought longer, not to give it practically his support. If I devote
myself to other pursuits and contemplations, I must first see, at least,
that I do not pursue them sitting upon another man’s shoulders. I must
get off him first, that he may pursue his contemplations too. .. . If
the law is of such a nature that it requires you to be an agent of injustice
to another, then, I say, break the law. Let your life be a counter friction
to stop the machine. . . . As for adopting the ways which the state has
provided for remedying the evil, I know not of such ways. They take


HENRY THOREAU 411


too much time, and a man’s life will be gone. . . . Some are petitioning
the State to dissolve the Union. . . . Why do they not dissolve it them-
selves,—the union between themselves and the state,—and refuse to pay
their quota into its treasury?! (Works, Vol. X, pp. 131-170.)


“Let your life be a counter friction to stop the machine”—in
this doctrine of individual syndicalism Thoreau’s conception of
the relation of the citizen to the state is tersely summed up. In
so far as he was a democrat it was of the transcendental school,
rather than the Jacksonian. He would be governed by the majority
no more than by the minority. The scorn of a fine ethical mind
for practical government by politicians could scarcely be more
tellingly phrased than in the bit of verse he tucks into Civil Dis-
obedience:


A drab of state, a cloth-o’-silver slut,
To have her train borne up, and her soul trail in the dirt.


Such a man quite evidently would go for Nullification as fiercely
as Garrison. Even though he might wash his hands of society, the
cries of those who suffered injustice followed him, and when the
Fugitive Slave Law passed, it robbed him of his peace, destroying
his pleasure in wonted things. The slave hunters were in Boston
streets, and justice in the person of Commissioner Loring was
sending Anthony Burns back to slavery. As he contemplated the
spectacle his wrath against a coercive government flamed up.
*“My thoughts are murder to the state,” he complained bitterly,
“and involuntarily go plotting against her.”


I would remind my countrymen that they are to be men first, and
Americans only at a late and convenient hour. . . . I hear a good deal
said about trampling this law under foot. Why, one need not go out of
his way todothat. This law rises not to the level of the head or the reason;
its natural habitat is in the dirt. It was born and bred, and has its life,
only in the dust and mire, on a level with the feet; and he who walks with
freedom, and does not with Hindoo mercy avoid treading on every
venemous reptile, will inevitably tread on it, and so trample it under foot,

1Compare the following entry in his Journal under date of March 26, 1842:
“T must confess I have felt mean enough when asked how I was to act on society,


what errand I had to mankind. Undoubtedly I did not feel mean without a reason,
and yet my loitering is not without defense. I would fain communicate the wealth


of my life to men, would really give them what is most precious in my pitt.) nie oid
know no riches I would keep back. I have no private good unless it be my peculiar
ability to serve the public. . . . This is the only individual property. . . . It is


hard to be a good citizen of the world in any great sense, but if we do render no
interest or increase to mankind out of that talent God gave us, we can at least


bi i Lee
preserve the principal unimpaired.


412 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


—and Webster, its maker, like the dirt-bug and its ball. (‘Slavery in
Massachusetts,” in Works, Vol. X.)


The law will never make men free; it is men who have got to make the
law free. They are the lovers of law and order who observe the law when
the government breaks it.


Thoreau was a stern judge, and he held his age in low esteem.
His Concord neighbors seemed to him poor fellows with too little
spirit to be free men; they were the raw material of standing armies,
militia, jailors, constables, and the posse comitatus. And then one
day into the field of his vision came a plain Yankee, primitive and
heroic, John Brown of Ossawatomie. In the contemplation of
his life and death Thoreau felt a shock of new faith run like an
electric current through his veins. The age was no longer dead to
him, for it had bred aman. “TI rejoice that I live in this age,” he
exclaimed, “that I am his contemporary.” He had found his
hero—not in past times as Carlyle and Emerson had done, but in
the present and among his own Yankee kind. He had talked with
John Brown in Concord and recognized him as a primitive idealist
of rugged mold, a stern moralist who set justice above the law.
That this man should be so grossly misunderstood by lesser men,
so foully slandered, filled him with sorrow and with wrath also.
“When a noble deed is done, who is likely to appreciate it? They
who are noble themselves. I was not surprised that certain of my
neighbors spoke of John Brown as an ordinary felon, for who are
they? They have either much flesh, or much office, or much
coarseness of some kind” (‘‘The Last Days of John Brown,” in
Works, Vol. X, p. 241). His trial and conviction Thoreau regarded
as a judgment, not on John Brown, but upon America; the lawyers
and editors and politicians who judged him were only convicting
themselves.


His company was small indeed, because few could be found worthy to
pass muster. Each one who there laid down his life for the poor and op-
pressed was a picked man, culled out of many thousands, if not millions;
apparently a man of principle, of rare courage, and devoted humanity;
ready to sacrifice his life at any moment for the benefit of his fellow-man.
It may be doubted if there were so many more their equals in these re-
spects in all the country,—I speak of his followers only,—for their leader,
no doubt, scoured the land far and wide, seeking to swell his troop. These
alone were ready to step between the oppressor and the oppressed. Surely
they were the very best men you could select to be hung. That was the
best compliment this country could pay them. They were ripe for her


HENRY THOREAU 413


gallows. She has tried a long time, she has hung a good many, but never
found the right one before.

I do not believe in lawyers, in that mode of attacking or defending a
man, because you descend to meet the judge on his own ground, and,
in cases of the highest importance, it is of no consequence whether a man
breaks a human law or not. Let lawyers decide trivial cases. Business
men may arrange that among themselves. If they were the interpreters
of the everlasting laws which rightfully bind man, that would be another
thing. A counterfeiting law-factory, standing half in a slave land and
half in a free! What kind of laws for free men can you expect from that?
(“A Plea for Captain John Brown,” in Works, Vol. X, p. 197.)


In Thoreau the eighteenth-century philosophy of individualism,
the potent liberalisms let loose on the world by Jean Jacques, came
to fullest expression in New England. He was the completest
embodiment of the Jaissez-faire reaction against a regimented
social order, the severest critic of the lower economics that frustrate
the dreams of human freedom. He was fortunate in dying before
the age of exploitation had choked his river with its weeds; for-
tunate in not foreseeing how remote is that future of free men on
which his hopes were fixed:


The life in us is like the water in the river. It may rise this year higher
than man has ever known it, and flood the parched uplands; even this
may be the eventful year, which will drown out all the muskrats .. .
such is the character of that morrow which mere lapse of time can never
make to dawn. The light which puts out our eyes is darkness to us.
There is more day to dawn. The sun is but a morning-star. (Walden.)


With the dawning of that day perhaps men will sit once more at
the feet of the ancient wisdom and fashion their lives upon the
principle that the soul is more than the meat and the body than
raiment. Perhaps they may even shape for themselves new
heroes—‘‘above and after all, the Man of the Age, come to be
called workingman.” He and his deeds are looked down upon in
our time—‘‘It is obvious that none yet speaks to his condition,
for the speaker is not yet in his condition.” ‘“‘Literature speaks
how much still to the past, how little to the future; how much to
the East, how little to the West” (‘“Thomas Carlyle and his
Works,” in Works, Vol. X, p. 118). One of the great names in
American literature is the name of Henry Thoreau. Yet only after
sixty years is he slowly coming into his own.


CHAPTER IV
THEODORE PARKER


Transcendental Minister


THEODORE PARKER was described by one of his biographers as
“the best working-plan of an American yet produced,” and by a
fellow minister as ‘“‘a conscience since Luther unsurpassed.”
The two comments suggest still another, that he was completely
and adequately New England. Yankee and Puritan contributed
equally to his making. His rich and plastic mind was two-sided:
one-half was wholly English, practical, logical, concrete, lucid;
loving fact and tireless in its acquisition; master of everyday
affairs and competent in dealing with this world; the other was
emotional, mystical, idealistic, deeply and spontaneously religious,
living daily with God as a son with the Father, carrying the sor-
rows of men in his heart and the wrongs of the world on his con-
science. One of the greatest of New England ministers, he was
shepherd as well as counselor, pastor as well as teacher. “I wish
to stand on the earth,” he said with true critical insight, ‘though
I would look beyond the stars. I would live with men, but think
with philosophers” (Weiss, Life and Correspondence of Theodore
Parker, Vol. I, p. 115). The generous amplitude of his nature was
too large for the narrow walls of a church; he took all Boston for
his parish, all New England for his congregation. Amazingly
active and vital, he consumed whole libraries in his pursuit of
knowledge. “His mind,” says Weiss, “was like the republican
idea itself; it could afford to be hospitable, but could not afford to
be exclusive’’ (zbid., Vol. I, p. 178). Conversant with many fields
of knowledge, with a memory extraordinarily retentive, he was
master of many languages—nineteen or twenty, according to
Thomas Wentworth Higginson—and at home in the most abstruse
subjects. He spent his vast energy with the prodigality of Cotton
Mather, and he achieved what Cotton Mather with his inbred
parochialism could not achieve, an intellectual cosmopolitanism
that judged Boston by broader standards than it could gauge.

A first-class fighting-man was this child of yeoman New England

414


THEODORE PARKER 415


—none braver, not even Garrison, none more effective; and yet
tender-hearted, sympathetic, with the shrewd common sense of
his homespun forebears. The son of a Lexington farmer and
mechanic, self-trained, endowed with indomitable will, he came of
the soundest stock in Massachusetts. His grandfather was captain
of the Minute Men who faced the British troops on Lexington
Common in April, 1775; and a conscious pride of ancestry broke
out frequently in his speech. The words uttered before the Min-
isterial Conference in May, 1851, in justification of his repudiation
of the Fugitive Slave Law, were characteristic: “I am not afraid
of men, I can offend them. I care nothing for their hate, or their
esteem. I am not very careful of my reputation.” He then goes
on:


I have had to arm myself. I have written my sermons with a pistol in
my desk,—loaded, a cap on the nipple, and ready for action. Yea, with
a drawn sword within reach of my right hand. This I have done in Boston;
in the midst of the nineteenth century; been obliged to do it to defend the
(innocent) members of my church, women as well as men! You know that
I do not like fighting. . . . But what could Ido? I was born in the little
town where the first bloodshed of the Revolution began. The bones of
men who first fell in that war are covered by the monument at Lexington,
it is “sacred to Liberty and the Rights of Mankind”’; those men fell ‘“‘in
the sacred cause of God and their country.” This is the first inscription
that I ever read. These men were my kindred. My grandfather drew
the first sword in the Revolution; my fathers fired the first shot; the blood
which flowed there was kindred to this which courses in my veins today.
Besides that, when I write in my library at home, on the one side of me
is the Bible which my fathers prayed over, their morning and evening
prayer, for nearly a hundred years. On the other side there hangs the
firelock my grandfather fought with in the old French war, which he
carried at the taking of Quebec, which he zealously used at the battle of
Lexington, and beside it is another, a trophy of that war, the first gun
taken in the Revolution, taken also by my grandfather. With these
things before me, these symbols; with these memories in me, when a
parishioner, a fugitive from slavery, a woman, pursued by the kidnappers,
came to my house, what could I do less than take her in and defend her
to the last? (Additional Speeches, Vol. I, pp. 13-15.)


With his sensitive conscience visited by such memories—a child
of ’76 living in the evil days of the Fugitive Slave Law, a devout
freethinker borne on the crest of transcendental thought—
Theodore Parker became the embodiment and epitome of the New
England renaissance. More completely perhaps than any other
representative, he gathered up and expressed the major revolu-


416 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


tionary impulses of his time and world: the idealistic theism implicit
in the Unitarian reaction’ from Calvinism; the transcendental
individualism latent in the doctrine of divine immanence; and
the passion for righteousness, to make the will of God prevail in
a world where the devil quite openly kept his ledgers. He was an
eager and thorough iconoclast, impatient to break the false
images—the God of John Calvin with its slanders of human nature,
and the god of State Street with its contempt for justice—which
New England, he believed, had worshiped too long, forgetting
the ideals of the Revolutionary fathers. The mind and conscience
of Boston seemed to him stifled by the strait-jacket of respecta-
bility. Righteousness like a fugitive slave, was driven into hiding,
or must walk the open streets with a Derringer in its pocket. As
a free soul loving freedom, and a righteous man loving righteous-
ness, he believed a duty was laid on him to cut away the strait-
jacket, to shame the Boston that sold the poor in the gates for a
pair of shoes. He must labor to set free the mind and conscience
of Boston that they might go forth purified to work a beneficent
work in a world that is God’s and not the devil’s. His attack was
keen and unsparing; he laid on with gusto; he used homely words;
he was just rather than polite. Impatient of humbug and self-
seeking he dealt in searching criticism rather than conventional
eulogy. At his touch distinguished reputations shrank to the mean
and commonplace, and inflated dignitaries collapsed like a pricked
balloon. Intellectually honest, he spoke the truth he had been at
immense pains to gather, and in consequence those who suffered
the sting of his attack—ministers and lawyers and merchants and
politicians, men in high position, distinguished leaders of Boston
society—were not slack in crying out against him as a demagogue
and agitator. Next to Garrison he became the most hated man in
New England; and something of that contemporary hatred, fierce
and unforgiving, clings to his name still, coloring later estimates
of his worth, hinting that his manners were not on a level with his
morals. An extraordinarily vital and interesting person, in short,
was this Yankee preacher with his Puritan conscience—this tran-
scendental critic with his quiver full of facts; one not to be ignored
in casting up the accounts of the New England renaissance.
With his memorable sermon On the Transient and Permanent
in Christianity, preached in May, 1841—a sermon that ranks in
1 See Wendell, Literary History of America, p. 348.


THEODORE PARKER 417


the history of Unitarianism with Channing’s Baltimore sermon—
the Unitarian movement entered upon its second broad phase.
It abandoned supernaturalism established on the sufficient author-
ity of the Scriptures, and adopted the conception of an evolution-
ary theism, of God progressively revealing himself to the develop-
ing faculties of men and speaking through the conscience. Under
Channing’s guidance Unitarianism had abandoned the major
dogmas of Calvinism—total depravity, predestination, a God of
wrath; it had shifted the emphasis from stable will to boundless
love; and by such teachings it had captured the greater churches
of Boston. By 1830 it had become securely established as the
religion of Boston respectability, with implied bounds set to its
intellectual liberalism. As the first ardor abated it fell to defining
the new orthodoxy, resting content with what already had been
won. It was against this new orthodoxy that held fast to the old
supernaturalism that Theodore Parker protested. “The defect
of the Unitarians was a profound one,” he pointed out; “ceasing to
fear ‘the great and dreadful God’ of the Old Testament, they had
not quite learned to love the all-beautiful and altogether lovely
[God] of the universe.” ? He would have no pausing of the move-
ment of adventurous thought, no settling back into the ruts of
dogmatism; and so he threw himself with immense energy into
the work of liberating Unitarianism from a premature orthodoxy.

For this work he was admirably equipped. The greatest scholar
of his generation of New England ministers, deep in German theol-
ogy and philosophy, with the latest results of higher criticism on
his study table, he was critically trained to separate historical
fact from ecclesiastical tradition, and establish his theology on a
basis of naturalism. He was at once scientific and transcendental.
He had translated De Wette’s Introduction to the Old Testament and
was intimately acquainted with Strauss’s Leben Jesu. He knew
the oriental backgrounds of Hebraic thought, had studied compara-
tive religion with its suggestive record of taboos and fetishism,
and was gathering materials for a comprehensive history of
religion from primitive times. Intellectually acquisitive and
curious, he far outran the less informed and courageous of his
Unitarian brethren. But he was far more than a critic, he


2 See “Letter to the Members of the Twenty-Eighth Congregational Society of
Boston,” in Weiss, Life and Correspondence of Theodore Parker, Vol. I1, Appendix
Il, p. 482. This account of his “Experience as a Minister” constitutes a brief
intellectual autobiography, of first importance to the student of Parker.


418 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


may well be accounted a religious genius. A convinced intui-
tionist, he tested every authority by appeal to transcendental
experience. He frankly abandoned faith in the supernatural,
with its corollaries of miracles and its “fetishism of the Bible,”
and was far advanced in a theism that compensated for the super-
natural by a passionate love of God. Thus established in personal
experience his religion issued in conduct. Love of God was more
to him than historical faith embodied in an historical church;
love to his fellow men was more appealing than dogma. Hence the
profoundly ethical quality of his religion, warm, palpitating,
generous, that set it apart from the colder and austerer ethicism
of the conventional Unitarians. The spirituality of Channing was
enriched in Parker by the ardency of his loving nature.

The three major doctrines of his theism, as elaborated in his
“Letter to the Members of the Twenty-Eighth Congregational
Society,” were the infinite perfection of God, the adequacy of
man to all his functions, and the sufficiency of absolute, natural
religion. In his elaboration of these doctrines the controlling
influence of transcendental thought is everywhere apparent.
A metaphysical optimism throws a golden light on all his thinking.
The trinitarian Godhead, equally with the devil, vanishes in ‘‘the
infinitely perfect God,” “immanent in the world of matter, and in
the world of spirit, the two hemispheres which to us make up the
universe’’—a universe created “from a perfect motive, for a per-
fect purpose, of perfect substance, and as a perfect means.”’ Hence
it follows in Parker’s logic, that


there must be a complete solidarity between God and the two-fold uni-
verse which He creates. The perfect Creator is thus also a perfect provi-
dence; indeed, creation and providence are not objective accidents of
Deity, nor subjective caprices, but the development of the perfect motive
to its perfect purpose, love becoming a universe of perfect welfare. I
have called God Father, but also Mother . . . to express more sensibility,
the quality of tender and unselfish love, which mankind associates with
Mother more than aught else beside. (“Letter,” etc., in Weiss, Vol. II,


PP- 470-471.)


The doctrine of the adequacy of man flows logically from the
doctrine of the immanence of God, but Parker was not content to
rest it on such basis alone. The conception of human perfecti-
bility, as it filtered down to him through different strata of thought,
romantic and idealistic, found a high sanction in his transcenden-


THEODORE PARKER 419


talism; but his practical nature demanded that it be established
if possible on ascientific foundation. Anthropology must substanti-
ate philosophy. Parker was not convinced that it could be thus
adequately established; nevertheless he would travel the objective
path as far as it might lead. Darwin’s Origin of Species was pub-
lished after Parker was seized with his fatal illness, yet in much of
the latter’s thinking he was groping his way toward some simi-
lar conception of “the unity of life of the human race,” with its
“progressive development” from “the state of ignorance, poverty,
and utter nakedness of soul and sense, the necessary primitive
conditions of the race, up to the present civilization.” In the
deep-buried scattered records of the past, slowly being gathered
together and interpreted by science, he found “proof of time im-
mense, wherein man, this spiritual Cosmos, has been assuming his
present condition, individual, domestic, social, and national, and
accumulating that wealth of things and thoughts which is the mark
of civilization.” The doctrine of human perfectibility might not
be capable of scientific proof, but it was more than a reasonable
hope; it was implicit in all the past.

But this progressive development does not end with us; we have seen
only the beginning; the future triumphs of the race must be vastly greater
than all accomplished yet. In the primal instincts and automatic desires
of man, I have found a prophecy that what he wants is possible, and shall
one day be actual. . . . What good is not with us is before, to be attained
by toil and thought, and religious life. (Jbid., Vol. II, pp. 471-472.)


Of this slowly and painfully evolving man with his expanding
ideals, religion Parker believed to be the highest ultimate expres-
sion; and religion, as the eyes of men slowly open to larger truths,
will be seen to be answerable to the needs of daily life, to enbody
the highest ideal of social excellence. The noblest religion he be-
lieved was not supernatural, but natural. “The absolute re-
ligion which belongs to man’s nature, and is gradually unfolded
thence,” “is the idea of humanity, dimly seen but clearly felt,
which has flitted before the pious eyes of men in all lands and many
an age, and been prayed for as the ‘Kingdom of Heaven.’” It
is forever refashioning its ideal, re-embodying its vision, in every
devout soul, in every creative age. “The religious history of
the race is the record of man’s continual but unconscious efforts
to attain this ‘desire of all nations’” (cbid., Vol. II, p. 473). But
unhappily every new advance soon crystallizes in dogmas and in-


420 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


stitutions; taboos and fetishisms are quick to re-imprison the mind
that struggles to be free. Old forms, therefore, must be daily
broken to make room for evolving experience. Religion must be
free; it must rise spontaneously from the depths of life. Chris-
tianity has suffered grievously from a fetishism of the Bible, from
its worship of the supernatural, from an ungenerous sectarianism
beloved of “‘ecclesiastic skeptics,’ who believe ‘‘there is no place
for the Christian Church or the Bible till they have nullified the
faculties which created both, and rendered Bible-makers and
Church-founders impossible.” Every age must write a new Bible
out of its God-given instincts, permeated with the divine love
that is slowly shaping society to the divine purpose.
No more is the atheistic mocker or the ecclesiastic bigot commissioned
to stop the human race with his cry, “Cease there, mankind, thy religious
search! for, thousand-million-headed as thou art, thou canst know nought


directly of thy God, thy duty, or thyself. Pause, and accept my authen-
ticated word; stop, and despair!” (Jbid., Vol. II, p. 475.)


It was this ethical quality of his religion that kept Theodore
Parker so sensitive to wrongs and so generous in response to the
call of social justice. His religion quickened his social conscience
and summoned him to serve the plentiful reform movements of
the day. With Garrison and Wendell Phillips he organized the
militants of Boston radicalism. His political principles were
simple and uncompromising, woven from the strands of English
and French libertarianism of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries—from Sidney, Locke, Rousseau, the great leaders of the
natural-rights school. One who accepted as axiomatic the nobil-
ity of human nature and the perfectibility of man, might be a politi-
cal romantic, but he was certain to be a liberal. Parker was a
primitive democrat, whose democracy was bone of his bone and
flesh of his flesh. But the democracy that answered the needs of
his dream of the kingdom was, like Emerson’s and Channing’s,
ethical rather than political or economic—it was “‘the enactment
of God’s justice into human laws” (“The Nebraska Question,” in
Additional Speeches, Vol. I, p. 327). “‘The democratic idea has
had but a slow and gradual growth even in New England,” he
pointed out; nevertheless he was convinced that it was spreading,
and “government becomes more and more of all, by all and for
all” * (cbid., p. 33). He hated Federalism with an intensity equal-


8 This phrase of Parker’s was probably the source of Lincoln’s phrase.


THEODORE PARKER 421


ing Jefferson’s, and ecclesiastical Federalism that twisted the au-
thority of the church to the side of wealthy pewholders, using
Scripture as a sanction for exploitation, he denounced as scathingly
as Garrison. The power of the political state he feared, because he
discovered the political state to be the friend of the rich rather
than the poor, of selfish advantage rather than of God’s justice.
With other Abolitionists he distrusted the machinery of central-
ization that was being skillfully erected at Washington. ‘“‘Op-
position to centralization of authority is very old in America,”
he remarked; “I hope it will be always young”? (zbzd., Vol. II,
p. 29). But he was no partisan to the rule of the majority, if it
determined contrary to his conscience. A transcendental individ-
ualist, he went for the nullification of an immoral statute in the
name of the Higher Law.4

Parker was never blind to the economic basis of politics. He
saw so clearly, indeed, the close alliance between group interests
and governmental statutes, that his political activities were al-
most wholly determined by that recognition. As a political critic
he was the shrewdest realist of his generation. He was one con-
stituent whom politicians talking for Buncombe could not be-
fuddle. He was too deeply read in American history, gifted with
too keen historical insight, to be impressed by the glittering rhet-
oric of the Rufus Choates. He had his own views of the Ameri-
can government, and majestic appeals to the Constitution left
him cold. The Constitution, he asserted, “is a provisional com-
promise between the ideal political principles of the Declaration,
and the actual selfishness of the people North and South.”” Amer-
ica was not a democracy. It had thrown off theocracy, aristoc-
racy, and monarchy, only to set in their places the “institution
of money—the master of all the rest.”’ The economic basis of so-
ciety in America he considered to be open and patent. In church
and state, money “‘is this day the strongest power of the nation.”
He declined to be deceived by party cries and platforms, either
Whig or Democratic; both parties served economics rather than


justice.


So there is a party organization about the dollar as its central nucleus
and idea. The dollar is the germinal dot of the Whig party; its motive


4 See “The Law of God and the Statutes of Men,” in Additional Speeches, Vol. I,
p. 181.


422 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


is pecuniary. . . . It sneers at the poor; at the many; has a contempt for
the people. It legislates against the poor, and for the rich . . . the few
who are born with the desire, the talent, and the conventional position
to become rich. “Take care of the rich, and they will take care of the
poor,” is its secret maxim. Everything must yield to money. . . . With
this party there is no Absolute Right, no Absolute Wrong. . . . There
is Expediency and Inexpediency. . . . Accordingly a millionaire is
reckoned by this party as the highest production of Society. He is the
Whig ideal; he alone has attained “the measure of the stature of a perfect
man.

The Democratic party appeals to the brute will of the majority, right or
wrong; it knows no Higher Law. . . . There is . . . no vital difference
between the Whig party and the Democratic party; no difference in moral
principle. The Whig inaugurates the Money got; the Democrat inau-
gurates the Desire to get money. That is all the odds. . . . There is
only a hand rail between the two, which breaks down if you lean on it,
and the parties mix . . . a Democrat is but a Whig on time; a Whig is a
Democrat arrived at maturity; his time has come. A Democrat is a young
Whig who will legislate for money as soon as he has got it; the Whig is an
old Democrat who once hurrahed for the majority—‘‘ Down with money!
there is a despot! and up with the desire for it! Down with the rich, and
up with the poor!”” The young man, poor, obscure, and covetous, in 1812
was a Democrat, went a-privateering against England; rich, and accord-
ingly “one of our eminent citizens,” in 1851 he was a Whig, and went
a-kidnapping against Ellen Crafts and Thomas Sims. (“The Nebraska
Question,” in Additional Speeches, Vol. I, pp. 331-335.)


The America of Parker’s day was fast becoming middle class and
Parker knew it, and like Lincoln he did not disapprove. Honest
thrift he found wholly desirable, and wealth if it were hon-
estly got. But speculation dissociated from creative work he
regarded with old-fashioned distrust. “If a man fully pay in
efficient, productive toil and thought, he is entitled to all he gets,
one dollar or many million dollars . . . and if his estate be but
what he has thus actually and honestly paid for with service given,
equivalent to the service received, what he can virtuously keep or
humanely apply and expend, then it will never be too large.” 5
But he believed there were other gods, and greater, than the god
of getting on; social justice was more desirable than unearned
increment; and he set his face like flint against the common mate-
rialism of America. “I come to build up piety and morality; to
pull down only what cumbers the ground,” he said; but he had
learned that the temples of State Street were not easily leveled;


5 Quoted in Weiss, Vol. II, p. 488.


THEODORE PARKER 423


that they would not fall without a mighty crash. A less courageous
man would have hesitated, but Parker was utterly fearless.
Boston he knew “was a Tory town.” “The Mother city of the
Puritans is now the metropolis of the Hunkers” (Additional
Speeches, Vol. I, p. 111). But the spirit of ’76 was strong in him
and he would “appeal from Boston drunk with gold, and briefly
mad with hate, to sober Boston in her hour to come.” He would
appeal from Whiggish Boston to Revolutionary Boston; from State
Street to Lexington common; from the Faneuil Hall of Rufus
Choate to the Faneuil Hall of Sam Adams. He would awaken the
-ancestral idealism of Boston that slept uneasily under the spell
of middle-class ambitions—that had sold its Puritan heritage for
southern trade profits. Such an appeal Boston had never before
listened to, ardent, unsparing, the Hebraic and the Yankee vernac-
ular curiously mingled; and Boston writhed uncomfortably and
pronounced the prophet ill-mannered.


When the Fugitive Slave Bill passed, the six New England states lay
fast asleep: Massachusetts slept soundly, her head pillowed on her unsold
bales of Cotton and of woolen goods, dreaming of ‘‘ orders from the South.”
Justice came to waken her . . . and she started in her sleep, and being
frightened, swore a prayer or two, then slept again. But Boston woke,—
sleeping, in her shop, with ears open, and her eye on the market, her hand
on her purse, dreaming of goods for sale,—Boston woke broadly up, and
fired a hundred guns for joy. O Boston, Boston! if thou couldst have
known, in that thine hour, the things which belong unto thy peace! But
no: they were hidden from her eyes. She had prayed to her god, to Money;
he granted her the request, but sent leanness into her soul. (‘‘The Boston
Kidnapping,” in Additional Speeches, Vol. I, p. 89.)


But he offended the Boston code of good breeding even more
seriously. He became personal. He named names. Before vast
congregations, in printed books, he pronounced judgment on
Bostonians respected in the Back Bay, mighty in State Street.
Boston gentlemen had never before suffered such tongue-lashings.
How mercilessly he excoriated Commissioner Loring, judge of
probate and Harvard professor, for soiling his hands in the An-
thony Burns case! How neatly he pricked the empty culture of
Edward Everett for his pro-slavery ardor—‘‘a Cambridge profes-
sor of Greek, he studied the original tongue of the Bible to learn
that the Scripture says ‘slaves,’ where the English Bible says only
‘servants’!”’ (Additional Speeches, Vol. II, p. 115.) What an


424 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


utterly devastating attack he made on the great Webster for the
latter’s subserviency to local economic interests! Much honest
realism underlies that criticism, and much honest American history.
The “‘Nebraska Address”’ and the “‘ Webster Address” are notable
historical documents, incisive analyses—rare in those romantic
days—done by one who has kept a shrewd eye on current politics,
and understands the hidden springs of party policy. Into the
Webster address he put his vast knowledge, his power of analysis, his
frank idealism. It was “‘a sad and dreadful day” when duty bade
Theodore Parker speak on the man whose uncommon powers he
had long admired; but he did his work thoroughly, refusing to shut
his eyes to ugly fact, refusing to indulge in commonplace eulogy.
It was the eighteenth-century economic realism of Webster that
stirred the wrath of the transcendentalist—that and the lapses
from integrity. Parker’s text was found in Webster’s dictum
that ‘‘the great object of government is the protection of property
at home, and respect and renown abroad’’; and how starkly it
runs counter to his own ideal of government, ‘“‘the enactment of
God’s justice into human laws,” is laid bare in page after page of
scathing commentary. To the exacting ethics of Parker, Webster
was wanting in principles; he followed expediency rather than
justice; and how surely expediency digs pitfalls for its own undo-
ing he discovered tragic illustration of in the career of the great
senator. It is a hard fate for a politician, accustomed to the cheap
praise of the gullible public, to fall into the hands of a critic who
is honest and searching; and Webster had too many weak points to
emerge from such an analysis with credit. It is probably the most
critical examination of Webster’s career that has ever been made,
and withal just.

Surprisingly modern, far more so than Channing, was this bril-
liant preacher—impulsive, colloquial, natural, whose every arrow
was pointed with a fact and feathered to fly true; concerned more
with righteousness than with policy; hating the dull commonplace
and empty dignity of Tory ways; careless of convention, somewhat
spectacular, with a keen relish for combat—a vital, vivid man, the
apostle of conscience, the advocate of every unpopular cause. He
possessed an amazing gift of words, yet he was too impatient, too
practical, to become an artist; preferring: immediate ends to more
lasting reputation, and spending himself with a free prodigality.
He was always the speaker rather than the writer and his printed


THEODORE PARKER 425


pages bear the unmistakable marks of impetuous oral discourse.
Emerson accounted him one of the four great men of the age.
Whether or not that judgment holds, whether he was too eager a
militant to become a great transcendental philosopher, the his-
torian sees in Theodore Parker one of the greatest, if not the last,
of the excellent line of Puritan preachers.


CHAPTER’ V.


MARGARET FULLER
Rebel


Tue fame of Margaret Fuller has waned greatly since her vivid
personality was blotted out in the prime of her intellectual develop-
ment. Misunderstood in her own time, caricatured by unfriendly
critics, and with significant facts of her life suppressed by her
friends out of a chivalrous sense of loyalty, the real woman has
been lost in a Margaret Fuller myth and later generations have
come to underestimate her powers and undervalue her work. Yet
no other woman of her generation in America is so well worth
recalling. She was the completest embodiment of the inchoate
rebellions and grandiose aspirations of the age of transcendental
ferment; for to the many grievances charged against the times by
other New England liberals, she added the special grievance of
the stupid inhibitions laid upon women. ‘Transcendental radical
and critic, like Emerson and Thoreau and Parker, she was feminist
also; and to the difficult business of freeing her mind from the
Cambridge orthodoxies, she added the greater difficulty of freeing
her sex.

The written record that Margaret Fuller left is quite inadequate
to explain her contemporary reputation. In no sense an artist,
scarcely a competent craftsman, she wrote nothing that bears the
mark of high distinction either in thought or style. Impatient of
organization and inadequately disciplined, she threw off her work
impulsively, not pausing to shape it to enduring form. Yet she
was vastly talked about, and common report makes her out to
have been an extraordinary woman who creatively influenced
those with whom she came in contact. Like Alcott, her power lay
in brilliant talk. Her quick mind seems to have been an electric
current that stimulated other minds to activity, and created a
vortex of speculation wherever she passed. Hungry for ideas,
intellectually and emotionally vibrant, she caught her inspirations
from obscure impulses of a nature thwarted and inhibited from
normal unfolding; and in her sensitive oscillations she was often

426


MARGARET FULLER 427


drawn away from polar principles to which she would later swing
back. There was quite evidently a fundamental unrest within her,
a conflict of impulses, that issued in dissatisfaction; and this
contradiction was aggravated by intense emotions, which both
quickened her mind and distorted it.

A product of Cambridge bookishness, Margaret Fuller was both
a wonder and a riddle to a generation that made little account of
the psychology of sex. She was commonly looked upon as an in-
tellectual monstrosity, the most fearful of Yankee bluestockings,
and a later Bostonian has gone so far as to suggest that she was
“an unsexed version of Plato’s Socrates” (Wendell, Literary
History of America, p. 300). But to present-day psychology her
character is an extraordinarily suggestive document, and a recent
critic has read her seeming contradictions like an open book.!
Before Miss Anthony’s penetrating analysis the Margaret Fuller
myth vanishes, and a very real, natural, and unfortunate woman
takes its place. She came of vigorous stock, independent, out-
spoken, opinionated. Her grandfather was a clergyman who was
unfrocked by his church for being lukewarm in the Revolutionary
War. Her father, Timothy Fuller, and her four uncles, worked
their way through Harvard. In Timothy Fuller there was a large
measure of Puritan grimness and severity that locked the door on
the passions of his heart, that none might know of them; yet there
seems to have been a volcano in the man who held off the world
so brusquely. The rebel was strong in him. The Fullers were not
of Brahmin stock and had no wish to please their social superiors.
While a Harvard undergraduate, Timothy Fuller turned Jef-
fersonian republican and lost his place as first honor man by join-
ing in an undergraduate protest against certain hated regulations.
As a lawyer and politician he repudiated respectable Federalism,
and although he was representative in Congress for four terms
and enjoyed certain other offices, his non-conformity in the end
cost him dear. No doubt he had counted on that, for he was stub-
born oak that might break but would not bend. The tragedy of
Margaret Fuller’s life seems to have been sketched before in the
life of Timothy Fuller.

To an extraordinary degree the daughter was the child of the
father, in ideas and sympathies as well as blood. Like him she
was a rebel, but for the daughter to turn rebel involved greater

1 See Katharine Anthony, Margaret Fuller, A Psychological Biography.


428 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


hazards than for the father. Her sex was a heavy handicap, for
the experience of Fanny Wright and Lucretia Mott had revealed
that American chivalry had definite bounds; it did not shield the
woman who ventured beyond the pale. Yet considering her blood
and training, how could she help thus venturing into freer fields
without? From her earliest years her father treated her as a com-
rade and gave her the training of a boy. In her studies he dealt
with her as James Mill dealt with his brilliant son. Perhaps it was
a mistake to force her into the rigid groove of classical learning
when she should have been playing with her dolls. From it she
got very unusual acquisitions, but overstimulation broke her
health, and isolation turned her mind in upon itself and made her
the victim of somnambulism and freaks of imagination. The
result was the development, on one side of her nature, of a female
counterpart of Cotton Mather—precocious, domineering, moody,
visionary, given to long hours of greedy reading, gorging herself
on books and well-nigh ruining her intellectual digestion as well as
her health. Against this unfortunate overstimulation her vigorous
nature struggled for years, and never quite successfully. Her
emotions were forever embroiling her intellect. To conceive of
her as sexless is curiously to miss the point of her emotionalism.
She was rather the victim of sex. Her ardent friendships with
other women, her flashes of mystical experience, her fondness for
children, her love of luxury and creature comforts, her eager love
affair with James Nathan who unchivalrously found safety in
flight, her friendship with Mazzini and her more intimate friendship
with Count Ossoli, that ended in an unconventional marriage after
her situation rendered it necessary—such reactions can be ex-
plained on no other hypothesis. Her ardent nature was the victim
of disastrous frustrations, rendered the more acute by premature
development. If she had married early, as Harriet Beecher did,
and her excessive energy had been turned into domestic channels,
her life must have been less tragic, whatever the effect might have
been on her intellectual development.

The acutest contemporary analysis of her contradictory character
is that given by her friend William Henry Channing, who found
his clue in the clash between endowment and environment:


Here was one fond as a child of joy, eager as a native of the tropics for
swift transition from luxurious rest to passionate excitement, prodigal to
pour her mingled force of will, thought, sentiment, into the life of the


MARGARET FULLER 429


moment, all radiant with imagination, longing for communion with artists
of every age in their inspired hours, fitted by genius and culture to mingle
as an equal in the most refined circles of Europe, and yet her youth and
early womanhood had passed away amid the very decent, yet drudging,
descendants of prim Puritans. Trained among those who could have
discerned her peculiar power, and early fed with the fruits of beauty for
which her spirits pined, she would have developed into one of the finest
lyrists, romancers and critics, that the modern literary world has seen.
This she knew; and this tantalization of her fate she keenly felt. (Mem-
oirs of Margaret Fuller Ossolt, by R. W. Emerson, W. H. Channing, and
J. F. Clarke, Vol. II, pp. 36-37.)


This disastrous clash between endowment and environment is
strikingly exemplified in her delight in Europe when at thirty-four
she found herself there—in her admiration for Georges Sand, and
in particular the extravagance of her love for Rome, where her
starved heart found satisfactions she had long dreamed of. “Italy
receives me as a long-lost child, and I feel myself at home here,”
she wrote in 1847; and a few weeks later, “‘I find how true was the
lure that always drew me towards Europe. It was no false instinct
that said I might here find an atmosphere to develop me in ways I
need. Had I only come ten years earlier! Now my life must be
a failure, so much strength has been wasted on abstractions, which
only came because I grew not in the right soil” (idid., Vol. II, p.
225). She was too eagerly pagan to be satisfied with either Puritan
or Yankee Cambridge. The pale ethicism of New England was
thin gruel for such an appetite for life. Even Emerson she found
cold, and her stomach rebelled at the food he throve on. But this
was only half the story; the other half was this:


But the tragedy of Margaret’s history was deeper yet. Behind the poet
was the woman,—fond and relying, the heroic and disinterested woman.
The very glow of her poetic enthusiasm was but an outflush of trustful
affection; the very restlessness of her intellect was the confession that her
heart had found no home. A ‘“‘book-worm,” a “dilettante,” a “pedant,”
I had heard her sneeringly called; but now it was evident that her seeming
insensibility was virgin pride, and her absorption in studying the natural
vent of emotions, which met no object of life-long attachment. At once,
many of her peculiarities became intelligible. Fitfulness, unlooked-for
changes of mood, misconceptions of words and actions, substitutions of
fancy for fact . . . were now referred to the morbid influence of affections
pent up to prey upon themselves. And, what was still more interesting,
the clue was given to a singular credulousness, by which, in spite of her
unusual penetration, Margaret might be led away blindfold. As this
revelation of her ardent nature burst upon me, and . . . I saw how faith-


430 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


ful she had kept to her life purposes,—how patient, gentle, and thought-
ful of others, how active in self-improvement and usefulness, how wisely
dignified she had been,—I could not but bow to her in reverence. (Jbid.,
Vols lly p.37-)


The inchoate rebellions in her heart were stimulated and given

form by her reading? From the English, French, and German ro-
mantics she drew much of her intellectual food. The long hours
spent with her father over Jefferson’s letters were the best of
preparation for Rousseau and Mary Wollstonecraft, and French
romanticism provided an excellent introduction to the German.
Her emotions were in high ferment when she came upon the German
school, and she yielded her heart to it without reserve. Novalis,
Richter, above all Goethe, became a passion and swept her along
the path that Hedge and James Freeman Clarke were following.
For years she gathered materials for a life of Goethe, but a feeling
of self-distrust held back the project. Her love for him was the
great literary enthusiasm of her life. ‘It seems to me,” she wrote
in 1832, ‘‘as if the mind of Goethe had embraced the universe. .
I am enchanted while I read. He comprehends every feeling I
have ever had so perfectly, expresses it so beautifully; but when I
shut the book, it seems as if I had lost my personal identity; all
my feelings linked with such an immense variety that belongs to
things I had thought so different” (ibid., Vol. I, p. 119). Later,
with more critical analysis of Goethe, she found her enthusiasm
modifying; she was repelled by his calm, aloof intellectuality; ?
but she never wavered in loyal recognition of his commanding
powers.

Her romantic idealism was in full career when the transcendental
movement caught her up and put its stamp upon her. It came as
an emotional appeal to the vague aspirations of a life inadequately
motivated, and she threw herself eagerly into the new philosophy
and became the most hectic of its expounders. The intellectual
foundations of her transcendentalism were so slight in comparison
with the equipment of Hedge and Parker as scarcely to justify her
pretentions to their fellowship. But what she lacked in knowledge
of Kant and Fichte she made up in enthusiasm, and none ques-
tioned her right to speak for the group. The editorship of the
Dial provided a convenient safety valve for her energy, but it
neither absorbed her nor sufficed to satisfy her limitless desires.


2See Life Without and Life Within, pp. 23-60.


mt


MARGARET FULLER. 431


She needed to espouse a cause more concrete and dramatic, per-
sonal in its demands, calling for high sacrifice. Abolitionism was
at hand, but it repelled her by its narrow dogmatisms. Garrison
was never a hero of hers. She regarded him with “high respect”
for his “noble and generous” course; but ‘‘he has indulged in
violent invective and denunciation till he has spoiled the temper
of his mind” (“Frederick Douglass,” in Life Without and Life
Within, p. 122). Later, when she was in Europe, she looked back
half regretfully at her indifference to the movement.


How it pleases me here to think of the Abolitionists! I could never
endure to be with them at home; they were so tedious, often so narrow,
always so rabid and exaggerated in their tone. But, after all, they had a
high motive, something eternal in their desire and life. (Memoirs, Vol. II,


p. 229.)

Even Brook Farm repelled her as much as it attracted her.”
Though she loved many of the members, bore her share in the
discussions preliminary to its establishment, and often visited
there, she would not join the venture. She had had enough of
farm life at Groton. To open a road to Utopia with a common
plow was, perhaps, too prosaic a business for her romantic nature,
and when the Fourier Phalanx was introduced she grew skeptical.
Fourierism seemed to her too mechanical a conception, in spite
of her sympathy for the humanitarian spirit that lay behind it.
As she looked back upon it from the vantage point of her French
experience, she modified her judgment somewhat, although the old
transcendental bias that Emerson had voiced still colored her views.


The more I see of the terrible ills which infest the body politic of Europe,
the more indignation I feel at the selfishness or stupidity of those in my
own country who oppose an examination of these subjects,—such as is
animated by the hope of prevention. Educated in an age of gross material-
ism, Fourier is tainted by its faults; in attempts to reorganise society, he
commits the error of making soul the result of health of body, instead of
body the clothing of the soul; but his heart was that of a genuine lover of his
kind, of a philanthropist in the sense of Jesus; his views are large and
noble; his life was one of devout study on these subjects, and I should
pity the person who, after the briefest sojourn in Manchester and Lyons,
the most superficial acquaintance with the population of London or Paris,
could seek to hinder a study of his thoughts, or be wanting in reverence
far his purposes. (Ldid., Vol. II, p. 206.)


It was in part from Fourier, certainly from the collectivistic
theories discussed so generally by the transcendental group, that


432 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


she received her equipment for the cause which, more than any
other except the dramatic Roman revolution, appealed to the
deeper rebellions of her soul. “She had dealt much with the woman
question in her “Conversations,” and in 1844 she published Woman
in the Nineteenth Century, a work that made a great stir in America.
The “‘little book was the first considered statement of feminism
in this country” (Katharine Anthony, Margaret Fuller, p. 80), and
its novelty was emphasized by its boldness. The question of
woman’s place had emerged sharply from the Abolition movement,
when the appearance of women on the platform had aroused op-
position even from radical reformers, and Angelina Grimké had
encountered insults when she spoke at Abolition meetings. But
Margaret Fuller was the first since Mary Wollstonecraft, fifty
years before, to understake a reasoned defense of the claims of
woman to emancipation from man-made custom. It was a some-
what shocking book to fling at respectable Boston bluestockings—
male as well as female—for not only did she discuss equality of
economic opportunity and equality of political rights for women,”
but she went further and spoke frankly about sex equality, mar-
riage, prostitution, physical passions—pretty much everything
that was taboo in Boston society. It was a bold thing to do, need-
ing more courage even than to engage in a Fourieristic onslaught
upon the conventions of private property. Only a first-class rebel
would have had the temerity to offer such morsels to wagging
tongues.

This was her parting shot at a world that had done its best to
stifle her. Thenceforth her field was to broaden out immensely.
In 1844 she went to New York to live in the family of Horace
Greeley and write critical reviews for The Tribune—a shift that
marked the beginning of her intellectual maturity, the end of her
mystical sentimentalism. She was thirty-four years of age, and
she plunged vigorously into the work of criticism, never perhaps
very successfully, certainly never with high distinction. Her
judgments were penetrating and individual, she awakened some
Cambridge animosities by her comment on certain Cambridge
poets, but she was not a notable critic. A fine craftsmanship she
never attained. A light touch she couid never command. Never-
theless the experience was sobering. Honest, practical Horace
Greeley, with his pugnacious fondness for social reform, was an
excellent antidote to Concord transcendentalism; and an awaken-


MARGARET FULLER 433


ing sociological interest discovered ample opportunities in New
York for the expression of her mother-instinct. She took to her
stormy bosom the inmates of Sing Sing prison, the poor and out-
cast of the city. At last she went to Europe, fell in with Mazzini,
and found a cause dramatic enough and real enough to satisfy her
rebellious instincts. She was profoundly stirred by the Roman
revolution, took charge of one of the hospitals, and spent her
strength freely. On the tragic failure of the revolt she started
home with her husband and child, only to perish on the sandy
shores of Fire Island—a fate she did not turn her finger to escape.
Perhaps it was well. She had only too good reason to be fearful
of her reception and of the future. Tongues that had wagged
before would certainly have risen to a virtuous gabble over her
misadventure in Italy. On the whole one must be glad that her
friends refused to permit her good name to be thrown to the gos-
sips. Why shouldn’t gentlemen lie stoutly if by so doing they can
cheat the salacious?

A sensitive emotional nature offers the best of social barometers,
and Margaret Fuller’s tragic life, despite its lack of solid accom-
plishment, was an epitome of the great revolt of the New England
mind against Puritan asceticism and Yankee materialism. She
was the emctional expression of a rebellious generation that had
done with the past and was questioning the future. Not a scholar
like Theodore Parker, not a thinker like Thoreau, not an artist
like Emerson, she was a ferment of troubled aspiration, an enthu-
siasm for a more generous culture than New England had known—
the logical outcome of the romantic revolution which, beginning
with Channing’s discovery of humanitarian France, and leading
thence to idealistic Germany, was to break the indurated shell of
life in New England, and release its conscience and its mind. She
was the spiritual child of Jean Jacques even more than of Goethe—
a fact that she eventually came to realize. Writing from Paris in
1847, she said:

To the . . . Chamber of Deputies, I was indebted for a sight of the
manuscripts of Rousseau, treasured in their library. I saw them and
touched them,—those manuscripts just as he has celebrated them, written
on fine white paper, tied with ribbon. Yellow and faded age has made
them, yet at their touch I seemed to feel the fire of youth, immortally
glowing, more and more expansive, with which his soul has pervaded this


century. He was the precursor of ali we most prize. True, his blood was
mixed with madness; and the course of his actual life made some detours


434 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


through villainous places; but his spirit was intimate with the funda-
mental truths of human nature, and fraught with prophecy. There is
none who has given birth to more life for this age; his gifts are yet untold;
they are too present with us; but he who thinks really must often think
with Rousseau, and learn him ever more and more. Such is the method
of genius,—to ripen fruit for the crowd by those rays of whose heat they
complain. (Memoirs, Vol. II, pp. 206-207.)


The rebel pays a heavy price for his rebellions, as Margaret
learned to her cost. She suffered much in her daily life, but it was
her art that suffered most. She was evidently a far richer nature
than her printed works reveal. Intense in her extravagant de-
mands upon life, a radical humanitarian in all her sympathies and
instincts, generous in response to whatever was fine and high, living
unduly an inner life as became a daughter of Puritanism—Margaret
Fuller was too vivid a personality, too complete an embodiment
of the rich ferment of the forties, to be carelessly forgotten. The
deeper failure of her career—its vague aspirations and inadequate
accomplishment—was a failure that may be justly charged against
the narrow world that bred her. Perhaps no sharper criticism could
be leveled at New England than that it could do no better with
such material, lent it by the gods.


v


PART IV: OTHER ASPECTS OF THE NEW
ENGLAND MIND


CHAPTER I
THE REIGN OF THE GENTEEL


I


Tue discussion of the New England mind hitherto has kept
pretty much to the outskirts of Boston, to Concord and Roxbury
and undistinguished precincts; it has not penetrated the Back Bay
where dwelt the authentic representatives of Brahminism, nor has
it concerned itself greatly with Cambridge that was a lesser Back
Bay. Nevertheless there were other ideals than those of tran-
scendentalism and social reform in the New England of the renais-
sance—ideals of culture, of scholarship, of belles lettres, to which the
Brahmin mind contributed, and which after the subsidence of the
ferment came to dominate genteel New England and for a genera-
tion largely influenced American letters. To the revolutionary
aspirations of the forties the Back Bay contributed little. Brahmin
Boston might turn Unitarian with Channing, but it was at heart
neither French romantic nor German idealist; it desired rather
culture for its own sake, and scholarship it regarded as the hand-
maid of culture. It hoped of course that righteousness and the
will of God should ultimately prevail in human affairs, but it was
not exigent in its demands. Occasion and means it willingly
left to God, anticipating that the walls of Jericho must fall of
their own weakness. It is surprising how little the greater issues
of the time ruffled the serenity of the Brahmin mind, and how
uncritical were its judgments on such issues as came under its
review. Divided between State Street and the Back Bay, its life
ran a smoothly agreeable course with no hint of potential antag-
onisms between exploitation and culture. It followed so strictly
the injunction, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand
doeth, that the two were almost total strangers to each other.
Like Edith Wharton’s contemporary Knickerbockers, the Brahmins
conceived the great business of life to be the erection of barriers
435


436 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


against the intrusion of the unpleasant. They took it ill when those
barriers were assaulted by rude militants, and when indisputable
Brahmins—men like Edmund Quincy and Wendell Phillips—took
part in the assault, the Back Bay regarded them as more than a
little queer.

The immediate consequence of this concern for defensive breast-
works was the reign of the genteel in life and letters, a reign that
set up a court of critical jurisdiction over the domain of American
letters. The essence of the genteel tradition was a refined ethicism,
that professed to discover the highest virtue in shutting one’s eyes
to disagreeable fact, and the highest law in the law of convention.
Gone were the franker days of Robert Treat Paine when a wit
might find his choicest bons mots in the bottom of his cups. Coarse-
ness had given way to refinement. It was the romanticism of
Brahmin culture, with all Falstafian vulgarity deleted, and every
smutch of the natural man bleached out in the pure sunshine of
manners. It was Victorianism of a more maidenly purity than the
English strain, so carefully filtered by passing through the close
Puritan mesh that the smallest impurities were removed. The
first of literary commandments was the commandment of reti-
cence. Literature was conceived of as belonging to the library and
the drawing-room, and it must observe the drawing-room amen-
ities. Only a vulgarian would lug a spade there. Any venture
into realism was likely to prove libidinous, and sure to be common.
Certainly Margaret Fuller had overstepped the bounds of decency
with her remarks about women of the streets. The Adamite
school was the vulgar expression of the natural man, and Con-
tinental realism—the French and the Russian—was only bringing
the gutter into the library. Literature must be fine and pure and
noble, and as such it will serve decency and manners; what excuse
is there for it otherwise? The case for the true church of lit-
erature, as against the Adamite and other heresies, was admirably
stated by Lowell:

I have not seen Swinburne’s new volume—but a poem or two from it
which I have seen shocked me, and I am not squeamish. . . . Why
should a man by choice go down to live in his cellar, instead of mount-
ing to those fair upper chambers which look towards the sunrise of
that Easter which shall greet the resurrection of the soul from the body
of this death? Virginibus puerisque? ‘To be sure! let no man write a line


that he would not have his daughter read. . . . But I have outlived
many heresies, and shall outlive this new Adamite one of Swinburne.


THE REIGN OF THE GENTEEL 437


The true Church of poetry is founded on a rock, and I have no fear that
these smutchy back-doors of hell shall prevail against her. (Letters,
Vol. I, p. 377.)


II


Though it willingly recognized the superior claims of poetry
and the essay, the Brahmin mind found a more congenial field
for its literary ambitions in history; and the quiet scholarship that
it pursued with exemplary diligence was likely to flower in sub-
stantial historical studies. Excellent work much of it is, brilliant
- in certain instances; yet it too is subtly marked by the psychology
of the environment that produced it. The renaissance of Boston
scholarship began with Everett and Ticknor, whose German train-
ing was imposed on natures instinctively aristocratic, swayed by
the older Federalist prejudices. The latter applied himself to
Spanish literature, but his colleague and fellow historian, Jared
Sparks, proved that in the American field even painstaking schol-
arship could not subdue the temptation to improve upon reality.
Sparks applied Boston ethics to. biography and conceived that his
mission in writing the life of a great American like Washington
was to portray a national hero as a model to the youth of the land.
In pursuance of this aim he studiously perfected nature by cor-
recting all the little blemishes of manner and little weaknesses of
character in order to produce an immaculate effect. He edited
Washington’s letters with a free hand, not only correcting the
grammar and spelling, but silently deleting such passages as did
not become the hero he had in mind. He did not of course go to
the absurd lengths of Parson Weems in inventing episodes and
effects, but he refused to deal with his materials realistically and
the result was a falsifying of the total impression.

The greatest and in certain respects the most characteristic
work of the period was George Bancroft’s History of the United
States, to which with single-minded purpose he devoted sixty la-
borious years. Trained in Gottingen, he gathered his materials
with German thoroughness, but the underlying spirit and purpose
of his exposition were native to the ardent nationalism of Jackson-
ian America. Bancroft was the only important member of the
New England group of historians who was a militant Democrat,
and he set out to justify to the world the ways of democratic Amer-
ica. It was a great undertaking and in the opinion of Ranke, the


438 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


German historian, it justified itself. ‘Your history is the best
book ever written from the democratic point of view,” ! he wrote
Bancroft. The praise was perhaps not excessive. Conceived in
the early days of the Jacksonian triumph, it reflects the grandiose
conception of the future of America and the beneficent influence
of republican institutions on western civilization, that were com-
mon in the golden days of equalitarianism and that even such a
scholarly legalist as Hugh Legaré shared. But unfortunately,
with his generation Bancroft had lost his economic bearings, and he
drove forward somewhat too confidently into the new seas of politi-
cal idealism trusting to the pole-star of emancipated human nature.
As a democrat he was too easily persuaded that democratic Amer-
ica lay in the particular keeping of Providence, and he assumed too
readily that the democratic development of American institutions
was in response to the divine will. It reflects something of the
partisanship of honest patriots who believe God is on their side;
but it served to correct the teachings of Federalists like Richard
Hildreth who insisted that God was on the side of Federalism.
Till Bancroft took up his pen the bias of American chronicles had
been anti-democratic. Every Federalist with leisure, a quill,
and a smattering of historical knowledge, had added his mite to
the Federalist myths that long constituted the body of our his-
tory. The democratic interpretation ran so counter to Boston
tradition that Bancroft found little congeniality amongst his fel-
low historians, and he eventually quitted his native state and took
up his home in Washington.

More representative of the Brahmin spirit was the work of
William H. Prescott, John L. Motley, and Francis Parkman, who
constitute what may be called the romantic school of Boston his-
torians. They sought the romantic in theme and aspired to the
romantic in treatment quite as consciously as did the contemporary
novelists. Of excellent Brahmin strain, with leisure, wealth,
opportunity, they were free to pick and choose as they would.
Prescott and Motley turned away from the partisanships of Amer-
ica, and while Jacksonianism was in full swing the former wrote
his Ferdinand and Isabella, and while the country was wrangling
over slavery the latter wrote his Rise of the Dutch Republic. Broad
in conception and dramatic in treatment, they are admirable
works, yet they suggest that aloofness from the sordid realities


1 Quoted in Stanton, Manual of American Literature, p. 103.


THE REIGN OF THE GENTEEL 439


of America so characteristic of the Brahmin mind. Far more
brilliant and significant was the work of Francis Parkman who
turned his imagination to the far West over which the struggle
for exploration and conquest had long persisted between the French
and English. In his twenties he had made a venturesome trip to
the great plains, and that experience gave life and vitality to his
later historical writings, that were enriched by close research, a
brilliant style, and a creative imagination. The theme he set him-
self was not alone a “history of the American forest,” but a clash
between civilizations—the “feudal, militant, and Catholic France
in conflict with democratic, industrial, and Protestant England”’;
and with fine tenacity of purpose, in the teeth of ill health, he
wrought at his project till the America of the old French War
times was gathered into his pages. The Brahmin mind has contrib-
uted to American letters no more brilliant work than came from
the pen of Francis Parkman.


III


If the highest aspirations of the Brahmin nature sought satis-
faction in poetry, Longfellow may be reckoned its most charac-
teristic product. In his work the romantic, the sentimental,
and the moralistic, blended in such just proportions, and expressed
themselves with such homely simplicity as to hit exactly the cur-
rent taste and establish a reputation that later generations have
difficulty in understanding. A gentle, lovable soul, widely read
and in maturer years possessing a ripe literary scholarship, he
was a skillful purveyor of gentle, lovable ideals. Although he drew
his materials from Spain and Sweden and Italy, from primitive
New England and aboriginal America, it was Germany that largely
provided the staple of his romance. With Emerson and Margaret
Fuller and Theodore Parker, he found Germany a singularly
congenial land—not Konigsberg with its transcendental meta-
physics, nor Weimar with its pagan culture, nor Tubingen with its
higher criticism. Such things, transcendental and critical, he was
not concerned about; it was the minor romantics, Freiligrath
rather than Heine, the gentle melancholy and pervasive Sehn-
sucht of the German folk-nature, that drew him irresistibly and
quickened his sympathetic pen. There was little intellect in Long-
fellow, little creative originality. He was the poet of an uncritical
and unsophisticated generation, as yet untroubled by science and


440 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


industrialism, and his mind was detached from politics and his
conscience rarely disturbed by social questions. He came of
excellent Federalist stock, his father having been a delegate from
Maine to the Hartford Convention; and with his courteous man-
ners he fitted easily into the little world of Cambridge Brahmins.
However one might question his poetry, none could question that
he was a gentleman amongst gentlemen.

If he was never the omnivorous bookman that Lowell was, he
was distinctly a poet of the library. His placid and singularly
happy life was pretty much bounded by his library walls. One
could scarcely have lived more detached from contemporary
America, more effectively insulated against the electric currents
of the times. Though Thoreau might flee to Walden he carried his
questioning intellect with him; even the constable would not
leave him alone there. But Longfellow’s door shut securely
against all intrusion. The winds of doctrine and policy might
rage through the land, but they did not rattle the windows of
his study to disturb his quiet poring over Dante. The transla-
tion of the Divina Commedia would go forward even while the
country was being torn asunder. In a sense such work was his
refuge against the storm and stress of malignant forces that trou-
bled him. He did not like the tumult and the shouting, and much
of Longfellow is compressed into the sonnets that preface the
translation, much of the gentleness of his evasion, and much of
the finer craftsmanship of his later years.


Oft have I seen at some cathedral door
A laborer, pausing in the dust and heat,
Lay down his burden, and with reverent feet
Enter, and cross himself, and on the floor
Kneel to repeat his paternoster o’er;
Far off the noises of the world retreat;
The loud vociferations of the street
Become an undistinguishable roar.
So, as I enter here from day to day,
And leave my burden at this minster gate,
Kneeling in prayer, and not ashamed to pray,
The tumult of the time disconsolate
To inarticulate murmurs dies away,
While the eternal ages watch and wait.


How strange the sculptures that adorn these towers!
This crowd of statues, in whose folded sleeves
Birds build their nests; while canopied with leaves


THE REIGN OF THE GENTEEL 441


Parvis and portal bloom like trellised bowers,
And the vast minster seems a cross of flowers!

But fiends and dragons on the gargoyled eaves

Watch the dead Christ between the living thieves,

And underneath, the traitor Judas lowers!
Ah! from what agonies of heart and brain,

What exultations trampling on despair,

What tenderness, what tears, what hate of wrong,
What passionate outcry of a soul in pain,

Uprose this poem of the earth and air,

This mediaeval miracle of song!


A single incursion Longfellow made into the field of Abolition
controversy, prompted perhaps by Dickens, whose “‘grand chap-
ter on slavery” in American Notes he had read in London. The
seven poems were written to beguile the tedium of a sea voyage.
They are unreal enough to seem quite harmless, yet they created
a decided stir on their appearance. For a Harvard professsor
to express publicly even a mild sympathy with the Abolition
movement, may well have been somewhat perilous, considering the
fate of Professor Follen; and the sacred institution may have
scented a real danger in such romanticisms. Grotesque as these
academic poems were, with their burnt-cork figures, they per-
haps served to romanticize and sentimentalize the negro for nor-
thern minds, as Uncle Tom’s Cabin did a decade later with tre-
mendous effect. Slavery had no weapon against such an attack,
and no doubt Longfellow’s contributions proved serviceable to
the cause of Abolitionism. But this one venture satisfied him, and
having got safely back to his library, he shut the door on the whole
vexatious question of slavery. He was not made for battle, and
causes commanded an unwilling allegiance. Little remained of
his Puritanism save conscience, a sense of struggle against some-
what vague and indolent powers of evil, a pleasant melancholy
that transmuted itself into pleasant verse. He lived vicariously
the lives of other poets, sharing their emotions, repeating their
thoughts, reproducing their pictures; yet adding some individual
color from his own sincere nature. Not richly endowed, he was
more than an echo. He marked the transition from the nebulous
ferment of the creative renaissance to the scholarly culture of Brah-
min Cambridge. After Longfellow came Charles Eliot Norton.
in whose blameless life that culture flowered, and after that came


sterility.


CHAPTER: 1h


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE
Skeptic


Arter his immersion for some months in the Utopian dreams of
Brook Farm, Miles Coverdale in The Blithedale Romance discovered
that he had drifted far from reality. ‘‘No sagacious man,” he
remarked, “will long retain his sagacity, if he live exclusively
among reformers and progressive people, without periodically
returning into the settled system of things, to correct himself by
a new observation from that old standpoint.”


It was now time for me, therefore, to go and hold a little talk with the
conservatives, the writers of the North American Review, the merchants,
the politicians, the Cambridge men, and all those respectable blockheads
who still, in this intangibility and mistiness of affairs, kept a death-grip
on one or two ideas which had not come into vogue since yesterday
morning.


In this suggestive pronouncement the intellectual position of
Hawthorne is revealed. Cool, detached, rationalistic, curiously
inquisitive, he looked out upon the ferment of the times, the clash
of rival philosophies and rival interests, only to bring them into
his study and turn upon them the light of his critical analysis.
One after another he weighed the several faiths of New England,
conservative and transcendental and radical, and ended skeptic.
He was too much of a realist to change fashions in creeds. Time,
experience—he is always remembering—have created men as we
find them, and very likely only time and experience can make them
over into something different. The conservatives would seem to
have common sense on their side, for they are seeking to retain what
has hitherto been won; but the reformers are not without justifica-
tion as well, for impelled by an ardent faith they are seeking to win
new conquests. But whether that which the conservatives defend
so valiantly is worth defending, or whether the goal towards which
the reformers drive so furiously is worth the trouble, are questions
about which the rationalist may be permitted his doubts. The uni-
verse in which he found himself was a moral universe, Hawthorne

442


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 443


on the whole believed; and if that were true then man’s chief
business and/urgent problem was the matter of a sufficient morality.

Radical jn his intellectual processes, he could never become
greatly interested in specific radicalisms. He is often thought of
as a transcendentalist, and his association with the Peabodys
and his venture into Brook Farm might seem to lend color to
such an interpretation. Yet nothing in his intellectual sympathies
marks him as of the school. The polar conceptions of transcen-
dentalism repelled rather than attracted him. Political and meta-
physical speculation left him cold, and the twin revolutionary
forces of the time, French romanticism and German idealism,
never deeply affected his thinking. Amid all the flux he retained
much of the older Calvinist view of life and human destiny.
Though nominally a Unitarian he did not share Channing’s faith in
the perfectibility of man. The buried voice of God that the tran-
scendentalists professed to have discovered in instinct, he greatly
distrusted. Man seemed to him quite as likely to turn out to be
a child of the devil as the first-born of God. Perhaps through a
long and uncertain process he may grow into something nobler
than he now is, but for the present the fact remains that the human
heart, if not desperately wicked, is at least on familiar terms with
evil; too often it is cold, selfish, malignant, and its secret prompt-
ings need watching. Doubting the indwelling presence of the
divine Over-soul, he could find no justification for the transcenden-
tal faith in the excellence of the universe, out of which came the
genial optimism of the Emersonians. Too pronounced a rational-
ist to comprehend the mysticism that lurked in the heart of the
transcendental faith, he remained cold to the revolutionary criti-
cism that was eager to pull down the old temples to make room for
nobler. Eager souls, mystics and revolutionaries, may propose
to refashion the world in accordance with their dreams; but evil
remains, and so long as it lurks in the secret places of the heart,
Utopia is only the shadow of a dream. And so while the Concord
thinkers were proclaiming man to be the indubitable child of God,
Hawthorne was critically examining the question of evil as it
appeared in the light of his own experience. It was the central,
fascinating problem of his intellectual life, and in pursuit of a
solution he probed curiously into the hidden, furtive recesses of
the soul.

The isolation in which he chose to brood over the problem,


444 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


seeking to take the solution by surprise in unguarded moments,
was the natural consequence of his temperament and his habits.
He lived singularly remote from common interests, singularly
self-sufficient. Both as thinker and artist he suffered from his
self-imposed isolation. The twelve years of his apprenticeship,
closely immured and given over to spinning cobwebs about the
old Puritan rafters, drawing the stuff of his romance out of his
own bowels, may have facilitated the development of technic,
but it laid narrow limitations on the matter of his art. Intellec-
tually unlocalized in his Yankee world, he was the romancer of
a dead but unforgotten past, at home only where the New England
conscience brooded over sin—subduing the old nightmares to less
terrifying dreams, intruding his doubts into old dogmas yet never
emerging from the old shadows. Although he was a child of the
liberation and had broken the web that Calvinism had woven
about the mind of New England, he did not choose to quit the
world from whose bondage he had freed himself. He would ex-
amine the old problem in a new light. In rejecting Calvinism as
a religion, he retained it as a background for his inquisitive prob-
ing. It appealed to his imagination after his reason had rejected
its dogmas; it determined his art after it had ceased to command
his loyalty. In consequence, all his life Hawthorne dwelt between
worlds. Though at times he tried to establish contact with Yan-
kee reality, though he essayed to establish an intellectual rapport
with his generation, he never quite succeeded, but remained to
the last isolated, a frequenter of the twilight.

Only in a narrow and very special sense was Hawthorne a ro-
mantic. With the romance of love and adventure he was never
concerned; what interested him was the romance of ethics—the
distortions of the soul under the tyranny of a diseased imagination.
How little he shares in common with other romantics is revealed
in his detachment from his native Salem. The place was not lack-
ing in picturesque charm, present and past. During the long
years he spent in his Salem study, the city was rising to the zenith
of its brisk sea life, with its ships in the China trade, its venture-
some fisheries, its echoes of the whaling industry at Nantucket.
Materials for romance were lying all about the Salem wharves—
such a show of canvas and spars and rigging, such briny smells,
such suggestions of far voyages to outlandish places, such strange
figures slipping in from the ends of the earth—such romantic


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 445


promptings in short as would have intoxicated the imagination of
Herman Melville, and that Joseph Hergesheimer wove into the
rich tapestries of Java Head. A romantic could scarcely have
found in America a setting better calculated to awaken a sense of
brave adventure than in old Salem; yet for three years Hawthorne
sat in the Custom House, with such materials all about him, and
then turned away to the seventeenth century to write of Hester
Prynne. For a man gifted with imagination to fail to lift his eyes
to the horizon beyond which the hurrying ships were seeking
strange markets, and instead to turn them in upon a shadowy
world of half unreal characters; to overlook the motley picturesque
in the foreground of the actual, in order to brood over an old adul-
tery and twist it into theological sin, can be explained only on
the ground that Hawthorne was concerned with ethical rather
than romantic values, that he was interested rather in the problem
of evil than in the trappings of romance. Aloofness of time and
place served to isolate the problem, stripping away the wrappings
of the physical, delocalizing it, transmuting the individual act
into the universal. Thus isolated, Hester’s sin becomes a symbol of
that ancient evil which forever waylays human life and by strange
perversions brings havoc to our hopes—the greatest havoc to him
whose heart, like Chillingsworth’s, is cold, selfish, malignant.

This temperamental aloofness from objective reality was both
the strength and the weakness of Hawthorne’s art. In choosing
to follow the way of the inner life he was true to his Puritan breed-
ing. The perpetual turning-in of the mind upon itself, the long
introspective brooding over human motives, came naturally to
one who lived in the shadow of a Puritan past. In their anxious
concern over sin the Puritans had become in some measure psy-
chologists; how else could the secret impulses of the soul be probed
and its dark workings laid bare? Hawthorne was only doing what
Jonathan Edwards before him had done in his psychological
clinic of the Great Awakening—examining the reactions of sin
on conscience and character. From this comes the simplicity of
his theme and the compelling unity of his handling. To be sure it
is pathological phenomena that he deals with, as the phenomena
that Edwards dealt with in his Narrative of the Surprising Work
of God, were pathological; and like Edwards, Hawthorne is led
into insubstantial and tenuous regions where he breathes with
dificulty. The substantial world of Puritan reality that Samuel


446 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Sewall knew, Hawthorne seems scarcely to have been aware of;
he created instead his own Puritanism, fantastic and unreal. He
was forever dealing with shadows, and he knew that he was deal-
ing with shadows, and this consciousness was a perennial source of
doubt and uncertainty that bred self-distrust. In setting himself
the task of dramatizing sin rather than sinners, of creating romance
out of the problem of evil, he encountered difficulties that op-
pressed him. The well-springs of his imagination were constantly
running dry and he must wait till they filled again slowly. Hence
the ‘development of his art is towards ever greater elaboration
of scantier and scantier materials, until the joy of the whole be-
comes lost at last in the milder pleasures of detail.”’4

From the grave difficulties inherent in his theme came the in-
veterate habit of sliding into symbolism and allegory—from this
and from the narrowness of his emotional life and the restrictions
of his sympathies. The cold thin atmosphere of his work, one
comes increasingly to feel, was due not alone or chiefly to the sever-
ity Of his artistic restraint that forbade all rioting of the sensuous
imagination; it was due rather to a lack of nourishment, to a
poverty of ideas and sensuous imagery. His inveterate skepti-
cism robbed him of much, but his inhibitions robbed him of more.
A romantic uninterested in adventure and afraid of sex is likely
to become somewhat graveled for matter. Like the Pyncheon
fowls, Hawthorne’s imagination had suffered from too long in-
breeding; it had grown anemic, and every grain of fancy is clucked
over and picked at and made much of. Once an idea comes into
his head he is loath to let it go, but he must turn it about curiously
and examine it from every angle. The striking chapter in The
House of the Seven Gables, where the death of Judge Pyncheon is
played upon so persistently, is only an extreme example of his
habitual method. The tongues that wagged over the minister’s
black veil were no more inquisitive and tireless than Hawthorne’s
when his imagination is fired by a vivid image. He will not let
it go till it is sucked as dry as last year’s cider cask. It is the way
of one to whom ideas are few and precious. Knowing how little
is in the bottle he will linger out the flavor of every drop. Hence
his fondness for symbolism, and hence his frequent lapse into al-
legory when imagination grows dull. Because Hawthorne was an


1Amy Louise Reed, “ Self-Portraiture in the Work of Nathaniel Hawthorne,”
Studies in Philology, Vol. XXIII, No. I.


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 447


artist he was saved from the shipwreck that such a method might
seem to invite; yet perhaps it is not unreasonable to suggest that
he was an artist for the reason that only through the mastery of
a refined technic could his scanty stock of ideas make any show at
all.

The intellectual poverty that resulted from his long immuring
himself in a void is sufficiently revealed in his American Note-
Books. In the somewhat tedious volume covering the eighteen
years between 1835 and 1853—the most vigorous years of the
renaissance—there is no suggestion of interest in the creative ideas
of the time, in metaphysics or politics or economics or humanita-
rianism. It is the occasional record of one who lived an unintellec-
tual life, and it makes but a paltry showing when set beside the
journals of Emerson for the same years. Few books are referred
to; systems of thought lie beyond his ken. Compared with the
thinkers and scholars of the time he is only an idler lying in wait
for such casual suggestions as he may turn into stories. Almost
childish is his delight in marvels. There is something of the spirit
of Cotton Mather in his persistent recording of the gruesome and
fantastic, in the hope that they will open a quarry for his art. In
the year that Emerson wrote Nature, Hawthorne set down the
following amongst some dozens of similar suggestions: “A snake
taken into a man’s stomach and nourished there from fifteen to
thirty-five years, tormenting him most horribly. A type of envy
or some other evil passion.”” The Note-Books, of course, are very
inadequate records of his life, and yet that a mind should lie in
wait for such grotesqueries, and treasure them, offers food for
speculation. After his marriage they are much less frequent
and his jottings become more normal—a change which the Freu-
dians, no doubt, would be ready enough to explain.

The one great adventure of Hawthorne’s life was the plunge
into Brook Farm Utopianism, a plunge that only proved the waters
colder and less hospitable than he had hoped. It was a curious
adventure for one of his temperament to engage in, and his even-
tual disillusion might have been foretold. Perhaps it may be
explained as reaction from his long isolation. The glowing en-
thusiasms of the times must often have tempted him to leave his
narrow walls, and share the intellectual and emotional stimulus
that others professed to discover in the work of making society
over. Whatever the explanation the venture turned out to be a


448 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


failure. His skepticism followed him there and came to later
expression in The Blithedale Romance, a work as thin and unreal
as anything he ever did. It is worse. There is in its pages more
than a hint of ill humor that colors his interpretation of the Fou-
rieristic stage of the experiment, and slips out in his portraiture of
the major characters. Hollingsworth both fascinates and repels
him. A dramatization of the intransigent spirit of reform, his
single-minded zeal for righteousness, is subtly fused with an intol-
erant egotism that destroys Zenobia, cows Priscilla, and wrecks
the venture. Perhaps Albert Brisbane may have been in the back-
ground of Hawthorne’s mind when he drew Hollingsworth, for it
was Brisbane who influenced the change he seems to have resented;
perhaps Garrison may have served to fill out the picture. Whoever
it was, the figure of Hollingsworth is Hawthorne’s reply to the
summons of the social conscience of the times, done by a critic
whose insistent skepticism will not shut its eyes, but discovers
under a new masquerade the ancient evil of a cold imperious heart.
Seventeen years before he wrote The Blithedale Romance, he had
jotted down in his Note-Book the conception out of which came the
later portrait:


A sketch to be given of a modern reformer,—a type of the extreme doc-
trines on the subject of slaves, cold water, and other such topics. He goes
about the streets haranguing most eloquently, and is on the point of
making many converts, when his labors are suddenly interrupted by the
appearance of the keeper of a mad-house, whence he has escaped. Much
may be made of the idea. (American Note-Books, pp. 20-21.)


Hawthorne’s interpretation of Margaret Fuller is not so easily
explained. Perhaps it came out of a subconscious personal spleen.
Her rich paganism may well have disturbed a nature so reticent
as his, so restrained by certain Puritan inhibitions. In an early
sketch he commented on the unfitness of authorship for women,
on the ground that “there is a delicacy . . . that perceives, or
fancies, a sort of impropriety in the display of woman’s natal
mind to the gaze of the world, with indications by which its
inmost secrets may be searched out” (quoted by Amy Louise
Reed, “‘Self-Portraiture in the Work of Nathaniel Hawthorne”).
Margaret’s frankness in displaying her natal mind to the gaze of
the world, her bold discussion of prohibited subjects like prostitu-
tion, could not fail to rub across Hawthorne’s deepest prejudices.


NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE 449


She was too vigorous and outspoken, too consciously endowed
with sex, too frankly feminist, not to have ruffled his instinctive
squeamishness. It was not her radical feminism in the abstract
that offended him, if he may be trusted; but certainly in the
concrete. A sexless feminism would not greatly disturb a mind
tolerantly familiar with the current radicalisms; but the frank
avowal of sex touched a sensitive nerve. It offended certain
latent Puritanisms in him. He was fascinated by Zenobia and yet
afraid of her—or of himself; so his hero falls in love with the ane-
mic and witless Priscilla. How characteristic of a mind long fed
_ on symbols, to turn away from the wealth of reality and prefer a
shadow!

After Brook Farm came no further experiments in the unsatis-
factory business of a rapprochement with his generation. His
marriage with Sophia Peabody brought with it the prosaic duties
of providing for a family, and he had no leisure to play with social
reform. Abolitionism he would have none of, nor perfectionism,
nor Jacksonianism—the futility of such things became for him a
fixed idea. That he once had the courage to make his plunge he
seems to have rejoiced over: ‘‘Whatever else I may repent of,”
Miles Coverdale wrote, “let it be reckoned neither among my
sins nor follies that I once had faith and force enough to form
generous hopes of the world’s destiny,—yes!—and to do what
in me lay for their accomplishment.” Yet the truer Hawthorne
is to be found in the judgments set down in the Note-Book: “It
is my opinion that a man’s soul may be buried and perish under a
dung-heap, or in a furrow of the field, just as well as under a
pile of money.”’ ‘Oh, labor is the curse of the world, and nobody
can meddle with it without becoming proportionably brutified.”
The man who wrote that had much to learn about life and society,
‘much that he might have learned from Thoreau. But Hawthorne
never grappled with economics as Thoreau did, and he learned no
more from him than from Melville, or from Emerson, or from any
of the books he read by the wise of other days. Self-sufficient he
remained to the last, hard-headed and practical, yet missing many
a deeper truth that more receptive minds discover. He was travel-
ing the path that leads to sterility, and the lifelong business of
playing Paul Pry to the secrets of the conscience brought him at
last to the comment, “Taking no root I soon weary of any soil in
which I may be temporarily deposited. The same impatience I


450 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


sometimes feel, or conceive of, as regards this earthly life.” He
was the extreme and finest expression of the refined alienation
from reality that in the end palsied the creative mind of New
England. Having consumed his fancies, what remained to feed
on?


CHAPTER III
THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN


I
OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES
Beacon Street Wit


_ Since the death of Holmes in 1894, his reputation has shrunk and

dwindled with that of his group. With the rise of other literary
schools, New England standards have been submitted to a some-
what rude overhauling, and Brahmin ideals are no longer reckoned
so authoritative as they were once believed to be, nor the supremacy
of Boston genius so indisputable. Concord has risen as Cambridge
and Beacon Street have declined, and in the shadow of Emerson
and Thoreau, the wit of Back Bay is in danger of being obscured.
Unsupported by his physical presence, his writings seem far less
vital than they did when the echoes of his clever talk were still
sounding through them. Certain intellectual shortcomings are
more obvious when his works are brought together in a library
edition: in the mass his prose seems far more discursive and his
verse thinner and more jingly than when the several bits appeared
singly, personally sponsored by the author in whose cleverness
everybody delighted. Read with sprightly vivacity to a group of
sympathetic listeners at the mellowest hour of the dinner, his
occasional verse must have sparkled brightly and have gone off
with such a crackle of laughter as to convince the Back Bay
that the asthmatic little gentleman with bubbling spirits was a
veritable poet, on the same friendly footing with the muse that he
was with Beacon Street. So frequently on pleasant occasions
did Holmes appear before his classmates and friends copy in hand,
so often and so happily did he respond to the invitation to write
something, that it would have been ungenerous of Boston—and
Boston meant the Back Bay, the Saturday Club and Harvard
College—not to have crowned him with a wreath of her own ivy.

For upwards of half a century, throughout the prime and on
past the Indian Summer of the New England renaissance, Holmes
was Boston’s own wit, inexhaustible in clever sayings, bubbling

451


452 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


over with satire and sentiment, the autocrat of her social gather-
ings, the acknowledged head of her mutual admiration society.
Not since Robert Treat Paine had there been such a master of
Yankee small talk. If he monopolized the conversation he dealt
generously with his listeners. The stream was copious and the
waters were never bitter or astringent, but with just enough ef-
fervescence to suit the Boston palate. As a young man the wit
sparkled more brightly; as an old man the humor exuded more
gently. At twenty-five he described William IV of England with
republican irreverence: “The King blew his nose twice, and wiped
the royal perspiration repeatedly from a face which is probably
the largest uncivilized spot in England”’; late in life he commented
on his obvious fondness of praise: ‘‘I was always patient with those
who thought well of me, and accepted all their tributes with some-
thing more than resignation.”” Taste had changed with the times
in Boston. Wit was yielding place to humor; eighteenth-century
frankness had given way to nineteenth-century refinement; Vic-
torianism was in full and vigorous bloom in the Beacon Street of
1850, and so Holmes became a Yankee Victorian. The morals
of an impeccable society required no castigation, and he was under
no obligation to satirize vice. Audacious sallies would have been
reckoned in bad taste. Ifthe old-fashioned masculine wit of Rob-
ert Treat Paine, with its echoes of Charles Churchill, had pre-
sumed to intrude itself into the teacup society of Back Bay draw-
ing-rooms, the indignant Doctor would have shown it the door,
and the small talk would have flowed again, decorous and clean
and amiable, far more refined than the wit that had delighted their
fathers.

And yet, though a full-blown Victorian in manners and tastes,
Holmes was something of a child of the eighteenth century at
heart. The situation in which he found himself might have proved
disconcerting if he had chosen to speculate upon it. By nature
a thoroughgoing rationalist, he lived in a romantic age. A gentle-
man of “parts and learning,” with a quick and lively fancy that
blossomed in the pat phrase and neat couplet, he loved wit and
hated dullness with true Augustan zeal. The great days of Queen
Anne were a perennial inspiration to him. He clung to the heroic
couplet through all the changes of romantic styles. He moralized
in rime with the fluency if not the finish of Pope.! He satirized

1See A Rhymed Lesson.


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 453


Calvinism with an honest wrath that he might have learned of
Swift. He commented in his table-talk on the manners of the
times with the chatty discursiveness of Addison. Like the earlier
wits, he discovered a deep sympathy for the maturity and ripe
wisdom of the classics. Writing to his friend John O. Sargent, he
remarked:


I wish I had become as familiar with some classic author as you are
with Horace. There is nothing like one of those perennial old fellows for
good old gentlemenly reading; and for wit and wisdom, what is there to
compare with the writings of Horace? You make me envious,—I vow I
‘shall have to get up Juvenal or Catullus, naughty but nice, or somebody
that nobody else knows. . . . I get so tired of the damp sheets of all
sorts of literati (worse than the “screeching women of Marblehead’’) and
clamorous essayists, that I want something always by me, calm, settled
beyond cavilling criticism,—a cool, clear draught of Falernian that has
been somewhere near two thousand years in the cellar. (Morse, Life and
Letters, Vol. II, p. 311.)


But unhappily what could he do? He was the most sociable of
persons, and he lived and moved in an atmosphere surcharged with
various and sundry romanticisms. How could he preserve the
spirit of quiet rationalism, or assure himself gentlemanly leisure,
with a host of “isms” clamoring in his ears? He was amongst
them even if he was not of them. He strove to keep himself aloof,
unfuddled by heady idealisms and untroubled by strident reforms,
but he could not shut his study door against the infection. He
could not deny his generation, and inevitably he suffered his
thought to be streaked and pied with the current romanticism.
He gave Lyceum lectures on Wordsworth and Keats and Shelley,
and their influence seeped into his verse. The Longfellow fame
was all about him, and he fell to composing ballads and idyls and
tales, quite as if he did not know better. Romantic garments
fitted him ill, yet he persisted in trying them on. He even got to
like them, and came finally to prefer The Chambered Nautilus
above his other poems—a strange perversion of taste for a rational-
ist. The One-Hoss Shay is worth a volume of such pretty mor-
alizing. Parson Turell’s Legacy and The Moral Bully are in better
vein—witty, lucid, critical—than any half-hearted ventures in
romanticism. The eighteenth-century wit does appear to advan-
tage patched with Victorian sentiment, and he should have been
rationalist enough to know it.


454 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


As a Beacon Street Victorian Holmes was as full of virtuous
prejudices as an egg is full of meat; but as a rationalist, with a
modest scientific equipment that came from his professional train-
ing, he kept the windows of his mind open to the winds of scien-
tific inquiry that were blowing briskly to the concern of orthodox
souls. Many a barnacled craft was foundering in those gales, and
Holmes watched their going-down with visible satisfaction. He
was perhaps the most militant Unitarian amongst Boston laymen.
Hatred of Calvinistic dogma was an obsession with him; it domi-
nated his thought and colored much of his work, Elsie Venner and
his table-talk as frankly as The One-Hoss Shay. The criticism to
which he subjected the old-school dogmas was always vehement,
often vindictive. Long after the battle had been won he kept annoy-
ing the retreating enemy. His father, Abiel Holmes, was a rigor-
ous follower of the Edwardean school, who after nearly forty years’
service lost his pulpit for refusing to compromise with Unitarian
liberalism that had gained the fortress of the near-by College Yard;
and the stalwart among his congregation, having to yield the build-
ing, the endowment and the communion plate, were forced to es-
tablish themselves anew. In this unhappy schism that came about
the time Oliver Wendell Holmes was graduating from Harvard
in 1829, the latter went with the liberals. He had broken with
the Calvinism of his father, and in the reaction he went further
than most along the path of Unitarian rationalism—not the path
of Channing that led to French romanticism and transcendental-
ism, but the path of Andrews Norton that led to a harder-headed
rationalism. The reasons for this shift are sufficiently evident
in his writings. At his father’s table he had watched too many
“whey-faced” brethren to like the breed—men with ‘‘a weedy
flux of ill-conditioned hair,’’ whose

acrid words
Turn the sweet milk of kindness into curds,
Or with grim logic prove, beyond debate,
That all we love is worthiest of hate,
As the scarred ruffian of the pirate’s deck,


When his long swivel rakes the staggering wreck!
(The Moral Bully.)


The words are bitter, but they ae the length of his reaction,
from the Calvinism on which he had been over-fed at home and_/
at Phillips Andover Academy; and they suggest also why, next:


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 455


to Theodore Parker, Holmes came to be the best hated of Boston
Unitarians amongst the orthodox. On this one subject he was
militantly radical, never shirking debate, but whetting the edge
of his satire and impaling his victim neatly with his logic. He
took sardonic delight in turning Calvinism against itself, in the
clever reductio ad absurdum of the Edwardean argument. Perhaps
this major intellectual interest appears most adequately in his
picture of the Master, the autobiographical rationalist whom he
introduces into The Poet of the Breakfast Table. A dabbler in the
law, theology and medicine, a philosophic contemplator of the
Order of Things, who refused to permit ‘‘the territory of a man’s
mind” to be “‘fenced in,” who agreed with the Poet in thinking
somewhat ill of the specialist who dedicated his life to the study
of beetles, preferring to range widely through time and eternity,
who followed Darwin and was deep in bacteriology, trying ‘‘curi-
ous experiments in spontaneous generation”—this was Holmes
on the intellectual side, a genial disseminator of the latest scien-
tific speculations, a tolerant amateur of the things of the mind, a
friendly dabbler in absolute moralities, who hoped “‘to do some
sound thinking in heaven” if he ever got there, but who was too
pleasantly engaged with Beacon Street to settle things now.

In his own special way, then, as a Brahmin of the Brahmins,
Holmes was a rebel, a puller-down of worm-eaten structures, a
freethinker rejoicing when free thought tossed a cargo of obsolete
dogma into Boston Bay, or drew out a linchpin of some respectable
social coach. He loved Boston the more because he believed that
Boston was the home of free thought and free speech, the capital of
American brains, the intellectual rebel of the continent. He did not
agree with Emerson’s strictures, or Parker’s. He would not concede
that Boston was the ‘“‘home of the Hunkers.”’ It was provincial;
it had crooked little streets; but
I tell you Boston has opened, and kept open, more turnpikes that lead
straight to free thought and free speech and free deeds than any other


city of live men or dead men—I don’t care how broad their streets are,
nor how high their steeples. (The Professor at the Breakfast Table, p. 4.)


When he contemplated the future of America, with Boston as its
intellectual leader, he was carried on the crest of an exuberant
optimism:


A new nursery, Sir, with Lake Superior and Huron and all the rest of
em for washbasins! A new race, and a whole new world for the new-born


456 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


human soul to work in! And Boston is the brain of it, and has been any
time these hundred years! That’s all I claim for Boston—that it is the
thinking centre of the continent, and therefore of the planet. (Jdid.,


p. 104.)


If the mind is free other things will take care of themselves—
this pretty much sums up Holmes’s social philosophy. Only, he
would add, when the mind is used to its freedom, it will create a
culture that is well-mannered, that does not run to extravagant
agitation, that considers time, place, and outward circumstance
in effecting needful changes—the quiet decency of Channing rather
than the noisier way of Parker. The Brahmin way, after all, was
the better way, Holmes believed; and Channing was a Brahmin:


Parson Channing put a little oil on one linchpin, and slipped it out so
softly, the first thing they knew about it was the wheel of that side was
down. T’other fellow’s at work now; but he makes more noise about it.
When the linchpin comes out on his side, there’ll be a jerk, I tell you!
Some think it will spoil the old cart, and they pretend to say that there are
valuable things in it which may get hurt. Hope not—hope not. But this
is the great macadamizing place—always cracking up something. (Jbid.,


p- 19.)

Certainly not on the intellectual side could Holmes be set down as
a conservative. He did not relish any such imputation and de-
fended himself with vigor:


If to be a conservative is to let all the drains of thought choke up and
keep the soul’s windows down—to shut out the sun from the east and the
wind from the west—to let the rats run free in the cellar, and the moths
feed their fill in the chambers, and the spiders weave their lace before the
mirrors, till the soul’s typhus is bred out of our neglect, and we begin to
snore in its coma or rave in its delirium—I, Sir, am a bonnet-rouge, a red-
cap of the barricades, my friends, rather than a conservative. (Ibid.,
p- 18.)


It was this spirit of rationalism that made him—at some risk
of unpopularity—an unsparing critic of romantic equalitarianism.
Here again is an echo of the older century. Neither the Jackson-
ian nor the transcendental version of the new gospel found favor
in his eyes; both seemed to run counter to the open facts of history.
As a realist he discovered justification for John Adams’s doctrine
of economic determinism: all society, he was convinced, tends to
stratify in lines of wealth distribution, in America as well as in
Europe, and no dogmas can prevent it. He went further and in-
sisted that the possession of wealth makes possible comfort, ease,


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 457


leisure, culture; that those lacking wealth are necessarily unfree
and their lives in consequence are meaner and narrower. Much
of his criticism of Yankee villagers and countrymen—and except
Cooper, he was perhaps the most critical commentator on Yankee
provincialisms of speech and manners—springs from the conviction
that a niggardly economics had created a niggardly society. He
desired more wealth to the end of more culture. He was too com-
pletely Brahmin to set material well-being as the ultimate goal
of the competitive struggle; that seemed to him the object of State
Street and of the plutocracy he frankly detested. In The Poet at
the Breakfast Table he apologizes for calling one of his characters
a capitalist, on the ground that “the word seems to be equivalent
to highway robbery in the new gospel of Saint Petroleum.”
Wealth as a means to power he would have none of; but wealth
as a means to leisure, and leisure as a means to cultivated living,
he was fond of extolling. The machinery of Brahmin life must be
well oiled, but the life is more than the machinery. Always he
returned to the intellectual as the hallmark of every society that
may be accounted excellent, and his instinctive dislike of the middle
class was founded on its intellectual sterility. It lived opulently
but meanly; its rich dinners wanted the spice of wit, its ostenta-
tious display lacked the salt of manners. It was vulgar at heart,
and Holmes hated vulgarity even more than he hated John Cal-
vin’s dogmas.

Unfortunately his Brahminism sealed pretty tightly certain
windows of his mind that might better have been kept open. A
radical in the field of theology where personal concern brought
him to serious grappling with the problem, a tolerant rationalist
in the realm of the intellect, he remained a cheerfully contented
conservative in other fields. He was unconsciously insulated
against the currents of social and political thought flowing all about
him. Economic inequality he accepted rather too complacently.
His daily life ran so easy and comfortable a course as never to
prod him into questioning how other lives might be running. By
instinct and training he was an aristocrat, and he was never at
pains to conceal his preference for the well born and well mannered.
He professed a philanthropic sympathy for the cause of the slave,
but he shared the Beacon Street dislike of agitation—it was not
well bred and it might bring down more things than he cared to
have brought down. The most completely class-conscious of the


458 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Boston writers, he deprecated all proletarian appeals. They were
not, in his opinion, “‘wholesome moral entertainment for the
dangerous classes. Boys must not touch off their squibs and crack-
ers too near the powder-magazine.” The less said about the wrongs
of labor, the better—at least publicly. Social strata being de-
termined by economics, the agitator is little better than a firebrand.


You can’t keep a dead level long, if you burn everything down flat to
make it. Why, bless your soul, if all the cities of the world were reduced
to ashes, you’d have a new set of millionaires in a couple of years or so,
out of the trade in potash. In the meantime, what is the use of setting
the man with the silver watch against the man with the gold watch, and
the man without any against them both? . . . Here we are travelling
through the desert together like the children of Israel. Some pick up
more manna and catch more quails than others, and ought to help their
hungry neighbors more than they do; . . . but we don’t want the in-
cendiary’s pillar of a cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night to lead us
in the march to civilization, and we don’t want a Moses who will smite the
rock, not to bring out water for our thirst, but petroleum to burn us all
up with. (The Poet at the Breakfast Table, pp. 5-6.)


In his attitude toward the present comfortable arrangement of
society, Holmes was no rebel. He was not callous to the evils of
society, but he was willing to take a longer time in the march to-
wards civilization than more exigent souls wished; it was a pleas-
ant march on the whole, and why quarrel over the difference in
packs? If his attitude was not the indifferentism of the well-
to-do, it was near kin to it. He reflected the negative quali-
ties of Unitarianism, rather than the positive, the free mind rather
than the tender conscience. His social bias is sufficiently revealed
in the tributes of praise he bestowed so generously. Among those
whom he delighted to honor, the names of Garrison, Phillips,
Parker, Thoreau, Greeley, John Brown, do not appear; instead he
offered his praises to Everett, Webster, Bryant, Whittier, Agassiz,
Parkman, Wilkie Collins, the Grand Duke Alexis, and a host of
lesser celebrities known to the Back Bay. His heroes were re-
spectable souls rather than militant. As a critic his vision seems
to have been blurred by certain astigmatisms, and he discovered
heroic qualities more readily in the militant dead than in the mili-
tant living. He delighted in the Boston of ’76, but it is reason-
ably cretain that if he had lived then he would have walked the
streets of that older Boston as a genial Tory, and would have
suffered the fate of other gentlemen who found it desirable to with-


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 459


draw with Gage’s Redcoats—unless, indeed, his love of the place
had held him despite his politics.

In his literary work Holmes was always the talker rather than
the writer. The charm of the vivid and racy colloquial marks
every page. A clever aphorism or telling pun is the objective of
every paragraph, and it explodes with a brilliant shower of sparks.
But like every talker his discursiveness is inveterate; he wanders
far in pursuit of his point and sometimes returns empty-handed.
He was always an amateur; life was too agreeable for him to take

the trouble to become an artist. The essay was his most congenial
_ form—his novels are to be taken no more seriously than his occa-
sional verse. Elsie Venner wraps up the familiar problem of moral
determinism in pleasantly discursive chat of Yankee bumpkin-
ism in contrast with Yankee Brahminism, and he returns his im-
peccable hero to Beacon Street, after his sojourn in the provinces,
to reward him with the Brahmin rewards—a munificent practice,
a charming wife, and an exalted social position. What richer
reward could be desired by one who had tasted to the full the
mellow flavor of that society? Staid, delightful, self-satisfied,
righteous little Beacon Street! Last refuge and citadel of the old
Brahmin respectability; basking in the afternoon sunshine of its
culture, not realizing that its sun is already well past the meridian;
in love with its own virtues and unaware that the morrow will
see the invasion of the Huns and Vandals of plutocracy, to whose
plethoric bank books Brahmin culture must eventually bow—
who would not have liked it? It was something after all to have
been its favorite wit, its ready oracle, its clever poet, who in prais-
ing his fellow Brahmins was well aware that he discreetly praised
his own admirable qualities. Kindly, delightful, fortunate Dr.
Holmes! chief citizen of the Hub of the Universe! He was born
and lived with a silver spoon in his mouth, and if a grudging
posterity inclines to rate him and his little world somewhat lower
than he rated them, what difference can that make to him? Toler-
ant himself, we should perhaps emulate his example, and not in-
sist too rudely that he is only a minor figure in American literature.


460 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND
I
JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL
Cambridge Brahmin


Whatever the critics may eventually come to say about Lowell,
he was certainly the ablest and most distinguished of the old
/ Cambridge breed, in the days when the Brahmin caste was dis-
integrating and Brahmin ideals losing their hold on New England
—a man of fine native abilities in whom Harvard culture did its
best to strike fire and light and understanding to serve as a beacon
to the rest of America. He was not of the Concord line of tran-
scendental individualists, nor of the militant strain of reforming
enthusiasts; but of the true Brahmin line of Josiah Quincy and
Edward Everett and Oliver Wendell Holmes—men of sound cul-
ture who could serve God valiantly in the social station in which
He had placed them, without wanting to pull down the old church
to build a new. Like Charles Eliot Norton—clarum et venerabile
nomen—he had no plans of a new building in his pocket, but was
content to enlarge and embellish the old. He would serve culture
rather than causes. His gifts were Brahmin gifts, his prejudices
were Brahmin prejudices; and so in spite of a “‘certain spright-
liness of brain” that tempted him to rebel at the aridity of the
scholastic commons on which he fed, and in spite of certain youth-
ful vagaries and incursions into indiscreet places, he remained at
bottom a Harvard conservative, content with his birthright, hope-
ful that his ways were God’s ways. ‘This suffices to explain the
extraordinary reputation of Lowell in Cambridge circles, and the
difficulty with which it made headway elsewhere. Though he
traveled much in his library—as Thoreau would say—his preju-
dices remained narrowly local. To the last he remained extraor-
dinarily parochial.

Yet the culture he served so faithfully never fruited in wisdom.
He was never quite certain of himself, of what he really believed.
He was fond of standing off and studying himself quizzically, to
learn what sort of person he was; yet he was swayed by so many
impulses he was never quite sure what sort of legs were under
him. He was hopelessly bewildered by his own vast disorder.
His mind was as cluttered as a garret, filled with an endless mis-
cellany of odds and ends. Life puzzled him, as it puzzles every
serious mind; but he allowed himself to be too easily discouraged


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 461


by his inveterate unwillingness to think. He never speculated
widely or analyzed critically. Ideas, systems of thought, intel-
lectual and social movements, he had no interest in; he was con-
tent to remain a bookish amateur in letters, loitering over old
volumes for the pleasure of finding apt phrases and verbal curiosi-
ties. With all his reading, history remained a blank to him; and
science he would have none of. ‘‘I hate it,” he confessed late in
life; “I hate it as a savage hates writing, because I fear it will
hurt me somehow.” A good many things hurt him in those later
years, and it was characteristic of him to say, “I continue to shut
_ my eyes resolutely in certain speculative directions.”” He defined
culture as “‘intelligent purpose”; yet of such intelligent purpose
his intellectual life revealed little. Naturally he did not relish the
theological unsettlement that came with the advance of scientific
inquiry. Leslie Stephen’s rationalism troubled him, and after
reading the former’s English Thought in the Eighteenth Century,
he wrote, “‘I am very much in the state of mind of the Bretons who
revolted against the Revolutionary Government and wrote upon
their banners, ‘Give us back our God!’” (Letters, Vol. II, p. 168.)
Neither did he relish the economic unsettlement the industrial
revolution was bringing to Cambridge and America, but he looked
back longingly to the quiet days “‘before our individuality had
been trampled out of us by the Irish mob.” Standing between
the older America and the new, with the foundations disintegrat-
ing under his feet, he confused the disorder in his own mind with
the disorder in the external world of society, and desperately
sought to cling to his ancient hopes. A pathetic yearning for
orderliness in an age that has grown heedless of it was natural
enough in a mind that had come to expect little of life; but surely
orderliness, like charity, should begin at home.

It was, perhaps, not altogether his fault. His impulses were
liberal and his mind generous, but he was never strong enough to
overcome the handicap of the Lowell ancestry and training. When
he spoke of himself half whimsically as a natural Tory, he was
putting his finger on the Brahmin strain. The sanctity of the
Lowell blood is a commonplace in New England; but that it was
Tory blood is less frequently remarked. His grandfather, John
Lowell, to be sure, was visited by certain humanitarian compunc-
tions, and in 1772 convinced himself that at Common Law slavery
could not stand, and was eager to put it to the test in Massachu-


462 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


setts. But John Lowell was high in the councils of the Federal-
ist party, and a judge, and it is a safe guess that his radicalism did
not go deep. Certainly, the next generation was stalwartly
conservative. The three brothers represented the three major
professions of law, theology, and business, that constituted the
New England hierarchy. His father, Charles Lowell, after travel-
ing abroad, was settled as pastor of the West Church, Boston—
Jonathan Mayhew’s church—a post he held for fifty-six years.
He was a stout Federalist, a good hater of Jefferson,? a pleasant,
cautious gentleman who refused to be drawn into the bitter
Unitarian-Trinitarian controversy of the day—as unlike the mili-
tant Mayhew as a conventional soul could well be.* His uncle,
John Lowell, was a capable lawyer-politician, one of the directing
minds of the Federalist machine, earnestly engaged in defending
Massachusetts against the wicked Republicans. Another uncle,
Francis Cabot Lowell, was an enterprising capitalist, founder of
the city of Lowell, whose multiplying spindles, it was hoped,
would turn the wives and daughters of Yankee farmers, and the
poverty-stricken Irish immigrants, into efficient revenue-pro-
ducers for State Street securities.

From this pleasant background of Brahmin conservatisms,
Lowell went forth into a world given over to momentous changes,
contemptuous of all Brahmin standards, to find his way as he
might. An original mind would have marked out its own path,
as Emerson did; a conventional mind would have gone with the
better sort, as Josiah Quincy did; but Lowell was neither Emerson
nor Quincy. Sensitive to change, he was rarely self-reliant;
generous in sympathies, he was timid in convictions. He was no
Come-outer to stand alone against the world, but unconsciously
he took color from his environment and was always glad to
find a staff to lean on. It was fortunate for his peace of mind
that he never realized how frequently he was no more than an
echo of other minds; yet the confusions and contradictions that
mark off the several periods of his life can be explained in no
other way. From Brahminism he drifted to radicalism, and from
radicalism back to a modified Brahminism; and these changes
resulted from no native intellectual unfolding, but from certain
dominant personalities who drew him aside from his natural or-


2 See Letters, Vol. I, p. 82.
8 See Hale, James Russell Lowell and His Friends, p. 10.


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 463


bit. He quitted college as a pleasant young Tory, who paused in
his Commencement Poem to address some pointed remarks at
Abner Kneeland—the last man imprisoned in Massachusetts for
religious opinion—upon the wickedness of an atheism that denied
the faith of Charles Lowell. But the ferment of the times was
already working in him, and when he was nineteen he wrote with
youthful fervor, ‘‘I am fast becoming ultra-democratic. . . . Lib-
erty is now no longer a cant word in the mouths of knaves and
fools” (Letters, Vol. I, p. 33). Within a year he had met Maria
White, whose influence till her death in 1853 was the determining
factor in his intellectual life. She was an ardent Abolitionist
and reformer, and under her pleasant tutelage Lowell was indoc-
trinated in the current philosophy of radicalism. He spoke at
Abolition meetings, and contributed to the Abolition press. More
important, he conceived that he had come upon his true mission
in letters. In an ode beginning “In the old days of awe and keen-
eyed wonder,” he put into verse his new creed, a prose statement
of which he elaborated in a letter explaining his Prometheus in
1843, a year before his marriage to Miss White:


Although such great names as Goethe, Byron, and Shelley have all
handled the subject in modern times, you will find that I have looked at
it from a somewhat new point of view. I have made it radical, and I
believe that no poet in this age can write much that is good unless he give
himself up to this tendency. For radicalism has now for the first time
taken a distinctive and acknowledged shape of its own. So much of its
spirit as poets in former ages have attained (and from their purer organiza-
tion they could not fail of some) was by instinct rather than by reason.
It has never till now been seen to be one of the two great wings that up-
bear the universe. . . . The proof of poetry is, in my mind, that it re-
duces to the essence of a single line the vague philosophy which is floating
in all men’s minds, and so renders it portable and useful and ready to the
hand. (Letters, Vol. I, p. 73.)


Six years later he asserted confidently, “‘I am the first poet who
has endeavored to express the American Idea, and I shall be popu-
lar by and by.” Yet within a few months he found the vein near-
ing exhaustion. In a survey of his course up to 1850, he remarked
that he had served love and freedom hitherto, and he now proposed
to serve beauty, adding the significant comment, “I find that
Reform cannot take up the whole of me, and I am quite sure that
eyes were given us to look about us sometimes, and not to be al-
ways looking forward. ... I am tired of controversy” (cbid.,


464 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


Vol. I, p. 173). Between these several confessions lies the bulk
of Lowell’s contribution to the “‘causes” of the times, and how
adequately he served them is revealed in the successive poems that
came from his pen. Their equal as a whole is not to be found in
the work of other contemporary radicals. The better work is
solidly vigorous, with competent iambs that often rise to the dig-
nity of such lines as “Slowly the Bible of the race is writ.” The
eager rhetoric of The Present Crisis was the highwater mark of
Abolition argument in verse; but its serviceableness for quotation
cannot make it so good a poem as Prometheus with its muscular
blank verse, or as 4 Glance behind the Curtain with its portrait
of Cromwell, strong in his faith, ready for all needful iconoclasms:


I have no dread of what
Is called tor by the instinct of mankind;
Nor think I that God’s world will fall apart


Because we tear a parchment more or less.”


This is frank transcendental radicalism, yet the truer Lowell of
those days of youthful enthusiasm is found in the Biglow Papers,
first written with spontaneous gusto out of his hatred of the im-
perialism of the Mexican war, and later carefully embedded in
the heavy machinery of the prose setting. The native clutter of
Lowell’s mind is there laid bare—the grotesque mixture of homely
satire, moral aphorisms, Yankee linguistics, literary criticism—
an unwieldy mass that he could neither simplify nor reduce to
order. The machinery spoils the propaganda and weighs down
the satire; yet the verse has survived because for once Lowell let
himself go and hit such heads as he had a mind to.

Lowell saw fit to retain most of his radical verse in the definitive
edition of his works, but his radical prose he disowned, and it was
left for pious hands to gather together long after his death. It
was perhaps as well for his reputation that the ambassador at
the Court of St. James’s should not be plagued by his youthful
indiscretions. In those prose writings were combustible materials.
He went with the Abolitionists in their brisk assaults on law,
order, and the Constitution. Whatever revolution was stirring
anywhere found him sympathetic. He was strong for the work-

‘The more significant titles are: Prometheus and A Glance behind the Curtain,
1843; Columbus and The Present Crisis, 1844; On the Capture of Fugitive Slaves near


Washington, 1845; Biglow Papers, begun in 1846; The Pioneer, 1847; Biblioldtres,
1849; Anti-Apis, 1851.


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 465


ingman’s revolution of 1848 in France; it was social injustice that
was to blame for mob violence, and the fetish of laissez faire
was a sorry enough god to worship.


The great problem of the over-supply of labor is not to be settled by a
decimation of the laboring class, whether by gunpower or starvation. . .
The giant Labor did not merely turn from one side to the other for an
easier position. Rather he rose up, “Like blind Orion hungry for the
morn.” . . . They had learned by bitter experience that it was on the
body of old King Log Laissez-faire that King Stork perched to devour
them. Let-alone is good policy after you have once got your perfect
‘system established to let alone. (Quoted in Scudder, James Russell
Lowell, Vol. I, pp. 205-206.)


In common with the Abolitionists, Lowell appealed to the Declara-
tion of Independence against the Constitution. He took delight
in satirizing his Federalist forebears, who, he asserts, beginning to
fear the light of freedom, ingeniously constructed a “‘Sacred
Parasol” for the new Goddess of Liberty, ‘to prevent her from
being tanned”:


A stout machine of parchment was accordingly constructed, and, under
the respectable name of a Constitution, was interposed wherever there
seemed to be danger from the hostile incursions of light. Whenever this
is spread, a dim twilight, more perplexing than absolute darkness, reigns
everywhere beneath its shadow. . . . This contrivance of ours, though
the work of our own hands, has acquired a superstitious potency in our
eyes. (Jbid., Vol. I, p. 210.)


No wonder Lowell later disowned such apostacies, for after
Maria White’s death in 1853 came the dun professorial period of
his life, when Harvard laid hands on him and came near to reduc-
ing him to its own ways. It revived the old Brahmin instincts that
had lain dormant during the years of his Abolitionism, without
reviving the old sanctions. Left without a cause, half ashamed of
his youthful indiscretions yet ill content to drift, he turned
bookman and for twenty-one years wandered with Norton and
Longfellow and Child in the Sahara of medieval scholarship. It
was not a happy time with him. There is plenty of evidence of
his restlessness and dissatisfaction that occasionally prompted the
wish to turn wholly scholar and keep his note-books in order; that
prodded him to salvage the mass of his accumulation by turning
his lecture-notes into literary essays; and that in other moods


466 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


induced him to turn half savagely upon his dead enthusiasms and
find solace in clever satire. His vigorous salvagings were scarcely
worth the trouble. He had nothing important to say about Dante
or Pope or Wordsworth, and he said it with a good deal of needless
verbal exertion. The essay on Thoreau, written in 1865, was a
different matter. Here he was brought face to face with a past
which it still hurt him to remember; and the ill nature that colors
his comment is sufficient testimony to the painfulness of his
memories. Certainly he did not understand Thoreau, was incap-
able of understanding him; yet might not his dislike have been
prodded by the consciousness that Thoreau had refused to make
terms with Harvard culture as he had done? An intelligent read-
ing of Thoreau must have been an unpleasant experience in Low-
ell’s mood, keenly aware of certain backslidings of his own; and
the essay is suggestive for the light it throws on Lowell, not on
Thoreau.

To this period belong most of the essays on which rests Lowell’s
reputation as a critic of letters and politics. Bright as that reputa-
tion long was, it is beginning to show tarnish. Subjected to the
scrutiny of eyes unblinded by the congenialities of the Cambridge
coterie, it appears that Lowell’s brilliancy covered over certain
grave shortcomings that unftted him for serious critical judgment.®
He had no standards other than ethical, only likes and dislikes;
no interest in ideas, only a pottering concern for the text;
no historical backgrounds, only isolated figures dwelling in a
vacuum. He was puzzled over new schools and unfamiliar tech-
nic, and was at ease only in praising established reputations
and confirming approved judgments. He scoffed at Taine in-
stead of going to school to him, and made merry over Masson’s
Life of Milton; yet he was wholly incapable of dealing with men
from whose fruitful minds came ideas that summoned throngs of
followers. In almost the last year of his life he spent weeks re-
reading Rousseau, and was satisfied to dismiss him with the com-
ment, “‘a monstrous liar, but always the first dupe of his own lie”’
(Letters, Vol. II, p. 424). Leaves of Grass he dismissed as affected,
not original. He was shocked at Swinburne’s ‘“‘Adamite” heresy
—When a man begins to lust after. the Muse instead of loving
her, he may be sure that it is never the Muse that he embraces”
(ibid., Vol. I, p. 377). He admired Howell’s prose style and loved

5 See C. Hartley Grattan, “ Lowell,” in The American Mercury, Vol. II, pp. 63-69.


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 467


the man, but he could not bring himself to approve his literary
and social theories. ;

During those sterile professorial years he was closing one door
after another. Scarcely an important movement of contemporary
thought awakened his interest. The hypothesis of evolution he
rejected somewhat flabbily. “I think the evolutionists will have
to make a fetish of their protoplasm before long,’’ he said in 1879.
“Such a mush seems to me a poor substitute for the Rock of Ages
—by which I understand a certain set of higher instincts which
mankind have found solid under their feet in all weathers” (ibid.,

Vol. II, p. 245). And as late as 1886 he wrote, “I am a conserva-
tive (warranted to wash) and keep on the safe side—with God as
against evolution.” Naturally so provocative a doctrine as eco-
nomic determinism never showed its face in his study; Karl Marx
was not one of his intellectual companions. Even the home-
bred knight-errant, Henry George, did not greatly interest him.
‘“Why, who in the world buys such a book as that,” he exclaimed
of Progress and Poverty; and learning that a friend had subscribed
for a thousand copies, he remarked, “‘He must be getting eccen-
eric,” °

The political principles that he discovered in the smoke of
his professor’s pipe were equally naive. He took himself seriously
as a guide and mentor in matters political. He was fond of talk-
ing about the “noble science of politics”; yet he never took the
trouble to ground himself in the elements of the subject. He had
scarcely read the primer of political theory. Burke was probably
the only political writer who ever made any impression on his
mind. Of American constitutional history he was as ignorant as
a politician, and when in Civil War days he began to scratch the
field of politics, he only uncovered certain old Federalist prejudices
that lay hidden under his later accumulations. The extreme
parochialism of the Brahmin mind is revealed in Lowell’s incapac-
ity to understand the South. The comment on Sibley’s Harvard
Graduates—“I do not know when the provincialism of New Eng-
land has been thrust upon me with so ineradicable a barb”—should
be turned upon Lowell’s dogmatic essays in American politics.
He had not the slightest comprehension of Calhoun’s doctrine
of majorities; yet he dismissed it contemptuously, after attribut-


6 Five years later he was more sympathetic, but hopelessly confused. See
Democracy, Vol. VI, p. 35.


468 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


ing it to one of Calhoun’s followers.’ He speaks of the “weak and
wicked element” of states rights—which he supposes the South
owed to “the unhappy ingenuity of Mr. Jefferson”’—as an unhistori-
cal repudiation of the principle of coercive sovereignty established
by the fathers, quite overlooking the Hartford Convention. His
treatment of Jefferson Davis and Andrew Johnson is marked by
the dogmatisms of one who is defending God’s will against the
devil’s sophistries. He will have no other interpretation of
history than an ethical interpretation, in which good and evil are
eternally at combat; and he closes his volume of political essays
with a comment that embodies for him the sum of all political
wisdom:


We have only to be unswervingly faithful to what is the true America
of our hope and belief, and whatever is American will rise from one end
of the country to the other instinctively to our side, with more than ample
means of present succour and of final triumph. It is only by being loyal
and helpful to Truth that men learn at last how loyal and helpful she can
be to them. (Jdid., Vol. V, p. 326.)


Into the stagnant atmosphere of the Elmwood study came on
a happy day in the middle sixties the vibrant personality of Edwin
Lawrence Godkin, and under the stimulus of his crisp thinking there
began for Lowell what may perhaps be reckoned an intellectual re-
naissance. Godkin was a moderate English liberal, a man of com-
plete self-assurance, whose tart comment on politics and economics
was pointed by a conviction of the finality of his own conclusions.
Under such teaching Lowell made rapid progress in the new school
of criticism fathered by The Nation. The delight with which he
‘read Godkin’s comment and the eager faith with which he greeted
his ideas suggest that his own ethical interpretation of politics
was giving way under the strain of post-war experience. From
Godkin he got some casual instruction in laissez faire, and certain
of its teachings snuggled down comfortably in his mind beside
the principles of coercive sovereignty and a centralizing state,
without awakening any suspicion of their incompatibility of tem-
perament. He never went over wholly to laissez faire; he was too
strongly Brahmin Federalist for that; but his leanings often carried
him into the English camp. It was a tonic to his native conserva-
tism that was troubled about the new theories of collectivism, and


7 See “The Rebellion,” in Prose Works, Vol. V, p. 134.


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 469


it awakened strong doubts about the experiment in democracy.
The reaction against the radicalism of his Abolition days became
sharp and final. ‘We have got to work back from a democracy
to our original institution as a republic again,’ he wrote Leslie
Stephen in 1879 (Letters, Vol. II, p. 161); and in 1888 he asserted
that the republic would endure only ‘‘so long as the ideas of the
men who founded it continue dominant” (The Independent in
Politics, Vol. VI, p. 207). He warned Thomas Hughes against
the extension of suffrage in England,’ and he was more and more
inclined to think that democracy meant a slough of mediocrity un-
derlain with the mud of corruption—that it might prove to be
“a Kakistocracy rather, for the benefit of knaves at the cost of
fools” (Letters, Vol. II, p. 159).

From the vigorous movements of protest of the seventies and
eighties, the agrarian uprising of the Middle Border and the pro-
letarian organization in the industrial centers, he drew added
confirmation of his fears. In his attitude towards both he was
little more than an echo of Godkin, who was laying about him
briskly, hitting both farmer and workingman with fine impartial-
ity. He shared the latter’s contempt for all agrarian programs,
without quite understanding them. He knew little of America.
The continent was scarcely more than a hinterland to Cambridge,
a hinterland that he explored with some bewilderment on a trip
that carried him as far as Cincinnati. Equally ignorant of eco-
nomics and of the Middle Border, he had no basis for any opinion;
a juster man would have put the agrarian question aside as beyond
his competency; at least he would have been careful to clear his
mind of prejudice. But Lowell was as much a victim of capitalis-
tic prejudice as Thomas Bailey Aldrich and other Boston pseudo-
intellectuals. The old Brahminism was close to the surface in
those later years, and a scratch would reveal it. In the matter of
the “‘Haymarket Riot” he wrote Howells that “he thought those
Chicago ruffians well hanged” —a comment that recalls the Abner
Kneeland episode of fifty years before. Physically Lowell was
in close proximity to the labor problem, but intellectually he was
worlds removed. He looked upon the labor unions with heavy
misgivings. He frankly feared the power of the proletariat and
was bitter in denunciation of social legislation. In 1869 he wrote
Godkin, ‘‘Pray give Henry Wilson a broadside for dipping his

8 See Letters, Vol. II, p. 175.


470 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


flag to that piratical craft of the eight-hour men. ... I have a
thorough contempt for a man who pretends to believe that eight
is equal to ten” (Letters, Vol. II, p. 31). And somewhat later he
wrote Norton:


I sometimes feel a little blue over the outlook here, with our penny-
paper universal education and our workingmen’s parties, with their
tremendous lever of suffrage, decrying brains. . . . But the more I learn,
the more am I impressed with the wonderful system of checks and bal-
ances which history reveals (our Constitution is a baby-house to it!) and
the more my confidence in the general commonsense and honest intention
of mankind increases. . . . I take great comfort in God. I think He is
considerably amused with us sometimes, but that He likes us, on the
whole, and would not let us get at the match-box so carelessly, as He
does, unless He knew that the frame of His Universe was fire-proof.
How many times have I not seen the fire-engines of Church and State
clanging and lumbering along to put out—a false alarm! And when the
heavens are cloudy what a glare can be cast by a burning shanty! (Jdzd.,


Volell;-p. 5s.)


The ways of the Gilded Age were a rude shock to Lowell’s ill-
grounded idealism. The crude post-war exploitation and the
political corruption that marked the buccaneer stage of the rising
plutocracy filled him with anxiety. As an honest man he was
angered by the common scoundrelism of the politicians and the
press and troubled at the apathy of the public, but his dislike for
economics did him a grave disservice. In seeking out the guilty
he went wide of the mark. To trace the source of the virus that was
poisoning the public life to an exploiting economics, would have
brought him close home. He chose to think it was spread rather
by western agrarians and city ringsters, than by respectable New
Englanders; yet after passing through the Crédit Mobilier scandal
he was visited by unpleasant suspicions. “I suspect,” he wrote
after his return from the Cincinnati Convention in 1876, “that.
few of our Boston men who have had to do with Western railways |
have been more scrupulous [than the western Grangers.] I rather
think they set the example of tempting legislators with the
hope of questionable gains” (Letters, Vol. II, p. 170). With the
open facts of a Congressional investigation before him, Lowell
got no deeper than that. Yet his indignation must find outlet |
and he contributed two poems to The Nation—“The World’s.
Fair, 1876,” and “Tempora Mutantur”’—in one of which he
wrote:


THE AUTHENTIC BRAHMIN 471


Show ’em your Civil Service, and explain

How all men’s loss is everybody’s gain; . . .

Show your short cut to cure financial ills

By making paper-collars current bills;

Show your new bleaching-process, cheap and brief,

To wit: a jury chosen by the thief;

Show your State legislatures; show your Rings;

And challenge Europe to produce such things

As high officials sitting half in sight

To share the plunder and to fix things right;

If that don’t fetch her, why, you only need

Your latest style in Martyrs—Tweed:

She'll find it hard to hide her spiteful tears

At such advance in one poor hundred years.
(Letters, Vol. II, p. 155.)


This is Godkin translated into the Lowell vernacular, and what
issued from his indignation was Godkin also—an apostolic ardor
for civil service reform. He had learned at least, that democracy
had not yet been achieved in America; that, indeed, such spon-
taneous liberalism as had been bred by free land was in danger
of being destroyed by evils that issued from the loins of this same
heedless frontier order.® In 1876 he wrote, ‘‘Let us all work to-
gether (and the task will need us all) to make Democracy possible.
It certainly is no invention to go of itself any more than the per-
petual motion” (Letters, Vol. II, p. 159). Yet in spite of his zeal,
one may be permitted to doubt that Lowell really desired any other
than a Brahmin democracy. In those later years his conception of
an ideal society was unconsciously colored by memories of Cam-
bridge fifty years before—a simple, patriarchal world, amenable to
the rule of the better sort. In such a world democracy seemed pos-
-sible; but in the rising proletarian-plutocratic order, what reason-
able hope was there?

From his growing perplexities Lowell found a happy relief in
his mission abroad. The experience was a godsend to a mind
that was growing torpid. In 1869 he had written, “I fancy if
I were suddenly snatched away to London, my brain would
prickle all over, as a foot that has been asleep when the blood starts
in it again. Books are good dry forage; we can keep alive on them;
but, after all, men are the only fresh pasture” (ibid., Vol. II,
p. 24). London, in this mellow autumn of his life, ripened Lowell.
He slipped into the congenial environment as easily as Irving had

9 See The Independent in Politics, Vol. V1, pp. 204-209.


472 THE MIND OF NEW ENGLAND


done a generation before, and found English society as delightful.
He loved England with unaffected heartiness, and under the stimu-
lating experience he expanded into a kindly English Liberal.
The extreme Liberals—men like Mill and Arnold and John Mor-
ley—he found less sympathetic; and radical thinkers like William
Morris he seems not to have known of. But English Liberalism
of the Gladstone type was own cousin to Cambridge Brahminism;
it united dignity and conscience; it seemed to him the ideal type
of government—the rule of God-fearing gentlemen who strove
to be faithful to their trusteeship, and who ruled because they were
best fitted to rule. Into such a world no other American of the
times could have entered more appreciatively than Lowell. If
congeniality to the host be a prime requisite in an ambassador,
President Hayes made no mistake in sending him to the Court
of St. James’s. He was a distinguished representative of Brahmin
culture; but whether he was a representative of the solid realities
of America is not so certain.


CONCLUSION


To the ebullient romanticisms with which the foregoing pages
have dealt, the Civil War brought diverse fortunes; and from the
titanic conflict emerged an America rid of one of the feculent
sources of domestic schism. The romantic imperialisms of the
slave economy were gone forever. So much at least was cleared
from the path of its destiny, and the field of potential conflict was
narrowed to the rival imperialisms of eastern capitalism and west-
ern agrarianism. Both had been vastly strengthened by the war.
In the eastern centers was a greatly stimulated industrialism,
fed from the reservoirs of liquid capital gathered in the process of
financing the northern armies, ready to turn to transcontinental
railway-building, large-scale manufacture, and a gigantic exploi-
tation of the raw materials of mine and forest and field. Along the
Middle Border the old romance of the settlement came to new life
as the flood of homesteaders, augmented by disbanded soldiers,
poured over the prairie spaces beyond the Mississippi, to repeat
there the story of commonwealth building. East and West would
eventually clash, for their diverse economic needs were driving
towards a collision; but that would not come for a generation till
the conflict of interests was thrust into sharper relief.

In the meantime many familiar things were becoming anach-
ronisms over night, though they might linger on for years. As
the romantic revolution began with the laying aside of the small-
clothes and tie-wig of eighteenth-century aristocratic conserva-
tism, so the new age began with the putting away of the outworn
dress of eighteenth-century romantic liberalism. In the hurrying
new days there was no time or place for abstract theories of natural
rights, for equalitarian democracy, for local home rule—these
relics of the past were thrust aside in the scramble for wealth and
power. The old philosophies were swept out on the rubbish
heap—Jefferson and Lincoln with Calhoun and Stephens—and
Hamilton and Marshall came to their own again. The lost cause
carried down to defeat much more than slavery, it carried down the
old ideal of decentralized democracies, of individual liberty; and
with the overthrow of the traditional principles in their last ref-

473


474 CONCLUSION


uge, the nation hurried forward along the path of an unquestion-
ing and uncritical consolidation, that was to throw the coercive
powers of a centralizing state into the hands of the new industrial-
ism. Here was a revolution that was to engulf the older romantic
America, its dignified literary ideals as well as its democratic
political theory. In the world of Jay Cooke and Commodore
Vanderbilt, the transcendental dream was as hopelessly a lost
cause as the plantation dream; it was in even worse plight, for it
left no tragic memories to weave a new romance about the fallen
hopes. Emerson in Concord was as much out of date as Lowell
in Cambridge, or Gilmore Simms in Charleston. A new age had
come and other dreams—the age and the dreams of a middle-class
sovereignty, that was busily surveying the fields of its future
conquests. From the crude and vast romanticisms of that vigorous
sovereignty emerged eventually a spirit of realistic criticism, seek-
ing to evaluate the worth of this new America, and discover if
possible other philosophies to take the place of those which had gone
down in the fierce battles of the Civil War. What form this
critical spirit assumed, and what replies it returned to the strident
challenge of the time, are questions not to be answered here.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Only the more important titles dealt with in the present study are listed hereun-
der, together with selected biographical and critical material. The invaluable bibliog-
raphies in the Cambridge History of American Literature, 4 vols., New York, 1917-22,
cover most of the writers considered, and the reader is referred to them.


BOOK I: PART I


Information will be found in the Library of Southern Literature by E. A. Alderman
and others (16 vols., New Orleans, 1908-13) and in Montrose J. Moses, Literature
of the South (New York, 1910). See-also Carl Van Doren, The American Novel
(New York, 1921).


i
i,


Il.
IV.


V.


Tue Otp Dominion. See Thomas J. Wertenbaker, Patrician and
Plebeian in Virginia (Charlottesville, Va., 1910).

For the economics of Jeffersonianism, see Charles A. Beard, The Eco-
nomic Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy (New York, 1915; Chapter
XII). Also Charles Gide and Charles Rist, 4 History of Economic
Doctrines (translated by W. Smart and R. Richards, Boston).

Joun Taytor: His works are out of print. Important titles are: 4n
Inquiry into the Principles and Policy of the United States (Fredericks-
burg, Va., 1814). New Views of the Constitution of the United States
(Washington, 1823). Correspondence (edited by W. E. Dodd, Rich-
mond, 1908).

See “John Taylor, Prophet of Secession” (by William E. Dodd, in Branch
Historical Papers, II, Richmond, 1908). See also Beard, Economic
Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy.

Joun Marsnatt: Sufficient materials will be found in Albert J. Bev-
eridge, Life of John Marshall (4 vols., New York, 1916-19).

For the plantation tradition, see Francis Pendleton Gaines, The Southern
Plantation (New York, 1924).

Witiiam Wirt: His works are out of print. Letters of a British Spy
(Richmond, 1803). The Old Bachelor (2 vols., Richmond, 1810).
Life and Character of Patrick Henry (Philadelphia, 1817; also several
later editions).

See John P. Kennedy, Memoirs ... of William Wirt (Philadelphia,
1849).

NatuanigEL BeverLey Tucker: His works are out of print. George
Balcombe; a Novel (2 vols., New York, 1836).—The Partisan Leader;
a Tale of the Future, by Edward William Sidney (printed for the
publishers, by J. Caxton, 1856 [7. ¢., Washington, printed by Duff
Green, 1836], 2 vols.); reissued as 4 Key to the Disunion Conspiracy:
The Partisan Leader (2 vols. in one, New York, 1861); edition issued
at Richmond, 1862.

Some information about Tucker will be found in W. P. Trent, William
Gilmore Simms (Boston and New York, 1892).

Wiiuiam ALEXANDER CaruTHERS: The Kentuckian in New York. Or,
the Adventures of Three Southerns. By a Virginian (2 vols., New York,


475


476


Il.


III.


IV.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


1834).—The Cavaliers of Virginia, or the Recluse of Jamestown. An
Historical Romance of the Old Dominion (2 vols., New York, 1834-
1835).—The Knights of the Horse-Shoe; a Traditionary Tale of the
Cocked Hat Gentry in the Old Dominion (Wetumpka, Ala., 1845; New
York, 1882, 1909).

Joun P. Kennepy: Works (3 vols., New York, 1854; 9 vols., New
York, 1871, with life by H. T. Tuckerman, Vol. X). Swallow Barn,
or a Sojourn in the Old Dominion (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1832; several
later editions). Horse-Shoe Robinson; a Tale of the Tory Ascendency
(2 vols., Philadelphia, 1835; numerous later editions, the latest in
1906). Rob of the Bowl; a Legend of St. Inigoe’s (2 vols., Philadelphia,
1838; later editions). Quodlibet: Containing Some Annals Thereof ...
(Philadelphia, 1840; 1860).

Epcar A.ian Poe: The bibliography is extensive. See the Cambridge
History of American Literature.


BOOK I: PART II


Joun C. Catunoun: Works (6 vols., Columbia, S. C., 1851; New York,
1853-55). Correspondence, edited by J. F. Jamieson (American
Historical Association, Annual Report, 1899, Vol. II).

Biographies: W. E. Dodd, in Statesmen of the Old South (New York,
1911). H. von Holst, John C. Calhoun (American Statesmen Series,
Boston, 1882, 1899). W. M. Meigs, Life of John Caldwell Calhoun
(2 vols., New York, 1917). G.M. Pinckney, Life of John C. Calhoun
(Charleston, 1903). W.P. Trent, Southern Statesmen of the Old Régime
(New York, 1897).

ALEXANDER H. STEPHENS: Constitutional View of the War between the
States (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1868).

See L. B. Pendleton, Alexander H. Stephens (Philadelphia, 1908).

Francis LEBER: The Stranger in America (2 vols. in one, London, 1834).
Political Ethics (Philadelphia, 1838; edited by Theodore D. Woolsey,
Philadelphia, 1890; with introduction by Nicholas Murray Butler,
Philadelphia, 1911). Essays on Property and Labor (New York, 1841).
Civil Liberty and Self-Government (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1853; London,
1859; edited by Theodore D. Woolsey, Philadelphia, 1891). Mis-
cellaneous Writings (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1881; edited by Daniel
C. Gilman, Philadelphia, 1916).

See L. R. Harley, Francis Lieber: His Life and Political Philosophy
(New York, 1899).

For the southern position, see Jeannette Reid Tandy, “Pro-Slavery
Propaganda in American Fiction in the Fifties” (in South Atlantic
Quarterly, January-March, 1922). Francis Pendleton Gaines, The
Southern Plantation (New York, 1924; Chapter III).

Wiiuram J. Grayson: The Hireling and the Slave (Charleston, 1856).

Wiuram Crarts: A Selection in Prose and Poetry, from the Miscellaneous
Writings of the Late William Crafts. With Memoir by Samuel Gilman
(Charleston, 1828).

Hucu Swinton Lecaré: Writings (2 vols., Charleston, 1846; with
memoir).

Wiviram Gitmore Simms: His works have never been collected and
most of them are out of print. Border Romances (17 vols., New York,
1859, 1866, 1879; 10 vols., New York, 1882; 15 vols., Chicago, 1885;
17 vols., Chicago, 1888; 17 vols., Atlanta, 1901 [?]).


BIBLIOGRAPHY 477


See W. P. Trent, William Gilmore Simms (New York, 1892)—an
excellent study. Also see J. Erskine, Leading American Novelists


(New York, 1910).


BOOK I: PART III


Excellent bibliographical material for western literature will be found in Ralph
Leslie Rusk, The Literature of the Middle Western Frontier (2 vols., New York,
1925). See also W. H. Venable, The Beginnings of Literary Culture in the Ohio
Valley (Cincinnati, 1891).


II. Interesting material will be found in Claude G. Bowers, Party Battles
of the Jackson Period (Boston, 1922).

III. Timoray Fut: His works are out of print and rare. Recollections of
the Last Ten Years (Boston, 1826). Francis Berrian, or the Mexican
Patriot (Boston, 1826; Philadelphia and London, 1834). The Life
and Adventures of Arthur Clenning (Philadelphia, 1828). George
Mason, the Young Backwoodsman; or, “Don’t Give up the Ship”
(Boston, 1829; with changed title, London, 1833). The Shoshonee
Valley; a Romance (Cincinnati, 1830).

See John Ervin Kirkpatrick, Timothy Flint, Pioneer, Missionary, Author,
Editor (Cleveland, 1911)—an excellent study with bibliography.

James Hari: Works (4 vols., New York, 1853-56). Legends of the
West (Philadelphia, 1832, 1833; five later editions).—The Soldier’s
Bride; and Other Tales (Philadelphia, 1833).—The Harpe’s Head; a
Legend of Kentucky (Philadelphia, 1833); as Kentucky. A Tale (Lon-
don, 1834, 2 vols.).—Tales of the Border (Philadelphia, 1835). The
Wilderness and the War Path (New York, 1846; New York and London,
1849).

See J. L. Davis, “Judge James Hall, a Literary Pioneer of the Middle
West” (in Ohio Archeological and Historical Society Publications,
October, 1909).

Aucustus LoncstreET: Georgia Scenes (Atlanta, Ga., 1835; New York,
1840; several later editions).

See John Donald Wade, Augustus Longstreet, a Study of the Development
of Culture in the South (New York, 1924), an excellent study with
bibliographical material.

Davy Crockett: Five titles are grouped under the name of Crockett:
Sketches and Eccentricities of Col. David Crockett, of West Tennessee
(1833). A Narrative of the Life of David Crockett, of the State of Ten-
nessee (Philadelphia, 1834; seven editions in one year). Life of Martin
Van Buren (1835). An Account of Col. Crockett’s Tour to the North
and Down East (1835). Col. Crockett’s Exploits and Adventures in
Texas (1836). The Narrative is reprinted with an introduction by
Hamlin Garland, in The Modern Student’s Library, under the title,
The Autobiography of David Crockett (New York, 1923).

There is no life of Crockett; such so-called works are uncritical jumbles
of fact and fiction. Some information will be found in John Donald
Wade, “The Authorship of David Crockett’s Autobiography”
(Georgia Historical Quarterly, September, 1922); S. H. Stout, “David
Crockett” (American Historical Magazine, Vol. VII, No. I, Jan.,
1902)—uncritical; Chester T. Crowell, “Davy Crockett” (American
Mercury, Vol. IV, No. 13).


478


BIBLIOGRAPHY
BOOK II


For Philadelphia, see Ellis Paxson Oberholtzer, The Literary History of Phila-
delphia (Philadelphia, 1906). Also H. M. Ellis, “Joseph Dennie and His Cir-
cle” (University of Texas Bulletin). For the politics of New York, see Dixon
Ryan Fox, The Decline of Aristocracy in the Politics of New York (New York,


1918).


I.


II.


III.


Cuares BrockpEN Brown: The Novels of Charles Brockden Brown. . .
with a Memoir (Boston, 1827; Philadelphia, 1857, 1887). Wueland;
or the Transformation (New York, 1798; best recent edition in Ameri-
can Authors Series, New York, 1926). Arthur Mervyn; or, Memoirs of
the Year 1793 (Philadelphia, 1799; Second Part, New York, 1800;
numerous later editions).

No adequate life has been written. The best is by William Dunlap,
The Life of Charles Brockden Brown (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1815).
See John Erskine, Leading American Novelists (New York, 1910),
and Annie R. Marble, in Heralds of American Literature (Chicago
and London, 1907).

Rozsert Montcomery Biron: For a list of his plays, see A. H. Quinn,
A History of the American Theatre (New York, 1923).

Calavar; or, the Knight of the Conquest: a Romance of Mexico (2 vols.,
Philadelphia, 1834; about ten later editions)—The Hawks of Hawks-
Hollow. A Tradition of Pennsylvania (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1835;
two London editions).—The Infidel; or, The Fall of Mexico (2 vols.,
Philadelphia, 1835; London, 1835).—Nick of the Woods, or, the Jib-
benainosay. A Tale of Kentucky (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1837; upward
of twenty later editions).

For his life, see Clement Foust, Life and Dramatic Works of Robert
Montgomery Bird (1919).

James Kent: Commentaries on American Law (4 vols., New York,
1826-1830; many later editions).

For his life, see William Kent, Memoirs and Letters of James Kent (Bos-
ton, 1898).

Firz-Greene Hatveck: Poetical Works (New York and Philadelphia;
eight editions between 1847 and 1859). Poetical Writings with Ex-
tracts from those of Joseph Rodman Drake (edited by J. G. Wilson,
New York, 1869, 1885).

For a life, see J. G. Wilson, The Life and Letters of Fitz-Greene Halleck
(New York, 1869). Also see W. C. Bryant, Some Notices on the Life
and Writings of Fitz-Greene Halleck (New York, 1869).

Wasuincton Irvine: The standard edition of his works is in forty
volumes, New York, 1887.

The standard life is by Pierre M. Irving, The Life and Letters of Washing-
ton Irving (4 vols., London, 1864; New York, 1879, 1883).

See also The Letters of Washington Irving to Henry Brevoort (edited by
George S. Hellman, 2 vols., New York, 1915). A recent study is
George S. Hellman, Washington Irving, Esq. (New York, 1925).

James Kirke Pautpine: Works (15 vols., New York, 1834-1839; 4
vols., 1867-1868).—The Diverting History of John Bull and Brother
Jonathan (New York, 1812).—Letters from the South (2 vols., New
York, 1817).—The Backwoodsman. A Poem (Philadelphia, 1818).—
Salmagundi, Second Series (2 vols., New York, 1820).—Koningsmarke,
the Long Finne, A Story of the New World (New York, 1823; 2 vols.,


IV.


BIBLIOGRAPHY 479


New York, 1834; three London editions, and a German).—Westward
Ho! A Tale (2 vols., New York, 1832, 1845; three London editions,
a French and a German).—The Dutchman’s Fireside. A Tale (2 vols.,
New York, 1831; latest edition, 1900).—The Puritan and his Daughter
(New York, 1849, 1850; also London, 1849, two editions, and one
German).

No adequate life has been written, but see W. I. Paulding, Literary Life
of James K. Paulding (New York, 1867).

James Fenimore Cooper: The editions of Cooper’s novels are numer-
ous; as good as any is the one in thirty-two volumes (New York,
1895, 1896-97). Much of his controversial work and critical articles
have not been reprinted. See Notions of the Americans; Picked up by
@ Travelling Bachelor (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1829). A Letter to His
Countrymen (New York, 1834). The American Democrat; or Hints
on the Social and Civic Relations of the United States (Cooperstown,
1838). The History of the Navy (2 vols., Philadelphia, 1839). Also
his eight volumes of European travels.

No satisfactory life has been written. The best is by T. R. Lounsbury,
James Fenimore Cooper (New York, 1883). See also Correspondence
of James Fenimore-Cooper (edited by his grandson, James Fenimore
Cooper, 2 vols., New Haven, 1922). W. C. Brownell, in American
Prose Masters (New York, 1909). Carl Van Doren, in The American
Novel (New York, 1921).

Witiram Cutten Bryant: The standard edition is edited by Parke
Godwin (6 vols., New York, 1883-1889: 1-2, Biography, 1883; 3-4,
Poetical Works, 1883, 1901; 5-6, Prose Writings, 1884-1889). Much
information on his work in journalism will be found in Allan Nevins,
A Century of Journalism (New York, 1921).

Horace GreELEY: His works have not been collected. See Hints
towards Reform (New York, 1850). Recollections of a Busy Life (New
York, 1868). Essays Designed to Elucidate the Science of Political
Economy (Boston, 1870). The American Conflict (Hartford and
Chicago, 1864-1866).

For his life, see James Parton, The Life of Horace Greeley (Boston, 1868).
Charles Sotheran, Horace Greeley (New York, 1915). See also John R.
Commons, “Horace Greeley and the Working-Class Origins of the
Republican Party” (Political Science Quarterly, Vol. XXIV, pp. 468-
488).

Herman ME tvitte: The best edition is The Standard (16 vols., London,
1922-23). Also see Works (4 vols., edited by A. Stedman, New York,
1892, 1896; Boston, 1900, 1910). Convenient editions of Typee,
Omoo, and Moby-Dick are plentiful.

The indispensable life is Raymond Weaver’s Herman Melville: Mariner
and Mystic (New York, 1921), with bibliography. Also see John
Freeman, Herman Melville (in English Men of Letters Series, New
York, 1926).


BOOK III: PART I


I. For the political backgrounds, see A. E. Morse, The Federalist Party


in Massachusetts to the Year 1800 (Princeton, 1909). W. A. Robinson,
Jeffersonian Democracy in New England (New Haven, 1916). Samuel
Eliot Morison, Life and Letters of Harrison Gray Otis (2 vols., Boston,


1913).


480


II.


ie


III.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Fisuer Ames: Works (with memoir by J. T. Kirkland, Boston, 1809).
Works, with a Selection from his Speeches and Correspondence (edited
by his son, Seth Ames, 2 vols., Boston, 1854).

Ropert Treat Paring: Works in Prose and Verse (with memoir,
Boston, 1812). ‘

Joseru Story: Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States
(3 vols., Boston, 1833; numerous later editions).

See W. W. Story, Life and Letters of Joseph Story (2 vols., Boston,
1851).

eee Wesster: The best edition of his works is The National—
The Writings and Speeches of Daniel Webster (18 vols., Boston, 1903).
Private Correspondence of Daniel Webster (2 vols., Boston, 1857).
Letters (edited by C. H. Van Tyne, New York, 1902).

See George Ticknor Curtis, Life of Daniel Webster (2 vols., New York and
London, 1870). For a critical contemporary estimate see Theodore
Parker, Discourse Occasioned by the Death of Daniel Webster (Boston,
1853). See also Charles A. Beard, The Economic Basis of Politics
(New York, 1922).


BOOK III: PART II


UnirariAnism: See George Willis Cooke, Unitarianism in America:
A History of its Origin and Development (Boston, 1902). Williston
Walker, 4 History of the Congregational Churches in the United States
(New York, 1894).

Wiiiiam Every Caannine: Works (5 vols., Boston, 1841; sixth
volume added in 1843; numerous later editions).

An excellent life is J. W. Chadwick, William Ellery Channing, Minister
of Religion (Boston, 1903). See also William H. Channing, Memoir
of William Ellery Channing (3 vols., Boston, 1848).

PerFecTionisM: For materials see Garrison, Life of William Lloyd
Garrison (4 vols., New York, 1885-1889).

Brook Farm: See Lindsay Swift, Brook Farm; Its Members, Scholars
and Visitors (New York, 1906; contains bibliography). J. T. Cod-
man, Brook Farm: Historic and Personal Memoirs (Boston, 1894).
Nathaniel Hawthorne, Blithedale Romance.

ABoLiTIonisM: Sufficient materials will be found in Garrison, Life of
William Lloyd Garrison (4 vols., New York, 1885-1889). See also
Catherine N. Birney, Sarah and Angelina Grimké (Boston, 1885);
and James G. Birney and His Times, by His Son, William Birney
(New York, 1890).

Wiii1am Lioyp Garrison: See Garrison, Life of William Lloyd Gar-
rison (4 vols., New York, 1885-1889).

Joun G. Wurrtrer: The Writings of John Greenleaf Whittier (Riverside
Edition, 7 vols., Boston, 1885-1889).

See G. R. Carpenter, John Greenleaf Whittier (in American Men of
Letters Series)—T. S. Pickard, Life and Letters of John Greenleaf
Whittier (2 vols., Boston, 1894).—F. H. Underwood, John Greenleaf
Whittier. A Biography (Boston, 1884).

Harriet Beecuer Stowe: Works (Riverside Edition, 16 vols., Boston,
1896; with life by Mrs. Field, 17 vols., 1898).

See Mrs. J. T. Fields, The Life of Harriet Beecher Stowe (Boston,
1897).


if


III.


IV;


BIBLIOGRAPHY 481
BOOK III: PART III


. TRANSCENDENTALISM: The literature is abundant. See The Dial (4


vols., Boston, 1840-1844).—The Harbinger (4 vols., New York, 1844-
1848).—Harold Clarke Goddard, Studies in New England Transcen-
dentalism (New York, 1908).—O. B. Frothingham, Transcendentalism
in New England. A History (New York, 1876).—See also Sylvester
Judd, Margaret. A Tale of the Real and Ideal (2 vols., Boston, 1845;
revised edition, 1851).

Ratpa Watpo Emerson: Works (Riverside Edition, edited by James
Eliot Cabot, 12 vols., Boston, 1884-1893; London, 1884-1893; Cen-
tenary Edition, with biographical introduction and notes by E. W.
Emerson, 12 vols., Boston, 1903-04; London, 1904).—Journals of
Ralph Waldo Emerson, with Annotations (edited by Edward Waldo
Emerson and Waldo Emerson Forbes, 10 vols., Boston, 1909-1914).—
Uncollected Writings. Essays, Addresses, Poems, Reviews and Letters
by Ralph Waldo Emerson (New York [1912]).

See George Willis Cooke, Bibliography of Ralph Waldo Emerson (Boston,
1908). James Eliot Cabot, 4 Memoir of Ralph Waldo Emerson (2
vols., Boston, 1887). George Willis Cooke, Ralph Waldo Emerson;
His Life, Writings, and Philosophy (Boston, 1881). Oscar W. Firkins,
Ralph Waldo Emerson (Boston, 1915). W. C. Brownell, American
Prose Masters (New York, 1909).

Henry Davin Tuoreau: Works (Riverside Edition, 11 vols., Boston,
1894; Manuscript Edition, 20 vols. [Vols. VII-XX contain the Jour-
nals], Boston, 1906).

See Francis H. Allen, 4 Bibliography of Henry David Thoreau (Boston
and New York, 1908). William E. Channing, Thoreau, the Poet-
Naturalist (Boston, 1873, 1902). F. B. Sanborn, Henry D. Thoreau
(in American Men of Letters Series, Boston, 1882, 1910); The Person-
ality of Thoreau (Boston, 1901); The Life of Henry David Thoreau
(Boston and New York, 1917). Léon Bazalgette, Henry Thoreau—
Bachelor of Nature (translated by Van Wyck Brooks, New York,
1924).

TueEopore Parker: Collected Works (edited by F. P. Cobbe, 14 vols.,
London, 1863-71). The Critical and Miscellaneous Writings of Theo-
dore Parker (Boston, 1843). Speeches, Addresses and Occasional
Sermons (2 vols., Boston, 1876). The American Scholar (with notes
by George Willis Cooke, Boston, 1907).

An excellent study is J. W. Chadwick, Theodore Parker, a Biography
(Boston, 1900), containing a bibliography. John Weiss, Life and Corre-
spondence of Theodore Parker (2 vols., New York, 1864)—indispensable.

Marcaret Futrer: Her works have not been collected. Important
titles are: Woman in the Nineteenth Century (New York and London,
1845; with additional papers and introduction by Horace Greeley,
New York, 1855). Life Without and Life Within (Boston, 1860;
New York, 1869). Papers on Literature and Art (2 vols., New York
and London, 1846).

An excellent study is Katharine Anthony, Margaret Fuller: A Psycholog-
ical Biography (New York, 1920). See also R. W. Emerson, W. H.
Channing, and J. F. Clarke, Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli (2
vols., Boston, 1852). Thomas Wentworth Higginson, Margaret
Fuller Ossoli (in American Men of Letters Series, Boston, 1884),


containing bibliography.


482


I.


ile


Til.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


BOOK III: PART IV


Henry W. Loncreitow: The Writings of ... with Bibliographical
and Critical Notes (11 vols., Boston, 1886 [Vols. I-VI, Poetical Works;
VII-VIII, Prose Works; IX-XI, Dante)).

See Samuel Longfellow, Life of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (3 vols.,
Boston and New York, 1891). T. W. Higginson, Henry Wadsworth
Longfellow (in American Men of Letters Series, Boston and New York,
1902).

NatuanieL Hawruorne: Works (12 vols., Boston, 1871-76; Fireside
Edition, 12 vols., Boston, 1879; Riverside Edition, 12 vols., Boston,
1883; Standard Library Edition, 15 vols., Boston, 1891 [contains
Nathaniel Hawthorne and his Wife, by Julian Hawthorne]; New
Wayside Edition, 13 vols., Boston, 1902).

The best-known life is Julian Hawthorne, Nathaniel Hawthorne and His
Wife (2 vols., Boston, 1885). Henry James, Nathaniel Hawthorne
(in English Men of Letters Series, London, 1879; New York, 1885, 1887).
See also W. B. Brownell, American Prose Masters (New York, 1909).
John Erskine, Great American Novelists (New York, 1910). Carl Van
Doren, The American Novel (New York, 1921); Stuart P. Sherman,
Americans (New York, 1923).

Ottver Wenpvett Hoimes: Works (Riverside Edition, 13  vols.,
Boston, 1891, additional volume, 1892; Autocrat Edition, 13 vols.,
Boston and New York, 1904).

See George B. Ives, 4 Bibliography of Oliver Wendell Holmes (Boston
and New York, 1907).—John T. Morse, Life and Letters of Oliver
Wendell Holmes (2 vols., Boston and New York, 1896).—Lewis W.
Townsend, Oliver Wendell Holmes. Centenary Biography (London,
1909).

James Russet, Lowe i: Works (Riverside Edition, 13 vols., Boston
and New York, 1902 [contains Scudder’s Life]; Elmwood Edition,
16 vols., Boston, 1904 [four volumes of letters]). Anti-Slavery Papers
(2 vols., Boston and New York, 1902). Letters of James Russell Lowell
(edited by Charles Eliot Norton, 2 vols., New York, 1893; 3 vols.,
Boston, 1904). Early Prose Writings of . . . (2 vols., New York, 1903).

G. W. Cooke, 4 Bibliography of James Russell Lowell ( Boston and
New York, 1906). H. E. Scudder, James Russell Lowell: A Biog-
raphy (2 vols., Boston, 1901). Ferris Greenslet, James Russell Lowell:
A Biography (2 vols., Boston, 1901). Ferris Greenslet, James Russell
Lowell: His Life and Work (Boston, 1905). See also C. Hartley
Grattan, “Lowell” ( The American Mercury, Vol. II, p. 69); Harry
Hayden Clark, Lowell’s Criticism of Romantic Literature (“Publications
of the Modern Language Association,’’ March, 1926); W. D. Howells,
Literary Friends and Acquaintances (New York, 1902); Henry James,
Essays in London and Elsewhere (New York, 1893); J. J. Reilly,
James Russell Lowell as a Critic (New York, 1915); and John M.
Robertson, Lowell as a Critic (North American Review, February, 1919).


INDEX


Abolitionists, The, 333, 337

Abraham Davenport, 370

Account of Col. Crockett’s Tour to the
North and Down East, 173, 174, 176

Adams, John, 13, 15, 17, 22, 78, 82, 95,

119, 187, 198, 226, 231, 282, 283,

305, 306, 316, 325, 393, 456

» John Quincy, 242, 249, 276, 365

——.,, Samuel, 292, 380, 423

Addison, Joseph, 31, 35> 199, 453

Additional Speeches, 297 n, 300, 316,
415, 420, 421 1, 422, 423

Adventures of Captain Bonneville, 209,
211

Aeneid, 32

Agassiz, Louis, 458

Agriculture of England, The, 304.

Alcott, Bronson, 342, 348, 349, 394, 402,
426

Alcuin, A Dialogue, 189

Aldrich, Thomas Bailey, 469

Alexander H. Stephens, Life of, 83, 86,


89, 91
Alexis, Grand Duke, 458
American Democrat, The, 226, 227
American Liberty, 287
American Mercury, The, 466
‘American Note-Books, 447, 448, 449
American Notes, 441
American Novel, The, 133
American Political Ideas, 94, 334.
American Scholar, The, 390
Ames, Fisher, ti, 19, 21, 36, 109, 113,
116, 119, 198, 241, 276, 279-288,
291, 293, 296, 297, 315, 317, 329
, Dr. Nathaniel, 279, 280
Anarchiad, The, 24.
Anne, Queen, 452
Anthony, Katharine, 427, 432
Anti-Apis, 464 n
Anti-Rent Novels, 231, 233
Apology and Defense, 309 n
Arbitrament of National Disputes, The,
121 2
Aristotle, 307
Arnold, Matthew, 265, 472


Arthur Mervyn, 190

Astor, John Jacob, 195, 201, 203, 208,
20, 230

Astoria, 209, 211

Ashe, Thomas, 215

Augustus Baldwin Longstreet, 169 n, 170

Authorship of David Crockett’s Auto-
biography, The, 177

Autobiography of Davy Crockett, 166

Autobiography of Joseph Story, 300


Backwoodsman, The, 215

Bacon, Lord, 31, 307

Baldwin, Joseph G., 133, 162, 166
Bancroft, George, 437-439

Bank of the United States, The, 309 n
Barlow, Joel, 188

Bartol, C. A., 384

Basis of the Senate, The, 306, 307, 310,


315
Bassett, John, 148, 149
Baxter, Richard, 371
Beard, Professor Charles A., 13 , 15,
18-19
Beauchampe, 130
Beecher, Elizabeth, 342 1
» Henry Ward, 238, 344, 351, 399
» Lyman, 357, 371, 375, 376
Benjamin, Parke, 238
Bennett, James Gordon, 102 n, 356
Bentham, Jeremy, 166
Benton, Thomas H., 14, 55, 151, 246,


309

Berkeley, Bishop, 380

Beveridge, Albert J., 22, 23, 24, 25, 26,
3162

Bibliolatres, 464 n

Biddle, Nicholas, 55

Biglow Papers, The, 368, 464, 464

Bird, Robert Montgomery, 135, 162,
166, 190-192, 220, 235

piney, James G., 246, 333, 351, 358,
305

Blackstone, 31, 35, 47, 113, I17, 120
168, 197, 302, 313

Blithedale Romance, The, 442, 448


483


484


Bliicher, Marshal, 94

Boone, Daniel, 138, 139, 162

Border Beagles, 128

Boston Kidnapping, The, 423

Bourlamaqul, 117

Brackenridge, Hugh Henry, 236

Bradbury, John, 215

Brevoort, Henry, 205

Briant, Lemuel, 325, 326

Bright, John, 241

Brisbane, Albert, ii, 101, 108, 200, 208,
242, 251, 350, 448

British Spy, The, 31, 335 41

Broker of Bogota, The, 191

Brown, Charles Brockden, 188-190

, John, 155, 159, 360, 364, 399, 402,
412, 458

Brownson, Orestes, 11, 108

Bryant, William Cullen, 201, 208, 238-
246, 247, 257, 258, 366, 458

Buckminster, Rev. Joseph Stevens, 113

Bunyan, John, 366

Burgess, John W., 94.

Burke, Edmund, 12, 15, 31, 94, 305, 311,
366, 392, 467

Burns, Anthony, 359, 360, 411, 423

» Robert, 366

Burr, Aaron, 197

Bushnell, Rev. Horace, 356

Byrd, Col. William, 8

Byron, Lord, 111, 116, 200, 216


Cabell, James Branch, 259, 260

Cabot, George, 296

Caleb Williams, 190

Calhoun, John C., 4, 36, 37, 38, 39, 41,
42, 61, 66, 67, 68, 69-82, 83, 89, 91,
93, 102, 109, II5, 120, 123, 126, 136,
137, 144, 150, 152, 153, 168, 170,
299, 311, 312, 357, 399, 467, 468,


473

Calvin, John, 215, 272, 273, 321, 340,
416, 457

Camillus, 285-286

Campbell, Thomas, 200

Capture of Fugitive Slaves near Washing-
ton, On the, 4640

Carey, Matthew, 185-186

Carlyle, Thomas, 47, 101, 111, 381, 389,
393, 406, 412

Carpenter, G. R., 351, 367

Caruthers, Dr. William Alexander, 28,
41-46, 377


INDEX


Cass, Lewis, 246

Cathedral, The, 266

Catullus, 453

Cavaliers of Virginia, The, 41, 45

Chadwick, John White, 330, 338

Chainbearer, The, 232, 234, 236

Chambered Nautilus, The, 453

Channing, William Ellery, 188, 252,
300, 314, 317, 319, 325, 326, 327,
328-338, 339, 342, 357, 361, 371,


390; 393, 420, 435, 443, 454, 456
——, William Ellery (Younger), 401


—, William Henry, 108, 228, 241, 347,
348, 428, 429

Chapman, Mrs., 351

Chardon Street Convention, The, 345

Charlemont, 130

Charles I, King, 372

“Charming Creature” as a Wife, The,
172

Chase, L. B., 102

Chaucer, 47

Chicora and Other Poems, 103

Child, Francis, 465

, Lydia Maria, 351

Choate, Rufus, 152, 329, 367, 368, 397,
398, 421, 423 |

Chronicle, The, 206

Churchill, Charles, 452

Civil Disobedience, 409, 410, 411

Civil Liberty and Self-Government, 95

Clarel, 265, 266-267

Clark, George Rogers, 138

Clarke, J. F., 429, 430

Clay, Henry, 4, 34, 37, 46, 48, 67, 69, 715,
122, 138, 139, 142-144, 145, 150,
152, 153, 209, 218, 242, 243, 240,|
296, 298, 309, 333, 353, 365, 366,
3975 399

Clayton, Augustus S., 176

Cleon, 398

Cliffton, William, 188

Climbing the Natural Bridge, 46

Clinton, De Witt, 201

Clough, Arthur Hugh, 265

Cobbett, William, 185, 186

Cobden, Richard, 241

Coke, Sir Edward, 15, 47, 117

Col. Crockett’s Exploits and Adventures
in Texas, 173, 178 n

Coleridge, Samuel T., 58, 381, 389

Collins, Wilkie, 458

Columbus, 464.


INDEX


Commentaries on American Law, 199

Commentaries on the Constitution, 301-
303, 311, 312

Commons, John R., 250, 252, 253, 254

Comte, Auguste, 30

Condillac, Etienne de, 382

Condorcet, Marquis de, 10, 11, 293

Congressional Debates, 175

Congreve, William, 54

Connecticut, 202

Constitutional History of Greece, The, 116

Constitutional View of the War between
the States, 9, 56, 83, 88, 89, 90 1, 91,
302

Constitution not a Compact between Sov-
ereign States, The, 311

Construction Construed and Constitutions
Vindicated, 299

Conway, Moncure D., go

Cooke, Jay, 474

, John Esten, 11, 28

Cooper, James Fenimore, 37, 131, 133,
135, 141, 183, 193, 196, 204, 207,
ZOSIIZIO, 1220,0222-23'7, 1238, 2575


266, 457

—, James Fenimore (grandson),
207 2, 229
» Judge William, 194, 224, 225
ates 72

Correspondence of James Fenimore-


Cooper, 207 n, 229
Cotton, Rev. John, 118
Country, The, 103
Courier and Enquirer, The, 253
Cousin, Victor, 381
Coverley, Sir Roger de, 52
Cowper, William, 188, 264
Crafts, William, 112-114
Crater, The, 226
Crawford, W. H., 168
Cream of the Jest, The, 259
Crévecceur, Hector St. John de, 215
Croaker Papers, 200
Crockett, Davy, 45, 138, 147, 162, 165,
172-179, 192, 366
Cromwell, Oliver, 215, 464
Cruse, Peter Hoffman, 48
Cujacius, 117
Curtis, George William, 238
Cushing, Caleb, 362, 365


Daniel Webster, 297 n
_ Dante, 440, 466


485


Darwin, Charles, 419, 455

Davis, Jefferson, 4, 62, 65-66, 70, 86,
146, 299, 468

Debating Society, The, 172

Declaration of Whig Principles and Pur-
posesy 310

Decline of Aristocracy in New York
Politics, 199, 224, 244

Democracy, 467 n

Democracy, Pacific and Constructive, 244

Dennie, Joseph, 187

De Quincey, Thomas, 258

Dew, Professor, 102

Dial, The, 348

Dickens, Charles, 47, 127, 141, 441

Dickinson, John, 186

Discourses on Government, 354

Disquisition on Government, A, 75 n, 77,
79s 299

Diverting History of John Bull and
Brother Jonathan, The, 214

Divina Commedia, 440

Divinity School Address, 337, 390

Domnet, 260

Don Quixote, 31

Douglas, Stephen A., 153, 397, 398

Drake, Joseph Rodman, 200

Dred, A Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp,
377

Dred ‘Scott, 157

Dryden, John, 31, 104, 289

Dumas, Alexandre, 216

Dutchman’s Fireside, The, 220

Dwight, Theodore, 278

——., Timothy, 71, 188, 240, 324, 340,
371


Early Spanish Ballads, 116

Ecclesiastes, 264.

Echo, The, 24.

Economic Origins of Jeffersonian De-
mocracy, The, 13 n, 15, 19

Edward I, King, 260

Edwards, Jonathan, 71, 321, 323, 324,
372 373» 379 39% 445

Eliot, Rev. John, 201, 343

Elliot's Debates, 83

Elliott, S. K., 102

Elsie Venner, 454, 459

Emancipation of Labor, The, 256

Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 108, 226, 230,
258, 264, 266, 304, 314, 316, 317,
319, 337» 344 349 3732 379» 380,


486


383, 384, 385, 386-399, 401, 409,
412, 420, 426, 429, 431, 433, 439
447, 449, 451, 455, 462, 474

Encyclopedia Americana, 94

English Serfdom and American Slavery,
102

English Thought in the Eighteenth Cen-
tury, 461

Epipsychidion, 259

Epistle of Robert Hogbin, Esq., 201

Essays (Emerson), 387, 390

Essay on Politics, 393, 394, 396, 397

Essay on Slavery and Abolitionism, with
Reference to the Duty of American
Females, 342

Essay on Thoreau, 346 n

_ Evans, George Henry, 254

Evening Post, The, 102 n, 239, 242,
244, 245

Everett, Edward, 109, 159, 317, 319,
320, 329; 397, 399, 423, 437, 458, 460

Examination of the Late Proceedings in
Congress Respecting . . . the Secre-
tary of the Treasury, An, 15

Exclusion of Slavery from the Territories,
On the, 312-313


“Falkland,” 287

Fanny, 202

Federal Orrery, The, 294

Federalist, The, 24, 196, 286, 302, 303

Felton, Professor, 367

Fenn, William W., 324 n, 327

Fenno, John, 186, 206

Ferdinand and Isabella, 434

Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 382, 430

Fielding, Henry, 128

Fight, The, 172

Fillmore, President Millard, 47

Filmer, Sir Robert, 215

Fink, Mike, 138, 192

First Settlement of New England, The,
306, 307-308

Flint, Rev. Timothy, 51, 140, 141, 162-
163, 211

Flush Times of Alabama and Missis-
Sippt, 133, 162, 166

Follen, Professor Charles, 94, 441

Forayers, The, 132, 134

Forrest, Edwin, 191

Fourier, Francois Charles Marie, 30,
244, 251, 348, 349, 431

Fox, Dixon Ryan, 199, 224, 244


INDEX


Francis Berrian, or the Mexican Patriot,
163

Franklin, Benjamin, 11, 185, 225, 228,

308

F ia Douglass, 431%

Freiligrath, Ferdinand, 439

Freneau, Philip, 186, 196

Frothingham, Octavius B., 348, 379,
380, 384

Fugitive Slave Law, The, 315

Fuller (Ossoli), Margaret, 314, 349, 426-
434, 436, 439, 448

——.,, Timothy, 427


Gage, General, 459

Gaines, Francis Pendleton, 102

Galloway, Joseph, 186

Gander Pulling, The, 172

Gansevoort, Maria, 259, 260, 261

, Major-General Peter, 260

Garland, Hamlin, 213

Garrison, William Lloyd, 256, 314, 319,
332, 341, 343, 351, 352-361, 365,
366, 411, 415, 416, 420, 431, 448,
458

Genét, Citizen, 292

Genius of Universal Emancipation, The,


353
George Balcombe, 162
George, Henry, 467
George Mason, the Young Backwoods-
man; or “Don’t Give up the Ship,”
163
Georgia Historical Quarterly, The, 177 n |
Georgia Scenes, 51, 162, 166, 168, 169, ,
172, 178 n
Georgia Theatrics, 172, 178
Gladiator, The, 191
Gladstone, W. E., 472
Glance Behind the ‘Curae, A, 464, 464 n
Godey’s Lady’s Book, 187
Godkin, Edwin Lawrence, 257, 468, 471 |
Godwin, Parke, 200, 243, 244
, William, 11, 22, 33, 188, 189, 190, |
2425 331, 335, 336, 409
Goethe, 389, 430, 433
Gournay, Vincent de, 11
Governor Clinton’s Speech, 201 n
Grant, General U. S., 48
Grattan, C. Hartley, 466
Gray, Edward, 48
, Elizabeth, 48
——, Thomas, 31, 188


INDEX


Grayson, William J., 103-108, 110, 111,
256

Greeley, Horace, 101, 107, 108, 200, 208,
238, 242, 244, 247-258, 352, 399,
432, 458

Green, Duff, 36

Greene, General, 132

Greenfield Hill, 340

Grimké, Angelina, 342 n, 432

Sisters, 343, 351

Grotius, 117, 306

Gulliver's Travels, 262

Guy Rivers, 130


Hale, Edward Everett, 462

Hall, Captain Basil, 215

» James, 51, 140, 162, 164, 172,

211

Halleck, Fitz-Greene, 200, 238

Hamilton, Alexander, 13, 14, 16, 20, 21,
24, 36, 48, 89, 93, 94, 95, 138, 143,
148, 156, 196, 197, 198, 206, 227,
245, 285, 291, 297, 305, 309, 316, 473

Hammond, Governor, 102

Harbinger, The, 244

Harper, Chancellor, 102

Harpe’s Head, 164, 165, 172

Harrington, James, 5, 305, 306, 307

Harrison Gray Otis, 341 n

Hartford Wits, The, 24, 188

Harvard Graduates, 467

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 259, 265, 442-
450

Hayes, President Rutherford B., 472

Hayne, Paul Hamilton, 126

, Robert Young, 310, 330

Hedge, Frederick Henry, 430

Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 318

Heine, Heinrich, 439

Helper, Hinton R., 133

Henry, Patrick, 33, 34

Hergesheimer, Joseph, 445

Herman Melville, Mariner and Mystic,
260, 261, 262, 263, 265

Hervey, James, 31

Higginson, Thomas Wentworth, 314,
344 2, 351, 414

Hildreth, Richard, 438

Hints toward Reforms, 250 n, 252 n, 257

Hireling and the Slave, The, 103, 104, 108

History of the American Drama, A, 191

History of the Congregational Churches
in the United States, 324 n, 325


487


History of the United States, 437-438

Hoar, Judge, 402

Hobbes, Thomas, 78

Hoffman, Charles Fenno, 163

» Josiah Ogden, 206

» Matilda, 206

Holmes, Abiel, 454.

» Oliver Wendell,

451-459, 460

Home as Found, 141, 229, 230, 233

Homeward Bound, 233

Hone, Philip, 245

Hopes and Fears for Art, 407

Hopkins, Samuel, 329, 340, 3735 375-376

Hopkinson, Francis, 186

Horace, 453

Horace Greeley, 254

Horace Greeley and the Working-Class
Origins of the Republican Party,
250, 252, 253, 254

Horseshoe Robinson, 41, 51, 53

Horse Swap, The, 172

House of the Seven Gables, The, 446

Howells, William Dean, 466

Huger, Alfred, 103

Hughes, Thomas, 469

Hume, David, 385

Hunt, Gaillard, 71, 72 2, 80

Hutchinson, Governor Thomas, 276


260, 319, 320,


Ichabod, 315

Illinois Monthly Magazine, The, 164

Independent in Politics, The, 471 n, 469

Industrial Worker, The, 141

Inquiry into the Nature of the Constitu-
tion of the United States, An, 299

Inquiry into the Principles and Policy
of the Government of the United
States, An, 15

Inquiry into the Principles and Ten-
dencies of Certain Public Measures,
Any ts

Introductory Remarks, 326, 333-334) 336

Introduction to the Old Testament, 417

Invention of Letters, The, 291

Irving, Pierre M., 205

, Washington, 29, 47, 49, 50, 51, 54,

172, 183, 195, 200, 203-212, 213,

218, 238) 471

— , William, 213


Jackson, Andrew, 4, 8, 26, 29, 34, 36, 37,
55 63, 90, 122, 139, 145-152, 154,


488


156, 173, 174, 175, 176, 178, 198,
207, 241, 242, 243, 249, 298; 309,


353

, Stonewall, 65, 70

Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich, 345, 382

Jacobiniad, The, 294.

James Russell Lowell, 465

James Russell Lowell and his Friends,
462 1

Java Head, 445

Jay, John, 196, 198, 224, 225, 227

Jefferson, Thomas, 4, 8, 10, II, 12, 13,
1S) 21,22) 20513431305, Ol, 02,100,100,
70, 71, 77, 84, 88, 89, 90, III, 119,
1200142, 146, LAS 9 T5O,eG TE LS3,
158, 159, 206, 228, 239, 240, 241,
PUGS si, Ay yl, Walap, Paihss, PAS.
287, 288, 300, 301, 302, 335, 366,
383, 390, 394, 396, 421, 430, 462,
468, 473 .

Jefferson Davis, A Memoir by his Wife,
146

Jeffersonian Democracy in New England,
2557

Jeremiah, 282

Jeremy Bentham and the Utilitarians, 116

John Bull in America, 214

John G. Whittier, 367

John Greenleaf Whittier, 351

Johnson, Andrew, 468

, Dr. Samuel, 35, 109

Jonathan Wild, 128

Journal (Thoreau), 411 n

Journals (Emerson), 317, 344, 349, 386,

387, 391, 392, 393 7 395, 398, 399,


409
Justice and Expediency, 362, 377
Juvenal, 453


Kane, Elisha Kent, 50

Kant, Emmanuel, 345, 382, 430

Katherine Walton, 128 n

Keats, John, 111, 453

Kennedy, John Pendleton, ii, 28, 37, 41,
46-56, 169, 172, 177, 203, 377

——,, William Sloane, 367

Kent, Chancellor James, 117, 196, 197-


199
, William, 198
Kentuckian in New York, The, 41, 45, 46,


- BYME
King, Charles, 245
» Rufus, 196


INDEX


Kirkland, President, 280, 281, 284-285
Kirkpatrick, John Ervin, 140, 141
Kneeland, Abner, 463, 469
“Knickerbocker” History, 212
Knickerbocker Magazine, The, 46, 163
Knights of the Horse-Shoe, The, 45
Knox, General, 291

Koningsmarke, 216, 218, 219


Vamar, b. O01 C162

, President, 170

Landing at Plymouth, The, 310"

Landor, Walter Savage, 389

Last Days of John Brown, The, 412

Last Leaf, The, 260

Last of the Mohicans, The, 235

Law of God and the Statutes of Men, The,
4210

Leaves of Grass, 466

Leaves from Margaret Smith’s Journal
of Massachusetts Bay, 363

Leben Jesu, 417

Lectures on Constitutional Law, 299

Lee, General Robert E., 29, 65

Legaré, Hugh Swinton, ii, 96, 103, 109,
110, III, II2, 113, 114-124, 168,
169, 438

Legends of the West, 164 ;

Leggett, William, 200, 208, 243, 244, 245

Leonard, Daniel, 276

Letter to A. C. Henry (Lincoln), 155

Letter to the Members of the Twenty-
Eighth Congregational Society of
Boston, 417 n, 418, 419, 420

Letters of James Russell Lowell, 437 n,
461, 462 n, 463, 466, 467, 469, 470,
471

Letter of Mr. Paul Ambrose on the Great
Rebellion in the United States, 56

Letters from the South, 198, 216 n, 217

Letters on Slavery, 102

Lewis, Matthew Gregory (“Monk”),
220

Liberator, The, 341, 353, 359

Life and Adventures of Arthur Clenning,
The, 163

Life and Correspondence of Theodore
Parker, The, 347-348, 414, 417 0

Life and Letters of Joseph Story, The, 301

Life and Letters of Oliver Wendell Holmes,
The, 453

Life and Letters of Washington Irving,
The, 205, 206, 207, 209, 210


INDEX


Life of Andrew Jackson, 148, 149

Life of William Lloyd Garrison, 256 n,
332 M, 342 m, 344, 344.2, 353-354,
356, 358, 359-360, 365, 368

Life of James Louis Petigru, 103, 104,
III

Life of John P. Kennedy, 48

Life of John Marshall, 22, 24

Life of Martin Van Buren, 173, 174, 176,
177

Life of Milton, 466

Life of Henry David Thoreau, 314

Life of Washington, 211

Life of Whitman, 367

Life Without and Life Within, 430 n, 431

Literary History of America, A, 416n,
427

Lieber, Francis, 93-98

Lincoln, Abraham, 4, 66, 152-160, 242,
420, 422, 473

Iiterary History of Philadelphia, 185

Literature of the Middle Western Fron-
tier, The, 164

Livingston, Chancellor, 227

Locke, John, 197, 198, 199, 228, 282,
287, 305, 380, 381, 382, 420

Longfellow, Henry W., 319, 320, 439-
441, 453, 465

Longstreet, Augustus Baldwin, 51, 162,
166-172, 176, 178

Lord Byron’s Character and Writings,
116

Loring, Commissioner Edward G., 360,
368, 411, 423

Lost Occasion, The, 367

Lovejoy, Elijah P., 246, 333

Lowell, Rev. Charles, 402, 463

, Francis Cabot, 462

, James Russell, 266, 314, 315, 351,

368, 436, 440, 460-472, 474

» John, 461, 462

Lucius Junius Brutus, 284, 285

Lundy, Benjamin, 353

Lyrical and other Poems, 114


McDuffie, Governor George, 62, 81, 136,
168, 170

Madison, James, 6, 71, 196, 288, 305

Magnalia Christi Americana, 371

Man the Reformer, 396, 397

Mann, Horace, 399

Manual of American Literature, A, 438

Marcy, Governor William M., 244


489


Mardi, 260, 261, 262, 263

Margaret Fuller, A Psychological Biog-
raphy, 427 n, 432

Marshall, John, 8, 20-27, 47, 94, 138,
197; 245, 300, 301, 302, 316, 473

Martin Chuzzlewit, 141

Martineau, Harriet, 351

Marx, Karl, 251, 467

Mason, Col. George, 277

Massachusetts to Virginia, 368

Masson, David, 466

Mather, Cotton, 202, 371, 391, 414, 428,


447

May, Samuel J., 351

Mayhew, Jonathan, 325, 326, 462

Mazzini, 428, 433

Mellichampe, 129

Melvill, Sir Richard, 260

Melville, Allan, 260, 261

, Herman, il, 58, 131, 183, 238, 258-

267; 445, 449

» Major Thomas, 260

Memoirs and Letters of James Kent, 198

Memoirs of Margaret Fuller Ossoli, 429,
430, 431, 434

Menander to Philenta, 288

Merriam, Charles A., 72 n, 94, 334.”

Metternich, Prince, 94

Militia Company Drill, The, 72

Mill, James, 428

» John Stuart, 104, 472

Milton, John, 109, 366

Minister's Wooing, The, 374

Minutes and Debates of the Constitu-
tional Convention, 72

Mirabeau, Marquis de, 10, 293

Moby Dick, 131, 261, 262, 263

Modestinus, 117

Monikins, The, 227, 228, 229

Monroe, James, 71

Montesquieu, Charles, 73, 75, 76, 94,
306, 392, 393

Moore, Tom, 30, 111, 114, 185, 187, 200

Moral Bully, The, 453, 454

Morison, S. E., 341 ”

Morley, John, 472

Morris, Gouverneur, 194, 196, 230, 280

, Robert, 8, 21, 183, 195

, William, 396, 406, 407, 408, 472

Morse, Jedidiah, 321

, John T., 453

x des Bey Le)

Morton, Mrs. Sarah Wentworth, 288


490


Motley, John Lothrop, 83, 438
Mott, Lucretia, 35, 428


Napoleon, 240

Narrative of the Life of David Crockett of
the State of Tennessee, 172, 174, 175

Narrative of the Surprizing Works of God,
445

Nathan, James, 428

Nation, The, 468, 470

National Philanthropist, The, 342

Nature, 390, 447

Nature and Progress of Liberty, 291

Nebraska Question, The, 420, 421-422,


424
Nemours, Du Pont de, 3, 10, 243
Nevins, Allan, 102 n, 242 n, 244, 245
New England Chattels, 102
New Views of the Constitution of the
United States, 299
New York Herald, The, 102 n, 356-357
Nick of the Woods, or the Jibbenainosay,
135, I9I, 192, 235
Niebuhr, Barthold Georg, 94
Nightingale, Florence, 107
North American Review, The, 111, 442
Norton, Andrews, 329, 454
, Charles Eliot, 441, 460, 465, 470
Novalis, 430 ;
Noyes, John Humphrey, 343-346, 3555
359


Oberholtzer, Ellis Paxson, 185

Oceana, The, 306, 307

Old Cambridge, 341 n

Old-Town Folks, 372, 3735 374

One-Hoss Shay, The, 453, 454

Orations and Addresses, 201

Origin of Species, The, 419

Origin, History and Influence of Roman
Legislation, The, 116

Ossian, 31, 111, 186

Ossoli, Count, 428

Otis, Harrison Gray, 279, 353

» James, 325

Owen, Robert, 30, 242, 349


Page, J. W., 102

, Thomas Nelson, 28

Paine, Robert Treat, 113, 279, 288-295,
317, 329, 436, 452

—, Thomas, 11, 12, 22, 88, 96, 284,
288, 342, 356, 366


INDEX


Papinian, 117

Parker, Theodore, 108, 115, 124, 171,
256, 2977, 300, 311, 314, 315,
316 n, 319, 327, 329, 338; 342, 347,
351, 373» 398, 399, 414-425, 426,
430, 433, 439 455, 456, 458

Parkinson, Richard, 215

Parkman, Francis, 438-439, 458

Parson Turell’s Legacy, 453

Partisan, The, 53, 134

Partisan Leader, The, 35, 36, 37

Pascal, 264

Patrician and Plebeian in Virginia, 7, 8

Patrick Henry, Sketches of the Life and
Character of, 31-33

Paulding, James Kirke, 162, 163, 183,
190, 198, 200, 207, 212-221, 238

Peabody, Elizabeth, 443

, Sophia, 443, 449

Peaslee, Mary, 364

Pendleton, L. B., 83, 86, 87, 91

» Nancy, 47

Perfectionist, The, 343

Perry, Commodore, 50

Petigru, James Louis, 103, 110, 123, 168

Phillips, Wendell, 108, 256, 314, 333,
351, 420, 436, 458

Phocion, 287

Pickering, Timothy, 187, 296

Pierpont, John, 365

Pierre, or the Ambiguities, 261, 263, 264

Pike, Albert, 162

Pilgrim’s Progress, 129

Pinckney, General Charles Cotesworth,
110

Pindar, 402

Pioneer, The, 464”

Pioneers, The, 216, 220, 224

Pitt, William, 170, 282

Plato, 252, 259, 264, 318, 381, 427

Plea for Captain John Brown, A, 413

Poe, Edgar Allan, 57-59, 127

Poet of the Breakfast Table, The, 455,
457, 458

Poganuc People, 372, 374

Political Ethics, 95

Political Justice, 331, 335, 336) 409-410

Political Science Quarterly, The, 250

Pope, Alexander, 31, 104, 114, 289, 290,
452, 466

Port Folio, The, 187

Prairie, The, 232

Prescott, W. H., 367, 438


INDEX


Present Age, The, 395

Present Crisis, The, 464, 464

Prince, H< L., 154

Professor at the Breakfast Table, The,
455, 456

Progress and Poverty, 467

Prometheus, 463, 464, 464.0

Prometheus Bound, 402

Pro-Slavery Argument, 102

Pro-Slavery Propaganda in American
Fiction tn the Fifties, 102

Prose Sketches and Poems, 162

Pufendorf, Baron von, 117

Puritan and his Daughter, The, 215, 216


Quesnay, Francois, 3, 10, 11

Quincy, Edmund, 314, 343, 345, 3515
359, 436

—, Josiah, 276, 279, 329, 343, 368,
460, 462

Quinn, Arthur Hobson, 191 n

Quodlibet, 37, 51, 555 56, 177


Rabelais, 262, 265

Raciad, The, 114

Radcliffe, Mrs. Ann, 111

Raleigh, Sir Walter, 307

Randolph, John of Roanoke, 8, 9, 26,
39, 31, 355 57

Ranke, Leopold von, 437

Rawle on the Constitution, 299

Rebellion, The, 468 n

Recollections of a Busy Life, 249

Recollections of the Last Ten Years,
Passed in Occasional Residences and
Journeyings in the Valley of the
Mississippt, 163

Recorder, The, 201 n

Red Book, The, 48, 51

Redskins, The, 226 n, 229, 230, 231, 236

Reed, Amy Louise, 446, 448

Religious History of New England:
King’s Chapel Lectures, 324.n, 327

Rhymed Lesson, A, 4520

Ricardo, David, 241

Richard Hurdis, 128, 130

Richter, Jean Paul, 430

Rights of Man, The, 12

Rights of Woman, 331

Ripley, Dr. Ezra, 199, 402

—,, George, 101, 108, 242, 347, 348,
349» 35°

—, Sophia, 349


491


Rise of the Dutch Republic, The, 438

Rittenhouse, David, 185

Rob of the Bowl, 51, 53, 54.

Robespierre, 398

Robinson Crusoe, 163

Robinson, William A., 255

Rogers, Dr., 199

Romance of American History, 140 n,
166

Rousseau, Jean Jacques, II, 22, 242,
261, 264, 284, 318, 331, 345, 366,
390, 402, 413, 420, 430, 433, 4345
466

Ruling Passion, The, 290

Rusk, Ralph Leslie, 164, 165

Ruskin, John, 101, 406, 407


Saint’s Rest, 371

Salmagundi, 200, 206, 213

Sampson, Abbot, ror

Sanborn, F. B., 314

Sand, Georges, 429

Sargent, John O., 453

Satanstoe, 235

Schlegel, August Wilhelm von, 58

Schleiermacher, Friedrich, 382

Scollay, Priscilla, 260

Scott, Sir Walter, 28, 30, 47, I11, 120,
129, 171, 200, 216, 220.9371

Scout, The, 133

Scudder, H. E., 465

Sedgwick, Catherine M., 241

» Henry M., 241

, Theodore, Jr., 241

Self-Portraiture in the Work of Nathantel
Hawthorne, 446, 448

Seventh of March Speech, The, 313, 314,
367, 368

Sewall, Jonathan, 351

, Joseph, 276

, Samuel, 364, 446

Seward, William Henry, 107

Shakespeare, 47, 129, 130

Shaw, Elizabeth, 259

Shays, Daniel, 276, 282, 284, 297, 340

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 111, 259, 381,


453
Shooting Match, The, 172
Shoshonee Valley, The, 163
Sibley, J. L., 467
Sidney, Algernon, 354, 420
“Sidney, Edward William,” 36
Simms, William Gilmore, 11, 37, 39, 475


001825397


492


53, 54, 102, I10, 112, 125-136, 169,
190, 232, 474

Sketches and Eccentricities of Col. David ©
Crockett of West Tennessee, 173, 175,
176, 177

Skipper Ireson’s Ride, 370

Slavery, 3335 335

Slavery in Massachusetts, 412

Social Destiny of Mankind, The, 251

Socrates, 427

Solomon, 264, 265

Song, The, 172

Songs of Labor, 370

Sotheran, Charles, 254 ”

South Atlantic Quarterly, The, 102”

Southern Plantation, The, 102 n

Southern Quarterly Review, The, 39

Southern Review, The, 112, 114

Smith, Adam, vii, 3, 121, 241, 242, 243,

308, 400

, Gerrit, 351, 359, 365

Smollett, Tobias, 128

Snowbound, 370

Sparks, Rev. Jared, 330, 367, 437

Spectator, The, 31

Speech on the Compromise Measures, 313

Speech at New Haven, 154

Speech at Springfield, 157, 159

Speech in Wall Street, 309 n

Spinoza, 264.

Spirit of the Sub-Treasury, 122

Spotswood, Governor Alexander, 7, 45

Staél, Madame de, 381

Stansbury, Joseph, 186

Stanton, Theodore, 438

State Rights Sentinel, The, 171

Stedman, Edmund Clarence, 200, 238

Stephen, Leslie, 461, 469

Stephens, Alexander H., 39, 56, 62, 64,
65, 69, 82-93, 94, 167, 302, 473

Sterne, Lawrence, 31, 33, 35

Stiles, Rev. Ezra, 199

Stoddard, Richard Henry, 200, 238

Story, Joseph, 83, 88, 93, 117, 197, 260,

297, 300-303, 304, 311

, W. W., 301

Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 107, 314, 371-
378, 428

Stranger in America, The, 95

Strauss, David Friedrich, 417

Stuart, Moses, 367

Studies in Psychology, 446

Sullivan's Island, 114


INDEX


Sumner, Charles, 106, 351

Swallow Barn, 28, 41, 50, 51, 52, 172, 377

Swift, Jonathan, 228, 453

Swinburne, Algernon Charles, 436, 466

Swinton, Mary, 115

Taine, Hippolyte, 466

Tandy, Jeannette Reid, 102

Tappan, Arthur, 351

, Lewis, 351, 362

Tariff, The, 308 n

Taylor, John of Caroline, ii, 14-19, 20,

21, 29; 6%, 90,1122, 123,00S5O,nt5ae

170, 217, 277, 299, 336

, Zachary, 71

Tempora Mutantur, 470

Tent on the Beach, The, 369

Thackeray, William Makepeace, 47, 54

Thanatopsis, 239

Thirty Years’ View, 14, 151

Thomas Carlyle and his Works, 413

Thoreau, Henry David, 156, 258, 264,
266, 314, 319, 367, 389, 394, 400-


413, 426, 433, 440, 449, 451, 458,
460

Thornton, W. T., 241

Ticknor, George, 116, 367, 437

Timothy Flint, Pioneer, Missionary,
Author, Editor, 140, 141

Toombs, Robert, 39, 62, 86, 91

Toqueville, Alexis de, vi

Tour of the Prairies, A, 211

Transcendentalism in New England, 348,
379, 380, 381

Transcendentalist, The, 384, 385

Transient and Permanent in Christianity,
On the, 338

Treatise on True Virtue, A, 372

Trent, Professor William Peterfield, 39,
131

Tribune, The, 248, 249, 250, 251, 253,
254, 255

Tristram Shandy, 31, 47

Trollope, Mrs., 215

Tucker, Henry St. George, 299

, Nathaniel Beverley, ii, 35-40, 41,

42, 47, 57, 119

Tuckerman, Henry T., 48, 238

Turner, J. M. W., 407

, Nat, 355

wait Mark, 159) 172, 2595 366

Tweed, “Boss,” 471

Tyler, President John, 8, 116

Ty pee, 261 ;


INDEX.


Ulpian, 117
Uncle Robin in his Cabin in Virginia and
_ Tom without one in Boston, 102
“Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 102, 376, 377, 441
Unitarian Christianity most Favorable to
Piety, 330-331


Van Buren, Martin, 36, 55, 197, 203,
207, 217, 246

Vanderbilt, Commodore, 231, 474

Van Doren, Carl, 133

Van Rensselaer, Stephen, 194, 195, 231

Vattel, Emrich von, 117

Virginians, The, 54

Voet, 117

Voltaire, 382

Vote Yourself a Farm, 254


Waddell, Dr. Moses, 168
Wade, John Donald, 169, 170, 177 n
Walden, 400, 403, 405, 406, 407, 408,


413

Walker, Nathaniel, 327

, Williston, 324, 324 2

Ware, Norman, 141

Washington, George, 7-8, 21, 48, 159,
LOA NZTI4 2055) 201, 292,300, 30T,
356, 437

Waverley Novels, 216

Weaver, Raymond, 259, 260, 261, 262,
263, 265

Webster Address, 424

Webster, Daniel, 37, 67, 69, 88, 90, 94,
116, 122, 144, 159, 177, 207 m, 227,
242, 246, 252, 278, 298, 299, 300,
301, 304-316, 317, 330) 335, 359
367, 368, 387, 397, 398, 399, 412,
424, 458

Weed, Thurlow, 197

Week, The, 404, 406

Weems, “Parson,” 437

Weiss, John, 347, 414, 417 2, 422 2

Weld, Isaac, 215

Welles, Gideon, 64

Wendell, Barrett, 416 1, 427

Wertenbaker, Thomas J., 7, 8


493


Western Monthly Magazine, The, 164
Western Souvenir, The; A Christmas and
New Year's Gift for 1820, 164

Westward Ho!, 162, 163, 217, 220

Wette, Wilhelm Martin de, 417

Wharton, Edith, 435

White Jacket, 262

White, Maria, 351, 463, 465

Whitman, Walt, 127, 183, 222, 244, 264,
265, 366, 367

Whittier, John G., 244, 314, 315, 319,

351, 352, 359, 361-370, 377

» Robert, 364

Wieland, 190

Wilderness and the War-Path, The, 165

Willard, President, 292

William IV, King, 452

William Ellery Channing, 330, 338

William Gilmore Simms, Life of, 39

Williams, Roger, 97, 327, 345, 379» 399

Willing, Mrs., 207

Willis, Nathaniel Parker, 200, 202, 238

Wilson, Henry, 469

Windsor Forest, 114

Winthrop, John, 124

, Robert C., 47, 49

Wirt, William, 29, 30-35, 47, 48, 49, 56,
169

Wollstonecraft, Mary, 188, 189, 242,
331, 430, 432

Woman in the Nineteenth Century, 432

Woodcraft, 131, 134

Woods, Leonard, 367

Woolsey, Theodore, 94

Wordsworth, William, 111, 381, 389,
453, 466

Working Man’s Advocate, The, 254

World’s Fair, The, 470

Wright, Fannie, 242, 244, 428

» Henry C., 343, 358

Wyandotté, 235

Wythe, George, 25, 29, 142, 143


Yates, Robert, 72
Yemassee, The, 134, 135
Young, Edward, 31, I11, 254


ry i ' wah i et em

fe fi Neuen - . ms

rans) Hy ia Aine ; Be ine se
ee ® eed cere til va


x“. y2 pone) t ‘Ai ah


‘wy bom =~


way 2 es ~
AS At 7) See oe


Ra


ny


001825397


SER tNg sn
Sadi


ay iit SHAR Sreseaiet
Sree


be Se Sy
Bain


Sead
ENE ST panies ia


Sciassiae


Brehtay money Sear


BEE Neen


renin ae ~
SRS aaa eno
SSP ern et

papa noes eames


Aor Oey,
oes


bnialcas


etbcuseeyiseens
ino apnea


es
ASS Nh Arg) Sig


SOr rte
ates Brats fa

‘s Burk me vs
a ere Hearne iso atone


ft mE eames


Shien


eshistetyiercconaity te
Hore ei
Feiss

re eae

SoS imate? tte


Seas aks


RLS


Se WAU ESACE «hl MS Gee


easels oes
Sapiens
Po ne


esd , poh
POS eee has Sued ve
Mibners LGaGR SD rue


uA at Sous
SEO RORY seg
“Oo ATR ALN GE


co


: o Chinese
se che adersiton letra
eee rs


i
Tei gis een Wee
Guan


Per Destiacess
HREM Fare


BOR ANOR
Ce ton ad
opens sine


Ue to


St
Ean i


ADF
caer. ss


SORE sy
Frown Ue

; ma cetcn: cS

SSAC = PE Se gilt ak


frag N std te races PA


sce ts

sees tase seas 0
HUMPS asiien\eqts yind a Ci nasuhyeh cas
Spam Sas ar 8 be PALER LARS ACV 1


“Ysiie AO) «


Sniens.


