Opus Reformatum (John Partridge, 1693)
==========================================================
Partridge's 1693 reformed astrology; the Whig astrologer's attack on Gadbury and the old art. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/bim_early-english-books-1641-1700_opus-reformatum-or-a-t_partridge-john_1693).

1
#-
oh
"$1 5


£, tny Rerormarum: :
OR,A. M44:


TREATISE
ASTROLOGY.


IN WHECH


\-\-The Contnon Exrors of that Art are!


Modeſtly Expoſed and RejeQted.


With an'E'S'S A Y, cowards the Reviving the
True-and Aqacient Method laid dow for our Dire&i-
pn.by the GxraT PTOLOMY; and more agree- |-
-able tothe Principles*'of Motion and Nature, than
that Ie. PraQtiſed and"Taught.


mm__


In Two "egg =


) 1 By. By Joun PARTRAIDGE, Phyſician to-Her Preſent


Majeſty, and Student | in Aſtrology.


& one "Poſt Nutita Phebus.


-
k ant


LONDON:


& Printed for .fvnſhem and Yohn Churchill at.the Black-


Swan'in” Pater-Nofter- Row. - M MDCXC Il.


| *g THE
READERS.


GENTLEMEN,  _ |

HO I have here. detefied awd. di{covered divers

Errors in the Study and Preffice of Aſtrology,

eſpecially in that Part of it that. concerns Nati-

vities ; and alſo ſpoke ſlightly of ſome Authors

who are much valued , and. in great eſteem among divers
Pradtitioners ; and likewiſe condemned their Writings, as
being filled with little elſe but Errors and idle Innove-
tions , which. are indeed but the ſame thing ," if rightly
conſidered. ' Tet I would not be miſunderſtood in what 1
_have- bere done; and thought (becauſe 1 tharge ſo many
with Miſtakes ) that 1 think my ſelf free from Faxlts,
Errors, and Overfights, either in my Prattice or Wri-
tings, or that I intend to airet# teach the Students
in this Art to endeavour after ſuch a Perfettion: No, 1
know too well, that Over-ſizhts and deceptio ſcnſus, x
to0 true, and too viſible u Chagatter of Fleas wan Nature ;
and to Err , is the hnown and common Calamity that
Mankind is [ubje# to; for beſides the Infirmities of our
Conftitutions, the Depravity of our Wills \'and A4fﬀettions,
the Obſcarity of onr Under ftanding, and the Weakneſs of
our Tudgments.,: The Curſe ow our Original Parents for
their Tranſzreſſion at the beg inning ſeems ſtill to lye heavy on
our Shoulders, and tells ns plainly, That Sorron and Sweat,
4+ A 2 Thorns


-


A


a
=


a, ” 1s G = C
© Pa - -


" 7 d wy oy


#*" 4th dT $4. £6 =Y eas, OO 5
m P'S wo : . s A }- 4%


At?


| To the Readers.
Thorns and Thiſtles, Life and Error, ave inſeperable. But
yer There 1s @ difference betiveen the Errors of  Natare,
contra voluntatem, ' and the Errors of Prattice, introduced
by Cuftom and Diſcipling. Apd thelp are they that I contend
agair ft, and endeavor j Z ; tho the other alſo onght
not to be forgotten, . |

"Nor WoWa I bawe any one- thinks that T intend t0'de-
froy the Aft of Altrology.by. what I have here. done ; no,
1 do aſſure yo, that this. is the leaſt of my. thoughts ;
nor would 1 impair any part of it that T judge uſeful and
ſerwiceable , either for its Support 'or Reputation. © But


«my real Intent ali Deſign is to excite the \ Lovers of


this C ontemprible' Setence; to refine it, and make it \ more
coherent in"'its" Principles aud \more certain" in its: ſe
and Pratlice., than it is at. preſent; and alſo to lay by
thofe Idle Notions and Prattices uſed therein; which have
ar awn the Objeftions of Learned Pens upon us. For tho
-T am" not--willing to” ſwallow down thoſe fulſom. Errors
with»which- it is tlop'd and loaded; it doth not therefore


+ follow, that I am an Enemy to its Truth and Excellence,


and muſt be debarred my Inquiry towards its Perfettion ,
and not permitted\ to approach the Spring- of. it s 'Ori-
"ginal Truth: Þ doubt not but you may find-ſome Errors
in this Treatiſe, which you may wmpute either to my Over-
ſight, or want of Skill, which you pleaſe; yer T-hope they
may deferve your Excuſe and. Pardon , eſpecially when
you" conſider, that I havewnaertaken to tyrn the Torrent of
« mighty Stream; and that with" ſuch little Aſſiſt ance as-#
' have received : I being indebted to' no 'Man for any ſet-
wice or "help therein, but to my Honoured Friend and Late
Deceaſed Maſter , Dr. Francis Wright, by 'whoſe Inſtru-


' what I have elſe at 'prefent . under. my Conſideration for
the Preſs. "But "for my Errors ( if any ſball think _—_
I . - 0


—


"(tions only, I own my ſelf enabled to perform this, and


>


| To'the Readers.
Jo) laid down 5n Pratiice; by "way of Rule", I deſire no
excuſe For them, but refer them to y1ur Conſideration, and
for thut-wery parpoſe T have printed them here ; and alſo


hope, that thoſe Gentlemen that think" them ſo, mitt be'


pleaſed*ro*inform_ my Unierſtanding.," ant give me better
Notions in-print, with better. Proofs for their Dorine,


than 1 have given for mine; and 1 do afſare them, I will


re-dily ſubmit and cr5 Peccavi, And ſo I come to ſpeak
partitularly.\ . - .


Firſt, To the Book it ſelf. In which thou haſt the
whole Myſtery of Aſtrology relating to Nativities, accord-
ing us 1 underſtand 'it ; but it is diſperſed here*and there
thronghout- the whole Book an# Matter alſo, and will take
thee ſome time and pains 400, to collet and digeſt it into
a method for Prattice,” which is no hard matter, if thou
.art but willing to take a little paths; ani without pains; - F
can aſſure thee-, thou wilt prove but a very ordinary Av-
rift in thy Profeſſion, I have there given thee the Nati-
vity of Oliver Cremwell , with my Reaſons for its Cor-
rettHon, 'mad alfo his Diſeaſe, by which he expired; with a
T able of Direftions from his Birth to his Death; with each
Ark, its tine Meaſure ; and the Year of our' Lord when
it 'did begin to operate. T have alſo ſhewed the incohe-
rence of thoſe Rules laid down pn ſeveral Occaſions, not
only" in his Nativity, but in divers. others; andthe juſt.
Cauſe our Enemies have from thence to Cavil at, and ri-
dicule the Art and its Profeſſors. -1 have alſo throughout
that Nativity,.-00 my Jadzment thereon, wholly diſſented
from the Common Method noi prattiſed ; and where I have
fo done, IT have alſo given you the Text of Ptolomy. for
my Juſtification to prevent my being queſtion'd in print ;
w thofe who'think my Method \new, may examine thats
Anthor , - and ſce 'whether I have done him "and the Art


it -


itt


ſeen


” . a c - s, Ta _— a d


'To'the Readers: - |


_


£ ut elf Fuſtice or. not... I have alſo ſhew'd you the excellent _


eof the Hilez, and the'wanity of their calling the Lord of


'- the Eighth, the Anareta, aud judging the Quality of Death
, © from his Natare and: Poſition... And indecd,. T have been


plain. in every thing elſe nſeful in the Judgment of s Nati-
vity, with my particalar Upinion ayd Method, that I. uſe


in all Reuolutional Fignres, and alſo. how to take them:
And to, tell. you'plazply, all other Methods are really Inno:


vations, and new Projetts without any ground from Authors
of Authority. , |


1n the Second Part » 1 have endeavoured to ſhew- you,


That the opipion of Cardinal Signs dy Angles, according.


to Mr, Gadbury's bs 9g in his Cardines Coli, is vam
and. proundleſs; and the Arguments aud Aphoriſms he


brings to prove it, are lug'd in by Head and Shoulders,
and. of no Validity to that purpoſe; and that the, Nati-


vities bronght to that ena, are alſo fititious.. In the Sup-
plament'] Jive row you ſeveral Nativities out of He-
minga, . that be brings 4s Arguments againſ# Aﬀtrology,
becauſe he could find no Reaſons direttional for. their Deaths,
Sickneſs, and'other things in his.way of Aſtrology, which |
I. have endeauoured here to ſhew was #0 hard thing to.
do; and. in particular, in that Nativity of" Cardan's
Son, about \which both he and Alexander de -Angelis, do
ſufficiently abuſe. the Aſtrologers , -and- the Art, becauſe
there was no Diredton Theus for his Death, either by his
Father, Maginus, or Naibod, three Great Men'in their -
Times. -It was firſt printed by Placidus de Titis, 5n- his
Primumi Mobile, which may admit of a Correttion, as
may be ſeen by that printed in this Book; and yet we
both keep exatly to Cardan's :etimate Time , as nidy be

>" by his 'own Figare tn his Comment on Ptolomy;
Ltb. 3: Cap. 14: Aand indeed, 1 could have given you dj-


Vers


To'the Readers:
vers-more ous of Heminga, were I not cert ain that ome
of theme are falf? , and ſure be took them apon Truſt. In
the whole thing there is mueb Variety , both in the Mat-
ter and Method , and ;hefe founded on very good Prin-
ciples , which I ſball delivery more methoaically hereafter ,
according as I ſhall find this is recerved in the World. 17
da not pretend, that either the Matter or Method, is either
of them new, but only the old ones revived; and to ſay the
trith, it is ſo old, that 1 can [afely ſay, it is forgot, and the
whole of it will: ſeem ſtrange to this Age. Which I hums
bly offer to the conſideration of the Ingenious Students ,
. and intreat every one t0: examine it Terzouſty and -acti-
berately before he. gives @ determinate Thdgment , either
in Approbation or Exprobation - of what I have here


Secondly, To the Studions Lovers of Aſtrology in
General. 1 hope Gentlemen , there will be no iced to
wade you with Arguments, either to belreve, or. aſſert
the Truth of Aſtrology ; eſpecially you that have alrcady
had a- profpet# af it from the Top of Pilgah ; and have
alfo- « better opinion of its Trath and Excellence, than you
_ are" uble to demonſirate tothe Unbelievers, by Examples
of your own'; fair Prediffions ( 1 mean) of the Effes of:
&229- Direttion before the Accidents happened, for it is that
muſt-give your Art '« Reputation. And yet T judpe it
may not: be wholly improper to perſwade jou to'a-greater
diligence" and labour in your feveral” Methods of Praftice
in that Art; not ſo much for the diſcovery of New Whims
and Notions, without either Groxmnd' or Reafon, and ſome
of them not at all under ffood by their Inventors and Teachers; .
But for improving thoſe we have already in*our Poſſeſſt-
on, - and tt try whether they will ſtand the Teſt. of Exam-
les and Examinations in ſeveral Nativities; not to: ſpend /


time


1


""Tacthe Riaders,


"Hiatt 48 making, 4: noiſe.rakoat; 6: thing | but Uitthe dnonw;


—_— perhaps leſs -nider flood; but \to-mork;, and. by the. va:


nizty of, Examples, to, 115 ahd::compare.ione with anpther_,
axd-at Laſt - ſee how their: Rutes' will agree in"-the. gene«
ral; for 1 -can: aſſure .YORg. OE- hour . Spent "thiat. way, {ball


yeach you. wore ſubſtantial. Kyeowledge in'theſe things, than
: 6,whole Yays. prating.... And 'to this end, {t-i5\00t a ruſh


matter what. your I'7iuciples are; witther, Geaccntrichs
Rickioecacrick, or. Selenoceptrick*;- vor whether thein. Dim
reftions . are, Dire&,, Convers, Rapty or Secondary ,
wranght » in. Mundo: or Zodiaco,, ##..4þe. Crepuſculine,
Gatcles,. orithe Obſcure:Arks,; fo you wil-hut. wake. your. -
Doty Ine all of 4 piece ;..and let your Diredthons do,'the ſame,


| at one time, that they ao. at another, and not give ſome*


thing in one Nativity, and. miſs in Twenty others, whey
you ty them again. And to this purpoſe , I do adviſe
20u,a0t to rely. on your Authors. , "m0, takt up, their: Rules
12 your Prottice, without rexemining) their Ability aud”
Truth..' For Teat aſſure you;. That all the Printipal Authors _
of the laſt Centary, SS (except two or three). have
done. very little for the Art Pay ey unleſs it, pas.
to make, it. Ridigulons.. and. Contemptible.z:ſo that thoſa.
who are diſpoſed. .10, ah a6; AiltrOlogy.r Merd:ngt-rogd
etninga , Alexander. de Angelis,. Chambers, and the,
reft of them that . have ridicel.d it in. Print but have.
recour/e to our awn Authors, and... conſider, and compare:
theni well , . «xd they. will find fooleries. ſaffitient for. their
purpoſe'\and deſign that way," be-it what it wil.". . Our Reutes


. in Judgment are ſo deficient , that. they are generally not.


to. be reps 0n.; and; mbat is" more ,, one thwarts. another,
by mhich means the. Young, Stadents.' know. ngt which ita,,
believe or. fallow. Our new-made Aphorilins. axe, /q Yale.


' that "not _ one in ten of i them will hold according \t6. the,


Text given for our Direction and Guiae,. In the Becks.


of


To the Readers,


of Direftions they have followed NiaechivePs Rate (Throw © _


vi


dirt enough, and ſome will ſtick) ; naw'd abuntanoe of 4o- -


cidents 6 attend tath Direttion, 'and the Devil's in't if
ſome of them do not happen to take effett. - Bit in the
Direftions affroned for all kind of Artidents, Death,” &c:
there they have out-downe thenifelves ; a4) fo. twrvoled' us
_ into a Labyrinth of Confuſion, that we are not able to under+
ſtand them if me will make Reaſon our Guide, and com-
pare one thing with another. Therefore, pray Gentlemen,
take it into your Conſideration, and let fomething be done,
that the. next Are may be better tnform'd by 'yow , than we
_ were by that' which" went before ns. Let us have leſs Yo-
lumes, and more Truth", fewer Rules, and more to the
purpoſe; plainer Direftions how to work with fewer Con-
traditions ; refine the Art, and vejet thoſe Fooleries it is
loatied with; aſſert "its \Fruths, and detlaim its Errors,
and" then it will appear vo be" what we tell the World it
is, and would have-it thought to be. Nay, let us have
all the New Inventions likewiſe that can be diſcovered,
provided they' ave true. ' There 1s one thing more, Gen-
clemeny #het -I would ſay 'to: you,' and that ts," Do not hug
Tmnovations for no'other Reaſon but becanſe they are new];
That trick hath been to often pitt upon us already, and
ever by-thoſe ton, that knew very little of the matter ;
_ and bud "as Hittle' chill, as theſe that endegvoured to fol-.
tow their Direttions ; by which means and ways our Errone-
ons Confuflont were not a little increaſed. Nor would I
adviſe you to be afraid of any thing that is new , becanſe
i#t is fo; bring it To the” Touchſtone and try it ; and that
i #0'be dont nd othermiys, but by Labour and" Experience;
for 'if the thing itſelf b#h'# good Bottom, and ſrems ra-
Fronal, it may prove worth your while to examine it.
And by this way'T intrext you to' put what I'have done to
the tryal; awd'if # will wot hold, and ip the general uy
MABYY - >.<. a HIS.


- vill


4 To the Readers.


the Tefty,\I-ſhell be ready. #0. (CONF aud beg your better


Informations. fans 7 ES oo! | F

Thicdly,\Js' the-Enemits of Aﬀtrology, to whom, tho
I am aot obliged either by Kindneſs or Duty, yet 1 have
a few words to ſay, tho 1 do not expeit to make one Con-
went” by..my. [0 doing. It is. the hard Fate of Altrology
aud Altrologers ta. nndergo the ſevere Cenſure. of | you,
Gentlemen., who never knew any thing -of it , but . its
Name ; 4nd 1am confident; ſome of you-do not know one
Charatter. from. another , nor.:did_ y0ueuer yet arrive at
that. Skill to erefF' a Scheme. of Heavens; which if. you Aid,
yet they are very. ſmall Abilitizs.'$0 entitle. any man\to be
Tudge of 4 thing hz is.ſo little acquainted -mwith;. as, Iam
certain the Major part are , that pretend to ridicule this
Study. For whatever the Common: Profeſſors pretend-to,
either by falſe. Notions, or. worſe; Pratiice;. .1 own it, and
ſtudy-it no. otherways than a Bran:h of Natural Philoſo-'
phy,. aud do think it is no hard matter to. give it a fair.
Foundation. ou very. rational Principles, and thoſe'I think,
demonſtrable. too. without any. gxeat Difficulty. and Trouble,
and they.:axe Motion, Rays ,. and. Influence;' and theſe
in that Part of | Aſtrology that takes notice of Nativities
"TERS, which Part of #t I bave moſt -
rally my Study, and. or the other Parts of it, let thoſe who.
have imploy.d themſelves therein, take. the ſame 'care-t0,
juſtify it both by. Examples and Rutss.; \ And i, do-believe.
that this. of Nativities being done, will give ſonit  Repu-
tation. to the other Parts of Aſtrology likewiſe ;_ and this as:
preſent is . fallen. unger. my Confideration', tho. 1 believe
there are ſome far more able than my {elf $0 do its if they


were pleaſed to. take - the. trouble * off... weh - 4 Werk upon


them. (IN at VSM ans At
_. » And whatever. your dſſertions are: of its being forbidden.
ip.Sacred Writ, they axe rexlly falſe and done? any more.


prohibit


h To:the: Readers.
prohibit t hat, than rhe Command giver tothe Prophet Hoſea
ro: Marry a Whort, aid juſtify Whoredom ; for what #; ſaid
there againſt it, doth only reprove the Pretenders abuſe of it,
and the Peoples ſuperſtitions dependance thereon ; which every
honeſt Artiſt will diſown at this day, that believ:s the Power
of an Eternal God: Sb d-\BRAIY CNV Ns 7


Neither can it be an Enemy tb Relioion and Piery for | |


by how much the more every good Man knows the Myſteries
of Nature in her various Ways and Operations, by ſo much
#he more-it will bring. him to. admire and contemplate that
undeniable Power of the Tremendas Deity that" firſt gue it
its Being and Order ; and we ſee daily when the" beſt of
things fall into the Hands of Ill Men, what a Scandalous
Account they give of them, and. pervert their lawful Uſe.
Hence there is to reaſon to believe, that the Abuſe of
Virtue, or any other uſeful: thing, pleads its Prohibition ,
either by Law or Arguments; if _ ſo, farewell Food and
Phyſick. [ |
And beſides, if we ſboild allow ( what ſome: of you / ay)
that there is.no verity in it, .yet\thak ncither doth not pro-
claim it unlawful,” but juſtly reprehends us for ſpending
fo much time 'in a. thing void of truth, and would draw
from pood Men rather Pity than Scorn ; but we deſire neither,
being able to juſtify its Inuth, and that it is of more worth
- and uſe than ſome Studies that. carry-a:greater Applauſe and
- Repute; concerntns which, I hope ſomething will be done
hereafter. | |
* Bat: your great Objettion that makes it Ridiculous and
Scandalous, 1. muſt. achnowledge is too true, That many
. of-its Pretenders tell the World they can. do things that
are impoſſible, and under the pretence of Afrology att
abundance. of Villanies : Ad thoſe, perhays, iznorant of
the Study, do' not know #0:the contrary, but that ſuch things
are preſcribed by ies Rules and Ruidiments. And. ering they
a 2 a4VE


IX


To-the Readers.
bavethe' Impudence teat ſach things ,' 1 hope it will be
. Offence tÞ:the' World. _ far of rh , mor t0 _
honeft Artift-to hear it told ;- and therefore take theſe fem,
| a judge by them" what- they are that - uſe ſuch Roguiſh
FAG ei oat ak Oe hl HD 7H AQ VC \
There is a little Ruddy-fac d Conjurer,. who. in my heav-
ing had the' po—_—_ ( d' being/ unknown to bim) to tell
the Company that he could 'do ſeveral things out of | his
Power ; and at laſt ſaid, That be could raiſe Spirits; and that
if \any of: the. Company would: come. to: him one at \« time,
he world. ſhew'them.'d Spirit that ſbould apprar fairly on
the" Table. So1 adviſed them to. po, which they did,
«nl nlways when they came, he put them 'off With a Rot
gaiſh Excuſe, till be bad tired them; aud:fo they went 20
WOrVEs..: » SL. IOYUES 0 BOYER $1 > YYASC\L,
. The Jame Max had a Womay came to him out of South»
wark t9'a5k him a Queſtion; and that \was, Tf her Misfors
tunes were all over ;; he-told her, no, they were not ; but he
bad an oft: to make them go of quickly, which fbe aefired:
So having ettorted « Fee for: his \Fignre, told her, fe muſt
fit down and. pare the Nails of  brer Fingers and Toes, and
leave him ſix Shillimgs more to buy. fix Ounces of Aqua»
fortis ; sud by ſetting them in 4 Sind«heat; as. ber Nails. -
, conſur'd,: ſo ſbanld ber Midforruntes;\. ol which the Woman
did. Theme bid her remove from ber Honſe to anot her, and
. the would corre and write ſomething behind. the Door 'that
fbould make her fortunate. And « Month after , ſte ſext x
friend tohirs, to know-how it-went on ;\ſo he went«Hown
"Stairs pretendingitofte, and tare wy ayain, and told her it
went 08 ery well;,> but the poor Wfomun 6: -ftill as. ſhe was,
 -» Mrs: B. iy Holbourn rook'y |: of .2 Maid, ' to mate her


xSweet-heart Lowe ang Marry. ber; who hal then yot «' new
 Gliftreſs, and loft whe former z, the Hut ibding her ſelf


_ cheated,


Fo'the Readers.
cheated , went to.4 Fellow abour White-Chappel, who ook
105. of her to make the other Cheat bring the 31. again :
Tow may gueſs at the Couſequence. | TS
i There ts one Ianorant GConfidert Fellow; that gives « Paper
folded up. and ſeal d, for which he -Bubbles ſome of 5, and
' ſome of 105. apiece for them ; aud this is fo make Men- and


SI


Women love owe another im order to Marriage, and to pro-
cure Laſcividus Meet ings, XC. and tomake People fortunate.
Thus he \[erwed' a poor Mind i the 'Minories, and cheated
her with them ſd long as ſhe would find Money, and believe
his Lies. |
Others, and TI con!d name them too,” pretend to ferch Peg-
ple bath that” are abſent of run away , and this by force" of
Magick as they call t to take off Witch-craft from thoſe
th:y ſay are Bewitched ; and alſo to promote or prevent
Copulation, according to their Clients defire, either out of
Love or Malice to thoſe they intend it ; with abundance more
of ſuch ſtuff, as I could relate, that is praftiſed under the
pretence of Aſttology, by a Crew of Scandalous Cheats. Yet
I hope, Gentlemen, you will not call this Aſtrology, but
Cheating, Roguery, and Abuſe, both on the Art , and the
People ; and therefore I world intreat you to conſider what it
is 10 would condemn ,, before you take the Seat of Tuſtice,
and paſs the ſevere Sentence againſt that nhich I am ſure at
preſent you do not underſtand. |
Laſtly,Since theſe Sheets were printing, there is a Treatiſe
' come to my hand from Padua, written by oxe- Antonius -
Franciſcus de Bonattis, 1 whichhe gives us a new Method
of Direfions, but not by him (he ſays) invented, but by his
after Confalonerius ; «nd becauſe rhethingjs wholly New,
and as yet ſtrange tothis Nation here being na-other of thoſe
Books in England but mint, Ihelieve,. and am partly ſure;
therefore 1 will give you one Operation in the Protector *


Cromwell's Nativity, according to his method, and it 4
| | | |


r


—


ii To'the/Readers,'


be full-as.plain as thoſe he hath given in his Book , "without

: «ny Direttion to underſtand them. And it is of the Sun
tothe Body of Satutn at the timse of his Death, in his Method

and Operation , \and.to'that end you muſt know-that Crom-

' well ved 59 Tears, x Months. and $8 Days. '\

.._ - The Sem. NoQ.. Ark of the- Radix, is 4162. which
gives. the Suns diſtance from the Fifth Houſe 2045. The
Sem, NoQ. Ark gf the Direttion, is 3417s hence it gives
the diſtance of the Sun from the Fifth Houſe, 11679. or
27 4.39 m. which added to the place of the Direttion, leaves ©
the Cuſp of the Fifth Houſe in 7 degrees 19 minutes of
-Leo, 45 you may fee by the. following Figure and Direction
rogether. For by a Figure he-always explains and; demon»
ftrates his Direittions; and indeed this Diretion agrees to the
time of 59 Tears, 4 Months, and odd days. |


| 2


4


WL, | And at this Age| *
| aq. he died of an Inter}
©," - mitting Fever , &c. |


IDS ip 5+
Fa. Sd


/ a®.., A


H
Fg \S O %, 4%


-v Thus, -


==


To the Readers.” Xill
Thus, Reader, I have given thee, with this Curioſity,

« ſbort- Account of the Book, and deſire thee to read it im-

partially, and confid'r the Matter and Deſign of it, to the

end 1 have writ it. Corre the Errors that have ſlipt

the Preſs, which are not many, yet perhaps there may be

more- than I have objerved; Deal by me as you would

have another do by you in the like Caſe ; 1 beg no Pity,

but Tuſtice;, ufe me genteelly, and it ſhall be a further Obli-


gation


—


.To your Friend, -. |


—_ Fo « *


Foun ParTtrIDGE.


. % 6:18
Corre& the Errors following , that have eſcaped the
; L Trels.
Age 5. line 31. read Dime, p.g. 1, 12. rooverfow. p, 13. 1. 16. f. he dim at.
Es the Scheam, r, © 13, 55. p. J1.2-r, Horry times. 'p. 41. 114. re
ocs


\p. 80. L 39. r.dominiun. p. 81. E147. Tis. p. 84.1. 22. r. Jupiter in
Libra. p. 95. 1.6. r.wveriata. p. 115.20. r. wan, p.135. 1. 33: 7. are hindred,


P. 155.1, 15. x. for that year. .


OPUS REFORMATUM


"Shall not enter into an Argumental Conteſt about the
Art of Aſtrology in general, but.leave that Work for the
-more florid Pens to diſcuſs. Neither will 1 at this time -
undertake to demonkirate the Motion by which DircQions
A. aremade, nor.'the Principles of this Art; nor yet thoſe
things that. we call Cauſes Afirological, they being not only in-
tended, but alſo more proper for avother "Treatiſe: I having de-
figned hete to-ſhew ſome of thoſe vifible (I had almoſt faid pal-
pable) Abſurdities, that ſome of the greateſt Profeſſors,” not only
of. our- own Nation , but others alſo, may jultly be accuſed of ;
Now, if Dire@ions, thofe things that we-call Cauſes of Accidents
' in the Life of Man, do really produce an Effect at any time,-then
mutt they certainly. at all'times give ſomething proportional to,
their Natures, and the-Adjun&s-that 'do attend them. or elſe
ſore Rules-of Exceptions hid down, . by which we may judge
and diſtinguiſh when they will ar will not anſwer the Rules gi=
venus by our Authors on the Effects of DireQtions. I know ve-
.ry well, that the ſame DireQion ſhill not have the fame Efc& at
one time that it hath at another; and I think I know the reaſon
why ;z bur yet there ſhall be an Effet, and ſuch a one too, as
ſhall be, agreeable to its own nature, and part of Heaven, And
to-this purpoſe, Guido Bonatus ſpeaking of things of this kind, ſays,
Cauſa enim perfeita, perfeinim inducit Effedium : Which is indeed
really true; not only in this of Attrology, but alfo in all other Phi-
tolophick, matters in riature, For it we.own'a thing to bethe
real-Cauſe of any other thing at one time, when perhaps it ſhall
paſs by twenty times afterward without -the leait ſh9w of an
 Effe, is to tell the World in. plain*terms, That we neither know
nor underſtand what we'mean our ſelves ; or elſe by reaſon of


our Ignorance we are not able to diſtinguiſh between a a
B an


| nt Bd -
$ | .- Opus Reformatum.
- and-an' Effet , according, to-our own Principles in; that Art
' which'we pretend to 3- which 'gives our  Adverſaties juſt Cauſe
ro ſay, 4nt enim Aſtrologi non Intelligunt , aut fi_Intelignnt graviter
Errant. TE f Ira
For | am+ perſuaded, if the Aftrologers, or ſuch as are
eftcemed, were asked, How many of thoſe Directions, that they
cal} Mortal ones, haye-in' divers- Nativitigs paſſed over withoue
giving: Death',. or -anly Difeafe to the Injury of the Body'z they
would-be apt co confeſs, As many of them have. miſled as hit, and
* yet they are very well ſatisfied with their method,and go on as con-
fidently.as if they had never found either crror or diſappointment ,-
as you ſhall find That further examined and proved throughout
this Treatiſe ; fox 1 have made choice of this SubjeQ, as the pxo-
Z _ pereſt; I could pitch upon to \bring 'me readily to the point'in
5 hand, that. is ; to expoſe theſe Foolerics and Abſurdities, which
I find not in one, but moſt of our Anthors: Nay, -our Enemics
too are not without -their Ablurdities, as we may fee by Heminga, x
in the Nativity of Pope Paz/the Third, page 92. wherein among
A the xeſt of his ObjeQions, he tells us of forne reputed
BWP Directions that the Pope had paſfed , and yet did no injury. to his
1 | Life;- and one of lioſe rotor npancp ory the HNANy to his :
2 own $ ; learned Objefion ! ; F think no ways like , <
: ro hoo 00d "ba good or; bad, and therefore muchle(& Deans,
but I do not-ſo much blame Heminge, (tho a very Learned Man,
and-well read in the Art of Aftrology).as Ido Cereſartas of Mans
ta; who wrote the Predidtioris that H-mings carps at, it which
he hath-theſe words, D. V. R. graviter ſe babebit cane magno Vite
diſermane que dies erit 4 tel 5 Maii, 1549. -ex divefiione Horoſcopi ad
. ſuum trinem qui pro quadrato babetur, w quis ft int ſignis brevium! 'Af-
 - cenſionum, 1 muſt needs ſay, itisa very odd fort of Aﬀrology to
_"rmy ears; to hear them talk of: the Aſcendant” co: irs own Trine;
and this by ſo-cminent a Man as Paris Cereſariw: was; and what
is yet more ſtrange, that he ſhould from hence predi&t danger -
- of. Death; And befides, we find the ſame thing printed in Carden
about this Popes Nativity, where he takes ſore little notice about
| thoſe Dire&ions,' but ſays not one word” of that about” the AL
6: cendant, to his own Trine, which makes me doubt whether he 6 4
bo; did-net countenance that Opinion allo. Now, pray let me ask
any man what can be expeRed from ſach-like Dire&ions as theſe ?
and whether the Sextiler, Squarer ad Trines of the Dreagons __
an


MT


FF


q Opus Reformatwm.
and Tail, are not as proper and effectual as theſe ere ? For tho
J do allow that there: are ſuch points, as Sextiltr, Squares, and
Trines to the Aſcendant, Midheaven, &c. taken in Manas, ct at taft-
wiſe in their imaginary way in the Zodiack yet what is there to
irradiate thoſe points or parts of the Heavens ? for the Aſcendant
and Tcnth can emig.no Rays, and therefore can give no0 Power to
| theother parts of Heaven to become ferviceable after this manner
- as they pretend to 5, therefore fay, if theſe Points were ever fit
for the uſe here pretended, they muſt be ever ſoin ſome meaſure,
more orlefs ; but in allmy Praftice Icould never find it ; and 1
am ſure there is no ground nor reaſon to believe it, let them fay /
what they will; yet by theſe and ſuch-like ways, young Students
are ſeduced and led by. the Noſe with theſe Tongs of Authority,
And therefore let this {erve for an Inſtance.in general, That there
are Methods uſed, which are both Vain'and Improbable ; for-eve-
ry Cauſe muſt have its Effect, or elſe it is no Cauſe. '- *
To theſe I might add thoſe DireQtions that are ſo often mad
uſe of in all Nativities,and. with as little ſucceſs as theſe are, as witl
appear by what follows, ſo.far as it concerns this Nativity I am
about to handle. For if we allow thoſe Reaſons there alledged *
- * to betrue, then we (ſhallind abundance of Nativities to be above
the Order of Nature, and reach of the Stars, or elſe the Stars
- !- havedone their duty negligently and by Halves, when we ſhall
find fo r


J


many. people have eſcaped the Aſcendant to the Squares
; and ofitions of Satxrrn and Mars, and this pooy Gentleman
fall by,it,; which is indeed-a perfe& piece of Imzpolbibilicy, if the
Rules of the -beft Maſters Eb are frue, and the Experience of _
thoſe that have tried them, the ſame. Now to fatishe you- yet
farther, that their Dire&ions far Sickneſs, Death, and other Ac-
cidents, are generally. vain and impertinent, and that there are
very tew, it any of them, that are” really ſctled in their own
judgment and opinion; how te determine thoſe things according
to: Rule and regular Method ; do but carry a Nativity of any
rſon that is dead, to any of themy and detire tht Reaſon of

is Death Aftrologically, they ſhall immediately. give you ſome
ſham fory or other either of tht Moon-to the Square or Oppoti-
tion of Fupiter and Venus Ralers of the Eighth Houſe, the Aſcen-
dant to the Dragms-Tad, or to the Artiſcion of forme ill-natur'd
Star ; nay, they ſhall affign you-ſome DircRion to the Aſcendant

, to kill, when the Sun and Moon are both in Aphetical places ; = :
Ke, B 2 elte


TS.
« *


_ - Opus Reformatum.. -

.-elſe DireQions tothe Sun or Moon, placed in the Third, Fourth,
or Fifth Houſes under the Earth, which are indeed neither agree-
able. zo Reaſon, Nature; nor their own Rules publiſhed trony
their own hands : For do' they not tell-you long ſtories of the
" Sun; Moon, and Afcendant , ( and fome-the Midheaven ) being
givers of Life ? And did you ever know+- them keep tothe aſe of
them; unle(s-it was to ſerve a turn 'when nothing, elſe would do?
Which is.plain to me;that they donot underſtand their own Rules,
or elſe they do not believe them. To my knowledge thefe was
( as in the caſe of the Prote&or )-a Figure of Charles the Second's
Birth generally agreed on, - and believed by all thoſe that profeſſed *
Alirology, and by. which a certain perſon did predid& his Death
in T1685, and by which Figure they all ſaid he would live to 70
years of Age z but tince his Death, you may go to twenty: of
them, and perhaps-every one of. them ſhew. you a diffexent Figure,
-and-aſlign different Cauſes for his Deaths they being as much con<
founded about that "Prince's - Nativity :ah& Death, 'as ever they
were about the Protector's : Of. theſe and {uch-like Roriesas theſe
are, I could give youa- great number, which will ſerve for no other
ule but to ſhew-you,:that Ignorance becomes: Powerfal, when it
grows. Popular and: General, at which time it is uſually guarded: by
Inpnudence and Error, and ' by their affiltance it commonly takes
Truth by the beard. . I ſhall therefore conclude theſe things- with,
this Axiom, OE | ,


* YPhat every Chuſe muſt bivi k Cettkin Efe8 ; and by
' that Rule, any Direttion that hath Power to kill at


*


one time,. hath it another, -or elſe a good ſubſtantial


Rule toſhew reaſon to the contrary.


It hath been'the. common cuſtom of - our Modern Pretenders to
Aſtrology, /to impoſe-on the world, and abuſe the: Art they pre-
tend to, by Printing the Nativities of dead perſons for trite ones 3
for-when they are lajd-in their Graves, it is preſumed that- no-

thing can happers afterwards able-to:contrattidt the Authority of
their Rules, an the pretended CorreRion” of ithe: deceaſed man's

Geniture ;"for now all Accidents ceaſe, .and the common Profeſ.

fors zeſt) ſatished, that what was done was true, they not being
able or willing co make any farther Enquiry after it, 'nor- perhaps
: | TRE. cal


Y:.-»


.


Opus” Reformatum.
canthey: From hence they pretend to give reaſons for all the
palt aRions of Life, Famous or Infamous, Health, Sickneis, and *
laſt of all; Death it ſelf; making every thing appear as plain as the
Sun upon: the Meridian, elpecially-tothoſethat do-not underſtand:
_ it. And leſt-any of-thoſe advantagious rotions-ſhowld be loſt,
"they are printed and-+ubliſhed to mſtru@ the young - Tyroes. and, -
"Students in this Science, where they may tind the Nztivity print-
ed, and the Reaſons thereof: annexed ; with- choice Rules and
Aphoriſms tit to be conſidered by thoſe that | are Beginners, that
they. may be led out” of their 'way'z'and'by rhe OiKencs that
they maybe confirmed in _their;Errorsy For thafe Nativitic® that
- are commonly printed, are made by the Aftroloyers'y they often
differing from the true time, - one, two, or three hours, end ſome-
times more £ So be; did, that promiſed his Client in print; he ſhould live
one dr two and thirty years longer, and' the poor Gentlenian ' wasded be-
fare'tbe:Book was publiſhed. So that it is-ſafer to take a Nativity by.
gueſs -only,. than' by. their Correction, and perhaps. neatcr the'
truth : Not to mention the ftory of Sir F. H; or Mr. P.' with ma-
ny. others, that -may fairly challenge a place in this ſtory, beſides
this. Gentleman, whoſe Nativity:.is the ſubj<& of this Treatiſe,
and: hath been. as unfairly, uſed by them,” as any man whatever.
For as long as.he lived, they let him. have Piſcer aſcending, and
Mars. in” his Aſcendant, which they thougke was a Poſition very
ſuitable «to his Grandeur and Courage, and for one that was fo
-great-a Watxioor.. And this paſſed very-well among them for *
foe years, 'withoutany:diftrult of the truth of it'5 and" by.that
Figurethey could! prove-all his Sickneſs,. Honours; Vietories, &e.
Buet at laſt be died. and to:the amazcment off the whole Society,
without any :Dire&ion to kill him z which without doubt -puc
them out of! their: Trines for a while, till they had agreed upon
making higt. a New Nativity 3 for it was in-vain for then to be-
lieve/\ that any'man. would think: that to-bethis truc one, when
they had no DircRion,;'( no, not a:ſham? one ) to make the world:
believe that he. dyed: by Order from- the Stars 3 and- that- was
- ſtrange,that they had no direRion-atthat time, for they are ſe}dom
 unprovided of. the ; Aſcendant-to'the Square or Oppolition of
ter Or Venxs, the Adcendant. to his' own Sexvile, Squire, or Trine
in Sigus of; Long; or. Short -Aſcentioh,jasrioccakion (erves 4; or the ,
 Smn or. Moon to the Sqware of the: Dragoty-Tail, or ſuch-like finffas:
this'is'z and tho this may.ſecmmauſeous and fulſome, fo hear ſuch-


fooleries-


—


-ary
6 3 3 . |
p LU 1 WP


77 Opus: Reformatum) - - —
fooleries as theſe are,. yet I-do afſare you they do make uſe of ſuch
things, -and woyle, it worſe can be, in point of: Zeaſon ; But at
this time it '{eems they had not ſuch Directions as they rhuughe
probable ro: pals amor the reſt- of the Sacietyz and: theretore
' a new Nativity. muſt_be tound-ouc, and it-muſt be-ſach a-one roo
_ that proves his Death, tho it: prove nothingelſe.” + + :
Ayd the -next-they- pitched upon; 'was fartherifrom the true
time of bis Birth, than the former was ; for now they make him
Aries Aicending, 'and the Su in-his Hoxoſcope in Taxyns, and Sa-
tern arid. Flyin Qppotition fromthe Culps of the: tirkt and ſeventh
Hodles,/and-pr Square to his Tenth, aint Fapirer in Oppolition to
his caven, and in Square to'his Afcendant, - which woyld
make but an untoward Nativity.,- ( according. to, their own
Rules, and” Gadbary's in particular, printed by himfelf, | but "all
borrowed ),vfor. a Perfon” of his Conn, Condwtt,” Bravery, and
+ © - Preſence of mind in his molt dangerous-Undertakings : For Mare
- _- onthe Aſcendant miſt be allowed to ſhew his'Manners, Diſpoli-
tion, and Temper; by being in that Angle; as you may ſee, Dotir.
Nativ: pag} 9t. and then: his being in Oppolition to Satmrn, and *
in. Square t0;Zupiter, mult make a very odd temper'd man, , Moroſe,
'Peeviſh, Raſh; and Unſwcceſsfid ini'his general Endeavours, and
withal- Sickiy3 vide Cardin.” Cali, page: 34. $. 78. in his own
- words: To: which: I' will add, That' the Oppaſition' of Sammrn
{ſhould make him timorons and fearfisl, and by - conſequence a little
Comwardly,- and of a Baſe ſpirit 3. but] could neves hear his Enemies -
charge any of theſe things in the leaft 6n;him.; but-they fay that
he was Brave, Bold, and:Generoxs 5 that he:mever: had any Fear or ©
Terror upen him, but always beat that into his Enemies 4 and
' when he took-them, "ufed them morg like Gentlemen at liberty,
than Priſoners 3 but belides, they all allow; that the Lord of the
Tenth .in Oppoſition. co Marr, and. both' in Square to,the- Mid-
heaven, is @ fatal Pohtion to any man's Honour when born to it 1
and then/ pray how ſhould ſuch a Polition give fuch Grandeur and
Power as he advanced to, if their Rules aretrue ? vide Dottr. Nat.
| Pag 164. For it is ceftain, - that: Satzra and: Marr in Oppoſition .
from the Fix{t and, Seventh, would :make him -@ very 'ilntured'
man, and ſubjetfo many Misfortunesy and: indeed-I could ſpend
- ſomePages after thism {fromtheir'6wn Authors and words,
. directly to-this Petition, and very, probible-co prove,that--
. this which-was then


printed, was-not-the Proteftor's true Nativi-
FRY ek ly;


_


F


. Opns Ref ormatum.” 4
fy z but I ſhall Teave all theſZ Arguments and Reafonings, becauſe

I have berter to infift upon, which will better ferve, and more __
demonitrably prove the Falfity of that Figure, and the Unskil-
fulneſs of him that made it;-and fo I come tothe matter more
nearly. .

The Figure of this Great Mans Nativity is owned by a very
worthy Gentleman; one F. Ga4bzry by name, and by him printed
in his crowd of Errors, cailed Colle&io Genittrarum. or x Collt&tion
of- choice Nativities, that is , of his own making ;z now this I
could have paſſed by, and took'd on it as the e&ffe& and overfighe
of his Juvenile years ; bufhe prints the ſame again in his Card.
Cali, after tive and twenty years, to fhew that he was till the
fame man, and that he had no more skill in his own Profeflion in
1685, than he had in 1659; and by doing that, he feems to
me to juſtffie all-the Errors of his Collection, becauſe he hath
hitherto given us no Caution concerning any of thoſe:Errors in
that book, of which theſe of the ProteQor's are ſome of the great-
eſt ; and to ſay the truth, rhis of his Cardings Celiis as full of Fool-
eries and abfardities,- as the other ;< which I ſhall endeayour more
fully to evince, beforeT conclude this Treatiſe,

The time he fers, this Figure for; is the twentyfifth of 4pril at
almoft forty ſeven minutes after three of theClock in the Morning /
1599.. and upon that Poſition he fpends a whole Page to tell his
Reader,that there are ſeveral things concur to prove it true,befides -
the Dire&tions he after mentions ; as the Oppoſition of Saturn and
Marr from Aries and Libra, the three Superiours in their own Digni-
ties, and'above all Cardinal Signt, poſſeſſing the four Angles of.the
Figure 3 which in the Nativity of Charles Guſtavus, as well -as.in
this of the Proteffor's, was {as Gadb. ſays) fully verified. And
from theſe two FiRitious Nativities ( for. ſuch they both are )
he confidently forms this notion-into an Aſtrological Aphoriſm,
and' prints it in his Choice Colle&ion , Aphor. 18: of which more -
hereafter ;- and after abiindance of ſorry Ttuff belides, he con- -
cludes with theſe woxds, *© Preſuming that divers Artifts will be
© curjods in (carining this Geniture , I ſhall. for their affiltance,
© and prevention of trouble, preſent them with a. Catalogue of
© ſeveral Accidents of His Life, and the DircRions, &e. that were
©(in an Aſtrological ſenſe ) the proper Occaſions of them , and
© (with no ſmall pains tome) they are theſe following. -


And


}


—


=


_- b
2 £43
_- © ” . b
*% 84 # Ly
Sg &
* *


- * 7 * i &
s'E - \ TS Ps A”
- « : m_
b ; 3 |. 4
ns -. ** Op
. .


Reformatum.-
- And here I defire the Reader, and all that pretend: to-be Ar-


745 :


-


. © —
*
=” .


* tiſts, to conſider. his teafons forthe Correcting this Nativity, .


1. 1n the Year 1540. this, Native" Grandeur began, for
then.he was firſt called into publick buſineſs, by being choſen a
Member of Parliament ;- to fignifie which he had, [2s . G, ſays]


-


his Mid-heavert ta the Dragon's Head y now, is not this a probas +


ble thing, that this Node ſhould give greater advantage than the
M. C. to the Trine of Satzrn and Sextile of Mars, nay the greateſt
of all, for this was the beginning,and ground of all the reit.of his
Honors and Preferments both in the State and Army,, Now if
yon will but conlider., this Dragons Head and Tail are nothing
but the InterſeQions of the Ecliptick and Orbite of the Moon at


oppoſite. Points; and thoſe; two. Circles are but. :imaginary , and -
- therefore the two, Nodes cannot; be otherways : Again, Why one


of theſe Points ſhould be a-F ortune, and the other an Infortune,
15a Myſtery that the greater Maſters of this Science ſtill reſerve in
their own boſoms, Bute to the'Queſtionrin hand: Pray what is
the reaſon that the M. C,.ad Capt ſhould give ſuch preſent ho-


' nour, and lay the gxound-work for the. future, when the MC,"
© tothe Trine of Saturn, and..Sextile of Marr, went a little before


it, and gave nothing/atall, as we know of: and yet this Native,


deſigned by God and Nature to be fo great-a Man as he after pro-'


"ved, and that too, from the nature-and. principles of chofe two
Stars, Policy, Power:and Courage ? And” indeed. 1: would intreat
honef Fobn to preſent the World with ſome Treatiſe that wight
refolve.and-unfold-theſe ſetret Noſtrums not yet known to-the un-
. believing World, as I ſuppoſe he calls the great, if not the great-
eſt part'of the Nation, - But did*this Dragons Head give this ? ,if it
thould happerrto prove true, I proteſt it is a moſt admirable Diſco-
yery.z but I doubt-this is the firit Experiment, and/judg it will be
the laſt too of its kind 3 for whaſoever ſhall have occation to try


it in another_ Caſe of the like nature; will 6nd” themſclves \


wretchedly deceived and cheated. - For: throughout -his Choice


...-..Colleivns he nevet tells you.a, word of ary one being preferred

by.the'M..C, ad $8, but of that Miniſter's being eledted Fellow,
ag. 111. but to tell you the truth, it was yot on. that,- but the *
Afcendant to the body of Venuz,as he tells you him(elf; bur he doth


net tellyou one word of the effe& of the M..C..ad $23'in Dr. George


Starkey's Nativity. However, he tickled off his Friend Mr, Blya-


EC


-
»% 4


V


_


Opus Reformatams, :
man with  Inpriſonments and Scandals upon the M.C. ad Cendam


draconis 3, but to tell you plairly,.'thoſe Accidents*(if the Figure ©


is trac )\-were' from, the Swh at oppofiriont Saururns, who is the real
Author of ſuch things 4s thoſe, as the Cale then fiogd; and he
hath let Mr. Eafwind, pag: 170, pals by his M:. C. ad $2 without any
, remarkable-effe&t\, which ſhews a_ kind of 'plaguy Hl-mture in
him, to let the young man at 20 years of Age paſs without ſome
good effect of it; ſhre he'might havedeſerved ſomething at that
Age, as well as Oliver, to have all at forty, Ina word, T think
he hath knocked twoor three little Babes on the head belides wich
the Dragons Tail ; which is as uſeful as the ather in its place, , and
ferves-fornerimes at a dead lifr. Bur let him prove to mcif he
can, why the Head and tail Yhonld not be both of one and the ſame
neture,- if they have any influence at aY, or power to give good og
evil in direction ; 1 confeſs I could never find it.
+2, Secondly, In the Year 1642. he was preferred- to the Cor-
mand of a Collonel of Horfe; having before, like an hone
Gentleman, and true Engliſhmen, raifed a Troop of Horſe at his
own Charge, and ſerved in his own Perſon withad
againſt the chen' growing Popith Intereſt, which like a Deluge was


like to overthrow all. -He had then, fays F. G. the Moon dire-- -


Qed to the Scorpions Heart,” but 'whether with, or without Lati-
tude, he hath not told us : bat let it be which it will, it is whot-
ly falſe 3 for the Mhorn's pole of Pofition in that place In his Fi-


ure is abont'50 ; and.her Oblique Aſcention under that Pole in _


\the oppoſite point is about 3504.18? fo that the Ark'ot Dire-
Qion with Latitude, is 37 d. 28”: and without Latitude it is-4.5 4.
14'. which according to Nailod's meaſure, will give-more than
45 years :- and therefore neither of them can come up in the Year
1642. as he pretends. Bat ſuppoſe it-did come up then , why
malt it give fach conſiderable Preferment as a Collonel of Horle,
whicty to him at that time was very great, both as to his Com-
mand-and -Truſt repoſed in him? why ſhould it not give trouble .
or fickneſs to him ; the death-of his Wife, or Mother Gf he had
one living) as well, or rather than give honour and preferment?
for in OEOſy of the Freneh King; pag. 40. of his CollcQion,
he gives him a violent Fever on the direction-of the Aſcendant to


the Scorpion's Heart, without arly thing ee to affift it, except a
Franfit of Marr on the Moon's Radical place. And in pag. 43. in
the Reyolution of Guftavas the __—_ it is there brought ins

; an


his-Country *


s \


a
- - % &


. - ſends


©, © Opus Reformatum.


an Argument of death.z the Sain and Saturn in ConjinRion near


the Cor ML, is there Called: yiglent becauſe of the Antares,: And in


the Nativity of the Price of, Orange, -pag- 54+-it is there made uſe


- of to kill his 'Mother, and. to give him .a great deal.of trouble;
' but to afiſk it; he tells us; that the -M. C. came up then to- the


Square of Satwrn , which is notoriouſly falſe, for there was no


ſuch direQion at that time, or near it. Yet afterall this Stuff


ny


and F , when he comes to Dr. Gonge's Nativity, pag.107. he

[gh Gambridge upon noe other DireQion, but the Swn to
the Scorpion's Hears, and .nothing elſe to athit ir; Thus you ſee
what an Excellent Aſixologer Mr. F. G. is, ard -how obedient the
Stars are-to thoſe who can $kiltully cotamgnd them3- make them
kill one, give another trouble, ſend a, third to- Cambridge , and
make £ fourth a Collonel of Horſe 3 Buitif. all he {ſays were allow=
ed in the Protedor's Caſe, it, ſerves nothing at all to the Corres
Gion, nor to prove the- time of his Figure true z for all men that


| know any thing of Dire&ions, know very well thatthis DireRion


would have been nearly-the ſame, had the time been taken later
or carlier-;-/but 1 wonder why 7, G. ſhould cxclaim againſt Crone
well for ſinking the Oath of Allegiance. tg his Sovereign, as he .
calls him'; when; that King, had broke: and ſunk his Coronation
Oath- lovg/ before-; arid we all remember: very well who it was
that did it ſing alſo in the Year 1686, and 1687... to almoſt the
Nation's ruin, and deftruQtion, of the Proteſtant Religion.

. 3. Thirdly, 1 the Year 1643, /he was made. Lieutenant-General


' to the:Earl of Mancheſter.3 at which time he ſays he;had the Moon


directed tothe Trine of 'Mgrz;, but this is allo extreamly falle, be- -
cauſe there -is no ſuch direion as he pretends to at, this- time z
which any one-may fee by working thoſe Operations, in which
the Ark without Latitude,, which is.the only DireQiog-that he
knows in that way, is 48 9.26" and the Ark- with Laticude is


- almoſt 41+ both; which arc far diftant from 1643, and. cannot


come up'at that time he-mentions,' nor_ngar it :- but if it-did, it
cannot -correct without fome-other-to agree with it to the An-


ii; 4« Fourthly, He tglls us, that he quarrelled with the Earl of


/} Mancheſter his General; and preferred-divers Informations againſt


him.inParliament,and.managed it ſo wel;thathe carried hisPoint,
and came off with honour z the Cauſe of this was (he ſays) $4-


#x#7n being on his Aſcendant, and the Radical place of Mars in.Op-


poſition


_ Opus Refoymatum. I1
poſition to-his own; and the Afcendant direted:to the Terms of
Mars. Certainly' this Man _was infatuated when he wrote this
Nonſenſe; for | have more Charity for him, than to think he had
{ little Skill or Senſe to beheve this; and not know better; but -
tell us of a Tranfit of Satarn by Afar; his Radical place in oppoſi-

- tion to: his own {' Why, what'was this to: Crampell ? "why did not
(if chis-is true } Saturn do him a miſchef” the laſt year, when he
got his' Licutenant-General's Commiſhog,' tor he was then Sta
tionary on the Radical place of Mary, and no harm obſerved.

— Welt: but the Aſcendant was atio aftlited. by direction; how To ?
why, it. came to-the Terms.of Mars 3 Ay, this is' ſomething like
to do the feat :idid-ever any Soul hear-an Infallible Son of an 1n-
falilble Church give ſuch Reafons as thefe-are *- In'the laſt year
he ſays:the Moon-to-the Trine: of Mars gave him Preferment; and
is that Dire&ion ſo foorr over? will it 'not-continue in force one
yea ?: and if it doth, pray why ſhould-the Terms'of Mars be al-
ledgedas an Injury to him, and he'under a very'good Martial Di-
re&ion ? Why ſhould not the Trine of Mars give the Conteſt (if
there was ſuch a Directionat that time; as he ſays there was) more

Jikely:than the Terms of )Mars ,-it ending in his Advantage and
Honour ? which cannot berallowed ſach an:AfMittion ashe ſeems

to:infimate by the Tranfit'of Sztwre. But why muſt the-Aſcen- -
dant to the Terms of . Mars be brought in now as'a'cauſe of 'dif-
ference? Doth it always give Quarrels and Conteſts? Did it alfo
give Quatrels, Contefts, and. Difference,” when' the Aſccendant

. Skis to the; beginning of Cancer, 'which-was the Terms of Mzrs
alſo, which'was two or three years-afterward ?-I doubt it 3 and
I think-it would be worth while-to:ask: the'Geatleman, if it did
not fallin pitted and ſmoaky degrees; if ſo, then it is beyond all

- queſtion and doubt ; but the truth of. 2]- is, there'was nothing

- lc toſham in at this time,-and therefore this matt do; yet 1 do
hifik there is;:v0- maw will look-upoi this'as'a good reaſon and
Argyment to profeche Nativity true. :- CR

$;i-Fifebly, la 1545 he- fays Oliner Cromwell was made Lieute-
-nant-General to Sir Thomas >F airfax;- and: this under the Dire&ion
-of- the Moonto the Sextile of Satzra; Lord of the. Tenth Houle 3
and. indeed: it was-welFhe'was Lord of the Tenth, or etc he had

. $ertainly loſt. his Honour and. Preferment at.that time ;-however,
that is ao alſo falſe,there was-no ſuch DireRion at that timey and that
for the Reaſons before-mentioned. >. RD. 4

| _ 6, Sixthbly,


x »* Pp


"Or ep :


Y 6. Sixtbly, In 1648, for his-contending with the Parliament,
| "and ſome other things, he ſays he had his-Smn. to the Square of
- Satzrn;, and the part of Fortune to the Oppotfon of Venus: As
- for that-of Venus, I ara fare *tis falſe; for he is not able cichex to
- take or direct the-part of Fortune z and what'is more, if the
of Fortune wete truly placed irthat Figuae, tit ſhould be in
110r-12 degrees of Leo, and he hath made it it one and twen-
ty; and for that Dirc&ion of Saturn,if it ſhould be war it doth net
at " help to the Correction.
In 1649 he: went over to Ireland to. oppoſe the
Popith ables in that Nation, and defend the Protcfiant Religious
and as Gadbury ays, he had aFlux and Feaver there; for theſe
things he gives him the Moon to her own Square, and the Con-
trantiſcion-of Topit er 3 alas, poor man! he never knew yet how
to take _an Angiien or.a 'Zodiacal: Paralldl, which you pleaſe 3
/ .and ] will venturcar cven. Wager. of what he will, that he doth
not know how to dire&:the Moon cither co an Autiſcion or Con-
agirns of wy Planet; ſo great is his Contidence and Ignorance
retending to a thing he underſtands not. And furthermore,
5 C the Moon been ſo direftcd at that time, as Ie ſays.ſhe was-to
thoſe two- direRtions, 3 am certain! he would -have had neither _
Flax nor Feaves at that time, if Peojtorny fays,true 5 bit you muſt
bear ' with in ACSI for if he cw better, he would do


I.
ht _—  Wioreefter to theis: hearts: content; for this he
IC his: own Sextile, but how he:doth make it
vo, 1 | capmot 16ll, Bethe Arkoos dircQion is 53,46; and giv4s
DE $4. 7006, Ae he was. now but 51 and 52-years of age:
mo a great-differcnce in of times. but he-doth nor tell ;
word of the Suncth 1 _ comer ogy Sv |
; L at e P
-; Snort aa 3 ' not! tel tell whaiihey fend =
mgh 391d uswhee tht patken eat Ghaftbey thwart, or
ſegive Sickneſs,az- well as the Moon tothe Contramilcion
of Japhr wal diy axed Squaze 3.0r why the Sun to the _-
| bf Satwagud: More, dhould yigrhy Sages rip
- Reputation; ag well as wers-fnok,- hr:
MR of rents betrthels b foppolen


| kisown Oy ware ot be mate kom he]


gore th |


In 1450 and PIER *: beat the Some. Danbat:


-


Fai


Opus Reformatam.
on of: his body of Tautology, or a more convenient time: Now
if this Nativity that he hath printed, were true, then the Sun is
politively Giver of Lite, which if fo, he hath .C according to
-®P ) not only the principal Government of Honaur and Gran-
deur, but of 'Health, Sicknels, Lifeand Deach ;- and therefore it
is the greateſt wonder to me, that under two ſuch dire&ions
there ſhould: be no effect attend him either of Sicknels or Scandal ;
-byt theſe are (mall things with honeſt Jobs. - |
9. Ninmbly, Ia 1653, in December, he was Proclaimed ProteGior
of England he had now the SundireQed, to the body of Fupiter,
Sextile of the Moon; and the paxzt of Fortune to the Sextile of
- 'Venac 3. thoſe direQtions, I coufels, are.probable for ſuch an effeR,
and the foxmer comes too at the time he fays it doth ; but the
- aft of the three he knows nothing of it. -

» 10, Tenthly, In 1654 he concluded a Peace with France, and
makes a League with: Sweden; and for that Gadb, ſays he had the
part of Fortune to the T rive of Mars ; but that cannot be allowed ;'
for if he had lived twenty years longer than he did, that"directi-
on would- not have come up 4 ſo tmprobable a Direction that is
tobe-alledged for this time 3 but alas, poor -man ! "tis his want
of skill. \ | |

11: Eleunhbly, In 1656. he called a Parliament, and they de-
fixed him to take upon him the Title of King, which he refuſed
far this he had (as Gadb, ſays) the pazt of Fortune to the Sex-
tile of - Satrn, Lord of the Tenth : I have little occaton to lay

" any thing: more to: this, becauſe. I told you before, that he can
neither take nor direR'that Point, a
12. Twilftbly, ln 1657: he ſent Six thouſand men over into
-- Flanders, under the Command of Sir Fohn Reynolds, by whoſe
-- means he became Maſter of Dankirk, he had. then the Sun directs
ed-to-theSextile of Mercury.s and why ſhould: not- this Sextile of
Mercury, being uwSigns- of long Afcention,be equal to a Square? it
ſo, whyhould it give any good at all * But let it be the one or the
"other, - this. as well as the re(t can by no mcans ſerve to prove the
Figure truc, which is the thing he aims it.
. 43, Thirteentbly, In.the year 1658, on Septenaber the Third, this-
gxcat: General and: Stateſman dicd-of an Intermitting Feaver at
fix ; but. afterward Continual:; which Gadbary tells us was
_ cauſed bythe Aſcendant. (whois, fays he in this Nativity, Giver
\, of Life) difefted to-the Square of Mer: in Cancer, his fall fg
. : UNA


,


13


——


Opus Reformatum..
Sun to the Head of Hereales,and the-part of Fortune to the Square


of the Moan, As for this lati of the ® to thg Square'df the'Moon,
-that cannot be dire&ed+to the AﬀpeRts in the Zodiack , becauſe


oftentimes that doth not move fr it, nor he knows no other -way
of dirc&ting.-And for the Sun to the Head of Herewles, *tis aſmall
Star of-the Second Magnitude in 18 degrees of Cancer, and almoſt
7 degrees of North: Latitude but he direRs it here without La-


| titude : If this hath any force*to kill without Latitude, - why did


not the Sun to that Star with Latitude kill,- it coming up'with che
Square of Satwrn, and the ® to. the Oppolition' of Henas, in the
year 16487? For it would be more able to kill when the Sun was
afflicted by two violent Promittors, than by one3* and the rather,


- if the Sun ſhould prove Hikg, as 1 believe you will find it is in -


this Figure of his making: And here by-the way, I muſt take
the liboxty to queſtion this crifling Gentleman” how: he proves the
Aſcendant to be Giver ef Life? For in his bortowed Rules'in the


. _ Dytir of Nativ. he tells us that the. Sun in the: Aſcendant is Hileg,
and I hope he will not make two Hphzta'sin one Nativity.: . And


alſo Origen in Introdad.. par. 3. cap. 2. preacheth the very. ſame


'Dodtrine 3 ſo doth Argol, Pezelins, Ranzow, and all the reft of our
Authors 5. but above all, the Great Prolomy, in his ©#adripartidum,


lib. 3. cap; 11. andcap. 13. where: he is particulir arid very poſi-


-tive, when heſays, Cam autem querimus in bis locis potentiſſinum,


primus erit Medium Cali, deinde Horoſcopus, &c.- So that you ſee the .


- Horoſcope is one of the chicfeſt prerogatory. places” and yet this |
© worthy:Gentleman, contraxyto he |
all our ancient Authors, r6zeQs the Sun-in tHe tmiddle'of the Afcen- -


Rules printed by hinſelf, and *


dant, and confidently or ignorantly tclls'us, That the Aſcendant
is Giver of Life, or Hileg 3 and this for* no other reaſon, ( as I.
can fee ) but to give:countenance-and credit to his own erroneous—
praQices3/ and to lead ( like Fack with + Lanthorn ) other mien out


. of the way, into theſe bogs of Error. Io fhort$l do affirm; That


the Sun 'within five degrees above the-Cuſp of the Aſcendanr, till
within five degrees of -the Cuſp of the Second z. or rather, to'ſpeak


- in Prolomiy's terms and meaning, within the compaſs of his double ©


Horary times there, he-is to be accepted for Giver of Life z: pro-
vided the Moon is. not in an Aphetical plage above the- Earth, or


. -  the-partof Fortune, &e... qualified for-that; power : Bat in this


Figure of_his, the Sun is beyondall doubt Giver of Life, he being


"In-the'very-middle of the Houle, and hayingthere no Competitor.


* . Hence


Opus Reformatum. * |
Hence that which Gadb. aſſerts in this caſe, is a palpable falſhood,
which might have been excuſed in a- Novice, - but in an old B:J-
wather it ought. to be reproved, and that ſharply too : Bat let jt
go how it' will, it was a ercdit for Cromwel,, that his Foes could
had nothing to kill him but the Head of 'Herewles, joined with a
* fiQtitious DircRion; and that.is the Aſcendant * to the Square of
Mars, which in reality could not come up before Ninety years of
age, or 'thereabofits, x
-.. Butthe main'DireQion that Mr. Fohi lays all the Rireſs of the
matter upon, is the Aſcendantto the Square of Mars in the .Zods-
ack, which is, < to fay the trath ), no direGjon at all ; for you
* may as. well dire& the Aſcendanrt to the Antiſcion of any Planer,
as'toan Aſpe in the Zodiack 3, they being both impoſſible to be
done by any one: Fobnexcepted. But ſuppoſe it were allowable,
and thatthere was fuch a Dire&ion in Nature, as he there tells us
there'is, yet that Dire&ion could not kill ; for if he pleaſeth but
to read 'Ptolomy, Lib. 3. Cap. 13. Qradripart: he there tells us,


\ ©» That if the Rays of ” Fipiter or Venzs fall within eight or twelve


degrees after -a Maletick Direction, that DireQtion cannot kill :
Now in this caſe; here is bur one-Malefick DireQion to the Aſcen-
_ dant, and that is the Square'of Mare, which is fucceeded by the
Aſcendant to the Sextile of the Sun, the Body of Jupiter, Sextile
of the Moon, and Sextile of Mercury, and'they all ncarly in Aſpe&
to: Jupiter, and for that reaſon partakers of his nature- in a great
meaſure 1z'thereforehow this body of- Dire&ions ſhould ( contra-
ry toall good and Authentick Rules ) Kill, feems to me a Myſte-
ry 3 and-what is more, that he ſhould dye of ſuch'a Diſcaſe as an
intermitting-Feaver or Poyſon 3 for it is not Mars, but the San
and” Jupiter, that . do ſpecificate the Dilſcaſe 3 and. how they two
ſhoald kill, but eſpecially after that manner, I hope my Friend
Fobn will explain in his twenty- years promiſcd Body of --Tawtolog y,
when he thinks convenient to print it; and alfo-in that Book to
give us full direction for the underſtanding his -pitted- Azimeen ,
and ſmoaky Degrees ; which, perhaps, may have a great hand
in killing this Gentleman, tho he hath not mentioned it, nor do
we underfiand it, which is worfe. bi" 3: Lat:

But ſecing Aſtrology is. allowed and- owned by ſome of the
moſt Learned, to be a bundle of Experience improved into Rules
by continued obſeryations of thoſe Accidents and EffeRs that did
always attend different DireGions and Pofitions : - Hence it then

: follows,


I5


4 $8
5


HET CE Lee I I I TITTY RC EEE -- v
A . * , 0 6 L"T' ” - #4" 4 : oy
. . . s 1 Yo.
= . , % -
- RF ;
x ”
F
4 ,


16 pa;
follows, That like Cauſes muſt always bave like Effe@s,, or elſe Rules


- - ogy with a witnels ! Riſuem roneatie. -


\ : es” : in 4 X > Pop. a kw, /
” WA. Y a” £b « —_ , \. \
» \ w ”
' _" -
+ SAN
Opus Reformiatum:
; . ,


of Exetprion Jad. down 10 know when they thall, and when |
they thallnot give thoſe common Eife&ts that they all. tell-us' of :
For if the Aſcendanf, Syn or Moor to the body, Sr aare or Op-


 poſitionof Satyrn and Mzrs, hall kiil in two or thace Caſes, ahd
- miſs. in ten or twelve, it leaves Afirology an-idle, fooliſh, and © -
reprogchful Study, being. uricertain and vainz and therefore not


fo. be ſiudied nor defended by any but mcn of a Reputation-cqual
to it ſelf : For if -the Aſcendant tothe Square of -Mars, in this pre-
tended Nativity of the Lord Protetior's, (hould kil-when. the Body


- -of Fupiter,. Sextile of the Sun and Moon, &c.. axe ſo near, then I do


That nothing can binder it at any time, but jt muſt always cer-
tainly kill; which if true, then pray obſerve what follows, taken
out of that:Ezarned Tredfiſe,” called Coletti Genitnra, a Book full
of Contradictions and Error, as to-the Principles and Truths of
Aftxology 3 /which I ſhall more fully detect hereafter, but give
you a glimpſe of it now, to ſhew you what a ſoxt of man-he-is,
that _pretends to be the Leader and Top-man ofthe Society of
Aſtrologers in England, and how he and his Notions cught to be
believed. LIFT ; 0% y Us


1. Firft then'z In the. Natrwity of Queen Mary, pag- 14 the


| Aſcendant to the Square of - Mars did not kill, tho-it wasaffi |
' the.Bodies of pony the Sr, and they both Maletick and


Peregrin z nor did the Squareof 'Satumn afterward kill her. . _
- 2. In-the Nativities of. An Queen of Hungary, pag. 28. -Lewic
the XIHth., King of France, pag.13 4.” and Charles Guſtavus,” King of
Sweden, pag, 35- he lets thoſe theee out-live the Aſccndant to the
Body of Mars,” which muſt be undoubtedly more violent than
.the Square z arid in two of tlie three it. came up. young,
In the Caſe of Frederick, King of Denmark, pag. 37+ it did not
kill, tho it fell-:near theLyons heart. © - #
© -3. I the Nativity of the Eav) of Eſſex, pag. 45. we havea-
moſt admirable Inſtance z for there the-Aſcendant to the Squares
of the Sun, the Moon, and Mars, all together, had-not "


' and Strength enough to kill, and yet no- affiſiance from” Jupiter


and Venus to helporfave-; when you ſee in the Caſe of Cromwel,
that the Aitigte Square-of Mars gid the. buſmeſs, tho the Body. of
"Jupiter, ttc. were very'nearto the place: This is Brick-Cowt Aftro-


-


4. In -.


4. Inthe Cale of Coins King Pike, pag 46. iK did like»
"ik fail, tha Mars was there among i ey ethane,
| Hthe-macgy vichente ©) 546; 8 Frick Sv
whe "In the Nativity ol Charles |
= ary oa is in: 0 with the -Lord-of
in Square to Satwrainthe Eighth; yet this worthy
þ ode 9s lets him out-live the Aſcendant to the Square of. $2-
txra, Bodics of ' Mars and _the-Swn, and ſends him to:the other
world.onthe Aſcendant tothe Oppoſition. of Setarn. In this Na-
tivity Honeft Job hath ſhown as mach of his Ignorance. ( as to
the naleot Aitrology) as-in any.one Caſe throughout the whole
= ou ens Fi here he ew i Arbor pi —_ Hi-
: yet Sun in accs, the one in
- the firſt, + Sai _ —s mal - ft
" +; 6;Jnithe iniey of the Daoeſo of 64.
of Marg did noe kill, ba the fins ge 6s Spc
Moon and the Sun tothe. > oC Fam NE nad nt Ne of
them Givers of Life ; did the Afcendant to the Square of
Fo kill [04s the \Nativity of Dan of , pags 65.
Nativity of George of 4 le, pag-.50, nei-


VEL Square of; Sarxyn or Marr: to the. Aſcendant cqald kill
him, and yet Mars Lord. of the Eighth. Houſe.

' 8, Inthe Caſe of Pope Paxl the 5th. the Afcendant eo the Square
_ of Marg did not kill; and yet the TOC Moy out of
the h_ Houſe fell near the fame place.

9. Ii: the "Caſe. of: Pope Gregery. 15, pag. $1.) the to
heme Margdid not ki ,and yer that le Giverot bi z


- T0; In the Nativity of: Cardinal Peter. Bembus, 5: $5-che fame
in pu way ren end yet Meri Lord of the Eighth, hg
ge that he was a Papiſtin thoſe times ;; what-think you' Job,
was he or no? You arethe ORE FEngiat hare, le you
are of that Perſuaſion.)
11: Inthe Caſe of Mr, Thenan, Garokery pag, 103. the Soqne
of Mars, and of the Sun'out of if The Eiphth, would


not do z but the oſition of Satzrn did it afterwards,
| | D 12. In


"Op


= 15/4 the Narlviey of”


Kira, \g? 123. thid Dgwave of
OI Ry of es; comErge


pig 433 ke out-Uved
Caf Yar dhe Sun, bocls: which '


14% In the Genirare-of"Mi: Ropers, 13S. the Ae.
"Uaiit was'direQed wo-the'$ hy Rot pag. 135. that could


not kill him, th the ey ip
GC d*

9.0 that of Mijor-Goawe!/ Lenbert pag; 167, he ipaſſed the

Alcendunt to the'Square"of Mars,” a years * tothe


Square of Saturi{and the Moon, and lived many- years afterward.
16, Io the Caſe of Dr. ;


& q) b 16 Wor! JC EÞ AAUTRNEY | $6?


+ #3" the of Wb, Fla you vii
- \R ET apts Be the Aſcondant to 407
of the$un; & of the Moon, and: Square of Merewry,


rw agd: | WW. Y 210% EV, 204 11!


goal ern ure” -of Mr Wl. Lepbown, as es oe
c Bquaze ,


find that he alſo hath: out-lived the

Mats and Mercury, andyet- theſe fel} Heat the> Cuſp of the/fourth

_ Houſe, and in Cancer likewile'3 as it did. in' that Figs) Honeſt
Re Gave ws for the true-one: of 0liver:Cronewelh, |

mb god 190.) hp outlived the Akcendane

 Oppoſtionof Mars, 4 yet; as

lt” 26. ki the Nathviny:of _ Fobn Malin; pay, 186.” te-oudtied

. thet"Afbendant. tothe Square of Mars, but dhappity dycd affer-
ward 'og- 2þo« Abendant to. (hs Tqons: «8 Snare, as " Honeſt


3h. Ti: 4: zi gt


Hoa
- Tixbttave: cen youbdls\ Farecity; Examples: of uk Ape
ant; Diredtioy. tof his own Book, ay Eng not kill; and
kcoyld: have giveniyou: more out-of thef/me alſo, if E had<not
ooo dolge ating dpre the Improbability
- of what this trifling man puts pow us for trath;-Now: let any
X faeces” mo arigy f 'zonſtlewehs Reaſons thather gives to -
_ - prove tive, ( which he. fays colt him{ mach-pains:)
and eſp, that. for: his Death; RF TOpE the- 99"
LITY amples


Refermatns,
lc thee Rogier he-lnth given,
. quare off Mari-is a
f : 2 Deen
WAA) ONE. gUHnietit 372


is-85 | I 56% you That th is x3ther fifto be
Pane ieved > as .Jou-may cal ; pry 646 ly =


| of Cagheny, if u_ compare ne thing with angther
his whole oa alſed the he Dprarnap which 1 in a nog nel


FHP

And rio ele Genileman gijed opche Aſcen
Siu to the ; gr 6 is Conviction of the

xox, when thi ap Twenty Examples under. his own hand to-
prove- where and when. it hath miſſed of that Efec, is 16 tel all
mankind, That I am an Ignaravt, Czedulous F Fellow, void: both of
Reaſon and Skill, and fit to'be impoſed: upon by any one'that is
willipg to attempt it. ., Aud for my. part, when Ieonhder: tia
BL AXE; A Log nomher 6 of Ingenious perſons of. all Qualitics


ho undead. Aft
xk Neaers have io this ngdam ng $a TInny


. 1 wonder they were never called inqueltion, and exploded
now.z for they will ſerve for no-qther uſe, but to [lead the young
Students qut. of their way, and bring an Qdiam, upon the Scicace
it (elf, when it is xcad by ſuch men,, who when they obſerve its


bins are readily apt to. make uſe,pf -it; -orany+thing| clle -


they. can. pick up to brand it with Infamy 4 for which ene they

need not ouble themſelves. to read Books writter-agaiuſt it; for

th them en peruſe but our own Autres and :chey; will not fail to

| h /to, make. themſelves: mexry atsand yer>forall

ho up oem Afrologyin teing; $6de.b rEhaprogal Quir- logar
ut YES


Qbjett. But perhaps here,, may. riſe an Objection, ey would
not have any kt inthe dark, that now ogcuas to my inemo-
xy ; For perhaps lome any (ay, Do you! belicye thaviit i 5
for the Alcendant to the Square of Mare, 10 Kilkegney time? or
do you think, it can never £12


-


D 2  Anſw.


and. Cheats of - array Laan | |


v9


wk paſhe bath brought, Catholick. * Jon's Reputation Tat |


Op ian


« Arſe, Yesz That T can/attef upon expetience, that it doth
kill ; and I can telt-youſeveral Nativities in honeſt Fibn's Collecti-
on, cn pda chr ogwneptnr to the Square of Marr, and
Square of| Satzrn, GO NIIES opens 3 but it nuſt be in ſuch

itics' where the 'Hotoſcope is Giver of Life z for no Point


Nativ
- can be ditedtcd for Death, bue che Hilegz and therefore whoſo-


ever iſeth contrary to thatRule, erreth, and will never'do
any thing well z- and. you ſhall{ee more -on. that (ubjet, That no
man ever. yet made any famous Prediction of Death, but when. he
puree made uſe of the Giyer of Life in'his Operation and


us have I made it as plain as poſſible itcan be, toany Artiſt,
or other Pretender to Aſtrology, That the Rales arid Reafons-made


- {uſe ;ofto prove the truth of the Protector's Nativity, are falſe


-and cxr6ncous, -and built upon fach Principles as are-not true in
themſelves, neither will they h hold rrac- in'other Pohrions, to cf-


' fect what they are brought here'to' prove.” And alſo the major”


part-of the Direcions that he there talks of, will ſerve t6 any
other Poſition withiti half an hour or an hour, witha lictle varia--
tion ;but for the firſt; the fourth; the tenth, andthe thirecenth,
being thole that do depend onthe truth of the Fi-
gure, they-are {© ridiculoufly falſe, that they need no other Argu-
mezits to.expole them, bur'their Non-effe@ in, other Genitures 3
and- therefore | do- adviſe. al Ingentous ; Laborious Artiſts, to
compareone thing with another aft exaiis -inmiter, in thoſe books
fent:forth into the world by our Modern Authors; and' at lalt try


' in their own Practice, whether thoſe Rules will h#td or not ; and


al let them contider, whether they are not impoſed upon in di-
i Os in this qr at + ca |
14 Mr. /obn, feeing Marr hath: played t

[ons "t& proceed Spain him -ph Form of
ashe k doubt; and the-Bookſcllers'of
ery good kill in Scandalum Magnatunis',' for


mY


London ſay he
- which they dehire him to to remember the Exrl of P,


then, Lethim bring a.Owo Farranto inſt hitn, and take
== wrer, { he SE a Boe Jad for that
& he car they © good" tc be Non
I y, ahd pgs Kil one, part
T wenty eſcape; thit lay athis mercy z by


- | - photbeſis before hid down.


Opus Reformatum.
doubt and queſtion, for which he can neyer make him fatisfaQi-
on, unleſs he can help him to a greater ſhare of . And
in the next place have hin before Father Perers , and-Inquitition
him; roo Knave is not ſound in the Faith-,-but-hath-
a plaguy ſhare of Hereſy and Diſobedience. How! ſerve honeft
Fobn-{0! But it will be ſo ſometimes when Papilis deal with Here-
tical Stars. + | rs

And- then let him. draw up an humble Addreſs to Monſicur

Titan, im jhe Name ofthimy and his Society, in quo bamiliter Mon-

fretur ; that he hath for a lopg time drove on a Trade'sf Lying,

( but not a word of his Ignorance} being cheated and abuſed by
a ſort of obſtinate and diſobedient Stars. And that if now at laſt
he pleaſeth but to give his Mandamas, that Saturn and Mars, &c.

may henceforward obediently comply. with all the Atirological

Rules in falhion,. that he ſhall bein duty bound. tg ſhew bimſclf

full. as Kilful as ever. © |


And fo I come to. preſent you with the true Nativity of this
Great Genetah. without ys 2 Trick; and the DiteGiqng ſhall
alſo have ah equatFffe&in Narivicies; according tothe Hy-


» ”


--


Opus Aeforacion. 40
| "YI 7 aid 7774 ab 3 JE 1


" H$0 7 R-IGIL NS SRI 254/867 0 in ql2d e169 ai et:


L114


a _ mi
retort ————_—__ orb odoetmnrt” TVET IIHtT LESH10-]


= SAVED
-» $ 1 FS 3 {4 —p £ " a
— gore RI OOTY TTY INTY T JOITY EX 77 hd —+ IT riot mr" FP ici
- 4 - {2 i ; #
' TE) in sf F: 2H 10 T6107; Vf l
. 1 4 + Ou
#4 Ju 11 we [2.1 14d


THE | ee; 2 ox


'N AT I SY Y.


i "oy | QUE,


| Oliver Cromwell, a


ord Protector of ENGL4: N D:-


RE and faithfully handled according to the
.rrne Principles of Aſtrology.


x


HE time of this Great Man's birth, accendiog as he =
it himſelf, was on St. Mark's day in the year 1599. Sum-
mo Mane, at Huntington , whoſe Latitude is 52"deg. ow!
a few minutes; ; and. this is the eſtimate time given. |


Now the main point is, how we muſt AGES; this ſhort

Sentence , Summo Mane ; and it can in- my Judgement have no

other meaning than very early inthe Morning, that is, is the very

top of.rthe Sree or ſuddenly after Twelve, for ſo the word

ſeems to import z and inded I can give-it no other Interpretation

- but this3 for the word Swmmomalt be there taken Adverbially, and

© derived from the Adjetiive Summer, which/in that 'ſence it is here

_ ſpoken, ſignifies the yery higheſt, extream, utmoſt, top, &ec. of the
"Mponings tho R Cos the word _ takes in all the-whole

1 , 7 time


-


ove Reformanm:


& «wel, 0 « Midnight of}1 Twelve at Noon'z but-if he
i | ABT; L6n.rory apt to beheyehe. would

ha pa wag 15A kt, 'as by Arte Merediem ,. &c.
but if belore Sum ah eines hey all agree he nas; then I
can take it in no other ſence but this that T have already given, The
top of the Morning, and the tine pitched, upon, .is.a6. about 5 mi-
nutes after one of the Clock; and to thatitime the: Planets places,
both in Longitude and Latitude , CY calculated by the Cardline
Tables, as followeth, - *©*..


_—  —


Longit. Phahetor. ©+ n Lat," Plan; | Par. Phan.
an m, uy
h 147 2 =u"|þ:2 $4. No $0
Þ : 15 4, 19 © Boer is Ne” | 23 5
3 wo Y3%45" of k 'x 6g. i 3 9
2 '29 51 46 5-40-29. No 90.40
5 16 19025 5 fÞ'o 15 Ne+ f 19
'0Þ39 : 27; 38 IN - #2 At. 00 kk. ZM 16 $
) 14 355+ 45 Rp fo 2 31 Soul ,þ' 0 9546
Q 15 FI 28 3 © O©O ©0 © 00
gry A * 99> web "A *þc oh 06 aobM UG 8&9 11] kD


11 274 2b 3+ 2d


- From their Levg des wid! Latieides' __ are ; this
Paralich, or Amntiſc zbtafied, as rye ray i
155! 208 [ge Mmsx2 7:
-h 5 , z MY 4
, 2 jp) 8 "449" 48" vV
'S 7,55 Þ...7.55.8 4.22
$5 I1z 19! A 12 #2 Tr F
+ $129 ; $814. : ;3P « 138 1! M:
'D 20 31,47. 26, 23k; 5
© 1133. 97-46) +143 $7 Mi.


Now: tw" ite the: Cufps of the Twehe Houſes: F proceed'i
the Soha roars by taking chexipiie Altention of the Sur,
ind "WHEN Aſcention-of Tiny dad tem together,


gives:


"Opus" Ryformiatlim:

ves the right Akeention of 'the- Mid-Heaven 5 to which
ary Degree gin the Aſcention oftheFleverith 19-4
\ and {oby-the additionof - hou we gainthe other bx of
the Oriental Houſes, as inthe wing Guvphs


IT f* 3


1H £34 tk a5 gt 26 © of, + 6 or qu?
'F : } TF43t1


- | feenti Ref#. Temiperss - 96 I," £2 | LN:


Ty "cent. Refs. med. Cali © 237 40 m 29% 52
Adade 30


© cen, Obliq. Dew. 41. 267] 49 18.7
| Ade 30 \


Aſcen. Oblig. Dom. 12 297 49 vs 4 X
Adde- EL”


AS obs. bk 337 44. as 4 ,


> ”*%


ies ly. Daw w; 357 40- X46,
30


cfm ovy, Doms. 3's * 27 46." 5: 671 A


Many of our Modern Profeſſors jave. wade 2 great; noiſe a)
bout taking the Minutes and Seconds for the Cuſps of every Houle,
which I think are both ufclefs and! impertinent 4 for what uſe do
they make of them, when they. haye taken them ?, nope, as
know 3 RR I will aeÞr> Agr wy, and leave the


WLITENT. I cok ; bowors.the th
3 \Aſcentioh of the M. "4 and
gate gel 1 take the di between the next Leſf. and
the Right Aſcentjon, and that is 54 7 'then1 fay by thie Rufle of
, If 62-gives 60, $54 ſhall give 52, which leaves the
ofthe Tenth in's9 deg; » minutes of Scop:
And for the Cufp of the A I alſo take" the difference
as before between Fn two Arky , grace and lefſer--than the Ob-
Alcention of, . Aaninat an t is 44 Minytes4, and
SED the; Qblique -Aſccntion;, which is


4 Minutes; then 1 Tree 6, By the Al of Proportion, if
44 mi-


_ and 19 minytesof' Capricorn,


notice of the Equ jon for. thoſe few rbirnitcs a
fe the” figure without any further operatiby ,


Birth; and' ther
is as followeth ;


44 minutes gives 60 minutes, 14 minutes ſhall give 19 minutes
which cells us, that che Galp of the Alcendant reſtech in 26 degrees
ex. the Pole;52. | /[ omit to take-
bove 52. the Pole of


-— — --


| Natus. 2
Die-25;Apritts;--
-- -Minut. 4. Second


np armanps \,


Hors r,
"56;


4 *


1»-2-f-© ad * 2+:
1 Latitude, Hunting/on, © | &,


os iS» . . - x .
4.0} att
GS: -


"Op Aefrmatn.


4 Table of the Dire&ions in this Nativity, with the
ſeveral Arks thereof, , the meaſtire of Tune agreeing.
to-cach of them, andthe year of our Lord When they
began t to take effect.


w


: ES PI \.. ..-,. | Arcusj}Menfur.| Anni
6 - ; : 4 ] Gr. Mi|An. M.|
O L at. Terminos 1} ani  ” % —— 9 11] 1606 |
Sol ad $h. 2+ in Zodiaco . '=—— I oo] 7 oof 1600
Luna ad %. Y in Zodiaco cum Lttitudine —] 13] 1 , 3} 1600
Luna ad % © in Zodiaco cum Latitudine —— 1 $2] : a1160r
Sol ad Cirpus © ' ————— — 2 8 2” > 2 I6GoT
' Luna ad Terminer th ——on——  #mom— | 8] 1601
Luna ad Terminos >1 + wnn—o—_—_— 7 4 | 5} 1603
——] 4,34] 4 | 8| 1603
4:4 4-;9 ©1603
» 45:7 es
| I7} 5 «' $1 1604 |.
6: F 6,3 1605 |
6 23], 47 1605
6 2576 | 7] 1605
6 45} 6 ' 7 1605
& 27] 6 + 8] 1605
6 3th $10} 2608
X. 16] 7 | 5 _
167 { 57
7 3 7 falf 1607 |
7 2 930g 1 1607
7 68 p 7. 48] ©. 09] 2607. |
Luna "7 49] 8 oof 1607
Luna ad 7 56] 8 2] x607
® wd (1 — 7 57] 8 1] 1607
- Luna ad paralle lem proprizm — : — 5|-$  3| 1607
® ad parallelum Y in Zodiac ———— ., —— 3 5$| 8 . 3] 1607
Sol ad Terminos þh ——— — 7 5 60
Luna ad () © in mundo dd. . > www 9 149 F168}
Medium Cali ad = — ___ __————— 9 39] 9_ $1608
Sol ad Pleiadet fone Latitudine ' =—=, © w—io gſto 1609
Medium Cali ad L — IT) 26 IO 7 1609 |
® ad parallelom I mundo dd. —— 10 29110 8} 1609
Luna ad. Trrninds © 10 10- 11} 1619
® ad {x F in mundo dd.mmommmem i1-<Ilalin $1] G10
® ad: Jovis dd. 12 37/tr- 1o[ x61 |
Bad ad 6 is Zac row Latent f2 1 $16n1h


AA "BL c1] -  , Gr. Mijan. M
Celt wd > h s gn ———_ATY YEE +
f Bd @ -in Zodiate fine hatitudine o——— roles
Lons ud Copper hy" in Eadiaca-cum Laticadne FT F410
ol a Timings If —_— —— J
Land ad Terrwitlos 1 ———— - Frirdg Te
Sol ad Cirpus 2 in Ziiace —— ———_mmeenndry, 4815. /
$ol' ad Prrmims © ty Fj 3
- | % Lot ad % 1þ in mundle dd——— s a9 7
Lend ad \Spictts TR cans Lavitudine —_—_—\ 46 $
Sol ad Parallvium Rm Zodiaco m6 372
Aſcendens ad Sewn? atlraturm ©) —
Lunk ad 8 of ant Zodiac cums Latibndens — "of F 00
Lans' ad Termitias: — es ko d w— 1
Lank ad Corpia Zads ace -fone- Lati 48".
Sol ad” Paralliinn 1 mote wept oo  TITTTYÞE 2
- ffeyndenr” ad” Semuquaalr um © -— —_—_——_
tof= ad Aldebaran fine Laviendine ooo EPI + 00
» Aſeendent 8d Srmiquaor omen _- — 3
Lanes &d O I © Zadiate-fne Latitudime——— |
Pay 5 Alcrndens ad Sexeilem" 2 —— 4-220 3* 10
X Sol ad hm mundo dd — - | unt—_—_— 39120 '
Lun# ad Terminas & —
Lans ad Termints J _ 2x -2727 ©
@ ad quadritum 2 in mundo dd. — end Jt - y5j22 "©©
Sol ad Termites HH —_— \ mT 5 [22 |
Aſcendens ad 8 = wnmmananc 2 Þ 2
Median Cali ad CU) 3 < IT nr RT
- "$f ial of Sf anals mus Curt — wed vo22
Iams ad Spicans ih fine Lavitndine = © 2:2 "22122 10
Sal ad Aldebaran. cum Lavioeudine —— —— —__"
Lama ad quincilem 1}  wnendo dd. WIPE 07 53}24 -- 5
$ol\ ad 36 1 "in muntle td er wand 24
Lend ad Paretleiam DV in Zodiac —— I 4 4 po
_-. Parkiitiem © Mi Zodatei—— -—=_v4, 45 4
_- Sol. ad * itt ZOlaco—— et Kiah" Y
® ad Seſquiquadratum: F& in mundo 1d, mm 316
Dans ad Tirmims Po — == - 26 12126". 6
| Sel ant {hin Zac eee een 6 3026 11
Taws ad Seſyniguantr ann mundo , moru Converf. — 28 4.427 ot
@®-4d, Par : © | domme ——— Ft & Il
Jams ad Tirmims Ye nn— —_—— Ep" $1] 0!
ad Semiquidr atam Ty muntt mayo Canverſ, _—— 9." 05}
Median Cali-ad © © a m—_—y ey. 7


1617}


1628


Luna ad {\ 1 in Zodiaco cum Latitudine


-® ad /\ © mundo dd. o— —
Inna ad $ © in| Zodaico cum Latitadime
Lune 4d parallehon. h mts raprom——oe.
- Sol ad Semiquadration 1 Ad, —
Luna ad Terminor 1þ -{GESERM?


Sol ad rallelum 1 ini Ziad gice. won
Sl. ad Parallelem 2} Thus dd. ———
Lans ad I 2 oy nA |


' ® ad Parallehem 7 x05
Sol ad Parallelum” ) mity rapto —— _.
Lama ad 8 © in Zodiaco fine, Latitudine

Luna ad Terminos Ion. eons

Luvs ed Jin Zadiere fe Laviradine
2 , 0 gs fs. Lotions
1 rad Corpus Oo... _
—=r Cob ad'J) of —
Lane than Yona rae
ies T 2 motu Conver].—


|


lj ik [


Ow wn w


I


mundo moru Comver| —


roriem mts Crue —


1 L111 |


& 0 2» 6 A.


» o v0 ao wi ww oo


=”


AK ADD yp


—_—_—
-


& © »
4 —_ 4


_-_ _—_—


5


- Opus Reformatum. 7


Sol ad (] & in munds dd.——
Luna ad (.) ) i» Ae fries Latitudine ——


Arcus Numer Anni
Nomina Dire&ionum. DireQi.|Annor. | Dom
> ak Gr. Mi Mi[An. M] —
® af Sfeaiqedbratn Y ERA —— 42 .2j41 10] 1641
® ad /\ 2 mundo dd: — 42. 5j41. 11] 1641
Sol ad 7 ) mundi dd.io—— —42 12142. 00| 1641
® ad Seſquiquadratum © in mundo dd — © — 4 12/42: 00 1641
Þ ad Cor Leonis dd. oonwmmnge — — +3. 41143 5] 1642
Luna ad {\ Yanundo dd. _——— MG ks + 26144 " 2] 1643
Lima ad % h mundo mtu Conmver moo —\+4 34/44 - 4] 1643
Luna ad Parallelum P mot rapts —— — 44 4gol44 5 1643
Sel ad Semiquadratim 7 munds dd 45 1144 17 1644
Sol ad 6 © mundo. motu Converſ. — D— 45 31/45 3] 1644
Luna ad Cor Min Zodiaco cum Latitudine =  —/45 4! 1644
Sol ad Terminos f — : 4 7] 1644
Sol ad Parallelum of motu rapti——— —— 4 8] 1645
. ® ad Parallelum 1} mor PRSOIordinee Boos —— 46 9] 1645
Sol ad * © in mundo dd. —— 46 9] 1645
Luna ad .8 Þ Zodiaco froe palate —+8 I] 1647
Medium Cali ad 8 * — m— «q| 1647 |
Aſcendens ad OY _ . -o—o—_—_} 4s 4] 1647
® ad % Þ} mundo dd. w m——49 6] 1648
Medium Gali ad L\ ) —— o| 1649”
Luna ad {\ &f in' Zodiaca cum Latitudmi ——— —Fo. "2] 1649
Luna ad * h jn Zodiaco cum Lavitydous — 3] 1650
®- ad Corpus Lune dd. - —— — 5] 1650+
Aſcendens ad Corpus © — - Dk © 6] 1650
Medium Cali 54 ©] — | I [7 6] 1650
poem" heroer hor apr — mn F2 8] 1651
® ad Seſquiquadratum: 2 mundo dd —moa—_— —\;2 of 1651
Aſcendens ad Corpus © = — — 11] 1651
Nedium Cali ad (0) 5 — —5 1111651
Luna ad Cor Scorpii ſme Latirudine —F2 Ir] 1651
Luna ad Terminos, Y —— — — 11] 1652
Lama ad 1 1þ in mundo dd. = 54 11] 1653
Sol ad Terminos Q. — H1653.
Lina ad ) proprium Zodiaco cum Latitudine *4 1] 1653 |
Sol ad * 7 in mundo dd. — —|5 gf 1654
| Luna ad /\ & in Zodiaco fine Latitudme ——— —57 6] r6s5 5 -
Sol ad Oo in Zodiac —— mn — 8] 1656
Sol-ad Parallelum 1 m Zodiaco — —57 _ 2] 1656
Luna ad % 'h in Zogiaco fine Latitudine———\;8$ 8} 1657
Sul ad [.], h in Zodiaco _ « 2] 1657
Sol ad quintilem ) mundo dd. —— — 5 F[ 1657
Luna ad Parallelum of mundo dd. n——_— 56159 + 201658:
Luna ad Paralltlum Sf mundo dd.—— '6o x "4{ 1658
av—o__y — 34159 1659


_ Opus Reformatuns |
Nomina DireFiomum- | |


——_w_@O.


Luna ad {1 Ff mundo motu'©  Amm—_— waynlars 69


Lins #d Paralichen Th minds tdmamo=m—
Lung ad Parollehnn bh 1iamdo ad. ———
Sol ad C] h in mundo dd. oo
Luna ad C) h mundo moto COrFUey] mominnmas  —————


. Having Gaiſhed the Table of -Diz<Qions, give me leave to lay
2 word or two- about the DireQions-of the Swn, as it is deli-
vered and , approved by the” beft Authors in that” way and- me-


thod : The'Dire&tions of 'the Swr under the Earth are different
from thoſe above the Earth, and chat two ways: Friſt, By being


- in,the Crepnſcaline Cireles : And ſecondly,-By being in the Obſcure


Ark; and the cauſe-of this difference is-from the Sxxs being
nearer tSo, or further from our: Horizon or Hemiſphere, Or ra-
ther (which is more jproper according to the Intenſion of his


- Light toward our Hemiſpherez -for when he is in the Crepuſculine


Circles, he doth much more affect us, and his Directions: arc
more forcible thar when heis in the Obſcwre 4zk, | Now, ni the
Operation for the DireQions in the Obſcare Ark, the main thing
is, the Part proportional for the occurrent place. * But in that for -
the Crepuſculine Circles aſcending. or deſcending, the chickelt thing -
,to be obtained, is the Ortiverirfference, and both theſe are to be a

ied, as directed to compleat and perfe&t-thoſe DireQions m che

diack; * And-theſe things will appear the more” plata, if we


_ Conſider a few things about _DireQions, with the real and natu-


ral Motion thereof: The -Prorogatory Vixtue of the. Swi. or
"Moon temaing, immovablc ' in Mundo, movable-in the” Zodiach,,
which 1s plain, becauſe the No&urnal Ark is either extend or
contracted ;; according as they. by their dire&ional Motion thall


* Change and alter their Declinziiong and by the ſarhe reaſon make


their diſtances greater or tefs from-the two next Angler, from
whence ariſeth that diverfity and variety of Operation in work-
ing.the Suns directions thuc, which is. a Myſtery not known to
Bat yet further to illuſtrate thisruthz Suppoſe the 15th De-
gree of Aries ſhould afcend under the Elevation of-52, at Which'-


|


- time, about fix degrees of Cancer will-be on the Imam Celiz the


SeniinoGurnal .


SOR, Opus Reformatum.

Seminocurnal Ark of the end of Aries in Horary Trines is- 75 d.

30', of Tarrue, 63 d. 6'. and of the cnd of Gemini 57 d. 30.

by which you fee the difference between the Seminocturnal Ark of

_ the-3oth degree of Aries, and the. zoth degree.of Geatini, is 18
degrees, 'which is the 20th part of the whole Cizcle, which in

one Quadrant muſt of necefficy form ayother Oblique-Ark of diffe-


rence in the diſtance "between the 3oth degree of Aries (where -
we-will ſuppoſe the Sn. to be) and. the end of Gemini, the place '

_ ef a Pramittox, either Body or AtpeRt ; and that the NoQurnal: -
Circle of the 3oth degree of Aries, from which the Sus moves by -


direction, is greater by 18 degrees, than the 30th degree of Gs
mini, to white Point the Sun muſt come to meet the Promittor :


And thig'is fach a difference, that neither the Circles of Pofition, *
nor the Horary Times will, or can.rxcgulate, becauſe they arc both .


formed from the ſame Principle, and the reaſog of it really: is
-_ that which I ſpoke-of before, That the prorogatory+virtue re-
mains fixed in Mwido, but moveable in Zediaco ; And. by reaſon
of that mobility, it makes a variation ji its Circle by reaſon of its
Declinatian 4 for at that time, befoxe-rventioned of 15 degrees of


Avier alcending,, the Sus being in 30-of the fame Sign under the -


Pole-52.; thee dittance of the San from the AſcendTnt will be 6 de-
grees, 3$ miutes 3 but whietiche DireQion is tmiſhed to the 3orh
degree of Genin, the Sun will be diſtant from-the Afcendant bur-
5 degrees, 3. minutes 4 fo that your own Reaſan-will tell you, if
his'difiance grows leſs, his Pele muk. grow. greater 3, and then
where. is the: truth of your direQion?+ And let this fulhice to have.


ſpoken of the ground of direction which hath fallen in;by accident, .
it not bing intended-at firſts perhaps I nazy take-a time. to diſcourſe


it larger and plajner. boo. <L

7 [The Swn. ( as it is agreed. on. by all}, when he is above. the

Earth; exerts yn ay more, .ang; his 4nfluence_is.greater, and
more effectual to: vs An all Caſes,. whether he be Significator or :
Prormittor, thats when he.is under the Earth 3 if fo, thes when he.
k underthe Earth,” by bow mach.ncazer be is to the Horizon, 'by

fomuch the more (eſpecially in the Crepuſculine Ark) the Powen'
and Influx of his- and Vertue affeds our Metidian; and ac+
_ cording © the intenfon of his Light, fo is his vital, and. Prozo-

xy Power. - ;


But now in this Nativity,though the Sw is under the Earth, yet -


- — his Accidents arc fuch;- that will not admic- him toravy Gerd
n Rule


-


] I


8 oh Opus Reformatum.


- Rule that. I have ſeen' in order. to direRion ; for at the time of


_ Mw Tuco wm Cw wv EM © 4. VOTE CI OR tn. ERA 1” _
mo. , ” "—— ,
,
' ,
;


his birth we find the _ Sun in the third Houſe diſtant from the Aſ-


- cendant-52 degrees; 9 minutes; and in that point of the Zodiack /
his, Obſcure Ark is one hour 44 minutes, and his Crepufculine Ark |


is two hours and 45 minutes,. which together- make up his No-
Qornal Ark-four houts 33 mjnues. + Hence you ſee at the-time of


| birth-we find the Sx Within the Limits of his Obſcure Ark, and


by thathe ought to be direted (o long as he hath any, whichter-
minates in the beginning of- Gemini, when he is increaſed. in his
North Declination about 4 degrees and 8 minuteszfo that then' his
Nodtarnal Ark+ is abdicated,-and he within the Crepyſculine Ark,
where he bught to be directed alſo; different from the former


- method: but at that time alfo the method tnientioned-'is obſtru- ..
' ted, for.the NoQuurnal Ark is but one continued Crepuſpulum, - _


and admits of no operation ;-becaule the Ottive difference is' not
to be pained as in other Nativities. That is, in other Nativities


_ of different Poſitions, or different Elevations, or at other Scaſons


of the year; for all Nativities of the ſame Poſition and Elevation
are liable to the very ſame Circumſtance, when the Sn is near-the


Solltitial Tropick,- and under the Earth, as here in this now under '


conſideration. IETY +:
: Now the-whole. curioſity and- difficulty (as I ſaid before) in
working Dire&ons of this fort and natiſe, is to gain the true Or-


tive difference that is proportionably allowable for each Ark of di- *


ſtance, ' and 0 apply according as irought (to the Ark of Dire-
Qion, by which tears the true DireRion is produced and obtain-
ed. + Bat this catnot be performed in this Nativity, and therefore


1 will propound afother way, which to me ſeems rational in this
Caſe, and that is-tq dire the Swmn, as if he were in the. Crepuſcu- -


lint "Circles without the Ortive difference ;: For though we cannot


- direct "the"'Smn as he ought to be , yet we” ought toi purſue: the
trat and method: of Truth as far,-and as near as it is poſſible; in -


order to obtain what we-exped@ from the diftance and” Ark of Di-
recion: which if it be done (for all the preceding Directions of


the”Su#in the Zodiack are performed, according to Ptolomy, By the


Oe NEG ;*taken under the-true Pole of poſition z And
thoſe DireRions in Mundo ate performed by the uſual way of Pro-
portion, &e. without the Obſcure Ark ) we (hall find a conhde-,


'rable difference when we compare the DireQions following, which
* are wrought 'after that method. with thoſe performed after _


*%S


Td


Opius' Reformatnm,
uſual manner, and inſerted in the Table of DireQions preceding,
For indeed-the DireRions of the Sun there wrought have no great
matter #6'dv/ in-the- pablick TranſaQtions and: Matations' of this
Native's Life* Airflefs we do allow :( as a ' certain Bounce amr
as' hath done Y' That bad DireGions in Violent and Eminent Nativities,
give glorious and eminent Effefls 3 and that they do not ſhew their Effefts
by injuring the Native, but thiſe who are bis Enemies, and with whom
be doth contend; which is a pretty ſort of Cant, that the Effects of
the Stars ſhall in one Nativity from the ſame Ray and DireQtion,
zive' Sickneſs; Loſs of Honour, Imprifonment, and.” perhaps, Death in
the conchufion, tothe Native 3 and in another Nativity to his Ene-
mies only: a very likely Story, and juſt ſuch tuff as the reſt of his
is, who hath impoſed this upon the World.

Bat us to the Sun, he is the principal Significator of all Ho-
nour,- Grandeur and Reputation, as well by DireRion as by Po-
fition ; for as the Adoon is lignificator of all common and general
A@tons of human Life, ſo- the Swn'is fignificator principally of
thoſe of Honour, &c. Hence we = very well cxpedt the Smn to

ive ſomething conſiderable in this-Great Man's Nativity : for I
Sink every one allows the Accidents and Contingencies of hu-
man Life are brought to paſs, and -produced by directions, as the
only eff:& of Motion; and therefore as this Native hath had great
and prodigious Effets, ſo the DireQions ought to be ſomething
in proportion -to what was produced ;, for from weak Dire-
Qions there can be but ſmall and inconfiderable- produced.
However, 1 do not lay this down as abfolutely neceſſary to be fol-
lowed , 1 only propound.-it, as being an'unuſaual Caſe; that you,
whoever you are that underftand it, may judge which is the moſt
probable ;- though I arm ſatisfied: chat the DireQions of the Swn in
the Crepuſculine Circles are true, but in this Caſe we have no
Rule, and therefore this method is offered as a ſupply to that de-
fe: that is, whither the S=2» directed after the method and man-
ner when he is in the C Circles without the Ortive dif-
ference (when it cannot be had, as here) will not nearly correſpond
to Truth, as in other parts of the Zodiack where it gan be taken.
In which thing T ſubmit my ſelf to thoſe skilful in that way and
method, and only enterit down as an Effay to better diſcovery ;
for I am well aſſured, that the beſt method of directions yet dif-
covered, may admit of corxe&ion and emendation, .if the Profef-
ſors of this Study would be pleaſed a—_ pains and labour wi

- - h, ue


-
%
> Doe tes eo———_ acniOrhoo—appocmans o etretmas «4 "I
©) .


34


| Opns Reforwatur.
but one part of them ave ignorant, and the other idle, and fo-the
work lies by ;" but-tor the common. way, as.it is a very cafic ane;
fit is a/ very: falſe! ane-3 and he that pactepds to; Allpology, .and
hath: not found himfſgf cheated by his. own Rules jn DizeRions;


| ee. | ſome hutidreds of times; k thipk he hath takenybut very little


pains in thoſe Operations 3. or'ele by. the help of a bad memory he


- hath forgot. thery;- but it ſerves the turns and. fo long as none
" knows better, every one is contented ,- and, h ſuppoſe,. moſt of


them are fÞ far from mending of it, that were, thexe'a bettes pro»
duced; they, aze fo fond of their Errors, that, they wiil,not pare
with. their old. one, and therefore” let- chegy go 00 and fee. what
they can make of itz and whether this 1 have; here done-pleaſeth
or not, I care not,z under which contderation, 1 come now, (as
I promiſed yow.) to give: halt a {core DizeQions to ſpend, your =
Judgment ons and toconſider what. proſpet'they have to;Truth.;

yet 1 do got expect everyone: to, be capable. of judging whather:
it be-wuc or: falſe, and therefore would: nat have every little
Capricio think-thet I call: for his Opinion, *or would have hin by-
fly concerned: in giving his: Judgment about the matter, before:
he apprehends it: And yet withour fenting. a Figuze, 1 can; tell-
yow'F muſi-expe& fuch uſage, and that from. ſuch Peoplcj two,
who] can affuze you {fome of them) ate-no: ſmall Fools, |


- GETUDNCE in Zodiaco =roypnoeroiomnmmmgatmmmeers


E have none particular and higniticand before lic was 40, or 41 yeas |


# x” F% # LA, >* LA ASL
N L I 1
.- - Nomina Dreftioaum:
a 4 -


# -
& - 4
TY "IF OT T2SI1929! TEETER 7


&l a4 Trize 'h in Z0G dt oem r re —————_


Sol # |

Wy ako rey 5 HH - — :
ar ” -, d LEO, = a Ap jew 4

Stet P; 2 [Sl ii 2iitba'


WY | ; ; 0 2
ad * Merexrii in Zodiac —— ———— ——55 5


-
.
—_
-


-


-- had now'the Moon ad £ % in mundo


|» 0 Rift
of Age, the former pert of his Life being to me tthknown ; nei-
ther 4s there any folid Account of any of note by thoſe that have
written his Life, and therefore I ſhall make uſe only of thoſe Ac-
Tidents that are certainly true, and generally: known to alt Man-
kind, ard they are thoſt that do generally relate to the Publick.


Himo 1646, He was by his Country choſen a Member in that
Purlietnent that King C. 1. calted to fit-in November, and this was
the firſt ftep he thade no the Publickz, but-1 cannot own this to
be & great a preferment us ome do,” becauſe it is attended with


- Uabout, trouble and charge ; yet I muſt acknowledge that this laid


the ground-work of his future Rift and Gratidenr : He had then
the Moon directed to the 'Oppvlition of Venier 'in Zidiacoz Modn af
| o__ in mundo 44. 4bd the Mid: heaven ad 2 and OH, aud

th fibRtvolarion for that year Fupiter was fri exat' Sextile to His
Radical Mid-heaverry thus you ſee he had both good ind.bad Di-
xtetions in this year; and" therefore? dyndt doubt but he had ſome.
firugftvg and conteſt it his BleRion,as well as in his other Aﬀetts.


"Arid x 641. Like s Trait Engl; much he HHiled of bop of Fotte
#t His '6wnh Charge ro atffift fa tory) 'wd'd Lhd Tk Corft-
try againſt Popery, which was then coming iti'like a flood © fit Hall
then the ® ag Seſquiquadrat of 2 dd. and tothe A © dd. the Swn


& the Fyware of the ror; and the & 2 Selquiquadidt of the -
Ne hi theſe he hid alfo a7 ublicky Reva "6 þ


* 118g 1645; Be Hat x Comirififiod fora Repinietit of
whit Repitheht he raiſedſtrhis own Countty of Fretholdefs, 4
Frechvlders Sons, who did reafty go ut” in pohit of COLE
th Forve thei Countty I thixe tiftic"0f daright 2 he Had now
&" af Ci" ahd i Vty got Rproluibn td affilt hith.
mo 1643. He was very aQtive in the North, where he oppo-
wdffne kai of Neweefte, arid to that patpott joined with the Lord
Wilmpbby, afid did the Parliattierit and wh _
thi Surtimet HEdMotook Sranfbrd from rhe }
Mite was thi firlt yeat cofilit he wis tiltth Hotict bf th plabfick; atid
eſteemed by the Parlrament, pars <n— foirnd him Faithfll; he
. Moon ad % h in mundo
_ Motis Rapto;, with hee
2 c


—_


44. aud Moon alſo ad parallelam 2


tion gallatit Service. -
Kit's Forces 3 uri


35


"took a portion or. part of Scripture, a


| his own Caſe good.


a Bot te re ee een Sem -


Opus Reformatum,
he had alſo a-moſt admirable Revolution, for the Myon was on his
Radical Mid-heaven in Trine to Venus, and both: Marsr:and Venxs
in Trine to his Mid-heaven, -with other advantageous Poſitions,
I remember Honeft: Fobn exclaims.againſt him.in this. year for. his
whining and dithmulation in, Religion, which I confeſs, if true,
was 2 Very ilt thing z but prithee Fohn tell me one thing, Was this
Hypocrilie at Fhite-ball, in the Year 1643. greater than that at
Breda-in 165% when none but the good men mult beg a bleſſing
on the good Creatures? &e. And when. one of thoſe: good Parſons +
asked a certain Gentleman how: they ſpenc the.. Sabbath-dayz. why,
fays he, we ſpend the Morning in reading, and Private Devotion
but in the: Afternoon They always met together, and every man


| ſpoke from that ; and
when: they. had. all done, then His Majchy took up. every. man's
Notions delivered, ſpoke to them diſtinly;, givinghis own Opini-
on of the whole matter z and after ſome Exhortations t0-a goo
Life, he himſelf concluded the day in Prayer 3 which made thoſe
good men fay , that they had a King in Covenant with God, I
think this 'enough without mentioning any thing of the Seatch'Co-
venant, to ipform honeſt F. G, that he might have forbore that
Refle&ion'on Cromwelh, for you ſee it is an-calic matter'to give him
a Rowland for his Oliver. py :


. - Anno 1644. He differed with, the Earl of Mancheſter, one of the
Parliament Generals; about the Condut of a Batte),, I thigk that |
of Marfton- Moor, about which they accuſed cach other ; but Crom-
well came off Victor,and Kill ftood fair with-theParliament, making
ale g00 He had now the Sun ad, Semiquadrat of 2 in
mundo dd. the Sun to his own Sextile in mundo dd. and the Moon to
the Cor MM, with latitude. .In his. Revolutipn he -bad, the. Sux in


| Conjundtien with Jupiter, the, Mocn.in, ConjunGion with Satwra,


Radical Mid-heaven.


£ Anio 1645. Cromwel was made Lieutenant-General ” Sir Tho»
mas Fairfax, and did the Parliament and Nation admirable Service


and Mars in Trine to


rapte,, and


—
#


| lathe Weli of England, in Oxfordſhire, and at Naſeby: He had now
the Ser a brain 0 in mundo noſn Py ad par i mots
c |


Sun ad *% 3 inmunde dd, |


—


Opus Reformatum..-- |

Anno 1647. was 2 year of trouble and:much labour to him abeuc
the Differences of che Army ; -his Enemies appear'd openly again
him, -and endeavour 'to' out him bydivers Aﬀperfions ; but at laſt
he got an Impeachment againſtthetn in Parliatnens, and: with-niuch
firugſing heat laſt' got clear with Honour'and Reputation: He
had now the Mvon'ad 8 ?. in Zodiaco 'S, L. the M.C. ad #8 % and
the Aſcendant to the Square of Jupiter 3 and in'the' Second Table


he had the Swn ad Square of Mars; and' parallel of Fupiter, which |


_ *are indeed-all of them'very apt and' proper' Directions for: ſuch

TiephiunT Vauaoe as he then undetwent, 'The Revolution
for that Year was bat indifferent; more of bad than'good in it; for
the San, Moon and Saturn was in Conjundtion.


Anno 1648. was a Year of much Labour and' Toit to him :'
for then was he imployed to reduce” the” Welſh Rebels, which he
did effcQually z after that he went againſt Duke Hamilton and the
Scots, then in Lancaſhire, where he beat ind took the Duke Priſoner ;
and toward the end of the Year he was choſen by the Parliament
to go General for Treland 5 he had now the-part of Fortune to the
* of % ; in his Revolution: for that Year he had his Moon in Sex-"
- tile to his Radical Mid-heaven, and Satwrn in Oppdofition to it;'' &*

on the radical place of Mars, and in Trine. to his Mid-beven;
which I judge gave his Arms ſacceſs.. @2


Anno 1645. he went General for Ireland to reſcue that poor
Kingdom out'of the hands of the Papiſts, who had ſo barbarouſly.
tmurthere$ 200000 of the Protefiant EngliſÞ before in the Year
1640, and'on Fuly the 10th he ſet forward on his Journy, which

God was pleaſed to profper with ſucceſs, and that glorioufly too,
> as you may fee by the Hiſtory of that War z-and eſpechally his firſt
Undertaking, which was at Drogedab, where he ſtorm'd that ſtro
\ Garifon, $i put them/to'the Sword z and by that means fright
' the -whole: Country;''and' made other Towns eafier to be taken,
But during his coritinuance in this Kingdom, they fay he had the
Flux, way hoon bleſfing of God he'did very well: He had now
his Mid-heavett: a4 & Þ 4 thei. Avon ad L & in Zodiaco C. EL. two:
very great DireQions, and.fit for ſuch an Undertaking : his Revo
lation (was but! indifferent ;' but what was in it, was good : His
' Moon» was int his Radical Horoſcope in 'Trine to the Swun,-and in
to Þ an the Radical place of his '@. ; Pi:


33


KIA Refers AV


fone; 1.650.. he. was. matle Lind Genera} of all. the Forces.ig the
Commonwealth of Englend, and was then {ent into Scotland reduce
Yan: [76 obolimes Aad-on Joly the poghe __— ak
with-a powerful Army'z and on the. 3d following, he
Chaſtiſedithe Soy gr Sherri es famous;Battel of Danbar,
where he flaw/3900./ and took 10000 Priſoners, and with chem
Lieutenant-General Lomſdin, Adfutant-General Bickerton, Three
Collonels,. Eleven Lieutenaft-Collonels, Nine Majors, Foty ſeven
Qepiains,..Seven-CaptainrLieutenants, Twelve y Seventy
body; rode, - Guys; Fiftecn:t rms, an 'Two
ladenl Cologm He: had now.the Matad %- hin a GL,
the © ad Corpus _—_ and the Alcendantto the body © the Sxn
with the Dize&ions of the laſt Year, which are not yet over.'. In


his Revolation'fer that year. there is no any, ting remarkable ;


| all:that-ie, welt eden in. ajuettioe with, © and Marg. .


Shy bor innit Hai ss
"me 165 ty the Valiant Cromwel beat the: RI Irreeber, whews


| he fook(Dake: Hemileon and Twelve Earls; Lords, and Knights, be-


fides y Three Viajor; Generals, and Four other Generals, . Twelve
Collionels,;Sigtttta- LituteranteCollondls,, Twenty: onc. Majors,
aHandaed anditen Qapteing, a banded and thirty fix Lirutenangs,
| Twenty one;-Enfigus, Ninety Quartermakers ;


_ ' Seventy lixtContets,
NINE PARSONS, Nine Ghyrurgeons, Thirty © cat bt


wks Hen cs gr, Eight thouſand Priſoners, Two th
and fit, Goleurs eakert 4 with all their:
68; together, wich! the Plunder of.
theSun to the Square of -2 nor Conderſas
2 in merdo; dd. the: Akcendant tothe Sextile
_ ard the Mvon to. the Cer. WM 8: 1s inthe Revelaticn
Wit anoditing aotfuletebic Fam ya 1 (£m uoy 25
b (0101479 I1f{v uy LY IA 1 alas
FW IPG we have but liitle Jeevunt of his-Publick kions
and:\Affairsinthis Year 57 neither Have we any DixeGion, except
inthe. Second iTable ,.the Suniad *: Þ 5- but-a very g60d Revolus
tions theiSaH in Trine:t0 (Zapiter, the Moon im Trine 10 the Mits
heaven} and:iald iniSyuare' 40; $iin * by ®. & and ” 'to/W;-//1
_—— es Yi 7 ah} een. _
:itHano 1653-1ot hg eyear he iflalicd 1h 1
liemados, and dllrhe year afferward. he was bufic #bout the Aﬀabry
of the Nation, and in December he was pores He had
> now


yp ry
et 4; ey moingriges


—


w_ Aefirmadin.
now the Mom 24-4. Þ in nendd. 44.-S\m ad Tedm''2 the Mon +;
 bex own Square in the Zog. C. Li and in the Second/Tablethe Sr
to the body of Japinns Py wag Pam nar wy that Year was but i kin-
Cifferont:: d £8 4

| Adin 1654. he made Peace wich the Dureh, ſene A Fleet to ts
Welt ISey under the Command of Pen, made a League with Swe:
dan, &c. he had now the Sw to the Stxrile' of Venus in mundo dd,
but in the Second Fable the '©:44 wand Indeed cis of chem
' may be allowed fuch an effect. |


Ano. 1655. Bis Army in the Wiſt-Indias was Aeſtroped. by the
overlight of the Commander; the Fleettoak Famaies 3 he received -
Addreſſes from divers parts of the Nation, and he appoints a Com-
mictee 80 provide reticf for the-poor Proteſiants:in- Piedmont. He
had now. his M1 directed to-the Trine of Marr in Zodiueo'S. L.
= a very ill Revert; Mars on is Aſcendant i in | Sfwegh to
t Moon.


Aomno 1656. there: was- » Plot ke Lav by Pts of his
Guard; and alfo to. ſet White-hall onfire ; but: it was diſcovered,
and. Sindereom apprehended , and alſo condernned for-, but died
_ ijn-the Towers and as it was ſuppoſed, he poifoned hirmfelf, The

Protedlor alfo called a Parliament, or ſomething like-it, who con-
firmed him in his- Title and Power that he had before't He had
now-his Sin ad © & in Zodigee,- aid" tothe 'parableF of Frps
ks Zodjaoo-alfo 3 which are very like the EffeRts of this Year. In his
Revolution he had his Sr in'Conjun@ion with Jupiter and Trine
.of Saturn, and the Moon in Ehinie t6-th&"Thn and: ner, —_—
@onjundbon wich'Samern. UETIONL


Links 1657: Be 01 F orces | ito Flaids-ptor hi ehb'Spwnitrdh
le took Dankinh,- &c. He had! now-the Mor ad # h in Zodiaco
S:;.E.\ and the/ Sun ad DO I int Zodincs likewiſe, Im the Revolu-
lation he had his” 4 on te Radical Aſcendant' in: Trine to
Saturn.


Buvin Anns'1658, after te great Succeſs of his Army in Plin«
. ders, the Confirmation of his Titte, and many other Publick Af-
fairy of State being SIA: by him 3'as the Relief of the perſe-

cuted


2)


> Opus Reformatidn.
cuted\Proteſtants in' Poland* and Bobemis\, his preſerving thofe in
| Piedmont from: the French Perſecution; .&. on September the 3d.
he died afar: Intermitting Feyer, having been fick about:a Month,
and: was taken-at Hampron-Comrt, to which place he reſorted once a
week. know ſome pretend he was poiſoned, and alſo ſay they knew
the man, which was one of his Phyſicians : and fo let him befor
me; for that doth not concern my buſineſs here in hand : If his
DoRax:did poiſon him, and then brag of it, 1 think he was a ve-
ry.Il man; for whateyer Qliver was, \cither as. to his Power, Prin-
ciples or Religion, if very bad in all, was no-authority for him
to.commit a private muxther, nor any way extcnuate his Crimes
of:Marther arid Blood z but aggravated and made more hainqus,
as being done by his Phyſician z which would be of il] conſequence,
| ſhould ſuch; things grow into cuſtom and approbationz and who-
ever ſhould encourage ſuch a'thing , w wall be very unwillin to
ſafer. by'the ſame-way themſelves 3 therefore in a' word:, if the
Phyſician did do it, 1 think he was the worſt of men. - About
Fune'this Year, the Moon, who is giver of Life , came to the
_ rallel of Mars in Mundo Mota Comverſo ;, and-about the latter od
of Auguſt following,” he' had the Moon to the. parallel of Marg in
mundo moti direfio-:. and+ this followed by the Moon to her own
Square in Zodiaco Sine-Lat. the Moon to the parallel of Satwyn in
waudo-motue  direfio O& mote Converſo; the Moon ro the Square
of Saturn in mundo motn Converſe, allo to the Square of Mars in mundo
mote Converſo. Thus you ſee he had ſeven DireRions violent and
—_— (anti.not one good Direfion between): to kill him ; which
only-inthis, but inariy other Caſe to the Giver of Life, ſhall
without ſhamming in the Aſcendant to the e of
prion a50ur Popiſh Conjierex you ſee hath done, and yet at-the ſame
time take the confidence to el the-World the Horoſcope was Giver
of Life , when the Sun is but cleven degrees 33-miputes diſtant
from: the Aſgengaot,. which according to'all the Aftro Au-
thors: Sher þ1 1 have read, Ire a pugyt Gp be Giver of Life. - As
you. may ſee in Prolomy's,Luadriparth, Lib. 3. . cap. 13+ . Campanella,
Lib.;4+. cap. 4. Artic. 2. with. many others that/I would defire
the worthy Gentleman to look over, and examine them well; and
after he hath done that, to reſolve us what he means by that. Ex-
preſſion in his Dofvine. of Nativities, pag. 258. where he fays,” The
_ Suncannot be Giver of Life, if be were in an Apbetical place, becauſe the
ings is Nadurnal. Methighs | it ſounds a little odd. g
c


7


But Yet utther' tb dlcar this r #bout the Efleg ; Une
have. mentioned my Authori fer it, 1 wil} ao prove itp
from miy wag, words, with the ot and” OUPEE, fe |
may Teaſſuine icouſtorged "pift of Tirpufente, ant”
Quotations, 45 he did in eo ly to th om *f 268. Ired
thoſe Quotations were realty true, prom 4 he Trarfhticon
that T uſe, 1s that of Metahbin , vhtich is the beſt Trarftation' of
Prolomy in. beitig, and hath I think given the errieft meaning of
Ptolomy's woids; . and if you pleafe but to look into. the T4 th
Chapter of that Quadripartite, and "che Third Book ;; ' you 'will
there tind chele. words, Crum autirs guerimanr 'in bis tocis potenciſſt
Mun, frimus ers Medium Celi deinde Horoſcopes, poſtea yndecima dinns
Joccedens Medio Cali, deinde occaftus , ftes 3 Ws domus Amecedtis
Medium Cali. In this Chapter heis ſub outing to prove, and alfb
lay down by Rule the place of the Proto mivke and after he =
ſpene. Tome. eime to ſhew the Prorogato act” tt general;
comes in the words beforemenitioned tothe Prod, xd w hich
of them do precede in Power and Order z and therefore fays he,
When wve inquire who is moſt pozverful in theſe plater , Yhe firſt in tr #er
is the Midheaten ; next after that the a ney he EP
Houfe, then the Seveittb, is OE Sb
why he is fo particular in this Cale; 13 aber I Sie hs
- may be ſometimes both in Proxogatory Places, and both"
tor ' Pleriey z therefore. in ſuch a Caſe theſe Rites 'are*th be t6nt
and compared, with. thoſe of the ryth Chapter of the
ny +43 by whick it rnay be decide&.whith' of the eworhave
the xcal Power of Hileg ; or, giver of Life. Hence "certaly one
Author by, .taKin; fuch-paltis ahd' care "to* Jown' er
Rules how to cle the giver of Life, di# intend a gr wr 70
be made_of it}, than any of our late Pretenders, 1 Nebipt, Ire
ware.of z, which ſcems more plain from the frtt Paragruph of the
24th Chapter,, where he. aitourſich wh wholly of che Angreriedl
Point, and who or what he j udgeth' to'k, Ahititd, Yet Yeats vs
to be dixeQed to that By bur the % uk or Fiver of Lite;
dtherefore he begins that Chapter with le wotds , Irveto
Pronogatite, duo mad umends ſuat, $c,
| yy, if this DoQr Bos be true, and thar' the p priſeors odds
Science will be p allow the;/Great, Proto {AE it their
þ vm MCs OE Lyin Weng MF" 5. wit ont bf
n his owb he _
tae


rs, and belides the "Miik. i


-


the World , Fhat.+be Sun cannot be giver of Life , if be were ia an
Apbelical place; as in the page'before-quoted. For when he al-
lows. the Afcendant in Cromwelfs Nativity, the. power of Hileg ,
and the. Sn at the ſame time-within 12 degrees of the Cup, and
locally in it , ſeems to me a ſubſtantial piece of Nonſence , quite
contradiory to the. moſt approved-Authors in being, who allow
all of thera, that the Aſcendant- is the ſecond placein' power
- to entertain the Prorogatorz and that the Swn there is alſo certain-
ly Hileg, if the Moon is not above the Earth, So that ſhould I
infiſt on no other reaſon but this, it would be ſufficient to prove
the Figuzc and Time-bf his Nativity faiſes and this becaufe he
. makes that imaginary DireQion of the "Aſcendant to the $;

Mears, the only one to prove the truth of the whole Calculation,
For jf we ſhould allow. ſuch a DireRion in_that Figure, as the
Sun to, the Square. of Marr (which indeed there is none before” he.
ſhould be Ninety*one' years of Age) yet it is wholly miſapplicd,
and a power given to it quite diſtin from the 'Order of Nature,
and the Authority of Authors ; the Aſcendant not having power
* to kill when the Sun is in the Horoſcope, or any other place, giver
"of Life. _ I have been the plainer and fuller in this pojat, becauſe
it is the Principal Foundation:of Nativities , and the only
firſt-to.be- known. in, the Direions. and PrediQions "abbut Li
and Sickneſs, and the ouly thing negleRed and forgotten at this
time among the Profeſſors, both old and young ; they having on-
ly. the Name of it, but nothing of irs Power and Uſes 'but T have
Gokes enough if undex(tood 3, and more'will.be to.no purpoſe if


Bat again : In this Nativity that he hath publiſhed* and afſere-
cd for truth, there is ea rem C4 ape that is, he lets -
the Sun paſs by the Square of Marr, the Square of Satxrn, and bo-
dy of Fepiter, Loxd of the cighth Houſe in the fourth, that fatal
"Place as they call itz and kills him with 'the Afcendant to'ohe

gle Dired&ion only. Now, if we ſhould allow that,the Aﬀeens
datt had power, and-did kill by DireQion to the Square of Mars 3
Why ſhould not the, Sx. to thoſe three fatal DireQtions before-
mentioned,. give the Native the ſatne effe&t of Death long before;

| ny a ny _ I owing wi to hoay contrary, TS
to that ſort:of Aſtxology which is common' among moſt 'o
Profeſſors. but eſpecially uſed, by this our Famous and thoſt Re

nowned Nativity-Makyr z, as may appear by thoſe Joggulics ns
| . Sy AR, eu nee.


ol =


=—_


, ”. a


| Opus Refor mitum. 4}
Learned Treatiſes that he hath befriended the-World with, being
; filled 'with abundance of Errors and Contradictions. But to re-
turn to our Buſine(s again; at the time of this great Hero's death,
belides the Directions mentioned as the true Natural Cauſes
thereof; there were other things worth our conſideration that
did" concur as\Concomitants to. the ſame ; and the firſt was his
Revolution for; that year, and indeed a very-remarkable one it
was, if we conſider it well and fully. - And ſeeing I have menti-
ened omerking of Revolutions, I will alſo ſpeak a word or two
of their uſe and abuſe. The Profeſſors of this Age make a great
- buſtle about the exact time of a Revolution, that is,. to find the
exat_ Minute and Second when the S#n comes to his Radical
Place, for which purpoſe they have invented a great many Foole-
ries, and to little purpoſe; but when this exat and critical Time
is obtained, and a Figure ſet, they gravely tell us of ſtrange and
odigious. Effe&ts that- the Planets have by being in particular /
ſes thereinz that the Horoſcope and Midb even of a Revolutio- '
nal Figure, is of a great ſignification both to the Native*s Life and _
Reputation. Nay, they are now grown fo that perfection in
their Trade of this kind; that they work DireQions in that Fi-
* gure like' as they do- in the Radix; te which purpoſe alfo they
Have made us a meaſure of Time, with other kinds of Tables to
cotnpleat theic Folly, and render their Art ridiculous. When
indeed” the Ancient and more Authentick Authors:have taken no
netice of fuch things as theſe 3- and/Prolomyy himſelf hath not above
four Lines in his four Books that have'mny' relation to the Revo.
lutions in Nativitiesz and therefore how they came by all theſe
whims, it would. be worth while to conhder:, (for we have not
one word about them in Firmiczs, obe of the oldeft Aſtrologers we
have, that came after Prolomey), and.perhaps may find x ſpare ſheet
in my next Treatiſe, to unriddle-the [ | that they have jum-
bled together to cheat themſelves,” and the reſt-of Mankind. For
I do afſure. you, There is nothing in #hzir method of Revolution,
neither can they fetch their Authority further back than Oniganur,
Argol, Scboner , Hiſpalenſir', Junfine , and two or three more. of
"them that have taken it up upon very flender Authofity, and they
q that ſtill follow, do. .every one endeavour to improve the Errors
_ of him that went before... For I will now ſoberly ask one queſti-
on, and thatgis, to-tell me what they have found in the Revoluti-


6nal DireQions, that was __ plainly diſcovered by the Tranfits |
Wo . { Bo Tj in


3» al


in. the Revolution, andithe Returns? If ſo, whatrhould: we:ga
to: maks-dbundance- off Confulion-when it may te:done/with leſs
trouble.2- And to. be-plain-with-you-z The- truth-and myliery of
Revolations doth-xcallyconfilt ivnothing ci butthe Tranſis and
Returns of the Planets to the-Radical Points and:Paxts of the: Na>
tivity, and: to-the-plices- of DireFion, And to. this:end. there-is
no need of abundince of labour to gain the exa& time of the Swne -
returry to his Radical placez if- you miſs ten Minutes of it-in time,
it will be-no great-;matter of Error-in- youy Judgement, if ' you


underſtand your Buſineſs. Andto ſay-the truth, the Radical Fi-- |


ure- may very well ferve for- every Revolution throughout the
Native's whole Life; placing the Planets-in thedegrees of thoſe
Signs that they ſhall be found in at the-time of the Sway retyrn-to
his Radical place;-or near4t. And after this manneriE wilt givo |.
the Figure of this' great Native's final Reyolutionz and it is-as
followeth, | ;


+ Laticud: Planitar;
1: b,\v, 46, No
©... 14 . No
- 11-24 | No
' 40 / $0,

.- $9
33 --No


SG ADAR


© © ©
wo
"eo


" « P 6 0 :
LAS LES w ”
" *
. - £
_
. 0 a
>
* £7 « >
—* . ey * 5 þ
- R
. 4 * A *
# E - b
—
-_” " -1 =
_— wY
FO oor - _
—— — ”


Having confdered- the Dize&ians, 'and. alſo:the- Point; or. Part


I


of the Edliprick the- Mes: wh is givenof lifes, isarvived at in.


this year by divc& DiroQion in-Zodigeoy, and that inabout. 1497
, & S | =Kre


_


Opns : Reformatum. of
grees-of Shgirary, the exa# Square- to her own Radical Place,
and/ at the time-of the Szmr-return; going'to the oppoſite poimt -
of 'that place; and tothe Square of her own place in the Radix;
Sotwrn and Fupirer are both return'd*to their own Radical! Phces';
. mid {6s Mars and the Moon'to the Square of theirs ;' Mercury and
Venus are int Taurns , where; they were in the Radix, and: not far
from theit. own Radical Places. So' that you fre al} the Planets
are returned*to their own- places, except Mrs atid. rhe Mhon, and-
they are in-Square-to them. Now, the ufe I thall' make' of
the: Revolution is' this z The Moor, _Mars ,- and Satmrn, are all of
them - Promittors by direction 3 Maxs-is in Square to Saturn,
_- Lord of the Radical: Horoſcope, who is return'd'to his Radical
Place: and the Moon; tho Hiteg, yet ſhe' is here a-Promittor alſo,
and* iy going to the dire Oppofition-of the place of 'Diretion,,
and'tothe” Square of her own place; and. befides this, Mary is
.Zoing-to-the Mundane Parallel of the Swnz-'And'to fam up all,
we find both the Moon and Mars in violent Conltellations;, the
Moon being with the 4{debaran of the;Nature of Mays 3 -and Murs
is with thoſe Stars in the beginning of Cancer , called Caſtor ev
Polex, of the nature of Saturn. So that we' may from! the Swny
return, and. the then Configarations compared with the DireQi-
ons, conclude, That according * to ſecond Cauſes,” it:could be*no-:
leſs then mortal. When I have done-this,: I always-confider Sc
condary DireQions , and” Progreffions,, and. alfq obftxve"if they
helporthe Work; for if all. concur, we may certainly judge: that
ng but-a' Miracte-can+ fave z' and therefore under” this Revo-
lation, we find that the Aſcendint by Secondary Motion was di-.
re&cd'to the Oppoſition of Jupiter , the Sun.under the' Square of
Satzrn, and had been; fo, about {ix Months, and- the Mon to the
Poſition of Marr, and” that qaſt toucheth about” the: time of his
Sickneſs, all which are ill, and ſhew a bad year. The 'Progreifi-
on began January the 2d , about fix of the' Clock in 'the Morn-
ing, Anno 16c4, and was but an indifferent one. 3 you may if
you pleaſe, call: it bad ;- for the Moon was on the Suns Radical
place, Satwrn and Fupiter on-the place of Direction, in Square._to
the Moon's Radical place, and Mars in Oppoſition to his own place z.
but Yeius is on: the Radical Aſcendant in Conjundion with -the
Sun, and that'is all that may be called good in this Progreihve-
Lunation, But above all, the Ingreſſes and. Traaſits of the Pla-
nets at- the- time "of the beginning of his. Sickneſs , and - oo
© iy ec , eat


_ Judgment, -. *


[1 : _—


—


| \ , Opus Reformatum.:, |
Death , are very remarkable z for about the time. that-he was- _
taken Sick, which was Auguſt the, 26th, there: was a Tranſit


' and Irigreſs of the Sxn.on the Moon's Radical Place, it. Sguare


to the place of DireQon 3 and a little before that., there was a
Conjunttion of the Moon, Mars, and Mercwyy, on, or near the ſame:


'degree', and ſo .contigurated as before.z, and the very day of his


Death, the Moon did Tranſit the Radical Place of Mars's Body,
arid-Saturn's Oppoſition, and alſo in Oppoſition to Saturn that yery
day-of- his Death ; and the Swn-in' an exat Zodiacal Parallcl

to.the Zodiacal Parallel of Marr, and to


with Satzrn, and golng.
his Cenjunttionalfo. Thus I have endeavoured tor ſhew | you


+ how I-underſiand the method and manner of judging Death


by Primary and. Convers Directions , Revolmions , Secondary Dirtfi- +


ons, Progreſſions ,- Tranſits , and Ingreſſes 5 which if rightly under-
ſtood and


Riſed , would give 'the-Students in . this Science
more ſatisfa&tion than all thoſe Whims publiſhed by our Modern _ _
Authors, and- ftollen from them by our Popiſh Oracle.. And I
hope by this: time, L have given: the Profeſſors and Students in


_* this Art full farisfaQion , in proving thaf the Natlyiy which


Gadbnry printed , was: notoriouſly falſe, and- grounded upon
Principles_next to none ; and that the Reaſons and Rules given
to aſſert its Truth; are. no ways becoming a Man of Skill or In-
genuity, eſpecially one that pretends to be the Maſter and Head-


of the, whole Tribe, and endued with the advantage of Twenty


five years Experience, and more 3 when he wrote and publiſhed

Cromwel's Nativity laſt in the year 1685. And {6.1 come. in-the |
t place to give you my General Judgement on the whole* -

Figure after the manner that 'the reſt of our Profeſſion do on


the Twelve Houſes; and.perhaps too, I may follow the ſame Or-
. .- der In my Judgment, but not in their Rules and Principles of


=_”” Reformatum.
4 Judgment on the preceding Nativity, after the mane
ner of - the Twelve Houſes. :


_- E


T H E firſt thing 1 ſhall. conſider, is the length or ſhortneſs of


the Native's Life ; and from the Poſitions in general, what 7;


time may be probably ailigned for-the number of his years ; yet
I know vety. well there .can be no poſitive Judgment given -on
that point , becauſe the number of his years depends on the di-
ſtance between the giver of Life, and the Anarctick point, as to
the certainty of their number ,, and the time of Expiration ; but
yet give 'me leave.to tell you there muſt.be Arguments of a long
Life in the Poſition, or.clſe I ſhall be-very ſparing in his numbes
of years ;; and to be.yet more plain-with you, the Arguments of:
Long, Life: are ſuch good Rays and Poſitions, that roborate and
foxtity the. Giver of Life, 'and this the more when the Hileg is na»
 turally ſtrong, and. well-placed in the Figure. - ' <.


.. And in this Nativity we find the Hileg Angular, in- Trine to the 73, Myon ++
Sun and Merexry, in. Sextile to Jupiter, and alfo in Reception with i: Hileg.


Mercuzy ;, and; beſides theſe, we tind the Sn and in Sextile ,
to.the Aſcendant, and in Sextile to Fupiter likewiſe, and he in his
Exaltation in. Cancey,, and no ill Rays of Satwn and Mars any
ways afflicting either S»n, Moon, or Aſcendant , ſo that we may
rationally conclude.the. Native was deſigned by Nature for a con-
fiderable long Life ;. and not only long, but alſo a healthy one.
I know there. are ſome. according a: uſual Cant , would' tell
you, That the Square of the three Superiors from thoſe Cardinal
Signs ſhould give him | bad Lungs, with pains in-kis Head, the
Pertigo;, Lethargy, &c. imperfcQions in” his Reins, Gravel , Stone,
and abundance more of theſe things, had they ſeen his Nativity
before he had been grown. to yearsof Ripevels, But I dare venture
to ſay, That he had none of theſe, the. Gravel excepted z but they
that would know. more of theſe things, let them read carefully the
17th Chapter. of the. 3d Book of. Ptolomy's Quadripartite, De Le--
ſunibus & marbis' Corporum, © ..


, The Native's Onderſtanding, Judgment, with all” the other Under
Faculties of the Soul, depending on Fas Poſition and Conhgura- 2 anding


tions of Mercwry, as one well ſays,


alttates auime , qae proprie and fudge.
ſruny ment, &ec.


-


” _ ſunt ments, & ratucinationis , ſunmntur in- ſingulis ex Mereurii condi-
tione, Which if true, then-hath our Native a moſt excellent Poi-
tion for intc)keQual. Abilities, for his Mercnry is'as firong as im any

Fo Figure I have ſeens' Fer bcre is Mercary juſt paſt; the ConjunGton of

i - the mn, and in his Oriental Occidemaliy, increating in Light and

| Motion; ip Reception with the: Moon ; but that which is the great-

| . eſt, and{mbvſt to be. obſetved , is, that the Moon beholds him

'” ' , with 4 Trine; and Fapiter with a Sextife.z and what more, Fu-

EF piter alſo beholds him by a Mundane Square, {o that they are-re.

| ally contigarated-,” both in Zodiaco '&- Mundo ; "and beiides we find

him in'a'tixed' Sign, the Houle of Ven, and in a Zodiacal Paral-
1&t with Yeakr;, in Sextile to the Aftendant. | Theſe Poſitions-muli
- *be allowed to give aMl 'the great and exceflent Qualitications that
* . ..'are requilite to make a Counſellor, a States/tman, and a Soldier',
Here is no Rafhnefs, but Reſolution upon deliberate Conlidere-
"tion ; here is no; Timidity , mor yet unftedinefs in Judgment ;
here is nd Dulneſs nor Sctolidity, but a-Natural and Native Sharp-
neſs of-Fandy at alt times, fit cither for Inquiry or Council, In a
word, The Moon in Virgo'in Trine to Mercary in Taurus, ts without
+ foutt the moſt agrecable Pofition to give a good, quick appre-
'hetiive Fancy and Judgment. Mmlrzmn enim ad witime' proprietates
> © Fins conferunt-,_ in quibus Mercurius & Lama verſatitar - multiem &
| feelarum adſpefius ad ſolem & ud Cardines , &. nunera 'cxflfitbet pla-
nete ya Inelinationibus anime. Quadripartite Prolomet,

- Tih. 3. Cap. 1%.. | AY 2 Lib
of ke” 1 frat Faliter his Riches from the /part of Fortune, as the
Richer &c. $eneral Signiticator of Wealth; but yet before 1 begin my Judg-
- © - - - Ment thercod,” give me leave to premiſe a word or two: I woof
not have. you think, becaafe that he arrived to the Government
of a Nation,and-had the uſe and command of the Kingdoms Money
4nd Treaſure, that I call him Rich,for T look on-that tobe-but the
common: Attendant, of his. Honour and Grandeur ,-and not the
*«xcellcuce gf his Fortune to Riches; For a King may have vaſt
- Sums of Money, and yet be-no rich Man . as we have feen in_
K.C, 2. and a King may have far leffer Sums than ever he had,

” and yet be a very 'rith Man,<and' lay by him a great Treafure for

- bis own Uſe and Poſterity, diftin& from the Inrereft-yf the.Na-

-- 3 Yion-and People ; as was R. H, 7. "Therefore 1 Would not -be

; .- =". thought to build his|Honogr open his Riches; whitch is fnfteed nb

 * "2 Tach thing, but that kind of his Wealth was OE ET his
: | . onour


=


_


| © Opus" Reformatnin, -
' Hohour and. Grandeur; ' for the Sword was the Anvil upon which
he-wrotg out his Fortune, his Honour, &c;, And as that always
- bririgs @ certain Charge , ſo it yſually brings a Supply of Fortune

to-detray it. And therefore I ſhall confider his Fortune diſtinctly
and ſeparately, from that which came” by his Honour , and what
it might have been, had he continued in that Station in which
he was Born and Bred. Ad rem vero, the part of Fortune (as I
ſaid before ) is the only Signiticator allowed by Prolomy , for
Riches and-Fortune-in the World; and: that-we find about- 2 de-
grees diſtant from the Culp of the Sixth Houſe in Cancer, in Srx-
tile to Venus , and diſpoſed of by the Moon and Jupiter, all which
are ſtrong and potent,and do certainly promiſe (whoever hath ſuch
a Poſition) Riches and Plenty of the-things of Fortune 3 and this
, by various\ways and means:* And T am of Opinion, that it being

in Cancer, 2 a Sign, hve Sone ads KF to the Advan-

tage. Ptolomy lays, Lib: 4. C facultatibut : Japiter 'per fideli-
pv , Sms tac Cc. * Nhat when, Fogite gives his Atbtance to
the Natives Fortune , he doth it by Places and Offices of Truſt,
. Command and Rule in the Government , &c. ' And tho he:doth

dr ſay it, yet T judge the Moon in Trine to the Sun and Mercury,
_ Sives the ſatne things as relate to-Dominjon y- and therefore from
eſe and fach like things, we may judgeche ſhould grow Rich,


_ and increaſe his Eſtate. ' But ther” we hind: the-pars fe is in
- an exaRt Zodiacal Parallet with Mars,” and#'is alſo going to his
Mundane Paralld; his gives damage and lob tor his Eftate, and


why may not this be the Expence and Waſting! of his Eftite and
Fortune in-Militaty Service at che beginningrof the-Wars; /and)af-


terward too 1 believe? And irideed it is'in Protomy's own words, -


. Mars ex Militia & Gubernatione Exercitauin. And tho l thinkhe did


*


increaſe his Fortune, as lie did advance. in Honour yet I think


ſome men would haye got more, for 1 could never hear that he


left any latge' Sutns at his Death, unleſs. they-were-Debrs. - I do


%
4


therefore conclude , that the Parallels of Mars had their Effects


alſo as well as the other Rays; but bcfides' theſe, we tind Mars -


in the Second ftrong,” and alſo Lord'of the Stcond;; but in Oppoſi-
tion to Saturn, and Square to Fupiter 3 this ſhewed he would gain
much}, and advaiite mightily ,*buc: i6 would! be-by Violence ,
Farce, and with Oppo9ſitivn-tpo.' ; Brit whereever you hnd' Mars

nefas ,


iron ans ana ont! per! fas ant


49


* "quan Goes, |
Tag ef he cares/not which, and ſeldom parts with-it again as Tong
C45. as he-ives,.

Of the Na- — The old way-:4nd caſtor is to. judge theſe things from” the


. 5o-


| dred, 'Bre-. is. to judge of, Brvithiers and, Silters by the Tenth and Eleventh -
wy avs Mo Houfes,- with Year by Day, and the Moon by Night; and this he
| '* doth/ not do. dogmatically. and poſitively without rendring you
a reaſon for it, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. from which Principles and Mcthod
-  Ldohere form and colle& my. Judgment. The Sign Sagitary doth
poſſeſs both the Tenth and Eleventh Houſes, and Jupiter Lord of
it, is in Cancer, a fruitful Sign , and in Sextile to the Sun and
Moon , but in Squaye to Saturn and Mars and both Satzrn and
\. Mars ate in Oppoſition, and xaſting their\Squares'to the Cuſp of
the Eleventh. Hauſe, Theſe Politions ſeem ' plainly to ſhew he
had Brothers; butt not above one Sitter, it any z- but not many,, it

.".. - anyot both Sexes, "ſhould live. to years of Diſcretion and riper Age
ej and. do-think the Sextile of the Sup and. Jwpiter-ſhould give onet e
"* -might live to ſome conſiderable Age. ,-

But the Square of Fwpiter to. Mars and Sateen, and their yams
| , alfo-to. the th Houle, ſhould -alſo-ſhew, that [their
| EM ment wasbaut iridifferent,, and(rhbat.the reſt of his Conſai

BEOS: - tour) hey ns dc tie re for te Sea
NY's traordinary acfs the;one for the.other, neither

| in reality;;tho. in his bal wa


"4
C


(rermaniy, & ex:


”.  rove's Kin- Third Houle: : Bat 2royniytcacheth us another DoQtrine, and that $ I


Opus Reformatum, > _
ſerutari wolet , Datricem ftellam collocet in Horoſcopo, fatto themate, ut
4#n Genefi. Lib: 3, Cap. 57 7 7
The uſual way of judging theſe matters.among the Profeffors of :he Ne
of this Science in genera}-is from the Fourth and Tenth Houſes, re's Fo-
as they do Brothers, Sers,, and 'Relations , from the Third #7 ond
Houſe.” ' But the Great Profomry takes his Judgment from the Swn ICE
and $Satwn for the- Father ,> and-the Moon” and: Verne for the Mo-
ther. And according to their Poſtrtions; Stxength;* Weaknels; and
' Configurations to the other Stars, with'reſpe& to- the Parts of
Heaven , Where | they '#re-all placed 3 ſo herjudgeth of their
— Condition,” Original, Health, Riches, Length or Shortneſs of
Life, -&c, Yet 1 think'ir js not altogether amifs to-take notict
of thoſe Houſes, as welt as the other-Bedies that he mentions;
" and this the rather, becauſe I find he calls the Tenth Houſe, Lo-
*olw Materimns; iti another place, and therefore I ſhall confider them
= , , |


[5


er, p —_
In this Natives Radical Figure, we find both the S*n and
AMbon moſt excellently fortited by the good Beams: of the benefick
Jupiter; and belides, they allo in_Trine'to cach other from Ty-
rw and Virge;" the Mn is the fironger of the two, as being Angu-
lar, increefing in Light, "and in' Parallel as well as Sexrite wich
iter, whois in Cancer, his Exaltation, dire, and increafing
+ Motion: But the Szn is in Taxrws, among violent Stars Ca-
dent, flow in Motion, arid only in" Sexrife to Frpiter in the Zodi
ack, but in Square in Mwndo: | Ard'if we'ndd to thee Signiti-
cators , the Lords'of the Fourth and Terth Houſes," which are
- and Mercxry, we {hall not fiid' anything conſiderable to ,
- alter the ' Judgment from the' former Determination of the Moon,
Venus, and Jupiter, being far ſtronger than the Swn, Mercxry, and.
Satzrn: from whence it is natural fo judge, that the Natives Pa-
rents were-moderately healthy, and WI, and that they
might live till-the' Native was arrived' to # perfet Age, and*to
2 conſiderable number of years; yet Ifhalljudge the Father to be
the more heakhy, but the Mother the more durable and longer
Liver that ſhe-was ſabje&to the Spleen and Y/2porr. becauſe the
Moon is in Parallel with Mats; and Froner tin Square to Szxrn
- and Marg; that ſhe was fabje@& ro-Obfiruttions of her Lamgs. Hy-
pochonders and Stomack,, becauſe of the former Square of $arrn.a'td
Fupiter.- And- tho'T have been ©, fayourable to their 01d Mumpſi-
ms of the Third 'and Ck hee tbcondemuit; yer A
« 2 Tap tay,


=_ " | . 7
%
- Fl , >


22," Opus Reformatum. 9 + --
| lay, That this: Dodtvine of the Treat Prolomy is moſt nel and
-  \ conſentaneous to Naturez and what I cat-experimentally jultify in
-. _; co ſome hundreds of Nativities, ©. 1 1 |

of :be-Ne- - Sceingall. Proplc are ſubject to ſowe Diſtemper of Body.or other, _
rivy's Diſ- it is not-amnils.to ſay ſomething to'this-point alſo... And before I


T2


=


eaſes, A: begin-it 1 will ask /7.1G what: Diſcate or, Diſcales: the Protetior
. | "-_ had that, were: bxed ,. chronic and-durable 5- becauſe. he hath
placed- Satwyy (in-the-Nativicy/he hath. made him) -on the Cuſp of ©

the Seveuch, , alittle towards the Sixth Houle, in Oppaſicion. to
R Mars on the Culprot the 4ſcendant, the only two points in the
| whole Scheme 'to- give broken} Bones, diſlocated ; Joynts; and
Chronick .Diſcaſes; and yet | do pot remember that (it was ever
' ſaid he-was ſubject £0! either of them , | perhaps now and then 6
*  ;Wouud, the honorable; Mark of a Soldier} bat a Brave, Lulty, Jolly |
" Gentleman, .as' I my ſelf can teſtify, having ſeen him. ſome ſcores
of times. ,And to this purpoſe, will give you Prolomy's own
words in the Calc; as you will-ftind it”, Lib. 3. Cap.'17. De Liefi-
onihus & morbys, Corporum. And. he begins with theſe words fol-
lowing, when he-eomes:to inquire into the Hurts and Diſeaſes of
the Body. - Univerſelis vero regwla bee eft., Duv Cortlines Horizontis
Tnfſpiciantur, videlicet is, qui eft m.ortus, & alter qu eft in occaſu. Pre+
cipua- vero confideretur is , qui eft in-occaſts , © Locus Aiitecedens, qui
proiſus non oft Copulatus Aſeendenti. .Et obſerverar quomodo malefici Pler
_ neterea Lacs adjpicinpt,  Si,entm gradibus qui Aſcendunt in dattis Lociy,
 Inlis, ſrane, Gorpere 5, ant adſpienant cor." quadrato adſpetn ,, vel. ex oppw-
ſito x. ſen, alter;\plamta' maleficus., ſen. merque :; Lefiones, & morbinatis
accident, Thus. yotſee; in the} Nativity that F.G. made. for..the
SOIT Protector ,.. this very Rule; of Proloruy takes place politively ;, for -


s there ,we. find Satzrn-upon.the Culp of the Seventh, in'dire&t Op-

[# ph i Marr, on the-Cuſp of the Aſcendant. . And, you (ce; alfo
») - xth the Angles of the Horizon in that Figure are afflicted, which
————- 'by | Prolomy's. Rule { which: I. ſuppoſe they do. not ;dare deny ]
Ri ' ought to. give Hurts and Diſcaſcs to his Body: Bur on the-contea-


." Ty, he was aBraye, Bold, Healthy, Fortunate Man, 'and none more
ie rom Wong in :Hurcs, .or Diſcaſcs of /Body they pany ow
that-this is another ſtrong: Argument to prove that Figure falſe,
EIA vg 5 WH know any thing of the rhatter .
he pretended to give the: World an accout of. "And yet to add

| more, neither F. G. nor.any Man elſe can ſhew mea;truc Nativi-* |
- _ — ty where the two Infortuncs were in-Oppolition/ from the bank


/


- "might give him ſome


n «
>, a. >


Opus: Reformation.
and Fourth, or Firſt and Seventh; and that Native prove a Fortu-
nate, Man os Woman throughout their whole Life, as did this Gen»
tleman. And-fo I came to conſider the Figure of tris Nativity,
[which 1 call the'trie aneÞ and- to ſee what Diſcals gr Injuries to
his Body are predictable,” according to the Dofrine.and Principles
of the forementioned Author. Rage gt gs: k,
.- Both the Angles of the Eft and Feſt, are free from the Malefick
Beams of Satxry and Mars,& cand the Sixth Houle, which is his Locxr
 Hnticedens is poſſet by the benign Planet Fapiter, and there is no ill
Ray caſt to the Cuſp of the Firft and Seventh Houſes, bug the Square


of Venus from the Cuſp ob the” Fourth; and beſides, the Moon who -


is Lady of the Seventh , -is in Sexzle to Japizer in' the Sixth Houſe,
and the Szn in Sextile to him alſo. Which Poktions are-no ways
likcly to give- any Chronick Diſcaſc-or Hurts, -and Accidents of
detriment to his Body; neicher- indeed. had he any that was re-
matrkable and viſible; and for thoſe that are not fo, L think they
are inconſiderable, eſpecially, if we conlider that-all-Men are ſub»
4 __— ſome little defe&s in Nature; which may be Impediments,
t not Diſeaſes in Ptolowry's ſence and meanings for .in the Chap-
ter beforementioned , he doth thus diſtinguiſh between Hurts and
Diſcaſes, Differnnt enim bec interſe... Leſio ſemel corrumpit membrum
aliquod, nec adfert pojtea Cruciatus Intenſionem : morbus vero, aut aſfidue,
aut "- Intervalla correptos excruciat. OS
»; But-to conſider what he might be ſubject to,-let us confider
Mars and Satwrn in Oppeſition and bath in Squareto Jupiter; theſc
thing of the Grevel- in the Kidmes , with. a.
heat in, or about rhoſe partsz he might alſo be ſubjx& tothe
H-ad-ach, or ſome little diſorder there, coming from the Stomack
\ and Spleen 3 for we find both: the Malcticks in Square to Jupiter in
Cancer; and betides this, he might alſo be liable. to ſome Obliru- -
Rions of his Langy , "tithes by Colds, &c. but none of theſe-conti-
naal, . bur accidental, and only happening upon bad DireQions, --
Tranfits, Returns, &e. = r
- The Sn and Moon- both in Sextile to Fupiter , and in' Trine to


ing to @ Mdndane.
and Venus in Square to it, and Saturn no ways atflicting the Signi-
ficator of -Mariiage, are indubitable Signs thai the Native ſhould
Marsy.- The Mon in Virgo, & barren Sign. and a.Sign-of one
- ſhape, and in Aﬀpet to no. Oriental Plauet,. and but to pot Ooh
.. , þ . | ent .


-


each other from Taurus and Virgo, and the Mon and Fupiter apply- ad hs
Parallel z the Sma is in Sextile-co the Alcendant, rage, &c,


33


94 Opus Reformitum,” p


ſhould allow him-bat one Wite, 'not is there-any Rule hcre that
allows two; the.time of his Marriage ſhoald neither be carly. nor
late, but between bothz and therefore, 4 judge, h2 might Mar-


[2:6 - tm Mens Marriages, I cſteem. Eighteen years of Age carly, and

In Thirty-years of Apd late'z but in Women, I count'Fiſceen carly,
and Twenty hve late. And as to the Deſcription,of his Wife, 1.
ſhall take a method quite oppoſite. and contrary 'to the common

; way in PraQticez and therefore I do-fay poſitively, That the Sw

- and Jupiter arc Significators of this Gentleman's Wife, with a lit-
tle mixture-of Mereary, but that concerns her Intelle& more than.
her Body. Theſe Poſitions deſcribes her to be a Woman well de-
ſcenided; of a middle Stature, fleſhy Body'd, -and when in years
Fat, -her Hair brown, or rather- brtghtiſh, = Woman of a-high
Spitit,a generous Femper,a healthy Conſtitution, Ambitious, Lang- -
liv'd, and one of much Ingenuity and Sence. . |


+ *  theydeſcribe the Wife always by the Seventh Houſe,” and the Pla-

- nets therein placed, and there we ſhall find Sarxyn in Oppoſition t6

| Mos, ard Square to Jupiters and beſides, according to their own
Rules, Satzyn on her Alc.ndant in Oppoſition to Mary, ſhould give

the Native & Wife, but-[h6tt-liv'd; tho 1- confeſs, 1 know no

reaſon why thoſe. two' Stars {o placed -and configurated , ſhould

* give the 'Womatr a (ſhorter Lift than the Man. But I conteſs

ey are not to be asked Reaſons, for if any one doth give

. - them ” of reopble it will be without ſatisfaction bo him for kis

ins, for « Notions ate Apodidtical, and their Rules without

£ ba ( g Rag - we '3 | A > | "bf ; \
IF of the Ng. In conidering'the Native's Children , and their Qualitication,
.; 4ive's Chil WE maſt have recourſe to the Tenth-and Eleventh Houfes, and the
dren, &c. Planets placed therein, or in the Houſes oppohte to thents but in


| coniider het with the Lord of the Tenth and Eleventh ,. ind the
— bk - + +, © © Moon, and we find Fapiter Lord of thoſe Houſes in Cancer, a Pro-
2 5 Hifick Sizn; and his own Dignitics, in Sextile to_the Sun Mm the
_ Honſe of Venns, 4nd in; Sextile 0 the Moon in the Seventh, ard alſo

i Parallel! with tier applying.” . Theſe Pofitions Thew , that "the


, Cuſp


z


A £ ot. dental, befides the Strand Mercxry, which in this caſe are all one,


ry about the Twenty fifth or Twenty fixth year of his Age; for


Reta - But if honeſt 7. G's Figure were true, ſhe hould be one of the ©
FA worſt humoured Women in the World for Paſhon-and Pride ;- for- -


., this Figure we find none in cither but Yenus and therefore let us ©


Native ſhould have many Children ; and: as Venus was 08. the _,


py


=


Rl


\


- . fred from all manner of AMidction , and Jupiter Cadent in the


Children, and fo gives an Ulluſtrious Tue ; as well as an honour-
' Mars and Satwn, as well as in Sextile to the: Sun and Avon, which


-, out any Injury-to true Diviniry;' os. the Great Being, But to con+


Trade Akrologers judge fromthe Ninth Houſe;' and his Lord; Jearng: ,.


-


%
-


 belides ,* that they would: forbear Quarreling with me ,/ and


San, in Trike t© Merevry, act Diſpoutor, and/in Sextite to Fwpiter 3.
. ; of : : (o-


-_


Opus Reformatum. |
Cuſp of the Fourth, and the Avon allo Angular, I ſhould conclude,
that the- major. part of them were Females,: and becaule Venus is


]


FF I


Sixth, in Square'both to Satzyn and Mars, fo Lyudge there were

ſome of the Males died before they-came to Ripenels of years, or

Maturity, - That his .Children ſhould- advance to a* conhiderable .
Quality or Station, is vilible, becauſe Jupiter, 'who is their Sig-

niticdtor, is in Cancer his Exaltation, in Sexzile tothe Sun and Moon,

the Fountains of Promotion and Honour z but perhaps ſome may

obje&t and ſay, You might have ſpared your labour in that point, Objedt.

and not pretended to give-2 reaſon for it by the Stars, ſecing their

Father was advanced to a degree to make>his Children as Great

as himſelf, and leave them in Poſſcfſion of ſuch a Power, as to

be able to defend themſelves when he was gone. To this I an- uſp.

{wer, That there is no Man ri{cth to' any great and remarkable /\
Poſt or Station , but he mult have great and illuſtrious Poſitions *

for ſo doing and aQing z and itis very probable, that ſome'ot thoſe

Stars that give him his Honour, - may be alfo Signiticators of his


able: Parent. Burt befides, we find: Fupiter in Sy_ both to.
a


did alſo thew Rubs. and Misfortunes in their Lives, which 1 thall R
leave <o-the Reader to' judge, whether it was verified or not. |

And obſerve; that a poor Man as well as a rich Man, may have

famous and” eminent Children; and a rich Man as welt as a

poor Man, may have poor, dejeagd; and infamons Children, © -

and this from Principles in Nature, and Rules in Aitrology, with- |


clude this Paragraph, I defire all. thoſe who are Angry with my
Method in judging on this Subjedt, *as welt as-the whole Figure Fu


— Prolomy; . but tixft let -me: adviſe them» to- underiitand -

By long Journies, we commonly underſtand thoſe of the Sea, of +he Nu
in going into other Kingdoms or Nations , which our common tive'? Long.
but I paſs by that, and ſay, that the Signiticatox of long Jburneys Tres


in this Figure, is the Moon, | as he''that. peaſeth/ may read more at
large, Lib.' 4..Capi 95 par. F and as the is in” Trine to the


=


Be 5 22 15H Sis Gon:

fo bis Journeys : ſhould be' about- great and eminert AQions-and:

: © - Buſine(s; and the Iae of there ſhould be Great, Famous, and .
' Fortunate 3./ for you ſee the Moon is no ways afflicted , neither -
were his Undertakings beyond- Sea in his own Perſon without

Succeſs and Glory, he always coming home. Victor and Conque-

ror. But if we+ſhould accept and judge by F. G's Figure, and

take either Jupiter or Soars, they having both of them Dominion

in the Ninth Houſe, but Fapiter the moit Power, his long Jour- *

Ix -neys would have Sy [ by that Pofition ] tull of Labour , "Toil ;

= n Trouble, and-generally« ithout-Succeſs z but if-thac. ſhould have

| * given ſucceſs, it would have been attended with much difeiculcy and
Soubtfulneſs

Of the N= How and to what degree of Greatneſs 'this Gentleman did

- tive's He- arrive; is known'to the-whole World, and therefore I ſhall di-

Sr Cranks, reAly exainine-the Cauſcs of it beep .vowt -without any fur-

. ther inquiry into the Modus Aequirends, ſeeing he was really poſleſt

| - _- greateſt Power that. the Doc Dominion of England was able to

A ve him. ._-

/ 6 In his Radical Fi ure we find: Six of the Seven Planets efſenti-
ally fortified ;- according to the Dignities allowed them -by Ptolo- -
my , Lib.t. be Sotera-and Jupiter axe in their-Exaltations; Mars

"EE od in his own Houſe, Venus in her own Houſe 3 Mercury in Tawws in

”% $77: uk Reception 1 with the Mon. in” Virgo z- and what is yet maze, the

©: Han Moon, who is the Liemen Conditionarixm, is Oriental from the Sun, *

Bs. x7, BA r in Sextile. ©O Jupiter, and-in Trine to the Swi and Mer-

I FOE ©, po er Difpoſitors and what is yet more, the Poſjtion-of -Sa-

IF , and. Mars, are perhaps the moſt conſiderable of all,

2, th oy caſting their Benetick Beams to the Tenth Houſe, the An-

> -.,-_ __ _ _» gle of Honour and: Preferment, ar ' they:/alfo in thoſe Signs

©. , " Which we call Cardinal, and arc-in the Zodiack , <qual to thoſe

8 - polits chat we call Angles:in che Figute, 'And theſe are the xex-

Rt: "ſons that.1 giye for this.Native's Riting and Adyancement.z; and
| ' as the Three Superiors arc-in. the Cardinal Signs,” in Square and
—_.__ -.. Oppoſition, one to. another, ſo you ſee he attained[his Grandeur

. © » -***,-> __ by a-kind of. Violence;-Force, andLabour,-joyncd and: affifted

Wer Oren 5 avi .. with Power: and by that means/and-method e maintained it all


| ; ab =
32D Was” ke Bll Noel, and, the Moon & Light of the Time in
WEArS: "an. Angle , Myra Satellites. or Stipatores ,' according to Prolomy , -
OO RC _nethe fovs Money Mercury, PO Venwsbe ng
ell | extile


-


%


_JFortunes.


Th — Opus ' Reformata, ne OT


Sextileto.themall z nay, and we: may reckon Satzrn, and Mars too,


for ſhe is 'in a Zodiacal Parallel with them alſo applying z and
the Three Superiors; according to his Rule, are, two. of them in
Trine, and one in Sextile'to the Mid-heaven,. and all of chem ap-
lying likewiſe, and Japiter Lord -of-the Tench , che Angle of
'Honour.. To which I wilk add this Obſervation, That neither
Sxn nor Moon is in any-il} Aſpect with any-of the Planets, nor any
of the Planets placed to his difadyantage in the Figure. The
Sun who is always the.Significator of Honour, Glory, and Re-
putation, is likewiſe free from all ill Circumſtances, and in Trine
to the Mon, Sextile of Frpiter,- and Conjunflion with Mercury, and
Mars juſt rifing before him. Which if compared and confider-
ed with the following Chapter of Ptolomy , ſhews, That Arms
and Armies-would 'be: the Practice of his Life, - the. Delight
of his Soul, and by theſe things he would zaiſe.his Honour a
The great Conjundion of Saturn: and Fupiter, in the Year 1623.
in the Fob degren of Leo, ricar the dt his Seventh Houſe, =
Trize to Mars in his Second, and in Sextile to Satzrn in his Eighth,
was- none of the ſmalleſt Cauſes of his Greatneſs and Promotion
neither was that Conjundion in the Year 1543. which was on the
Cuſp of his Scgond, in exaQ- Trine-to his Tenth Houſe, and in


Sextile to Ven. |
, But'perhaps it may ſcem ſtrange to ſome ,. why he was ſo Old hy ſo log
before he began to appear upon; the Stage of Mundane Afﬀairs  *
which" thing: is not indeed very ſtrange , becauſe all the Planets ſages to
are in Occidental parts of Heaven, Jupiter and Venus excepted; and ,,,. ., .;,
none Angular but Yu and the Moon, all the reſt being either in Ca- mwer's.


dent: or Succedent Houſes, which always give what they promiſe
in the latter part of the Life z/ and this is; the more confirmed too,
if we obſerve, that all but the Moon: and. Satzrn ate under the


_ Earth. -'So thatif- the Pofitions are but really perpended, it will


ſcem no ſtrange thing that this Native did not Advance and Riſe


, ſooner, Bart if. F, G's Figure ſhould be: allowed, all the. Planets


{te Angular but the Moon 3. which muſt without doubt give the
Native his Honour and Prefexment-carly;-even. in his younger


Years, which *tis plain: he-had not. I'confeſs, 1 have no Autho-


rity from Prolomy for this Judgment of the Time and Age, when
the Native [hall receive thoſe things of Honour promiſed him in
his Radix he-only ſpeakipg to the thing in general, Si digntatem,vel-
5 | l oe OR non


% -


1


—


hy.


"Cc wy Or dt ANGST” CS” £5 4 HE i
” -


4 O50 % RE eond. Eee ed 4 LCs. 2a TOA


_of the Ordinary


3 © Opie efonaen.— -
gon:habear. Beit my Experience in many Nativities, and the method
| hich Pep cwtly and late Marriages, which is much after
the fatne miner ; with ſome other things that. I have formerly
fetnarked in the fatne Cafe, is ſufficient for me to believe that this
method is not r to be followed and practiced in judging:
this, \«nd things of this Nature. oo

of the n#- _ Prolomy makes a diſtinAion between Friends and Friends, and

rrve's Enemics and Enervics z for he calls nothing Friendſhip, but what

Friend: , is durable and intirely rea! ;-and-all the reſt of it he calls Familia-

and ok rity , and the effe@' of Converſation and Society. By Enemies

mies, Cc.


Enrmity;he- underſtands a perfc&t Radical and perpetual Hatc.
Al the other things of Difference, Debate, and Controverſy, he
looks upon it to be nothirig more than little Accidents or Caſual-
ties itt Converſation. And to-confider and judge of chefe,] he
doth not "make uſe of the Eleventh Houle as 'the manner'is but
conſiders the Sun, Moon, Part of Fortune, and Horoſcope z and: his


-Teaſon is, becauſe he judgeth Friendſhip and' Amity among Men ,
to be either for Comncil,: Pleaſure, or Profitz and indecd upon fome


or all of theſe Principles, Men do generally-love and ſupport,
ot differ and deftroy one another, and therefore bix Fudgment'is
founded reaſon. ta | | |
In the Radical Figure we find the Sun, Moon, ard Aſcendant,
well befriended by the Rays of the other Stars, but the Part of
Fortune is in Paraſlel both to Satwrn and Mars, both in Zodiaco, -
and Mundo, and May, who comes very near Protemy's Rule, who
- wo Nw Hoſe, and _ _ _ 77 degrecs diftant from
rhe Sov y the Oblique Afcention, is in Square to
piter, ond firion with Satern; the Mpon is in Reception Log
Narces, all the reft of 'the Planers in their own Dignities, cx-
cept the Sunn. Hetice it is reaſonable to jadge, Thatthis Native |
thoutd have both many Friends, and tmany Enemies: and as the
part of Fortute is aMidted moſt of the four,” fo | judge the hatred
of his Enemies was real, and -the cauſe of it was, -becaufe of his
Profit and Advantage he received with: his Power and Honour.
Beſides, Venzs is in Square to-the Aſcendant , which might raiſe
him ſotne that did envy him for the Pleaſure and Eaſe
of his Life, and other things that were the advantagious Cir-
cutrſtances of his Station he was in, at the latter end o his days.
White he was in the Army he had many Enemies, and they none
Peopte'3* but the Parliament was his Friend at all |
: ; times,


% %


times. ' When bt carne to be Proteor; he had Eneinies always
plordog agtinſt him; but at the farne time all Nations were
'his Friends, cither for Love os Fear 3 and what is more, it was
his own Prudence, Conrage; Council, and Condwd, that carrigd him
theough and above all theſe thingss and this is aptly ſignified
by Prolamy's Own Rylc and Words, which gre-theſe, Comm Loenins
congraunt , erit emicitis adjunia” conſilio optims & nutiſſins. Which
ia this Figure and Nativity takes place, for the Lights are in
" Trone £0 each other z the one in Conjunflign, and the other in Trine
and> Reception with Merry , and all theſe aflifted by the Beams
of Jupiter , who is in Cancer, andin Trine © the Mid-heaven; by
which means he is doubly concern'd in giving and ſupporting his
Honour,and Frieodſhip, which werceindeed really inſeparablc. In a
ward therefore , this Valiant and Fortunate Native had many
Encmies, and thoſe great and conliderable in their Quality, and
this judgeable by this Pofition z but he had more Friends, and
thaſe more powerful: co ſupport” his Intexeſt - which is che uſual
and natusal of {fo and fortunate a Polition, as he was
bleft with. Thus you ſee the beft and maſt Ancient Aſtralogers,
had other ways tojudge of Friends and Friendſhip, Enemies and
Injuries by chem, withoat making uſe of the-$Sevench Houle, the


Eleventh,and Twelfth, with their s and Governor Pla»


| nets placed therein, which method is indeed abfurd and vidifulous,
if compared with Prolomy's, which is founded on better Principles
of Philoſophy and. . But moxe of thoſe Fookeries you (hall
havye.in my Defediio Genitwarem, how ready for the Pros. |


E 5s-not very material to our work in hand to take notice of of che Me. 4


=


59


wy of ment ia this Nativity, becauſe he was not liable uw; 5or
to Fate Acdidents of private Men; for Princes ſeldom wars.


know their Servants, { ſome few excepted 7, and by that means
are not liable to any Differences and Diſcord with them; nor are
thets $exvants admitted to auy intimate Familiarity with their Ma-
Gters; for whep they avc put into.an Employment, the Service ex»
pected from them in that. Imploy, is Diligence and Faichfulneſs
 Ingheir Guty co their Matter. Byt we may certainly condude, That

all Princes have Servams of both (ort-,good and bad; for according
as thoſc Miniſicrs of State are affected, that pautiin, and imploy the
Ioferior Servants , fo mufi- that Prince expett 40 be ferred or be
betrayed ; and 1 gould with-ve had no Examples of. this Kind in


I 2 ' But


v


2


_


Opus 'Reformatum.
Butfor the Readers fatisfaRion, 1 will alſo give the Judgment
of this matter with the reſt. Prolomy doth allow the Twelfth Houſe,
and Planets placed therein,- to ſignify the Native's Servants ; 'but
if there are none in that Houſe, to take thoſe placed-in the Sixth ;
but moſtchicfly to obſerve how.the Lord of the Twelfth Houſe doth
agree, or —_ with the chief and moſt principal parts of the
Figure ; and thence make your Judgment of the matter in
hand. In the Nativity now under conlideration', we hnd Saturn
| Lord of the Twelfth: Houſe in Libra, his 'Exaltation, but in-no
AipeR, either good or bad, to the Mid-heaven, Aſcendant, Sw, -'| -
Mon, or part of. Fortune, only in Parallel with the laſt of them,
which ſhould indeed ſhew the Native*s Servants. to be none of the
-beſt 3 but if we conſider that Jwpiter 1s in the Sixth Houſe, and

- there-in,a Zodiacal Square , but a Mundane Sexiz/e to Sarun, |
ſbould judge that' his Servants were Moderate, Trufty and Juſt;
and this the rather,beciuſe Veaws' beholds the Culp of the Twelfth,

with an exa& Trinez but this laſt'I ſpeak-of my ſelf, there being

. —- - nothingof that in. the Rule. Upon the whole matter, I do judge,.

had this Native beep of the Common Quality, and-liable to thoſe
Accidents that Subjects muſt meet with in ſuch Aﬀairs, that-his
Servants would have been juſt in-their Duty, but ſtubborn and
> head-firong, and that the Native and they would. have agreed mo-
" derately well; ſome littledifferences thexe would have happened,


- _ but yet rrue and truſty inthe main. - _..
of the Na» + am now come to the lait part of Judgment,that isto be given-
_ ng 0m the Nativity of any. Perſon, "Nam wltra''mortem nibil ; but the
kirchogs moſt confuſed part of the whole Art, as it is now underſtood and
\ "ther depend PraRtiſed by all thoſe that pretend to underſtand the Language of
thereon-as; the Stars, and have juſt skill enough in hard Words, to- make the
ro its Cauſe xeft_of | Mankind: believe that they - are really what they conhi-
and Qual Jently caltthemfclves.;- that is, 4ſtrologe?r. And«therefore I ſhall
" 7” bes litdle the larger on this Paragraph. - Firſt, To ſhew the World
their Miſtakes; And Secondly, To give a few DizeQtions in ordes
: to ſet themi.right;/ but in this I ſhall be.very ſhort-and conciſe, and
_ -.. - that for feveral Reaſons, which perhaps you-may find elſewhere
mentioned-in this Freatiſe., For 1 am now handling a- Nativity,
not giving General Rules'ſo to'doz which perhaps 1 may perform
at 4 more convenient-time z- for E really believe I- have taken-as X
much pains ip that /part'of Aſtrology. that concerns Sickneſs. and ©
s Death, as any Man z, and for that reaſon, L think I ought to _—_ Þ
by, nd:


_


« Opus" Reformatum..- 5-0
fland it 25 well, However ' when tire ſhall-ferve;, I-will give
"the World what I have prepared and intended, and let them
that are more $kilful and knowing Corned it, for which I will -
give them thanks, if 1 atri convinced that they have done it. But
I-thall divide my Diſcourſe on this matter into Three Parts, and /
bring all ander three diftii& Heads. Wee = IT. -


Firſt, The Cauſe of Death. - "

Secondly, The Quality of Death. I mean of a natural Death,
I not intending here to run into x Dikcourſe-of Violent ones, "i
becauſe itwould' be too long, and alfo not faitable'to my pre- '
ſent purpoſe; th

Thirdly, To compare the Cauſe with the Quality, And, & contra;


from whence will ariſe ſore Queries, * - | "-


The Cauſe of Death"is variouſly afferted + ſome-laying the 7h cauſe
Eauſc of it on a bad' Revolution. . So one ſerved my Friend Mr. of Deach.
R. B. whom they faid lay under a bad: Revolution four years ſuc-
ceflive, and killd him 'at aft, for which they could never give
any other reaſon 5 and. yet had” his Nativity to conhkder in the
thing.” Some lay the fireſs- on Eclipfes of the Luminaries, and ©
theſe they tell you 'do'mighty things,' eſpecially in Death, Nay ,
many of theny to my knowledg have no other Cauſe .to alledg
for the late'Abdication, but a poor ſmall Eclipſe of the Sxr, on
the S's Radical Place,” and day of his Birth , Offober 14. 1688,
Mzme- Whitch if they pleaſe to -iconfider; *there was 'an Eclipſe of
the Moon, b- fo 15. 11660. near that place,-and that 'a' very great
Eclipſe, and yet did him no'harm. Alſo'in 1669. Ofober 14. at
which time the Sa on His Radical Place was Eclipſed in 2-de-
grees of Scorpio', the very place of the Dragons Tail;- and yet I do
not remember that- ic did him any harm, nor- yet kill'd him 4 -
but any thing ſerves when better Reaſons are not in their Power;
Sometimes they tell-us, that great Conjundions kill, and yet that
(hall not .happen' in divers Years after the Conenttion is over and
paſt. And this I have often heard altedged as the Cauſe of Death,
when ſuch a Conjunion hath happened' on the Mid-heaven, A&
cendant, Swn; or- Mon, '&c. of a Nativity; 'in which they could
find out- no other reaſon more. ſubſtantial.. They likewiſe fay,

' That Comets. oftentimes kill when they begin,- or expire' on the
chicf Poiuts and. Parts of the Nativity. Bur this as well + ll the
| . nS


CC __C@Þ—_cmrc,yfncncncncacc cn ge SV _ 5 ow
z -


-— _ 4 wv” Oo RY EIFIIErTSY co monoeR#Sy - RA Op. oo
= ”
- - =
” »
, 7


- 623


wy " | | / :
| Opus, Refarmatum.. ;
(> #  </


-


lo.to Baile and Banter a more (crious Wau iry after Txuth, which.
| - they pretend is their Standard, 1 ſay, theſe


who is Gjver of Life. - And; that che Comet,of 1553..hgd


uaze. to..the Man, in the Radix,
| its þc-
ginning/in or about the xoth of Gan, jo.Syuare to the
Moon's Radical Place, and the Meox nr his-lad Revolution on that
. wery place in'Gemini, or near it 3 with fame other fIngs, which

1:do.no ways jallow. tobe the caule of this. Death, but thaſe Dire-


Seven in wanker,
fey th - This


-


ll 3nd groundleh, and 1 do'po-.


reftions only inthe preceding Table, aud they are, as 1 remember,


S__


j


£ +. FRS"s


\ This being granted , That DireQions are. che Afrologica!
Canſes of Death z the next thing'is to inquire into the Quality
of it, ard how to jidge this according to the Method and Dire-
Qions of our Authors ; would 'purzle a far fironger Brain than 1
have to imploy in it ; as I believe you will conchude, | and readi> |
ly judge; when you have heard the Caule opened, and che Mat-
ter | ted, according to the ufaz! Method and Praftice now
in we among thoſe Men called Aftrologers,, or' fach as pretend
ro it. | ( "
' In ary Nativity, when” they come to confider Death ,' they tell
us, That'the Native's Death will'be by ſuch Means, Ways, or Dif-
cafe, as is agreeable to the Lord of: the Eighth Houſe, his/Nature,
Pofition, zod Configuration. And to totoar'the Foolery of this
Delation; they ref us, That che Lord of the Eighth Houſe" is
the Anara,, or killing Planet, when there is not one in Fwenty.
or Thirty that dye by the Dirc&ion of the Giver of Life, to the
Lord of che Eighth Houſe.” If (©, then there is nothing more
plain than che Contradi&ions'm their very Rules, hid: down to -
inftru& thofe rhat ate more Ignorant than-themfetves, if anyfuch
are to be foand; * For'is ir not « plain-ptece' of Nonſence to ſay,
That this or that Dire&ion:is the cafe of Dezth; and at the
ſame time teſt us [ikewiſe, that the Difezfe by which he muſt ex-
pire, will be'of the-Nature of the Lord 'of the Eighth Houſe, e&c..
when perhaps Vemw may'be Lady of the Eighth, in"Trine to the.
"Moon, ot Sextile t& Fupiter, but perhaps the Diredtion may be the -
$## or Mv2n, Giyes ot Life, to the Sqzares or Oppoſitions of Satwrn -
and "Marr, and one of thern-Lord of the Horoſcope. And it is im- +
 polfible eoreconcite theſe two Rules together, to make them <ither -
agree, or ſerye for a Cloak to hide their Errors, for there cannot -
be two Cauſes to fpecificate one. and the fame Diſcafe, and rhofe
Cauſes ſo Antithetically oppoſite, and yet the Difcaſe ſhall partake
but of one of them when all is done, and that-is the Direction -
or DireQions, that: the Giver of Life” is then directed to; and -
according to the Nature of that Star or Stars, ſo ſhall the Diftern-
per or Diſcaſe be. And indecd;this is the only rational-method;and -
the other altogether improbable for it is the occafion of the Di-
reQions touching at"that time, that givesthe Sickneſs, which if
fo, it is reaſonable to think that ſhould give. the Quality of the -
Diſeaſe alſo, and not the. Lord of the Eighth. Bac 1 will end
all ina word or two about this matter,” and: #.I can”, put it _


-


- —_©
\ \ o
=


- of doubts, ne. be Lord of 4 ra in je, /in Piſce,

_ © or. where. you xtae to the Sun.or Moon, and

 HeGinreh es the Bodies Bodies of a ef and .
, or. 5 y near

, ung Hey Ne ON to the Body. Jo or Mars, and”

the Squares, of the other. two -apd that Native ſhall either be


£0 IP popes (> cy poyſonogs PhyGck, and. this -in
TRE Eighth, ;:whol am .fare.. gives no


. fuch 1 +1 come to the third thing , and that is-to.
- © , compare ;; Cauſe with the Quality or Effet , which'is the Dif- *


ba oat
retheſe things,cis $0-8 amine ſach Nativities
pe] BD chick ELD have publiſhed/to ! orld,, and
bach with © AT their Rules, and the | Dat of the Patient
be. from the San or Mart, it is a Fever, a.
Cold Diſtemper,
DE
tes, dil-
rr of Repleti- ©
a ; s, "and
£54 all ol mehr coy riſe from” an
fromthe Moon, Diarrbes;- and other Fluxes
bitradions in yourg Wothen, dilcaſes of |
the; Then again, they give variety of. Dif-
y Las ke ing. to the Mjxtuze and tion of their Rays,
— Which is-no,very. rae; to-examine,, if you are but willing
to_take a lictle pairfs. the reaſon why 1 adyiſe you to com-
; of the. Pine Pagray its [2 meh , with that which you call. the


. dd =


1 IS «+


the Rules laid ; viz by that Dodr. of Nativ, page 142.
ſet. 1. page 261. ſea. 8 at ppl conſider mp By any .Native or
- Patient is dead;; whoſe Nativity i is. known td bertzue and. certain 3
Fay very you. been to have-given. your ;Jad t thereon be-
Se Dees you would have. that of 'which he

- died,: or ſome one very like it-in Nature and Quality, [for I know
-there-axe none can be abſolutely parcicular} by the Polition of the

| - - Lord of the Eighth Houſe Cos reſpe&t to that Angle it (elf,
GS nt” the Planers init, and thoſe with which the Lord -
CE Eh TY,» REI; dow, ori Nature;. in alittle time


'will


2 * Opus Reformatmin. '65
will ſoon ſhew you, to which fide Truth <afteth a favourable A- wo
ſpe& z- whether ts the Power of thoſe DireQions at Death, or to — |
the” Power and Poſition of the-Lord of the Eighth at Birth. To

which purpoſe Jet us make a ſearch and inquiry into ſome Nativi-

tics that are known aiid allowed, © + »


1. Who would: have judged by the Poſition: of the Lord
of the'Eighth, that-King James I. ſhould have bees poyſoncd ; for
Fupiter Lord of it, 'was in Sextile to the Moon, and in Square to the
Sun and Merczry, which ſhould rather have given a Cough, diftem-
per of the Lange, and a Heflick Fever , than an z{gu2 and Poyſon.
But the DireQions that kill'd him do paturally give Poyſon, Fd it
was the Smny Hileg, tothe Body of Mars, Square of Venxs, and Bo-
uy of Saturn. _ WP 22 OTST LT.
' Duery 2. What Artiſt skild inthat Learned Dodtrine of the Lord
of the Eighth, would have judged Charter H: flivuld have died by 7
. Violence, when Mars Lord of the Eighth was in Sextile tothe Smn,
and Lord of the Aſendant, and in no ill Ray with any, but the
uare of the Mvon7 And yet the DireQtions that kilPd him were
Violent, 'and tmight give Death by a ſort-of Violence, among
which, that he died by was one kind. ©. PPS NIE |
- " Bnery 3. Who would have judged that the Eazl of Eſſex ſhould + =
\ have been Beheaded, when Jupiter Lord of the Eighth was in Libra,
and free from all Malefick Rays ?  Collec. Genie p. 45-- OY
. Sxery 4- The Caſe of Duke Hamilton, why he ſhould dye ir that
\ fnanner,when Fapiter and Mars were no ways afflicted, the.former
being in Sextile to Saturn, and in Trine to the Swn ; and the latterin
no Aſpet with any,but pena to Venus #- Collec. Genit. p. 67. ©
"Ouery 5. Why George Duke of Albemarle ſhould dye of a Dropyy,
when Mere, Lord of the Eighth,” was .in Square to the Swn, -and in
Sextile to- Venus 5 which cannot berallowed to give a Dropſy in may |
Opinion, - Colke. 'Genit.' p. 70. <_ 6. ; .
© -» Deery6, Why Sir Robers Hlbarn did not dye a violent Death, | |
ſceing Mars and the Sun is in Conjuntlion in the Eighth, among vio-
' lent fixed Stars.z and' Satxrn going to-the Square of Frpiter, Lord.
of chat Houſe, from Cardinal Signs; which is indeed a very violent >
Polition, Colle: Genit. p. 124-. .. FA >33.s |
| 7.; Why Mr. Mffianiello ſhould not expire by a N
Death, ſeeing that the Mon, Lady ofthe Eighth, was no ways atflic
ed; but going to the Trine es bs Trine of Satuyn, and ſe
. . 5 c


\


——_


—


-66


*/ Fa


| 6 * 4


£ 6 | y CE l <4 of - <4" 4 - - 4 n * ”
. : -.- ,
X , ky je, & % . Ld - P > AC -
- _
4 | t
"
= | wn.
—_ s


then well ob{crved.


the Sim. Collec. Genit, p; 155.” Bat 1 fappoſe this is one of Mr. ohn's ©
made Nativities, and therefore ought not to queſtioned,”
| - Bury8. Why Sir Freeb, Holler ſhould dyg by fo violeota Death, as
being ſhot to picces,when the Lady of the Eighth, was ſepe-
rating from the Trine of Venus, Lady of the Tenth, and going to
the Body of, Fupiter, Lord of the Aſcendant in Piſces 3 for the Moon'
was not full 16 degrees in Pifees by her Latitude z and Fwpiter was
almoſt-19 degrees by his. Collett. Geage, p. 159. This is the Gene .
tleman chat. was to Yve ſome decades of Years, ( by F. Gad-s
17 but was kiff'd within fix Months: after he had print-
DBxery 9. In that.Nativity printed for Oliver Cronwelfs, Colle,
Geait. p. 145s Why Jupiter in Square to Mars and Satzrn ſhoutd


- givean Agweand Fever, and as they (ay, Poyſon; when at the ſame
© tifne, Japrter is.in "Bearile to the Moon , in Sextile to the Sun, to


Mercury, and Venus, which Poſitions do not uſe i give ſuch Acei- |
dents, but rather a Conſarnyption, or ſome other Difcale of the Laugy.
But. beſides that , even inthis. Figure here before us , and by me
now corzc&ted; why ſhould. Merowry that governs the Cuip of the
Eighth, i and isin Sextile to Jupiter, .and. Trine to the' Moon 3, or Ve-
aus who governs the. reſt of that Houſe, being in noill Ape with:
any of them, but in ber own Houſe, and free as well from Benehch,


._ * as Malefick Beams, ' give any Diſcaſe of the Nature of that he died


of > Whence it is plain, that none of theſe Rays, either of Mercu-
ry or Yea, can'be allowed by any Rule T have read in that me-


thod of Judgment, from the Loed of the Eighth Houſe, to give


either a Fever, Agwe, or Poyſan, &c. And indeed to'examine it ra»
tionally, it will appear a very lame, empty fort of a Rule , that


--the Lord. of a Houſe ſhould _ ſo conliderable am Accident to


Man's Life , as the Quality of the Diſcaſe of which he owſt dye,


_ and that Houſe but an imaginary Point or Part of Heaven, that he


is called the Lord of z and becauſe he is Lord of that Houſc,he muſt
kill and deſtroy z 'nay, and give Death by ſuch a kind-of Diſcaſc
as is not uſual to his Nature, Poſtion', or any other Qualificati-
on; 'which:if they would but conſider, xenders their Axe | by their
own Rules | a very in, falicious Inquiry,” as doth appear by


their Authors compared with thoſt Queries preceding, And fol


_ come to give the trot Cauſe of his Death, that in all Nativities ſhall


hold Good and Authentick, the Rule being well underſtood, and +
P . " Laſtly,


as


ag EIS


/


-


\


Opins Reformatum!
' Laſtly, He that wil come to there khowledg of Aﬀtology tn
this thing of Death , he muſt in the firft place throw by all theſe
Shams-and Foolerics, that are kept inuſe withoitt 2ty Approbition
of truth; or any other Authority bur that which ſore call Antiquity,
And I have been ſomewhat the longer on this mittter, to ſhelv how
idle a thing it is init ſelf, and yet how niudly rtragriified by thoſe
that pro Aſtrology. Not a Nativity done withour the uſe of
this Rule; and not one Nativity in forty , where the Rule rakes
unleſs it is by chance; for till they/cart prove to me ; that

they have 4 better, foundation for their Houſes, -than any I car F
learn, I muſt beg their pardorr, for my fiot believing this, and a
greac many Fooleries more in 'the Art-of Nativities. Of-which !
wilt give 8 fuller Account ſhortly in ty Defed?.Gen:There is no other
ing can ſhate in the Caufe-of Deeth , 2nd the Nature and Qva-
lification of the Difeaſe, but the DireQion or DireRions tirzt are
then in force and operation; by DireQion to the Giver of Life. I
do acknowledg, that Revolutions, Seeondary Direltionr, with Tranfits,


" Returns, Eclipfes, 8c. may increaſe the Arguments of the certainty


of Death, but all of ther together cannot give Death, or fpecificate
the Diſcaſe that leads.to it, bur the Din ions only: vr could
ſhew-you in ſome of -thoſe Nativities mentioned in the former
Queries, where the Diſcaſes did exa&ty correſpond to the Dire-
Qions., that gave them, Senſi Aftrologico. And. to, this purpoſe,
there- may ſometimes be three or four Planets: concerned in the


- matter,” ſometimes but one, but rarely les then two ſerve to give
the Diſcaſe and Death, To this purpoſe , ini the Nativity 'of
} Charles II; it was the Moon that gave the Diſcaſe, hut it was Mars


that kill'd him, altho there were divers DireRions;_I am lure
fix or ſeven in force and operation when hedied, and help'd to
compleat- the Work of Mortality. Likewiſe in this-Caſe of the


- ProteRtor,Crompwell, 'it was not Mercxry or Vern, Lord or Lady of


the_Eighth Houſe , that gave him ciches-an-4fgwer Fever, or-Poyfore,


no nor. Saturn, Lord of the Aſcendant in the Eighth, in Oppoſi-


tion'to Mars z but it was the DireRions of Satzrn, and the Moon
her ſelf, that gave his Diſeaſe,” but that of Mars kill'd Kim. And
that I do aſſert to be the true Cauſe of his Death, and ſhall have
a-proportional. Effet in a} other Nativities , where. the Moon is
Hileg, and in that part of Heaven that is , it ſhall-give Death,
but-perhaps it may not be by the ſame Diſcaſe, but it ſhall be of
the 'thmp ture, violent and quick, as indeed are moi of thoſe
| : K 2 6 © 'Dirccions


6," EA


—


AR:


Z [Gon Refarmatum, |
DireQions where Mars and the Myon are concerned, bat eſpecially
where they ſway aud govern. And that. you may be the moxe * -
ſatisfied, do but ne. the Nature of the Promittors in Dire-
Rion, and compare them with. the Nature and Circu
his Diſeaſe. by-which he expired, Both: whioh by
conſidered, in the next place tee conſul the Texti
Fourth Book., Chap. 10. De genere Mortis, and. you wil Pa be-
lieve) be ſoon fatished about the truth of that matter. ; And fo I -

will conclude my Diſcourſe on the Nativity of this Great General,

Stateſman, and. Politician, whom Mr. Dreyden in his Panegyrick on - | -


- his Death, commends for his great Labour, Toit, and Induſtry,


by endeavouring to the old oh to ſhorten the Kin gdarhs Miſerics,
and put an end to the War, which other” Men od their Trade
and Profit, and made. it their buſines alſo to Pome it, © His
words are theſe; "_-” Tt


*%.


Our former Chief te Stirs of the War 4. SHES UW
_ Firſt ſought Yenflame the Parties, then ta poiſe CEE TIOH
The Duarrel lov'd, but did the Cauſe -abbor, © LITE,
AMET at le ann. nn 1.2 Qtr
IWar, our Conſumption, was their- Trade z KA
; ed BL beth vw d our Pain. © 1
He fonight toend our fighting , and eſſay Ars
CCA A: pee nt! 15


.- 7 IF 8


Opus Reformatum: 0


—
-


TOM = "THE.
SECOND PART.
The Argument that induced me to it.


Having finiſhed this Great Mars Nativity, corrcRed the Fi-
B gure; and refuted thoſe ablurd Ertors , which others-have
Pile thereon, under the Notions of Rules and DircQions for
the Young Students to: Steer by.z I am directly led to examine
a Book not. leſs h]F'd, with Errors, than Cromwels Nativity | print-
ed. by the Gentleman.you haveheard mentioned in this Treatiſe ]
was with falſhood and 'ſhams. A Book written to”introduce a -
new and imaginary Whim , that - 7, G..di# believe the Power of
his then Intereſt, was able toput upon the World. A Book, that the *
_ Arguments which are brought to proye the thing there propounded,
his Principle afferted, are cither falſe,miſapplied;or cle lugg'd
in by head and ſhoulders... ' A Book, not written to-do the Ar-

. tilts of England any Service , but rather an opportunity made uſe
of, to (hew how plaguely he was abuſed, and his Reputation cur- |
tailed, by being called and eſteemed a Papiſt, from the Popiſh-Plot
to that, timez and yet at-the (ame time, with a fide-long, skew-
whiff Argument, to. ridicule the ObjeQions againſt the Cheats,
Fooleries, and Abfurdities in his Popiſh Religion, as'I ſhall have
occafion to ſhew anon more at large. A Book, written to juſtify

- and maintain the: Errors of his Youth, [I had almoſt ſaid , the
Sins too | - which. were great enough then and might have ſav*


himcthis labour of Painting and Hanging up a Sign,, to have gin
- the eafier ſeen-and Aiſcovercd; Per p-- | as had po, more

-* Skil-in Aftrology at Sixty years of Age, than' he had at Thirty.
For in the Year of our Lord ,- 1660, and 1661; he madea Col-
le&ion of Nativities , and molt of them falſe ones, as ſhall ere
| ; h loog


is ry preſent bulneſstonguire into.
. E oe S CO Fa ;
HE EN 463. + TEEN OY TORS EC>/ of PRES 59 1 RE IOETY FA 7 £ |


- whole Treatiſe is vothipg elle but @ heap gf Words and


” 7 is "dts .


\'- &
AT


Opies Reformatums..) x.


' long appear. From theſe Nativitics thus made,. he form'd a hun-


dred Aphoriſms, and moſt of them as falſe as his Natwities. I /
fay from theſe falſe Nativities, he form'd thoſe choice-Aphoriſms,,
a quarter of which,, F am confident, to this day he never prov'd
to be true.. And from two of theſe Nativities, | and I am cer-
tain they axe both falſe, for Þ have made one appear fo alteady,
and will do' ſo by the other before 1 conclude this Treatiſe] name-
ly Chifter Gaftavus ,, King, of Sweden., ant Oliver Cromwelt,, he


 form'd the-Elghteenth Aphorifas, which was this, Cardinal. Sigs


poſſeſſing the Angles of a Nativity, makes the Rative | of any Conditi-


_ on; or Capacity } moft-Eminent and- Famons in bis Gemrinim; aud t6


do ſuth Aits as After-ages ſhall admire bim. - And from this Aphoriſm ©
made in; the Year 2661. he writes.a Book in the Year 1684. to:
juſtify and promote the thing which he calls, Cardines Celi, which: -


p %
x < hy
, . - _
= - - of Ld


An Inquiry mnto }. G's Cardinal Errors.


5 Here are.2 ſort of Mean the Wosld, that whether they write

or talk ,. do pretend it is, for-nothing elſe; but Truths, of

this Stamp and Noe, is the Author of ous Cordigas Celis as you

may fee in his fawning -to the Learned Sir E, D. who, as

he. there conkeſſeth, Tav'd. him from the Gallows. And ry dow
c5

266


nothing at: all relating either to Truch- in general, or. |
Adzalogy Datta fe is. like. the common Dialcd of his Di-'
ſcourſe”, Evafive and Treacherous; And: for the firli- Eighteen
Paragraphs'ip. his Book, there-is Hot 2 ward to the,purpole, 'and
matcer of- the Txcaniſe, And therefore 1 ſhall. paſs by all, zill L
come-to that paxt of-it, where he diſtoureth about Cardinal Signs


on. Angler,” Ke. whick' is the only thing L have undertaken to-re-


fate,” according, as he hath aſſerted it ; for whatever. the mytiery
of Cardinal Signs is, -I am ſure he-hath a-wrong Notion about the


- * ryatter, and.chat not only the Nativities lie builds his Aporiſms
- upon, but alla thoſe be drings to.-prove his Theory, are falle,' But


before | begin, to examine that Book, it will not be-amils for-me -
__ vY | TY to
; ; foci - ,


=


c


-
:
-
-


CIR +


Opus Reformatum,


o
- 9,
”, wh "4


to lay down my Opinion, as an Axiom concerning the Power.of |


Cardint! Signs. | ;
| =


Cardinal Signs fightfy nothing on the” Angles of any Nativity, &c:
- Brut Cardinal Signs. on the Angles of a Nativity, and ſome of vhe
Swperiors placed therein, do certainly make Men Famous and Prodz>
+ giows in their Generation. And ſo they do is thoſe Signs, tha not tn
the Angles." © , ES V7» : iy ty


_


- | Whoever he is thatpretends to Aſtrology; end denies the Power
" of Cardinal Signs, not only in Nativities, but in other general
. Aﬀairs of the World, makes £00 much haſte to diſcover his Igno-
- rance and Folly ;-and whoever he bethat placeth more Power in


them, than Authors and Experience allows and juſtifies, makes.


too much haſte'to diſtover tis Confidence; which indeed hath been
in divers other things in this Art, the Priftice of rog-many Pro-
feflors of Aſtrology z by which means we ate at this day in ſuch
a Labyrinth of Errors and Confulion. For'moſt of the Modern
Authors. [1-calt them Modern that have been within One or Two


hundred years) have difperſed Errors, and-according to their In- *


tereſt ,* {o they were believed and- promoted, ' - Take-an Inftance
in one ; and that is the Learned Treatile of Nathod on 4lcabitiue,
which hath made fuch noiſe-among ſome very Learncd and Judi-
clous Men. Concerning which Book, if I were to ſpeak my plain
Opinion, -perhaps it might not be convenient in this place z. for
I have a very ordinary Opinion of the Book, altho nedly
done and this for ſome reaſons of my own, diſtin& from the
Opinion 'of- others. * And beſides, 1 could point our their Er-
rors', and ſomg of their mr tob , but that it is not my buſ-
neſs in this place fo meddle with thoſe things but all in good.


time, <\;


Why Catdinal Signs ſhould give thoſe ſtupendious and amazing |


Effects in Nativities, &e. that this-Gentleman fpeaks of, and yer
-pot. known-to the Aacients, is a thing 1 cannot eaſily believe
neither is. it at this day afferted by any but bimiclf, and thoſe of
our Nation , *who/'were deluded into the-belief of this idle AG
fertion. For -the! Cardinal: Signs withour- Planets in them, are


- but empty Spaces in Heaven -and what reafan- there is, that thoſe


if


empty Spaces-(hould 'be allowed lo great and mighty « Power,


% oy -


Fg


6E-:


. if they have oy Ge: 1 mul in my


' "On, Secondly, In the Nene 6d bf the fixed: Stars f


s. - -> ad two extreams of the: Ecliptick- As to the firtt; 4 dilown it

Es | wholly, am nberns Myttick. Power to the. Name of Aries ,

| -- ,- _-., "Cancer, Libra ;s Capricorn, nor"any more Power and_ Virtue to
.. . that patt

. Jiack beſides;

Signs, are. but what the firſt Iniventers imagined-thoſe Goulſtella-
tions to-beike; and" have therefore called them by theſe Naines.


did poſſes thoſe


NOW we 3 were
mo baby uaag thoſe Points,near a'whole Sign 5

F ox in the Sigh ies, which takes its Name from the Ram, the Fi-
| . (ov which 4s deſcribed-in that. part.of Heaven; and.
[bp | jndge ae thartieoewas in,;\or-near\the Point - of the Equinox
3 ERIC gona frſt-Star in-that Conſtellation ,, and-known- by the
_ +, te name ofthe inthe Ram's: Horn, is-in 2$-degrees'of Aries,
and about 30" or 40'rmimires-: $0 that if the Eigure of this Crea-


= IT Ss, then the Precethop'at "the bxed Stars-hath quite altered the


hs kt ” Id Trans; ad: ſo.of the reſt 4*niether 40 1. care by what Names
WED: | you call the Signs, io Fcan but tell what you intend'by thery, and
- that: we may by thoſt Names know how ,. and where to find the

',,. .* Seven Planets by.their motions diſperſed throughout the Zodiack.
- £0. = that belides, the empty-Spacesvf Heaven were never yet pretended-
by any Man, to have-any the-leaſt Power-imaginable, without the


 # -__ _ 1doallowthemi' andno furcher.”
, .-. - * «.; Secondly, As to the power of the fixed Stats in | chols Signs, 1
= think n6 Man will lay the {fraſs thetegj becauſe there are no ſuch
*- 7 "thing into or three of thems,: unleſs/rhey. will-make ſuch Stars
I» = 43 have great North or  Souh-Laticude.u his_ Caſe, which
+22 - __ - '- Lam-very uowilling' co-allow 4 n Nats, "fr the fixed Stars
=: -,- that have great Lacitade, cos res dt-BUe orcs: in the An
4. STRSnY 9A gps gwen, that the _


- ef | .-call


F
» D BY -
» 42> 1 24. ,
bow 7-25", 2 "+. © 38 -- ah
* - | 4 4 ; 9-3 2388 "2154 __ A
= 17D a Gadd . —
#1 y. . - i q %
,—- _— * >
"y


=
= "T'>
by . oh, - = -
4 <w « -
* Po i A a :


-_ -


, ef
. SE > "
FTE Prat = $4 EO SEAL


MO


b SY of. theſe f bene, Reaſons, rn to their _m Sy Feb i It - F324
b*.... .  mſititherrehde in-the ET %
8 - are in thoſe parts.of Heaven, - Or; , As being the-Medium,


heres i called, hin 17/any GOUT ures of che 26--
we all-know, that-che-Nantes of the Twelve |


And whats more; .thofe- Conltellations and Parts of Heaven that
ints- at.. the /time; When theſe Signs were fo _
the Pyeccihon' ofthe fixed Stars;or Retroceſli- =


- ture; gave a name"to- the Sign , 'and a power to the- Pere of Mex: 7
and it is flipped eway. into-that-part- and ſpace then cal-*


3 Er" 39 28 preſence of the Planets or fixed Stars'to-illuſtrate them z and ſo far |


{ #3V


» . »-


4 ..
Ito - LEP :
Ty / '. P2951 J3TIT ” 1
s 7 - + Ze c > _ = A. .
ret en ting og” ' REY 54h
14 4 LT. 0 "3 ; LEH » T2 . , 2 ud , ,
+ Py. : >. SARS S 4 ,


's a
© are two of tHe


Car-


'Ay


_ |
the Scvetith


1. Bit
it hath the ſou


5


ti
HL


-


Py


niore Eminentand Remirkablecin their
then: the \xeft-of - the Twelve: Signs: > With


coaſidery; That-even REITs
nt infec et: = th bog th


the op im tare pF Years; Oo eo abains erewabte
to eel the Wotld; that their Year did contain 365 days; FR,
«nd\about+50 minutes; There [might De-many-thore'A
raiſed of this miture; to'prove ; that theſe Signs and Points.of the
Equnatorate botly Eminciic-agd Remarkable; as that of their prirnd-
07 ove and Precedence in-Mehſaration zand+ Trigonomenrical
one br the'Dodrive of-chie Sphere.” Their Primrnacy and Ad-
that is cthementfare of Time in Dire-
bis, Tk fand Supereminence in'admitting no Parallel,
and being the 'only vfi Equity to. the! whole-World,” as
beih hopecntiat Poly char gives. equal Day-and. to alÞ che
Inhabitants; of the Exrthly Globe. Likewiſe their: \ phetwroe
prolifick Endowments to: all thoſe Places thats are! Situare-under
that Litiey aff fave thoſt two Points it! their Zetirh 5 yert donot
attribuce chit fertile! Power ro thoſe Signs of Hbaveh, ad choſe
individual Points of the Ecliptick and Equator , bur-ts- the Rays
war S%1 Who'is the Author of all Generatiorr and ProduRtion,
eg or near their Zenith; - from whoſe heat
Menſtrudnris fernicnited?] the fertile: Earth
forth its Emergent Produd, and alſo hattens'cheir Maturl-
node not only hen Pies of thi Earth that lis near, or under
ten ht 505 revs foes' Crick 5nd ippioathck hs
- returns
a Genetarive Fertnent' Irito all the'Seeds of Na
Aniinils to Procreation'; and'-che- Earth to'Pro-
ang well obſerves. Lafthy, Thr which ve
1 —_ yet peace hn ; that _


_n& other point nor part Ae PRE er dy arein
, few-underſtand / either their'Niture or the Opera
tion in the Mechanical part; therefbre>T err oiog Hhrndt are
thereof.

L 2 Thus


p* -


the Ruds 0-Rteer the Body with. | "Tuat thi
:add - much to/'the'Temperd Mind-; - CURE


=-


this t


=


:

Jr
j |

a;

:

4


KEE


| | , and:that- is
'dignitate, | Aſpice; devinnon &


- =« =
” :


T


ge
—
=
__
Cen
a.


l


'- thathath motÞ


ED


the'Sun in Diarnal Nativities, but the:
there were! "or No for=-var detirs chic” Planet
and the'Evor@'of the Afcendant; le that
bs rien bores han! 47 6 to fottie Power in Government, and
ſhall! grow-Rich thereby. And t© tell you the truth, this Author
doth Farris Lan nguage that they all generally give out'for
Dadtrine*in"this" Caſe 3\tho ſome" may make Hirtle Sekens of
their.own; yet none ever denied this,” neither do I believe thar
We 1.6. weep 1} ary rh jadge he thinks this difc>-


of his/ more exce "not fo uſe
by Ar ary hr goon iron yg = Nie crc n


Mens z/ bat this of his in none but thoſe having Cai Son
_ en I , which \may amount to-one or-two in- Ewentys
t is nothing againſt it, neither doth ie impair! the In
renabagrere ri pars Fr ſelf truey which'is plains to-me, that
it is[no6.-' But letievery one believe as he likes. * And {6 1 come to
—_ iments and- Reaſons, by which he endeavours to-prove
rce the belief of that idle Opinion about Cardinat-Signs;
= D bei of themſglves able to:make any (Native great 'atid: fa=
nous in his Generation. -'The'firſt (Eighteen Paragraphs of the
Book /being” fpent' only-in Words and?Noiſe, withouv'any Relay
tion to 'the- matter in hand, 'he 'comes'at haſt to-lay his
and Theſis in the Nineteenth Paragraphy he tells us there in
words;.that it is ſo farious ard retgarkable, thatt wants
but Belief and Proof. Pray, bwhavdotho:moſt roi obe rn
beſides; or fland more-ininert of than thoſe '1rwo things'y 'nayy
let Errors be butbelieved; and tl pro wnttro ram among
| thoſeiConverts.  /And torfay the truth} he doth oo ar ast


us: inthoſe words, That: y:dath noorinache Own OE
. prote&itz; and whetherzhe ' Altrologernswould ownamnd
believeit,:or pbt; he wasiqlome Jeiha tFomivis cfitain thar


| tip eng wotholt 06 |
a


5-5


ow Ren ;
-Neicher is the. £


ahi Fuhr of mY
AEST,


eee ſamuny 07 the
| $ez, ; to-the molt. near Salichury:
KT _ [ha when he-talks of ous Bleſſed Saviour's coats


Fes Fat itn


1 ATE BO? is ©
went up: nyt
hitdren


al. ſuffering under Cardipal Sigos, *tis'2
Orof WS got pets AT: means by that; 4
Conneting Supariors, hat 4 falſe 4 fot wan: Fw


Birth, of our Saviour , - was. ith Geynins,. Aled,
ay Ro If he means that. he hadiGardi Siges
eres nh ny penn ay Fa hy, Lu; os Cogn a
Moriaus have nowmore on.myF n rig

have or Gardtnat |


and. behdes,a Learned
of coun own Nation, [did once _ that Poſition of Cordan'
having Libra alcending 3; but the altered his Opinion afterward;
Kgaw a ren do However ,it is may Qpinjon, That if-che
not;chhow when. he will come, : poor Moetals
pede when he did come;3--and. 'tis-a. thing better

_  thart medled: with. . - For let any man2but- how
We ane: to it ſometimes to. gain the true* time of a Birth/of a -
Manor Womad, born in the ſame Pariſh where we live, and per- ©
haps-not-forty years before nay, and. it may be not» find it vei-
ther in the;Gonclaſion, tho time rfiay be given-as certain {and
.moxe; too.] as thatiob: our-Sdviour, Alexander the Great,
Merv, Geſor; and abundance of the old Popes, that they pre+
ns = cy Ws oa rg oc ou ery
(- 0 irt the .
Toro hang em etna Lit chey were therknown]
wlkere al ho, 09 ties ſufficiently ratio-
believe alt :tho{&; or at leaſhraok of thein axe faiſe and ficti-
by the fame Rule; his Confident Adventure [in his
== RIS vere Fo Ge»


at/budia-Dcdlaficiatid Palit pr iy yoo apt ackind and ithoſ'in


Dn uſBmzes PÞ and. chac brings me to


And the fizft he þ frond, 'A d
ERIFESSS ns 5p 409 wants
; Borealem


to xt is By | -
part of the World, and” renders the North habita-


| s From _ pon Fg North hall be wow , and
govern $ rom to' Capricor b hall be
welt-peop! ed, Eewford when mo ago rr oth Nimb. From Cx
£0 rye the Inhabitants of the South ST have the Dori.


non over the Northern Countrys, they beihg as fr were
F'rhink 1 ſhall have yo be need to fay any great mattet to this
reafon in his ewenry ſecond Paragr ther would any Man bat
tle , have brought this t6'proye Cardihal Signs on the Angles xs
ke erideavottrs. Arid all that any Man caty pretend ftom' this Apho-
riſm, is, that Cordon did believe'the Cafinal Signs to have u great
ſhare in the Aﬀairs of the World in general, ah of the d
ao a_ iſhing the Parts of the Weortd, 'o the times of thet |
vin in T particular, But that.it hath any elite tr
rdoag he chat hath but belf an Eye,” taay-ſee'the con
4 may as well affert ftom © farke Aphorili haha wy =
he pſt eth any bf theſe Armen orekgy ehale wie
done. it! the Workd, and alſo Men- born to i
for the Foundations or overthrow of Government z, bir?


nee the nga ems fo "rathet thak the vehler
_ Nyy the oy 8 a, ode rn, beg


utided on Suppbbirion, the Wo ur being as par i £09. [bort-liv'd to-


belfeye it will c | <

Canhdt whee |
at 4 difference
hath'ground-
om that the Sun


elitr Nor


yrur thr before
DT av;


. to that we have above 290090 years
ve th: Soy Gi docgerh: - 0


ve. Ge art Ei Mew woe it., An
th $i |
ce. of ntat
S yet1 dare ay, 7:


(c of an E! to that p
pr eung ek ran yet ſay, -
to


SEoteY Vin cs


"hv Reformnn. +


| Power und-Domigion over Laws, Religion, Rights; my Ceremo»
nies. And becauſe they have fo, they and the Tropicks
ne Of great yt wm do great and ſtrange things,


Je prove ray orgs TO: Heel Fe ek


' © onthis own Marriage at: Wildbouſe.. 1 rs Vial.
Ley nd: Orvuectvs erin wy __ Fat ego
4 rather yr pre Te But. nay we po]
Equinoltial Tropical to have. : Power in di-
vers-Caſes, when the Planets, ara 6m we oh.bri al-
low.them- to. do. every thing, and, haye,a ſhare in. cvery Cauſe in
Nature, EE non
Planets? kde, hr. . hell dth,or elev And 1


it elf. Frm will oc Earth phe
| challenge himſclf;6r an manin the World toprove, there i5one
Lecter os gs (thy frat rcbonen


of Sym the ge the /


SEEN > of aro th thr oſs:
rb oextn.0
the nao pe a rate, and ern ul wy: never


| pes vendeds nar ll he mondo he | laſt ujour what
= je 3 ates. only. ſous words. of the Anhorlin 4. Cometz' in .


bus; Regum.mortes, '&c. Comer; (fays he) whenever they ap-

pear in Cardinal Sig they hetokgn the Death of Emperors, Princes, Po-

my j do. ftil carry a Signal of Wonder

TEE Fan]
renders for

CO da


Op Rfemaes,
mp6, .117.Cardan.Comete immobiles Seditioner mobiles awtem

ab Externis. In Cardinibus Repum Mortes in nono loco » Hy
: in Offavo vel Dwodecimo loco Peſtilentiom, aut Fathom
Kg No "Which is thas-in : Im-
cxoneable Ocmers give Setions; bit moveable Comes thew Wars
between' Narkoas, In" the Angles, death of ' Kings; 'in the Ninth
Houſe, injury to Religion 5in the Eiglh and:Twelfth Houſes; pe-
Ailence and damage to the ſtanding Corn ; 'in the Eleventh. Houſe,
2 hel we fi of Noblemen. And tiow wheres and: by what word of


lug in
;I'vow it Ichi o eh inipoſſible, ane we weteanknated _


fach Souls as horjelt' F; G: was,” when Begwrote ir; Oh'my

dear Joy?” tl bloat old tranſlate Cordinibus for Cardinal
Signs fake Cariinibut for Gerdinalibus,” For it is plain, (that
2d ; ©: »but'the Angles of the Fi

_ biite or Utlificyted in plimo,' becauſe heimenti-


| ah the Even ; het Fotit' Holes" above" the 'Farth\,/ 34» the
whe Trecifth, Foulle hth: Houſes.':-/Now, 4


- Bec Rule rn


; \alliw; x bit of Cotdinil poor
"What F have 'wrirter, and
eh yu bat lo the Service of my


v1 Gre in uh Seve Dyes will fave-me the
titne to 55 WelkraRtle wh, ' ethim ,
ND am Darn Em

, being foatcne from! the” Breaft' row ar-ten years of Age z
and that be bath Marg, Lord of bis Aſcendant, and Saturrs and apl-


i, lea of 6 fey: which was fo vwell-bnown' t0'his Adverſa-
ns 6 yelrentng ele touch' of bis
Pe, and df in their own Vindication  Say'it thou fo


hoy
TT


pri egn
Holves all Metals, and


may


-


Gt


i Tithe ge of Fr wt a Virtuoſo as this is, cal> _


the Gage of a Figwre; into. theic. firſt Matter, and from

rk mk Gone Sint c viplger. 5 evNy rn
why, axe-no in s Re

ihe the Prieft with his Hae of


| thority Jabs Gad, bath raiſed this mighty Structure of his Gordite


—


" leave


- famons, without


Cal. uy pd the aher parts of his, Book ate fall as
falſe as:this)is, tho not obvious and notorious; For.to txanflate
-dntbus, to be macant- in Cardins}. Signs , cells as 4-4” uf vn


In Car
it. ſhews hia to be Egregiouly Ignorant, or

dem, in offering i@ boldly £9 allent aching ny p# ware
that he muſt needs. believe was-undexfiood by ſome : body elſe. as
well as himlel(s for othezwiſe. he bad been: ſafe. ho, 10k will
Friend Mr.Gardinibaz, only dfringhic » nhogeed
two Lines in Morel, Fes


| Indellum probum contigit, &
- ESCECTIESS.


as be ſays; if he dr nk 09. Ag nin from Coen
ben ew when en mer he Vern Eun, lo


other Teſtimanies. And, cn yy obo ſays, is di-
xeQly,intended by Carden for that vary that he: here brings-if}
and that this purs thexwatter 9utiof all-Controverſy,and fways the


Belance on his fide, becauſe at thattime the:Candinal Signs polels
the four Angles of the Celeſtial Figure, : and make the thing as
plain-as a Pike-Raff. ; Now obſerve, this. is:as notorious: 45 , the
6d the thing alledge "hin dinady fallas by which he

0a hails again. For if Cordax
wa jutcnded ſuch a Dodrine,; as :my Faint dere brings it to
prove,. then he would have faid.thus, Wifctr Jeiloms ing


notice


nmr Sceland,ypartiot

-Dinmark,: and divers other King-

and Dominladdqut ol-it;, hich is indced 2 ſort of Nonſence
i itifelf, and. not'ta-. be chatgachngun. Gordaa , ——-
that


Corpus , can'do one as well ,
the other z Ay by my front can he. Thus you ſee upon what Aus


a er
| TD - Opus Reformatum.
that better deſerves it; * For Cardan Tas's down y iſm oy

plain words, and makes-it both p I, which it
no be in [in e657 ſenſe v- | ve yn it for" and thi
tirade: of £906 . when thetrſt Serup}
Ce the Cufp of the 1 oth Houle: e\firlt degree of Leoa ++
on the Aſcendant, which puts the Aphoriſm I-5 out of doors,
| to allthem People inthat Latitude, and beyond it; if 7.G, is to be
believed 4 when" Cardan's {if there is fk a by intends
nothing elſc-but the Fw1 in the' and Mid-beaven'together,So
that. the thing is plain to. every onethat will but conſider , That
whatſoever he here brings in under the notion of Authority,is all of
it firain'd and forced beyond the intent 6f the Aathors ;> as you may
ſee more plalnly in his following 3oth and ih {t Paragraph.

And here he comes to- pen X hee Argament, and this
he ſays; is from his'noble Firmicar, in the Nativities of Piidar,- Ar-
chiloew,and Archimedes,Fol.17 $ 8174; And theſe three famous Meri
are: ure but _—_ two Nativities, and thoſe two no ways brought to prove

ne that the Conjundlion of Marr, Venus, and

io Leela the Aſccndant, in to Jupiter-in Arier inthe Se-
| venth, inthe Nativitiesof Pindar and Arebiloewsz and the Conjundion
of Marr, Ven, and Mercury its Aries, -in Oppoſition to Mars in Libra,
in that of Archimedes, do: produce great Men, 'and thoſe of cxcel-
lent Parts z but'this was not-from the Cardinal Signs {tho I do
allow the Poſitions to be the better for ways. dl but
from the Planets in thoſe Houſes and Parts of Heaven 3 and on that
joan wore lay —_— wah ter dertun
may 173. Butit was pretty tthey two ve
both ml Ag # Pin ar and Arebilocus , and ha to be
born in one andthe fame Minute, which-if true, isa ty Confir-
mation to Aſtrology z and that too confirmed by another example of
Demuftbenes and Hermodorus,whowere alſo born together,as Firmicus
ſays. But if Fobn hath no better © $and Authority -Canl or
his Hy by, than theſe, he had as good give up the Cau
I believe Firmiens knew the Nativities
| dvebiniides, Pindar and Arebiloens, much about fowell as F. G. © 7 G.a
Jadu Heb Six: Freeb. Holes's , Oliver Cromwell's, : Gufta-
ages Boakay and the' Freneb King's , in his-Coltedion of

more that I'could name, if occaſion _
And in by Say con afterall theſe Aſſertions, he ſays, He


kywns ns veer mby bio Apberiſe feud not ea the Livery and hare


Opus Reformatum.
Her of Trath; unlefs it can be proved, that Perſons have been born -*
with Cardinal Signs.on the Angles of their Genitures, and lived to
years of Maturity , aud have not been fargous in one kind ot other,
i. e. for Honour or Diſhonour, Vice ox. Virtue, Wealth or Poverty,
Leatning .or Ignorance, Courage or Cowardice; and-if ſo, then
the px ey aery againſt him is unjuſt, | |

Tothis I anſwer, The Propoſition is very unfair, for there is no
Man born into the World [ or at leaſt ways very few] that keeps the
exaQ Medium of his Birth, but cither falls below it, oz riſcth above
it, and ſo hath more of Honour.or Diſhonour in his Generation; and
for Learning or Ignorance, I wonder he ſhould talk of that in this
Diſcodtrſe, when he knows-that depends wholly on the Moon and
Mercxry. And I utterly deny | and he knows it to be true] that any
man had ever more. of Cow or Courage, for his NS eng

by Cardinal Signs z for the, one depends on the Rays

- Satxrn,and the other on the Beams and Power of Mars. And that of
Honour and Diſhonour, Poverty and Riches, depends on their pecu-
liar Cauſes, and no ways concerned with the Cardinal Signs on
the Angles; yet I grant that the Cauſers of theſe things being in
thoſe Signs [ no matter what Houſe they are in] may make their
Effets more remarkable and famous. And ſo my Friend” Fobe
leaves his Authorities, and falls in with his Antagoniſts about other

. things, which I ſhalt oyer-hale, becauſe there axe ſome things that
will yield matter that is worth reading, eſpecially about'that of

"his own. Nativity, and the reaſon of his Impriſonment z as you
have it in his 34th Paragraph.  *

Where he tells us, That he did foreſee his being in the Popiſh Plot
in 1679. twenty years before it fell out, and that by his own Nati-
vity. Why really Jobn this was a mighty Argument of your Skill z
but ſhppoſe I ſhould not be able to believe ic? Why, then judg he
will rebuke me ſharply for it, becauſe he printed it in his Dodrine.

* of Nativities, more than Twetity years before, and thereby it ap-

pears to be-certainly true, it falling out exactly according to the

time there mentioned in the Table of DireQions, which was the

Medium Cali ad quadratzem Solis, falling on the 12th Houſe of his

Figurc at Birth, which ſhewed Impriſonment, and the-Frowns of

Great Perſons. Ay, that is to the purpoſe, falling on the Cufp of

the Twelfth, which is a plaguy corner of Heaven. And yet for all

this, I do not believe one tittle of it z and I-will tell you why,in a.

'very few words; I cannot believe it, becauſe every Square or Qua

; te


$6


- Age by his Figure, which is co be


what


£
v


F9


drate in apy Cizcle, ought to confiſt of go.degr. and no more, whe- _
ther in Mwndy or Zadiaco ; but this worthy Gentteman makes this of
his to conſiſt of 12 3'degr. anda few minutes, which feems tome an
odd ſort of a Square z and indeed I wonder how many fach Squires
he, or any other of thofe Philoſopbers will make in a Circ of >
degr. For the proof of this,do but obſerve, They all allow that th


arc but 90 degr. between the Midheaven and the Afcendant, which ' Wi


makes up the Square, Quadrature, or 4th Part of the Circle; To that =
the $#n mal "he LO ES ant, before me GI TE Ss
his Square 3 bacar that time, * my old Frien > M.'C:
pan 'of © z the Sun was 32 Ge a6 more from the'fHo-,
roſcope z, and to ſay the truth, the | the;
Sun in 7- &'s Nativity will not come bp till about $5 ar V6 years of
| db, ph wich'you Þ falfe. 24, t.
cannot. belleve'It,, becauſe the M. C."to the'O'of” 5 fliould have
beer as Malefick, ,and of as fll itnport'as the O'of the ©, becatife
he is in 6 withthe ©, and his Square falls alfo on the Cufp of the
12th Hoyſe,and yet no trouble of the Nature and Quality of that'in
1679. when.he was ip the Plot ro Murder Charles M. Nor did his
M:E.'to the © of L. in 1685. ever 6fve him any thing of theNa-
elire of; the DireQibn at thit time. Aud beſides, why fhoaldnar'the


| Midheaven tothe 2 of Þ, at about 24 or 75 Fears of Age give
Biſhops, .and Law-


Impriſonment, and the Frowns of Great Men, Law-
yers, by the ſame Rule that the © did it afterwards. - T know he
hath no other Shan to excuſe It with, but, by ſaying, it did nor fall
onthe Ctaſp of the 1 2th'Houſe ; a plaguy kind of an Argument, and
one would think ic is ſufficient to convince anyman. But '2dhy apd
Lafily, .1 cannot believe it, becauſe he ters the Midheaven'pafs'b

the:Bgdy of th, which is a real and viſible Dire&ion,” anda mo

fatal one too bn all Nativiries,cither ea Life Liberty, or Reputativn ;
and" trumps up ap: imaginaty Diredion , which thete-is nv fuch
thing in nature. T know Flhall have Enemies in'thts caſe apt. there-
fore 1 will put it fairly co-them all, Ptay, Gintlemen. whith db you


' thiok is'the moſt proper DireQion to throw a man irito Priſon for


betraying the Nation, endcavouring to bring in Popery. {this is


; ain, upow big, "for he tutn'd_Papilt afterwards)*ro Murder'the


h likg Crimes 3 #he Mid: beaven to the Body of ty. or-to
. 6? itthe oe tg ©, then what: did Ae #Fh,
lid the 0 of the © give? For you have not Accidents for. both,
DireQious; and at that time, when he makes the M.C. to the PRA, l
pi "ED Mo | of


eaven to the Sqaare ofthe .


. © Opus Reformatum.
of Ir to be in force,was he top and top-gallant; then it was every one
palld in his Horns at the daſh of bis Pen, not daring to appear in-their own
| nan, Fog, to his Alman. 166g. Where it is plain to me,that
one of.theſe two DireQions is falſe,they being both expired,and but-
one Accident, 2dly, That his own Nativity is falſe,and that he never
knew yet how to corre it. And 3dly,that be did not underſtand one
word of the truth of Aſtrology niore at the writing of his Cardines
Celi,than at the priviting his Bod inc of Nativities. And for the 0-
thex part of this 44th Paragrapas that] have not touched on, 'tis all
falſe,and a lyzzand I will int in one thing. He ſays be doth efterm it
all mens Duty to be Obedient to-the Lawful Eſtabliſhed Government, hath in
Cheerch and State. Here he hath plainly given himſelf the lye ; for in
1690. he was catcht at the Poſt-Office in ſending a Treaſonable Let-
ter,. in which was a Popiſh Declaration, and a Scandalous Copy of
Verſes an the King and Queen, which he. promiſed in his Letter
ſhould; be printed ſpeedily : In ſhort, there was .enongh_ to. have ©
hang'd twenty men in the two late Bloody Reigns, and yet this Gen-
tleman eſcaped 3, and how many of ſuch Letters he did ſend, that
were not catcht,he will not tell us, I ſuppaſe; and was this obedicnce
tothe Tawful Government ? Yes, without doubt ;. and do bue call
1 0? ce of Seditian, and there you ſhall find a Popiſh Caſuiſt
hall-make it as plain as the Noſe on your Face.. But, 1 ſuppoſe, John
meant, that it was all mens Duty to be obedient to the Eſtabliſhed Govern-
ment that would ſet up Popery : A very honeſt, confciencious Fellow,
and a true Subjed. to a Proteſtant Prince. ha.! Maſs, Fobn, is that
true? Viz Credo... But by this: you may cafily gueſs, whether what he
fays isto be believed, or not, tet him fawn and difſemble. with the
Government in what Language he pleaſeth. Nay, I dare be poſi-
tive he will not take the Oaths to Their Majeſties, as appointed by
Parliament, he is ſo good an Engliſmman.: But talk about Charles the
- Martyr, and: his immortal Arch-biſhop, and there you hit him z if
you would know the. rcaſon, *tis becauſe. their Religion. is all of a.
| pave. Age oe ”: let FC prs obſerve ary ons Lev the
56th Where is out Loyeto Chriſtianity, (lays he) or t -
ſed dmtbor of wha bath taught us better Leſſons, than #0 injurg the Quiet -
of another, or-to caft fiery Bombs at tbe Innocent, and tbis without: firſt ashe
ug 4 reaſon of the Differtnee,or fairly proclaiming War * and fo on in the
following, Pazagrab» It ſeems it was an Injury at that time to-fall
upon- Hum, without giving cither warning, or ſhewing. Cauſe
why. Bat he had forgot that in 1687. when. he. did be-rehel and
- : an :


Pa Reforduteni.


Villan me in print, when ſolemnlypr gaveno Cauſe nor «
"Occaſion ; ped Zeal £ Popery a. the — Cauſe, prompted

«- hitn on to abule me without a Cauſe, and to ſhew himſelt a malict-
_ 6us, enviousFellow. And in that humour I leave him quarrelling
* with Gaſſendxe, and trifting with his Reader, and come down to his
Soth Paragraph, *where E-find him very angry with his Adve

for thinking wasa Papiſt 3 which doth indeed ſhew the

and excellence of that Gaiolenian' s Judgment z for Gad. did really |
turn Papiſt afterward.

And here let me. _ Readers pardon for my departing from
the-Textz tho not my fault, for I am till purſuing his
matter z $- Te: ks Tice what ſhift he makes, to leave-the
Cardinal


ES L ſhall only


to


upon g, . O's Religion.
I ThenLet us obſerve how peeviſlshe'is in The $5 Paragraph;and
how to be counted a Papift, and what Shrugs,Shams, and


; fo evade te Story :'Ahd at laſt,to convince ns that
borer he tells the. Wor Soy Oey indy ſce him at the 4bby-
- Church very often at Divine Service Tat enced of the Brine] =
which widwar Youdt a Heck? dirty to ye aman 2 Proteſtant z
as.if no Papiſts came thither;' but who h h ſeen hint there bu the
laft four or- five years, ever fince he uſed to go'to Maſs, and was
Father” Peters's Convert 5 ever fince he told C. that
Pt ar We ad rr ne
a at 6 24iy,inallt w
hath once ned of his-hard uſage, under Ga Fort. ridicuFd
er a ſham ſort of a way, his leughing at the tory of P
noe Dover Gut cer he be-papiſted him bow Coley
ſent him to his Beads z' and how he Fant Io
with the Popezyet this is remarkable;jin all that ridiculous Stuff,
doth not fay, He is ao P ; only endeavours to ſham a belief upon
us,a3 he would dythis of his Carina] Signs. po ewaiao Fon, -
why uid he always forget to put in the Fifth of November , by the
name of Gu 4. which he did eas gre
nk pert hare Keatd tn fees Re orgories Þ voy * acc he,
HiOahs, and hs Promiſes ae, pecan thoſe things hen


F


Opo” Reformaris. |
Cauſe is concetn'd, "If hewas no Papiſt, or
OR


= oy


hear Who eres Papi whyydi Aeeadoywour to
vertsto that Perſuaſion?. But4t 146 notmame — I
knowhls 1 apct Fobdeoyn, caring, ByHeavens'tis alye;will be the anſwer,
Sree: ivouted.to Convert Mil B:xDivine of the Church
7 the Popi : perfwal  Whichthis -Was/not
pos *then'he w i &d Gentleman in the
ns t Perfuafion, whodid eadectons to-convince and con-
Conran, De-G:vtto $& [000 MreB:) Gy as muck for thar GIG
t -G. Mr- y-as m that
Yying Religionias any Coſuſtof them lf could dozand der theg bag |
nged {otic Sheets of Paper in Controverly, the Dodo let his
expedted Conyert'reſtin his 6wn Perſuaſion,” At this my yrory
G. was very angry, and with cauriting Language told Mr. B. that
did pick, mn laftof all be foxced-to have him to Father Pe-
Fre, 4 nd Farhtr 'El#, two Notori6us and Arct-Traytors, at that, time
very fthous and iiiduſtrious todeftroy the Proteſtant Religion, and
ſubvert the Lyws of the Land. AnotherGanldnn; wasont fit R,P, -
. whom he alſo did perſuade to turn Papitt,) aid told! him it was the
only ring Religion 3 and he did foreſee by the-Scars from the &: of
h and'V in A, that/it. would/root out'the:Northern Hereſy; and'be
ho Univerſal Faith over all Exrope; and thereforedidhadriſthim ge.
turn betimes; and be an cpu peltbeathoteone.te
Prefertiient when the Govertiment'came into Catholick Hands z by
nr Me may fee on what Topick this worthy :Gentleman, builds
his ion; Dans what'made hirn at laſt cuen profeſtPapiftz..npon


Fd. e\ it adr , '6f Nod pymarrids ar 45 pervueyÞ atmo this
wetbot downs Treaſon


TS ny
Kingdom'of Engjand'? Athly , ger orrg s
anc in nine Paragraphs about Pope Joan;> the NE
late. In which I do obſerve two-things 3 1.-What a'pretty-ſort. of
endeavour he uſeth to'put the whole Story into doubt and gneny
how many ſhairishath he lug'd in byheadand-fhoulders,;to
the"Reader about'it ? - How' many Objections care there. raid, ro
- make the thing ſeem 4 improbable? How many Doubts peagoaped
in reference to Qualityof Scate, and <a Pata ie H |
reijier it impollible? ? How thany: CAIRO 9: reflected, on


Fae Day nl


| -4 ing cine oy tg =r4
beta 4 | | We SY


> ly the grou
one
= rain no
nOfangs <3


=


pl 21p2b141c C


. 103 £
”* .
' ICY [0
* l - 1 4 =
HO STMarrreet TOC F
, % "oF
; ® > r- s «
ic L ,
P "
=


i KY


thing remarkabJe, % ſhe Bladclthok X
: he _ , th ovine to.be 6 rt
do my ws our to oſs fog
———_
common Praia


rr Matter be all
«Sx kg
No EEE ny ets
on / is wri-


EP: Tk oog ha
to; an of
Tg Detambitares


MIVCIS TIOHATY TE ares, Of
Pr ns en 'S of &
pYz nor ji i to them
MS hith. ni
Cs
| ; which We itizy ſuppoſe a
And bavedan AN heh fd


Y EI ' , 4 -atroe _


Ea
ed'to hide Poftc-


f*oatihoe beinducel to believe, no
horiſfys, as br None ory
| t hole merk5ry oY
i] Sr, CODE
Chipu6 of Bok 1 in is Rar, Dee , where


he


Opics Reformatum.
he hath made mention'of a Book that'is loſt, 5: e. Liber Magne Com-
poſitionis but not a word of any elſe, as 1 could meet with, And
- fo Iconfe toconfider the Aphoriſms themſclves. |
- Iinthe'57th Aphoriſm,*tis ſaid; That they who have " or = aſcend-
ing, ſhall be the cauſe of their own Death. Which is direRly repugnant to
the Dodrine delivered in the Chapter, De' Mortit; Book 4th,of
his ®ragripartite, where he makes no uſe of any of the Houſes 'in his
Judgment about Death, but the Midbeaven;/ neither doth he take
notice of the '$tþ Howſe in any thing that relates to Death z, and it is
apon the myſtick' Power'of that Houſe, the 37th Aphoriſm is founded.
Now" he ha&*thought the obſcure Houſes had any power in that
ing of Death wheri he wrote his Apboriſmr,he would have cettain-
ly made ſome diſcovery of his Opinion, -when he was writing that
Chapter, De Morte. But neither in that,nor the other of Diſeaſes,doth
he take any notice of it in the leaſt.But the reaſon'of this Aphoriſm is,
Becauſe, wherr Y aſcends,then G'is Lord koth of the Aſcendant and
Eighth Houſesz and whery = aſcends, then 2 is Lady of both thoſe
Houſes 3 ſo.that the Lord of the Aſcendant, ' being Lord of the 8th
Houſe, makes the Native fome way or other, the Cauſe and Author
of his own Death, which isan abfutd thing to believe, and that the
Houſes ſhould-give #power*to the Stars,' becauſe the Signs [ appoint-
ed them for their Houſes] happen to be upon thoſe empty Spaces in
the Heavens, which they call Houſes, the'whole Scheam being divid-
ed into twelye equal partss and do (9 > ma this is not a very likely
tory,” and that Prolomy doth agree with Peolomy very well ? What
fay you? I houtd alſo have obſerved; thatin the fame Aphorifm;
it is ſaid, He #has bath "7 or % aſcending on'the Horoſcope, ſhall be +he
cenſe and autbor of hit own Preferment and FI 7 and the reaſon is,
becauſe the fame Star is Lord of the Firſt and Tenth Houſes, which
is direQly oppoſite to Ptolomy*s Doftrine in the Chapter, De Digni-
rate. Ando is- the"'q6th Aphoriſm. |
"The 76th Aphoriſmdiſcourſeth about violent Deaths,and_ lays the
cauſe of the violence to the c__— h in the Tenth 5/and yer the
Native hays muſt dyc of ſuch a Death,as the Sign on the Cufp
of the Fourth fignifies.. If it'be an Ezribly: Sign,be ſhall be knocked on
the-Head by the fallof # Houſe. If @ Watery Sign:be (hall be drowned. But
if a- Humane Tin be ſhall be Hanged. And at laſt tells us in the end
of the Aphoriſm, That it 2 Fortzne ſhall be in the Eighth Houſes be ſhall
be near theſe dangers, but ſhall not dye by them. Which overthrows. the
whole Dodtrine of Prolomy concerning, violent Deaths, and natural
i , © too.


N\


%


ns Geka:
too. For he lays no ltrcſs-00 any of the Houſes for v

the Polition of.the Luminaries, ©e, and for the Ii de Det
doth not ſp much as take notice of it throughout: whale Book,
25 I. remember; but for the Midheaven,he mentions it twice inthe
Chapter of Death, and Konnorts and. then no ways favopringthis
 Aphoriſm, if yourunder and: his Principles, Where it
is plain, "utter wk <y qapugneht tothe Dectrine of


Ptolomy his @uadripartite.
FF, "hotke $th and 66th Aphoriſms, . you find the word ProfeGion
in the Engliſh and Latin, .notianlyin the Tranſlation of
pane Ve in yes: Jovianus Pomtenwoallo 3 hg he 1g
Commenting 0n t e Centelogurmem, wes as a ſtrange Ex
the 58th Aphogiſm; and tclls us *— contuſed-motjon, which he fa-
-  thers on this Aphariſm,and endeayours to prove it bytiis own Nas
rig, hich he calls an &phetical Profedtion, {'of which more wy
and Fbdieve itis a contuſed mation bimſelf, becauſc he uſes.
terms in his Diſcourſe | that are really doubtful-aud fuſpicious is |


themſelves; as, 7; Propree #4ni0; Girculorune anfratius,

& fllloram form. -my preceſe: nobis Cogytts on rev But-when

he comes t@ Comment onthe Cote myerto td ord »
r fort of Dodbrine, of which!


#6, of BoakſUL., about AUD an


of the word in the rom Pwr

Pwr anp eo) far .moge 'abiruſc than that Te: xt in Book Jl. and
Chap.:14. where Ptelomy doth-lay down that Rule y. 4-91 ru
Whence it is vifble; that the Centilogaram, and the Auadiparitte,
were the produtts of 'two Heads, and | beſpeak$uhem..aMo- men of
— Parts. and Abilnics, But befades, this word NINE
Tise:zmaT


R


*%


4 BY Opus Reformatum. |
| loi ®; doth refer: 12 Motion,” and that £00 of the Hilegicals,
#8 they all owng and 1'do not remanber; That 1 ever found that


word 4 r:of his-two laſt Books, : where he diſcourſeth of Na-
tivities alone; but when he-makes mentiowee the Hilegics] Poincs,
healways aſcth theſe words, Apira@ rhrO-. Per omnes caſas veriata,
As you may fee.in his 11th, r3th, & 1 4th-Chaptersof his 3d Book,
and in the 13th of his Fouzth, - And ro tell/youthe truth, & really


think that-word ThuizerO- is ill tranſlated; for it truly fignifies,, ©


Arbieladio, aut -via in qua-aliquis ambulas. And therefore is referable to


Diredicn, Laſtly, As to-this thing of ProfeQions, as nowunder- -


flood, 1 look am it as-2 confuſed groundlefs thing, and inconfenta-
neous both tro-Natare and its Motions for the Order of Nature is
regular,” bat rhis is wholly ixrcgular, For Example, They make
each Houſe to move 2 witole Sign every Year3>and if you have the
Pen pantry as , the next year you ruſt have
feQly in difordey, and-no ways mg toany Figure in our Table
of Hoſts. '\For when you: comme to! have't degr. of XK aſcending,
| ang. 6 viowey mona »9degr. of +7 on the Tenth,

-butin 4 mom Figare you malt have 2 degr. of VS culmi-
neting, and fo-forward every Year 4 by which way you will have
ng-regular Figure again," rill comes to be on the Aſcendant, as


- - « Birch; Hence'yoa may re, if you pleaſe, what a confufion we


ore brought 'to by following Authors without Authority, and what
pretty Inventions have been found oat to kick Truth our of doors.
And #fter allthis, They render Ileeizwr@-in the 77th Aphoriſin,
to frgnify DireRtions , 3s Trapezantivs allows in his |
thereon3-and yet with'it, decauſe he will not loſe his Opinion,
yjumbles in a ame Difcourſe of Profections likewiſe, bur to as littte
pi s the former, And Idodeclare, Iknow no uſe of thething,
norany Authority for the name , if they infinuate any other Moti-
on by that name, than the 'rcal and natural Motion of the A, rant
cxtor im DireQion,-of which let every man judge as he finds him--
fe inform'd by his Reading, _inftrudted'by his Reaſon, and in-
<Hin'd inhis Prefitice.  Butcherearc-divers other things that I could
take notice of under thisronfideration, were ie wholly needful, as
'the'78th, and 88th Aphoriſms, - which do not want a deficiency
* FCufficient for Objetions of this natures butt judge this enough to
 thew-what ought.co'be conkidered, and to excite abler Pens to cx-
patiate


degree ff there; when-you know by Oblique Aſcention


"T0


*


Opus Reformatum. |
patiate thereon for the benefit of thoſe that may come after us; and.
to let them know, all is not truth that is Printed and-Publiſhed to
the World under the name and notion of Aﬀrology ; and allo, that
I care not a ruſh\whether they believe me or no, vr en

I hope no man that hath commonſence, and hath alſo read the

partite, Will ever believe the 95th Aphoriſm was penn'd by
Prvlomy,where it is ſaid, That the Images and forms of things &c.that viſe
with every diftind decanate in the Aſcendant of Nativities, ſhall rew what
Trade, Art, or Imployment the Native will cbuſe to live by. Which,if you
pleaſe to compare with the Doctrine delivercd in the-4th Chapter'of
the 4th Book, where he diſcourſeth at large, De Magifterio z you will
find, that two things were never writ more oppolite.and contrary
than they two'are.. For Prolomy makes no. uſe cither of the Aſcen-
dant, or the Facesof the Signs, or the Images and: Forms of men or
things therein riſing; which is fo abſurd a DoGtrine to father upon
Prolomy,if but compared with his own words in his Puadripartite,that
No man can aſſert it to be his, without bluſhing the fame moment.
His words are theſe,” Magiſterii domwius ſumitur ex duobus modis, & ſole
&: figno Medii Cali. Which in my Opinion have no Relation, Pro-
rtion, or Likeneſs to the words in the'Aphoriſtical Text, and yet
h believed to be our Authors words, when thereis nothing more
unlike in the very ground and principle it ſelf; and for that reaſon
I cannot believeit to be the inc of the Great Prolomy.

Laſtly, And to mention no more, pray look jvto the 56th Apho-
riſ#, in which you find a lame account of- the Moon's-nature in ber
ſeveral diſtances from the Sun; where he tells-you-from the New

to the Full | for ſo Funderſtand it] the Humidity and Humour of
Natural Bodics doth increaſe, but trom the Full to the New it de-
creaſcth'z. which in-general terms I believe may be true enough, But
then, to what purpoſe ſhould Protomy give us an. Aphoriſm here a-
bout a thing of this nature, and leave it ſo imperfc& as he hath in
the Centiloquizem, | if his ] when he had long before given it us in
plainer words, and'more intelligible terms to be underſiood | for I
ſuppoſe theſe Aphoriſms were, writ lat] in the 6th Chapter of his
1& Book, where he plainly tells us, - Lana enim 2 Conjundione, donec ap-
paret dimidiata, magis ft rigatrix. Inde nſque ad plenilunium calefacit.
A plehilmnio , done iterum dimidiata apparet, deficcat. Ab eq, tempore,
donec occultatur, frigifacit. Which is in plain words and terms,caly to
be apprehended. Then what need had Ptolomy after this, to give. us
another Aphoriſm imperfet ang lame, unleſs he lived to forget
/ 'wnat


what he had writ himſelf, and fo in his doating,
Yid thatwwhich was next to nothi
many mote of thoſe Aphoriſms in the Cemi


fambling days,
z which I judg this,and a great
wn to be; nay, there


are ſome of them ſeem to me to be'very'idle or imperfe&ly given to
us,' as the 16, 50, 65,78, 87, and diversothers of them, that may
be juſtly called in queſtion. Thus 1 have given you my Opinion,


wm of Pto-


why 1 think the Hundred Aphoriſms, called, the Centiloquiume
lomy,arerindeed and itn truth not his. And thus far have I gone
alfo to inform Mr.'7:G. and his Antagonift, in the ro8th Paragraph,


That thoſe Aph


rams are miftaken asto their Author,and that they


were not his whorn'they believe; and affirm them to be; and there-
fore.if they will have them to be his; and that they can prove it too,


they will very


much impair the Authority of Profomy in my Judg-


ment and Opinion x '#nd theonly reaſon-is, becauſe the Text in the


Duadripariiie is never to be reconciled 'to thoſe. in the: Aphoriſims,
unle6 fore: witty ' Moderator car tinite their Principles by the


Myſtery-of Language ina-Learned Comment upon borh of them.
In a word, this is notthe only time that F: G: hath affirmed thoſe
; > Aphoriſims to be Ppolomy's; and chereforg] am of opinion,that cither


he never read the
beyond the bare words, knowing


ie; or if he hath, henever underſtood it
nothing of the principles, nor de-


of the Author, as to the Phyloſophick ;Attroltogical-Practice
thereof z but if theſ&two ſhould happen to betrue | which 1 am ſure


icy are not Þ Lam |
with anotherr and to be phin with y


fident he never did compare one Principle
am partly (ure he cannot g


- bot Fhope hewill endeavoareo learn. being a man of ſuch mighty


Parts and In
he is]; if the
infaluble as her


nuity, as he hithſelF in divers of his Writiogs tells us
Hale; df Rome hath not inade him as perfe& and
f, which accompliſhment moſtof her Babes reach


ome arrive at and ſceing hehath been of that Sacred Carine


oO many years,


"would be ſtrange if he ſhould not have attain


| ſomething of her mighty Qualifications and Virtucs, both in Mora!


lityand Religion, and to have arrived at the unerrin
poſitive Perfection. Which if he be, then farewel all


Principle of


apes of Re-


formation in my old Friend, for where that ſort of truth hath once
prevailed, there is ſeldom, any admittance or entrance for Heretic:#
Perſuaſions and Inftrudtions, cither-to reform his Errors.in Science,
or his Hobby-horſe Religion. Lord ! that ever a fellow ſhoulA twrn,Pa-
fiſt, after having gone
teſtant !


twenty years #0 St. Peters Weſtminſter; as 's Pro-


Having


| CO GEE SG

Having tun over that paxt of hjs-proof that depends on Anthori-
Mook} rr lars a cometo the Secand part of his proof,and
that is his Train of rence, a$.he hath, enticled it, and proppunded
to doitinTen Nativities, which Lſhall ditiaictly examine by them-
ſelves; and prove the tnajox part-of they falle, as-well as the Pro-
teffor Crameell's was. - And for thoſe few that are true, I will hew
that they uponother and more probable Cauſes, than that
of mal Sig Anglcs x and:ia the examining of them, 1 ſhall
conſider the poſſibilityof their: Truth } by thEprobabiligy of theis
Accidents that did attend them both in their Lives, and at the timgs
of Death. For I'will-not take them is Fonts 0am as he hath
from others.and ſo take it for granted, becauſehe ſays ity and whoſo-
ever ſhall examine his ColleRtion of Genituzes,ſhall certainly find the
major number of them'to be.falfe;hecauſe taken upon truſt,as he hath
done the reſt he hath publiſtied; for the moſt part, , by which means


” the Readers are-abuſed: And the firſk Nativity le begins with; -is


that of Charles ers ery =p] Sweden;whom he tells us, was born


_ atthe time inſcribed in the Figure following, ſet Prolemaicaly.


The King of Swedeland, -
5 : — i — ) ten F ,


«
, - 4 .
;


_ —


ws Refern;
It would have been very convenient, if my worthy good Fiend
would have been fo kind as as to have givenust elliarer
Great Prince's Birth; but Teeir we haveitnor,] muſt pb vg ot wen beſt
. uſe of that he hath hexc af ed vs; and is Nativity, he ſays, in
his Colle&ion he corrected by the M.C. 4, at which time
Queen Grin ſurxendred, and he was crowned, being then about
of Age.and at 37 he dyed, which without further trouble to
x4-will accept for truth, and ask him if he doth really be-
\Gad 3H we im which he affirms did do it
| 4, and ifKe Qill ay he doth, 1 would
have: him tell us by what Rule it muſtdo it here, and-miſs in 20 or
30 Tang rac down as an Anim. pon {ed <Go-
elixoy_ the yp ate, and Reputation of the
| = i the © CG


. ticalPlace,w 5 ted, who * the 2. ls ing and therefore 1


Kirt the , could come at
time to


he was einer 1 he Who rp 12 bes” i53 forl pra certain
. that two-DixeFions haye more force than ans, whether good or
bad... But 1 will deſcend to Examples in. A trvitios and the
| ſhall be his own., oe gue true, -a$ he hath printed it in his
Natinitier, and owned it-twenty five years after in bis

| {eb fry that his M. C, ad © ©. came up in the year 1679.
which if ſo, then the Midheayen to the Body of h came up in the
- = ae he £670, Or Ry pho 1671. and was {6 fax from killing him,
deliroying his that- be wh then in the top of his

Sig i bo 82 uffling any one whom he
| Gre and no ways Sick, or. in i Janger | of Death. The ſecond is
the PpOART of Guſtavus Adolphus, printed by my Friend likewiſe,
Vide Gen. 'Þ, af; where By ets him pals the Midheaven to
the B of Mars, and Square of Satws , from. violegt parts of
ven, as. ſmaot bly as could be z and kills him about thaee years


er, with the Ss to the Square of Mars, and Oppoſition of Sa-
tzrn.. , But then, Ay why did not, thoſe two other Directions


- kill him three years


re, ah. as 006 Kill this mgn'? Frag


Opus Reformatum.

he will ay, becauſe the Sim is Hileg, and in the 4/corffam; why,
+ then; by the ſame Rule, is not the Moon Hileg here in the Ninth
Houſe, and fo of the ſame force with the other? Bur Tfuppoſe, 'if
he had. not found the Swn complying with his skill readily, it had
been but altering the Midbeaven and Aſcendant two or three degrees,
and then the other ſhould have'done the feat'a8 currently as in this
man's, - With this alſo, conſider the Nativity of Noftr ws, where


the Swn is placed on the Cuſp of the Midheaver yet he out-
lived the Midbeaven, and' Shs to the Body:of ppoſitiva of
Mars, Oppoſition of Saturn , and Oppoſition © Lord of tlic


Eighth Houſe, and the three latter all in ConjuncTion in Cancer. Now,
isnof.this a very firange (tory, that the Stars ſhould be fo plaguy Par-
tial in their Influence, -to kill Charles Guſtavus, 'becaule he-was 2
fighting King z and let Noſtjadamus live, becauſebe was  Popiſh
Prophet?, 'Tis very Mange? one lingle DireQipt kill'd"Charle; Gre-
ftavis, two would not kiff Guftavas Adolpbis, nur for Noſtradanins,
and yet all to the fame point and paxtof the Figure, the Midheaven.
Nay, in his own Nativity, it did not ſo much as'make him Sick,
nor give the leaſt ſymptom of danger to'his Life; altho the, Aſcen-
dant was Ger of The" ys er 2k i ot Yangon

| Doth this worthy Felend of thine belleve,that any man can think
or judge theſe irreconcileable Stories camever be rapked among the
truths of Aſtrology, or that any man ſhall be ſo void of Reaſon and
Judgment to believe his Notion in the one, and, make his under--
!tanditg ftoop to a lye, arid give conſent t6 the truth of the other's
being oppoſite one to another, as to the Notion and Practice. For
+Þ)t is moſt cettain, If the'Body of Saturn [ or Oppoſition either} to.the
Cuſp of the Tenth, did or doth ever kill, 1 think it muſt always
do it without Rules 'of Exception z but here he forceth a No-
tion upon us, which he openly contradicts by perrgieting the con- -
trary to pals for Do&rine in other Nativities, as you may (te in My.
Sepkins's Nativity for one, where Satvrn is in Sapitary in Oppoſition
to the Sn, and yet the. Mid-heaven to the ition of one, and
the Body of the other would not kill; In the Nativity of Mr.'Ste-
pben Rogers, the Midheaven tothe Body of Mars did not kill; p, 138.
Mr. Gataker paifed the Midheaven to the Body of Satarn and Mays,
without Song bin any injury to his Health ; and fo did Dr: Mor-


#01, p92: pals and out-live the'M. C. to the Body of Satwrn 3 and
yet this great Prince muſt fall by a Direction, that cither wonld or


could not kill gny Body clſe. A very bard Pate ©


E cans *


\


=
/


** I cannotdeny the Midheaven.to the Body of Fwpiter, tobe a Di-
reQion ſuitable enough to ſignify that of his Coronation; yet do not
believe it was that whichi'gave hint that Promotion. But for the Bo-
dy of £ turn forhis Death, 1do declare. it isa thivg impoſlible, and
never tobe allowed by/-any man that pretends to undertftand Aftro-
logy z unleſGit is fora ſham to ſerve a turn-when nothing elſe will

'do, the Rule being direRly againſt it 3 and you ſee here are (eyeral
mens Nativities where it did not kill z nay, in his own too; and. for
that very reaſon, I think he oaghr to tell the World why it did noc
kill, And Tara fare thoſe:Examples that do, and muſt prove anew
Notion { as-this of hisis] ought to-berunquettionable;z and theſe of
his are not,and upon very godd Authority.too. And I'do dare him
to ſhew me an Example in a true-taken Nativity, where the Sw or
Moon were givers of Life,and the DircQions to the Midheaven kill'd,
and the 4pheta at the ſame time free from all Malefick Rays by Di-

reQtion, as int this of Charles -Guftzvas's the Iluftrious King of Swe-

; den.” 1 ſay, If he can ſtew me a true-taken Nativity [that I cary be

ſatisfied is true, and no trick or ſham upon we | where ſuch a Dire-

ion kill'd under the circumſtantial Qualifications beforemention-
ed, will diſown my Dreanathe (Great Ptolomy,for 1 do think I partly
underſtand him.and am partly ſure he,nor no man elſe can (hew fuch

a one, if the Doctrine of Prolomy [ which of all is the moſt rational ]

is truczand I can alſo aſſure you, that it is not every one that fays he
\ knows and underſtands him,that ſpeaks truth. And to convince you,

" 'Tcould, if need were, give Examplefſafficient. Now, to ſum up al},

«there is but one Direction to prove this Nativity to be true; accord.

'thg to JobaGad.'s CorreQiion , and that is the M.C. ad Corpus Fovis

for his Coronation z and for this Accident by altering the Figure a

Kttle, I can give you three or four Dixeions, that are as probable.
as that he gives,if not more; and the firſt is, the Midheaven to the
* of & z The-ſecondis;the M. C, to the A of T ; The third is,the
Midheaven to the # of the Þ, and Ly of. the © ; Bat the fourth,
and the moſt probable,” was the Þ to the Mundane Parrallel of Z,

and this ſuddenly followed with the © to the like Mundane Par-
rallel of Z; and then-the © and » will come to the Mundane

Paratlcl of hfor his Death dire and convers; and loo the Zodi--

acal Parallel of &; yetI confels this laſt DireQion is ſomething an

- knproper one, btcaulfe they are, when the Deion is tinilhed, both

out of the Ecliptick 3 and for that reaſon, 1 do not look on that as
a Cauſe, but a Concomitant.» - The © and ZC.in the Revolution

Ia :


i


T1032 -


< |
DJ - Latitud. Paris: |

; % - —_
Ye? ; / C <p
Fs TH: ia PRenAty” C


ini & and 8 to the Þ's Radical place, and the » jn diret. O © &
his Radical place,and the Þ by ſecondary motion in © to the ©zand
this is the moſt proper: Potion that-Ican-thipk rational to ſelet -
for this gzcat Man's: Birth, not having the:eſtimate time; and the _
Figure agreeing to this-time,-yill be about fix degrees of Gemini
onthe Tenth, and about the middle of Virgoaſcending, which doth
his time above an hour... And Tknow no reafon, but that
may be as farout in this, as he was in the Freach King's, that he +


- printed at the ſame time, and would fill have juſtified it [no doubt]
_ had not Morinws long ago convinced him. . And to conclude, Fam
not ſure this Figure that I have ſuppoſedor the King of Sweden's


Birth is truez but I am confident his is not, and thereforc it will
but -meanly plead for- the Honour and Power of Cardinal Signs on the
Angles of « Nativjty. ERS 454

* The next he-makes uſe-of to prove his wild Notion, is the Na-


tivity. of the Dake of Gziſe, and it is-the Poſition following z the


*%


Upon this Poſition, Fobx would alſo build his imaginary Whim
of Cordinal Signs, which he hath here, by what Authority I know
nat placed on the four Angles! He neither tells us his eftimate time,
how,..or by what-mecans-hecame by. it; hor by what Directions and
Accidents he hath corrected its but with s fort of Confident Im-

ition pats it upon us, as if we were bound ta believe it becauſe

e fays it- , And for that very reaſon, I do miftrult the truth.of it,
well-knowilng, that all be ever did in Nativities, was for-the mot


part attended with lictle elſe hut Ignaranceand Error to ar'extira-


ordinary degree z and for thoſe'things that he hath befriended the


/


World: with , they were all cither-borrowed of fiolen | as I ſhall -


prove hereafter | the method being only;his. But as for this Nativi-
ty, it may he true as to its Effets, and not haveiCardinal Signs on
the four igles, as. you may obſerye by. making it a little r,
and yet the Polition every way as forcible. with. £ on the zoth, and
X onthe Aſcendant,. as by having theſe Signs that he hath placed
there or it may have Cardinal Signson the four Angles, and not a
ruſh the better for that, excepting the four Plancts that: Y and =
carries along with them. «For it'is the Planets, ' riot the Signs that
do, inthe Opinion of. ” Aftrologers, that were Mafiers
of what they- influence the-Afﬀairs of.Moztals, and give
the vatiety of Fortune, good or bad, to the Sons of Men. For when-
ever P makes uſe of the Signs in. his Fudgment on Drſcaſes ,
» Quealities of the Nind, Dignini, Richer,, and Death z, It is for

no other tcaſom, but ſe the areithere, as-I cn tl aftrate
in all choſe things: mentioned, if it were xcally neteſſary to
this my preſent þ and that it would. not (well this Treatiſe
GG But-l ſuppoſe the: Quotation is fafhcient, and therefore let
thoſe that axe willing to know-more of the matter, read the Text,
and-fee whether 1 ſpeak truth or not. Before my worthy good
Friend; F. G. had arrived at this mighty Myftery of Cardinal! Sagne,
there were-other Cauſes that did do as well as theſe, as you may ſee
in hls: Dottrine- of- Nativities, p. 163. where he hath: given-you the
Poſitions as Argaments for KinglyGenitzres, in all which the Planets
only areconfideredz1.and ſametimes with them, their Domal Dig-
nitics,, but never that, withdut:the Planet, but. often:the Planct
without that, - Why ſhould not the Lord of the Temth, in-& withithe
© in the Aſcendane inrhis Exaltation, give confiderable Preferment,
ant Taiſe a-Man above the degree of his Birth? Why ſhould not
four Planets ip the two Equinodtial Signs, give a ran 2 Fame and
F Reputation


——


-


"-"Opus Reformatam.
Repatation in the World, and make him popnlarin his Generati-
on? Why ſhould rot the'Þ {who'is Light of the Time] in %To
the Midheaven, ind in Aro in the'7th,” with the Virgins Spike,
give a man the Favour of his Prince; arid the Love of the People,
and theſe for ſome remarkable Actions and Services to his Country?
Why ſhould not 2 in exa&t & to the Midheaven, applying in 5
| her own Houſe, be allowed to.give Hmour, Preferment, Renown, and
Repmtation'in his Generation? -I ſay, Why ſhould nor. all theſe ipo-

r Poſitions and ' Configurations , give the Duke of Guiſe that

- Honoxr, Preferment, and Popularity, that he enjoyed inhis time, with- -
out crowding in the Cardinal Nigns to give that, which the other
were fully able to perform. -And to this purpoſe, pray obſerve but
my Friends own Rules io his DoQtrine of Nativities, [' that-rake
place in-this Poſition ]-p..46. - The Om the' Aſcendant in bis Exxalr a14-
an 5; He will Rule aver others He will acquire Authority ,' Honour{ aid
yr Princes ; He will have great Increaſe of Rither; He will be
life, "and Powerful." And in p55. he lays, Jupiter in the 7th
declares the Native to be Vidlorious over a yore, Enemies, 6cc- In p.
#64. he'fays; her the Lord of the 10th ſhill be poſited in the Aſern-
dant, i gives great Authority #0 the Native over Vulg ar Perſons > He will.
be Beloved and Homonred of Great Perſons; avid ſhall be imployed in Officer
roy near FE I &c. and Ao great things and buſineſs
of the Kingdom ; He alſo receives (Honour anil Profit from his Employment
_ and Profeſſion." | Now, if theſe Ruiles\{| all which'take place in this

Figure that he hath rm ty We truc;- why ſhould they not
be ſo flifl?. And if they are fo now, -we have Aſtrological Reaſons
enough to prove nome; ob; Grandeur and: Fortuhe ;
without flying to this filly ſham of Catdinal Signs, -inventcd for-no
othe:reaſon; but-to ſhew his Skill in the managing a bad Caitiſe, and
to.try his {atereſt among the Aﬀtological Stadents, how far they
would'Jdance after his Pipe, in. lying with thoſe Errors that he
thought fit toiimpoſe on the World, Orelſeitwas to out-brave his
then Adverlary with a canting Notion that hechad never heard-of},
nor read in any Aſtrological Author, - before this Learned Anſwer
that he was pleaſed togive him, called-Cardings Coli. {3010

| Biit after-all this'noiſe aud talk, Let- us compare this Poſitibn
with ſome other Aphoriſms of Jobs's; in tiks Do&rine of Nartivities,
_ and you ſhall ſee how he doth beflave him, and by his Kalzy," what

a Knave he makes him.co bes And firſt; in'p. 46. he ſays, When
Saturn ſhall bein 1be Aſcendant,- be gives matly Troubles and Difficxtties, |

16108 mel ancholly


/


- » Opus Reformatam,


- . ”—


mlaneholly Pertwibations ; bath of Mind and Body: bis Life hall be full


of Dolowrs, Grief, and Troubles 5 and it will be a Terror for bim to live.
In p. 106. he tells us, That when the Lord of the Aſcendant ſhall be jn
the Twelfth, it gives #he Native many Enemies, and much Evil, and ma-
ny Oppoſitions from them ; he will be in danger of much Impriſonment, and
many Moleftatiens and. Infortunacies from Malicious Perſons, Pray let
me delire the Reader not tobe furpriled-at theſe Contradictions,
when he compazes theſe Aphoriſms with them juſt now mention-
ed;for you ſee (acoordingto-Fobn's Principlesand PraQtice in Aftro-
logy) we do as\Gamefters'in their Paſtime at '/Nine-pins, ſet up a
whole Family by the power of the Stars, and immediately kick
them down again. - Butwto-proceed, in pi;.95. Dodir. Nativ. he ſays,
_ Satyrn Significator of Mangers, and- ill dignified, | as in this Nativity | it
makgs him Enviaus, Covetous, Timerous,.a Lyar, and a perfett Hypoerne.
Anda little after-he ſays, The Sun Significator of Mannerr,as bere, makes
a-Proud, Reftleſs, turbulent, DominecringiFellory ;, ane whoſe -Prom»ſcs ſpall


105


end-in_ſmagk; In the ColleR,:Genit. Aph; 12. The Sun in the Aſeen- - *


Zant makes eminent Boaſters, and very proud Perſons ; and by the ſame rule
' that Mars tbere-mkes Lyars, Satutn there with bim-muſt make very decert-
ful,, perfidions Men and Hypoeriter. And theres one Aphogiſm more
among . thoſe in his:ColleRion,. which qa overthrows this
whole'Figuret:ſelfzand we know Aphoritms ought to beundenia»
_ ble Rults,and-next toiinfallible ; for their very Name tells us, That
they-arcRulesiſepaxated fromthe reſt, to be oblerved as Maxims of
truth. ' And that:is the 25th Aphoriſm, where-he fays, That the
Lord of the Aſcardant ſtronger than the Lord of the Seventh, -the Native
alreays overoomes his Enemaes ; and the contrary. Bat in the Figure of
this great Duke, we find #-in the Seventh in L to the I; and £
Lady. of ;the Seventh in-G her own:Houſe. So that the Seventh
Houſe, /and his Lord, arc far ſtronger than. the Aſcendant and his
Lord,by which Rule: he ſhould be always overcome by his Enemies,
that. is, be ſhould be unfertunate, But on theeontrary, healways
avercatue his Enemies, and was very Fortunate, and did great things
_ in his time, as, niay be {een by thoſe that pleaſe to read that Book
called his Memoirs. For | do not intend to give the Hiſtory of his
Life, -and ſuppole. you do not expett it. |
But the; great and; principal Objection that I have againſt the
truth of the Figure, f{ai&to be-his Nativity, is that of bis Death in the
year 1664. for which-L am contident, my good Friend .G. can give
no reaſen, nor allign na caulc dafage! from that Figure and Po-


ſition,
v1


-


| Opus Reformatum.
tion. I ay again, They cannot give any DireRion for his Death, Tet
them make what point they pleaſe Groer of Life,or Hileg ; and 1 hope


' If my good Friend will allow:the Cardinal Signs to have ſuch power


[ with the good Poſitions here dylan 46 giveſuch ſtupendious Ef- *
tes inthe Aﬀairs and Adtions off his Life, he will undoubtedly give
us ſome accout alſo of- the DireQion, or other myſtick Cauſe of - his -
Death.For ifOliverCromwel,CharlesGuftarus,andWilliamLaud had ſig-
nificantCauſes in nature to foreſhew theirDeaths;T hope he will not
deny that Authorityand Aſtrological Demonſiration in the Nativity
of this great and-illuftrious Duke of Gaiſez and therefore, if there is
no cauſe to be aſſigned for his Death by my Friend Fobn,or any of his -
Admirers; the argument reſolves it ſelf into this Dilemma, i c. Either
Aftrology is deficient and not able to give-an accannt of the matter ; or elſetbe
Fignre given by my-Friend is falſe and fiditious, and induſtricuſly made to
ſerve a turn 4s occafiont did require; as 1 ſhall make appeat by what fol-
lows. The ©, whois in this Figure ſet to the time inſcribed the true
Giver of Life, and is dixeQed to no bad or malefick Rays at the time
of the Duke's death, for he paſt the © tothe O of &, at almoſt 34


 yearsof Ape, Ark. 3 deg. and to the L of the Yat 40 years of Age,


Ark,3 9d. 33m. and tothe L of X at 47 years of Age, Ark 46d.11 m.
nor were there any Antiſcion--in their-way, to be pretended to in
many years before-nor after. The Aſcendant, which according to


- their Principles may alſo kill, if direed to ill Rays,for all-the © is-in
the ſame Houſe, | as -he hath givenus an Example in Oliver Cronvell}-


-bat that alſo is tree from all Malctick Beams by direQion z for the
Hor oſcope paſſed-the 0 of &*[ modo Communi] at36 years of Age,
Ark 354. 41m and the © of the Yat 42. Ark 41 d. 53m. and the
L of Þ at 49. Ark;48 d; 31 m. which-was in full force and power
atthe time of- his Death. :The Þ was under noill Rays at thattime
neither, forſhe had abouta year and a half before paſſed by the body -
of $ without Latitude; and ſhe doth not govern either 4th, 6th, Sth,
or 12th Houles, [a thing of mighty wſe among them all] therefore
ſhe cannot-do any miſchief, But the Midheaven pafſed the O of 2
much about thae eime;yet I can hardlybelieve they will lay any ſtreſs
upon that neither, and that for the reaſons beforementioned. And
yet ſhe isan odd ſort of a Gentlewoman, and being among violent


. - faxed Stars, ſhe might give him a plaguy lift at that time,by the ſame


rule that the. M.C. to the B ody of h kill'd Charles Guſtavus ; perhaps |
he might dye of a Love-lick fit, becauſe ſhe is Lady of theSeventh;or_
clic for want of Money, becauſe ſhe is Lady of the Second, Ha,bo,bat


Now


—


%


_—_—_


-


4


{


—LI -


= -Opus Reformatum?

Now, under theſe conſfiderations.I will refer the whole matter to
any impartial Artiſt for Judgment| provided he doth not change his
Religion too often,] whether he reatly thinks this to. be the true. Na-
tivity of the Duke of Gwiſe,and that he had the Cardinal Signs on the
four Angles, which is: the only thing I have undertaken to refute ,
which I think naturally follows, if the Nativity is falſe. - And laſly,
whether it is not far more probable, that he had ® aſcending about


' 8 or40 degrees; and then there'is cauſe enough for his Death, and-


for his Grandeur too; the Þ and & inthe Aſcendant the ©; h; and
$Þ. in A, and Þ in * tothe Midheaven, However this is but gueſs,


' yet I dare aver'it is as near- the mark as his; for you may be fare.


of ſome hours of Error in the time z and *tis well; if there are not
ſome days alſo, for they are ſmall faults in his PraQtice.

\ The next Cardinal Example is that of William Laxd,who he com-
pares'tfo Jeſus Chrift, and ſays, He was murdered, tho he dicd in a
Parliamentary way ; but I believe he will not-own that expreſſion
- in the ſufferings of the late good People, who were Martyrs indeed
" for oppoſing of Popery.. The Scheam is as followeth, fays F.G.


* William Land.


"IRON eg hes? bbs fo
| Qs #450
| Oy 'D ;
X ate. -- ge


 )


—


107


LY


_know nothing, nor-þbelieye he neither,-if he were to be asked about


This Bitbops Nativity is broughtalſo by my Friend,to prove what
he hath a mind the World fhould believe;. but it is as falſe as any of
the other before ding, as tothe time and truth of his Birth,as Ihalt
make appear before I texve it,and this withas much plaineſs as poili-
ble I can. As to the Planets [ewe matters not whether they are
trucor falſe, tho the-place of © here differs from his place, given by


 Teovitimabout7 degy, but it is not the exact manner of Operation -
_ Fqueſtion, -but the miſapplying the Rules for Practice, laid down


by oar'approvedAurhors, .and the brivging in, of Innovations.
- Fhis-man, Tam informed, was born of meari Parentage.in the-


Townof Reading, and frorm thence brought up at the Hoſpital tit for


the Univerſity, towhich he was ſent, and ſpent his time for:divers.
years among thoſe men of Learning,after which he was preferred in


- the Church, where he advanced by degrees, till. he came to be Biſtop-


of Canterbury; andas I remember, he was. 40 years of Age before he
grew into any publick fame and.repute. Now,jtis ſomething ſtrange
that his Na and Time of Birth ſhoald be known to any man;


. becauſe He was born, of 6bſcure Parents, then broughtup among


Strangers that never mind or inquite intotheſe Curioſities, havin
fo many Children under zheir Tuition, which would be an endlefs


work, if they ſhould make that their Stady, which is very-rare. But -
 belides; the Binhs of min are ſeldom. minded; rill-they begin toad- -


vance in-prefexment z na, nox then neicher,till they come to zdegree


of conſiderable height above the Horizon of their Birth; and” tis well
- knew; thache was towards 5o years of-Age before he made any


they; wkes me much 'Joybt and miſtruſt-the, truth of the Figure,


- whei-I-tind it fo difficate to gain. a Nativity in the Pariſh where I


live;\tha born not above 24. ox 25 years befare. |
_ 2dly, If you pleaſe to.conipare this Figure and Nativity, with
that of the famous Sir. Theodore Mayerne following, your will fnd the


- - Horoſcopes both'the ſame in 4.degr. of 3%, the Planets places being
.nearly the ſame in both, the principal difference being in the © and
d;3-the © here is in 23degr, and'# half in =, and there 14 degr..


and a half in the ſame Sign; the Y. here is 3 degr. in X, but there
in 7degr, in Mz, all the geſ-of the Planets are not conſiderably dif-
ferent in either, 'The Q is Giver of Life in-both Figures, 3s being in
the Aſcendant;, 'and yet & [ whom my Friend fays] is yoreta in
the one, doth riot fall out'to be ſo in the other, of which Myſtery 1


the.


—_


confiderable Rigyre in his Imployment. All which conlidered toge-


Opus Reformatum. Te


the buſineſs.” Butin Fanuary, in the year 1644. he was Beheaded at -
Weſtminfter 3, and this my Friend -telis us was begun by the Midhea- -


ven, directed to the Body of &. in 14 degr. of Tk on the Cuſpot the
12th Houſe | which no doubt'is ſomething the worſe for that ]which
ave'his Imprifonment, Anno-164.1. and about four years atter the

\ ſcendant to the body of 'h with Latitude, putan end to his Life,

Now; if. this ſhould-happen to be true,why did not Sir Theo, Mayerne
ſuffer Imprifonment hve or (x. years before him,”and alſodyca year


ſooner ;- becauſe & in his Nativity was but'5 degr. and a half in TY, ©


and h but a5 degr. in M1; arid this laſt was the more violent Nati-


vity of the two, becaufe Z-who is witlPthe Aidebaran, is int exact |
-Qto F, and the Yand 2 are in the Via Combuſtz, going to the body
of h in M, and 2 Lady of the 8th Houſe, an Argument of much.


violence with Jobn; but inſtead-of dying ſooner than the Biſhop;


theſe plaguy partial Stars let him live longer by ten yearsz and be-" '


fides, when he did dye, it was a natural Death, and heof-a great
Age.Now 1 do confels,it ſeems a Paradox to me, why the Aſcendanc
tothe body of h ſhould not kill the Door as well as the Biſhop, and


the Midheaven to the Body of & give Tmpriſonment to the one as.


well 'as to the other; for and h have as good a title to their
power in Doctor Mayerne's Nativity, as they have in the Biſhop of
Canterbury's, nay; and I think more too z -for they ſay, and indeed it
its commonly believed, That good and boly Men live above the Power
and Inflaence of the Stars ; _ if the Clergy-men [ the Shepherds ]
are not good and holy, the Lord be merciful to the reſt of the Flock.


Therefore, if this be true, and that the fluence ofthe Stars earries ©


ſo abſolute a fate in its power to ſpare neither good nor bad, Thope
it may ſerve for an Argument to convince our Enemies of that Pro-
feffion ; or at leaſtwiſe take off the heat of their Paſſion againſt that,
which but few of them-und:rſtand,how pertly ſoever theycalk of it. -
* Butisit not very ftrangc,” That the Afcendant to the Body of hk


ſhould prove ſo cruel in the one, and fo-favourable in the other 5 and


what is mare (trange, ſeeing hedied a violent Death, why ſhould nor
the Midheaven: to the Body of & kill him, as welFas the M. C. 'ad
Corpus h,, did the King of Sweden, | beforementioned ] purſuant to
the 92d Aphoriſm in his ColleQion of Genitures. Nor doi know,
That there is any Reaſon to be given, why the Midheaven | in the Bi--
\h ] to the A of hthould not bt as remarkably fatal co hum, as the
Body of F was; nor why' the © to the Body of kh, and Qof.&
{he being Hiteg ] ſhould 'not kill in both, as well as the Aſcendant
- "as ay


%
-


% =Y _
by 1 FO
K _


Opus Reformatum.
to the Body of þ In the.one, and to the T7 of & in the other; I Gy,
theſe. things being well conlidered, carry with them a viſible Con- *
tradiQion one to another, and will without doubt at che firſt light
only, convince avy rational, thinking man, that thoſe Nativities are
really fikitious, and not the truc Natural ones as pretcnded 3 for it
is certain; if chcy were true, there would without doubthave. been
ſome effec in the Dofors, like that of the Biſhop,on the. Midheaven
to theBodyof &, andas ſurehad the Doctor diced as the Biſhop, on


_ _the Aſcendant to the Body of k, But ſeging it was not fo, 1 dode-


fire: that worthy Perſon, the. Author of thole Fooleries, to give us
the reaſon why it hit in the one, and miſt in the other z which I am -


' confident would be a great Service to all, but eſpecially to me his


inoſt humble Servant, And alſo, That he would be pleaſcd to permit
that Treatiſe promiſed in his CalleF. Genit. p. 90. to be-printed; where
he fays, he will give us'a Treatiſe at large todemontiate the Corre-
Gion and Truth of the Nativity of this his Immortal, Biſhop and


Laftly, The very ſame Argumentshe gives to prove, That the Bi--
ſhop ſhould Aftrologically dye a violent Death, are the ſame in the
DoGRor's, the Þ excepted, who is not in 8 to & but in the Combuſt


. way going tothe Body of h | and if heunderſtood it] in a Mundane


Squaremith &,; tho not exact. And therefore I would now ask any”
man that underſtands theſe things, apd hath conſidered and com-
pared them together, Whether theſe-two Nativities ate not hard
to be believed by any one that is not uſed to believe Lies, Nonſence,
and Contradiions z for it is moſt certain they cannot be both true,
if cither of them is 3 and to tell you the truth, Fthink neither of
them is, and ſhall zeſt in that Opinion, till I ſee my Friend hath in
Print made it plainer £ me and the whole World , than he hath
alrtady done;-or I believe is able to do. -And when that is done,
" Twill tell him my further Opinion” and Judgment in the thing,
and aſſure him,- that this ſpeaks but very little. to the purpoſe for
Cardinal. Signs.on Angles,” according to his Notion and Aphoriſm.
But there is one thing more as remarkable as any of the reſt to
prove the Figure notoriouſly falſe, which I forgot before z and that
15 in the year 1626, when-he was coming into Favour at Court, -
and earning to bean Inſtrument for their uſe, 'in order to be Bi-
ſhop of Canterbury, [ good+ Biſhop Abbot beidg then to be turn'd
out, becauſe he would. not Licenſe Knavi(ſh Books] a Privy-Coun-
{ellor, and a Judge.in the Star-Chamber Afﬀairs, he had then his

| by Midheaven


.. Opus Reformatum. +
Midheaven directed to the Square of Saturn'in Le and the Sm
to the. Squire of Marin Sagitary3 two a5 violent and dangerous'
Dire&ions, as any in the whole Figure .z not only in my Opinion ,
" butallowed'to beſo by all the Ancient and Famoirs' Authors and
Modern, Profeſſors. By the firſt of. theſe, 'in the Nativity of
the Duke of Motmorancy, he was beheaded, as faith Mirinus, Aſtrol,
Gall, p. 401. And inp. 402+ the fame-Author kills Duke .4lhert ,
the Emperors General, with the Midheaven to the $ of Mars.
And my Friend Foln, himſelf, kills Judge Reeves with nothing but
the San to the Square of Saturn, Colle. þ. r21. which is leſs able
than the Body in:my Opinion. And he ſends Dr. Gowge out of the
World .upon the Sx to the Square of Mars;but I muſt needs fay,there
was ſomething more, and that was the Aſcendant to the Dragons
Tail, a plaguy kind of a thing, p. 107. "And he hath let the Great
French cer dye'on the Swn to his own Square, without any
thing elſe to aſſilt it. As,alſo on: Judge Reeve's, the ſingle Square
did 'the like. Now, what man of Senſe can believe this to be
Wiliam Laud's Nativity, and at the ſame time believe there is any
Credit to be given to the Art of Aftrology,- when the Contradii-
ons in it are to viſible, nay," I ray fay palpable, as my Adverſary
ſo ingeniouſly makes appear. | FO


The next Eminent Nativity that my Worthy Friend makes uſe
of, as an Example to prove his Proje&t by, is that of my Lord
Thomas Clifford, Latina Lord Treaſurer of England, and it is as
followeth. He hath not told us, what was the Elevation of the
Polez but I think he hath ſet his Figure for the Latitude of 53. and
a half, or thereabours.


" 7 -


oa : = 4 - OY Et
b_ Opus Reformatum: -
+ Lord Clifford. +


7 7] /\  Latiud. Planetar,
9% h 2.238.
1- | % 0.15 M.
5 ID © FOE. Þ-j36p.Þ
a PY £ FOAS «4 | 2 1 50 M-
; | OO IE OO! i.»
: | atus die" primo Au. G2 ? 2:40 M
Hoc Bufti, Har, 10, Minut, 1 5 S | 2 4 46-8.
FA pane, 11630, | Sq -\
" P28 &ad%3 Og. | - a |
+ | Lat. 53: and a half -
; Wo << . - ; ”
F .c \ H ; & * Of
9 | -


_ This-Gentleman beingot.one of the greateſt Births in'this'Na-
tion; 'was advanced to one-of the greateſt;places'thata'Subje@& can
enjoy, which. was Lord Treaſurer, -to which'he was, preferred the
28th of November, 'in the year 1572; and did not coritinye iv it a full
' year, but reſigned his Staff, retired into the Country, and:dicd. Hence

we are to inquire what Afitological Cauſes there were, = For his
. Advancement to that great and eminent-Poſt. 24/y, What gave
the loſs of his Honour. -And Laftly, The Cauſe of his Death. For
' if the Art of Aftrology istrue, we mult expe froma true Nativity,
ſome rational and probable Cauſe for cach of theſe. |
1ft, As to his preferment thete is not one thing to ſignify it,
for none of the Hilegiack Points are-direQed to-any remarkable
Body or Aſpe@ at that time; poco that is any way adequate
to his Honousz the © was within a degree and 4 half of the Body


. of & at that time , . which I am ſyre could not give either Honour
or-Content of Mind. The Midheaven was then got into 4 degr. of
"MX wherethe * of £- falls; and I ſuppoſe *tis thatDireFion _ he

Reg». KPES. ath


Ret


|
bl


4 -


ES Oput Reformatam, matum.
hath corrected this Figure by for his Advancement, But let him
not cheat himſelf with that Notion, for t do aſſure him, That the
'M. G. to the % of 2 comes not up in this Figure: till 5$ or 60


_- years of Age; however, I gueſs 'tis that which he depends on at this


time, notwithſtanding the Þ is in Square'to her, both in Zodiaeo,
and Mwndo applying; and is very-unlikely in that Condition to give


ſuch Honour,But ſuppoſe I ſhoald allow this as moſt of them will do -


in their PraRice, .there is nothing elſe to afliſt it, for the Þ is then


- very near the Body of h, and che Square of 9, therefore*tis ſtrange


it ſhould do it when the two Luminarigs were fo near ill Rays by
DireRion;, and that of the * of 2 {o weak a Ray, and in "X her
fall, near the oppoſite point to Y. |

- 2dly, The loſs of his Honcur can be attributed to no DireQtion,
bat that which gave his Death, and that was at leaſt a degree from
touching , which 'muſt give at leaſt a year 3 but this will appear


— more plain in the laſt of the three,


'" 3dly, For his Death, which was about Awguft or September, in


, the year 1673.. and they have no DireRion-to pretend to io that


Caſe, but the © to the Body of & ; and therefore let us ſee how
that will agree to the time of his Death,he being then juſt 43 years
of Age. The © is diſtant from the 1oth,-about 26 degrees, which
ves his Pole of Potition 24 degrees and a few minutes. The ©s
lique Aſcention under that-Pole, is 133d. 50 m, The Aſcention
of &F is 1774. 5 m. from whence the Ark of DireQion 'is 43 deg.
15 min. which: turn'd into time according to Naibods Mealure in
the Dodrine of Nativities, gives 43 years, and 322 days, that js,
within a Monthand a few days of 44 years;z but this Native died
when he was 43.” almoſt a whole year before the direion of &
toucht, And how he will-or can reconcile this, I ſhould be glad
toſee, without his old cuſtom of ſhamming and yore,

The truthis, The © to the Body of &, did kill this Gentleman,
and it \did touch:exa&ly at the time of Death, or a little before z but
he had not Cardinal Signs on the Angles, as he fooliſhly and fond-
ly imagines; and I dare venture a Wager with him, if his word
could be believed or truſted, that the eſtimate time,if caretully taken,
was after 11 a Clock that Morning, © on the 1oth Houſe, and the
Ark of DireRion that killd him, was 39 degr. x0 m. And a Fi-
gure ſet according, to that Projection, will ſhew his Honour, and its


Greatneſs, -its ſhort Duration , and the ſhortneſs-cf Bis Life, &c,


For the fitft of which, he had the © tothe Mundane Parallel od Y,
whic


213


_


yy


6a. FS
*”. y YL ” *


—_


, 1 7 4 ; ku " A
Opus Reformatum.


which is a great and » glorious Dire&jon,he being in his own Dig:


| _nitiesin Trine and Reception wich 2, and alfo-inexad Trine tothe


Aſcendant. For its ſhort:contimuance, he had the © in the 10th, in
an exa@ Mundane Squire to hz and 'for his Death, the Dirction
before alledged, which is far more like his Nativity, than that he
hath here given him z and I'darcalmoſt be politive, that he hath the -
Sign on the 10th. | | )

But if this, which he hath given for his Nativity was true, let
him but tell us why, according tothe Rules of his Praftice; the AG
cendanit to the Body of h, Lord of the 4th Houle, that fatal Corner


(of Heaven [ as they ſay } and to the Squure of #,whois Lord of che
' 12th, and hath Dignitiesin the Sth Houſe, did not kill this Native,


as well as it did his Biſhop La#d, who had by bis Calculation no-
thing but the ſingle Body of hb, withoutany thing to alhit it, and yet
the © Giver of Life, as here. And AnnQucenot Hwngary, whodied
upon no other direQion but the Aſcendant to' the Body of Hh, and
with that the'* of & , or Mr. Gataker that he fays died on the A(-
cendant to'the' 8 of h, only the Bulls Eye to ailift it. Or Peter Bem-
bus apon the fame AﬀpeR, and nothing elſe with it, which he ſays


- | there, is naturally akilling dircQion. Or the Loxd Francis Viliers -


to the body of '& 5 and yet the-9 in the 10th Giver of Life. Or
in Henry the Third of Frence, the Aſcendant to the 8 of h, and the
» likewiſe Hileg, Or in Chriftiernies King of Denmark, , where the
body of H kill'd of ic ſelf, with & little affiſtance from an unlucky
Climacterical Yeir. And | co'narne no more, Iſt it ſhould be bar-


. thenfom and nauſeous to the. Reader] That Excelent young Prince


Edward the 6tb, King of England, whoalo died on the Aſccendant
"ro the bodyof H , and yet the Trine of 2X, falls juſt after it in '7.
I could mention. many more- in his Learned. Colledion, that would
be ſerviceable to make good what I pretend to,and givethe Lyc fair- ,
ly to his ow Inartificial Calculation of chis Nativity, which he ſays
he had the honour to perform , and 1 ſuppoſe by that Lord's Com-
mand ; but the Lord knows whar it was, for we n-uft only-take his
own account of -it, which without doubt will be ſparingly given.
Now pray conſtder; Is it not very ſiravge, that all theſe Great, Ex-


_ crſlent and Learned men ſhould die on theſe direRions, dnd yet this


honourable Native fhonld ſo be favour'd by the Stars to out-live


' and ſarvivethoſe ewo Direions, when a fingle one hath done it to


others, whom youce here named,and all of ther printed by himſelf
in his Colletion, to thew the Traub of Aſtrology 3, but theſe Nativities
| | _ printed.


Opus 'Reformatum.


priated in hisCatdines Cak were not far that End ;- but to ſhew the


wonderful power of Cardinal . Signs on z and yet when ic
. ©.comes to the Conclufion, I dare ja you will not find, ane true Fi.
gare among all the Ten that this worthy Gentleman hath printed to
' thatpurpofe. For you ſee by comparing then one with the other,
they catry with them plain Contradictions ; thwarts the defign

he intefids them for, an
heis cither afvery Ignorant mean; or a Confident Impeſtor 3 for no man
, will deny{ F. G. 5s that Like Cauſes ought to have Like
Effes, or clfe Rules of Exreption 14id down'to let us know. when
they will, and when they will not give thoſe Effeds they talk of,
ſecing they miſs fo ofteng which V am ſure he will not undertake to
do, te inlide of his Granizem being not lin'd with matter ſufficient


for that great Work. And yet what his fo- long proniifed Body of
Tautology may bring forth, I know not ; and I believe a Blind


man would be glad to fce itz I judge it may be full of words, and
to as little purpoſe as the xeſt-of the things he hath wrote ; he
. hath, I confeſs, the Form, but not the Power 3 the Wards and Jin-
gle, but not the Matter; that we wants. We have been ſerved up long
with abundance of emptineſs, miſtaken Examples, and un-
profitable Rules in the Art of Nativities. But I will take your Au-
thors of-the beſt Authority inta my confideration, diſl ir Do-
&rine, and fairly lay before your eyes their palpable Contradidti-


ons; ſo that every one that is not blind, nay, wilfully blind,ſhalland '


muſt confels, that the Aſtrology now'in uſe is nothing elſe but Sham


and Noiſe z for if one Dire&tion:in 40 or 50 hies, it is more than they


ſometimes tind; and if one Attrologes in an Age happens to make a
fair and a famous Prediction before-hand that is an{wer'd by the Ef-
fed, it ſerves thenext Age to boaſtof : For if they had.not Paris of
Mantua about Cardinal Farnefrur, afterward Pope Paul II. Sixtus ab
Heminga,who predicted theDeath of Don Fobn of Anftria to a few days,
-and Laces Behantius, about the Death of Mirandals by him predicted,
with ſome few others, they would be hard put to it to give the
World-Examplesof their Skill, and Proots of the truth of their Art.
The fifth he brings for an Example among the reſt, is the
Learned and Famous Mr. Thomas Hobby of Malmsbury, one that
hath given ſufficient proofs . of his Abilities by his many Learn-
cd Treatiſes that he hath beftiended the world with; and tho'
deſcended of mean Parergage,, was qualified with natural and ac-
quir'd Parts fit for the greateſt Employments Learning can plead
+ Q 2 for 5
/


\


fairly tells the Author to his face; that.


Tis


if


—


Opus Reformatum.


- forz and therefore 1 do not blame, Fobn for bringing (6 fargous .


Truth of it, which is my next buſineſs to inquire.


Mr. Hobbs.


a Man's Birth to prove his Aﬀertion; if he is able to juſtify the


| Natus die 's5 mw .


That this learned Man had a time to be born, I donot in the leaft
queſtion ; but. that this is the true time of his Birth, 1 do reall
doubt and queſtion,and that for theſe three reaſons. 1ſt, The leng
of Time, a hundred years almoſt before my Friend Jobn did print
it, at which time there were few or none could remember the t
particularlyz and he himſelf, if he ever knew it, he was then 0}
enoagh to have forgot itz and 1 am of the opinion, that Mr. Hobbs
himſelf never gave him his Nativity ; fo that at the beſt, it is but


| hear-fay, and indeed I am apt to believe this is the real ground of


his TS R—_—— _ upon Jeng x9 rugganr of wy
ſay, he conhdently printed Judge Haler's Nativity, ve t
World as much habe D ie” as if he had bon by bis Mothers
Bed-ſide when ſhe was delivered of him z when there was nothing
more certainly a Lye, than the time he printed for that good mans
Birth; and to convinceyou of the truth of this mattet,the very ſame
| | Gentleman,


© Opus Reformatins
Gentleman, upon whoſe report vg 56 4p 3h and correRed it
likewiſe, told me'above a Twelve-month afterward, That the time -
he had given to Mr. Gadbury or Sir Matthew Hales's Nativity, was -
- a miſtake of twelye hours;and yet it happily agreed with the 4ni-
modor of Ptolomy, p.20:" of the Fuſt and Pioxs Scorionift. And to prove
this Figure, he printed;true,he tells you the Aſtrological Caule of his
Death, was the Aſcendant to the Square of 2, in dignitatibus Saturii,
one of the moſt nonſenſical reaſons for the Death ot a man that ever _
was giveng Venus kill! and yet at the: ſame time, he owns the Sar
giver of Life,p.16. Nay,there is not a-page'in thatlittle Treatiſe, bur
abounds with Errors'or Noife,all which coname in this place would
be too tedious ; but 1 will give you ſome, to ſhew 1 donotcharge
him without a Cauſe. The Epiſtle is nothing elſe but a great many
"noiſy words, to ſhew us how able he was to manage a falſe and ly-
ing argument firſt to afſert that Sir Matthew had Mt aſcending and
then to vindicatethat which was not ſo, as if- he had a Patent to
- impoſe upon, and abuſe Mankind as he pleaſes. P. 6: he ſays, That
Honoxrable Native had © fortunate in tarneft, thoin &. And yet in
his Colle. of Genit. Aphoriſm 36. he tells us, 7 in X or &, maker a
man without reaſon , and pretends to things be underſtands not,
But this is a ſmall;matter , only a Contradictions and I think it-
implies, that one of them muſt be a lye:. P-8. The © | Gays he] in
the Aſcendant ſhews'#be Native to be of excellent Prudence, Judgment, and
Honour 3—— an obſerver of bis Promiſes, and @ hater of all ſordid, baſe
and diſhonoxr4ble things.” All which Excellencies did ſhine in tbis our Pi-
ous Scorpionift. It was wellhe: was a Scorpionift ,, or elſe the 12th
iſm in. his Colle&ion had fell to his ſhare z where he ſays,
-the © in the Aſcentlaut makes eminent Boafters, and very proud Per-
ſons. But becauſe M1 is a Chaft, Vertwous, Modeft. and an Humble Sign,
therefore the.© in that ſpace of Heaven gives mighty good People.
P.18.he tells us, That & is Lord of the Alchocoden, and gives bis great-
eft years , -which Ptolomy tells us are Sixty fix. This is a plain. lye
f upoh Prolomy by my Friend Fobn; for in the whole Qua-
dripartite, 'no', not in his laſt Chapter, De Diveſione Temporum , he
never uſeth 'any Expreſſion like that, nor gives any countenance to
their Alchocoden in any thing I have read of hisz and my Friend
would have done well , if: he had quoted the Chapter and Book
where he had found it, and ſohave ſaved\me the labour of inquiry.
In p. 19. he talks of an A4bſiſſor vite, and that is | forſooth] VÞ, be-
cauſe he happens to be in that Angle and Space of Heaven, called
| the


-


-—


' wr


#4


- * y, _ ', M Ut My ", .,
+— - Y * Tv %
* - ” 4 * F
a. - * "
, lk _ ,
a , "> . ®
-
.
XY » »


”


rhe Sth Houle-z and yet theSqwaie df £. kills, being direQted 0 the
*  Afcendanty' now;»pray confider-whatofe they maake of theit Hileg
, and Anavretez for he ſays, The Ois giver of Life,' & giver of Tears,


% is the deſtroyer of Life, aid yet the Aſcendeit i. the Square. of 2
kill'd T pry ins Ns Hears. why ſhoujd nor the , who h
leg co tht Square of ©. in_dagnitatibur Sotwres, kill as well as &
pre doair 099 point; this 4s-Nonſence with a witneſs, if I un-
derftand himy and-the greater, becauſe it canie from him. Bur ſup-
pole all theſe things-that he ſays were true in.z man, that had ſuch -
a Figute as he hath prinited for the Bixth-time-of Sir Matthew, yet


\ here it is all Folly and: Impertinence { I had almoſi ſaid Impudence ]
| becauſcit is publickly owned; that he was born 12 hours diſtance


from that timez and for daght he and 1 know, it may be 12-days.
Sactr is his Confidence in taking Nativities on txuft, and by hear-f(ay,
and then impoſing them or; the. World for truth,; yhich he bath
becys ofters carcht imzbut how often they have paſſed, 'undeteRed,is
to me yet unknown. And'gpon this very Auchority of hear-fay, I cer-
tainly believe, he hath tramptup this Nativity of Mr. Hebbs'to prove


 hHisnotianof Cardinal Sigusto-be true, as he did that of Judg Hales,


to-prove-M a virtugus San, and without doubt-both a like true.
2dly, The meancf of his Parentage, conſidered with the part of
Englond where he was borng/ may render it dubious, there ticing,
very few now of the mieancr and middle ſort of. Pebple in the re»
mote parts from London, that take any notice,or keepin memory the
time when their Children were born; and.much lefs ther, when
Aftrology was fo little known in chis1our Natiort bf England 3 nay,
ſcarce at all known, unleſs among ſome Learned Men, who were able


tt read other Languages beſides their own, there being at that time


but Iz2e of Aſtrology printed in the Engliſh Forgue, and that Hnete
very imperfeqly known, handled, and underſtood. Bekdes the
towneſs of his Birth obliged hin tobe abroad betirnes fiom: his Pa-
rents 3 and as Þ hear, he went to the Univerſity at 13 years of age,
which did prevent him of thoſe frequent opportanities to hear the
time of his Birth from his Parents, if chey did remember it.

3dly, F never heard that he'was ever ſtudiouſly inclined. co this
Celeſtial Inquiry; and for that PEI) 27:29 the taking no-
tice of his Birth, and think it not worth his Memory and Animad-
verſion; by which means,if he did ever know the-day when he was


., youny, I dare be poſitive he did not know, or at leaſtwiſe remem-
\ ber the time of the day, in which you know there is 24 hours, and :


every


. "Opus Reformatum.
every one of thoſe will make « great alteration in a Nativity, cfpe-
cially in-one that hath Signs of  Aicentions in the Aſcendant;
and mdeed many_aged People do remember the Yeer and Diy of
their Birth, but very few of therni can give you the abſolute time of
the day when it was. Whence I conclude, when he had got the day .
and-year, he made him fuch a Nativity as he thought agreeable ro
the Life, AQtions, and Learning ofthe Gentkman.. And tho1 46
condude it poſfible for him to get the day, yer-I do noe allow the
Figare to be true; "but perhaps he harh made this Potition toabuſe
him, as you-way ſee by the 12th and 85th Aphoriſms in his Colle-
&ion, where he gives all ſach Perfons as have the © and & in the
Aſcendant,a very ball CharaQter, making them Lyars, Boaters, Proud,
Perjured, Contrivers of Miſchief, and Inventers of Fabler; and more ſuch-
like ill Names he beftows upon them 3 how well theydeſerve them,
I knownot. However, thoſe Names do not at all agree with the
Character he gives him in his Cardines Celi, which ſhews my Friend
Fobn can make the Stars give and att what he pleaſeth; cool his
Broth, and warm his Fingers, and all with the ſame Breath.

Bat to put all out of doabt, let us come nearer and cloſer tothe
matter z ', ſecing they do allow that Dire&jons are the Caufers
of Death ; or at kaſtwiſe, that few or none dye without them ;
Let us ſee what they can aſſign for his death, either tothe ©, Y, or
Aſcendant, for they are all alike to them, tho I do affirm the »-
here to be Giver of Life, according to the-Pokition printed. This
Gentleman died in December, in the year 1679, being then 91 years
and 10 months old ; and the Ark of Direction to give that number
of years, according to their meaſure of time, is 90 degr. 31 min.
Now obſerve, The DireQtion that he concludes kilPd him, was the
Aſcendant to the Square of &, and the © to the Body of %, Lord
of the 8th Houſe, which to me ſeerns very ftrange,that the © ſhould
pals the Square of F, and he out-live it almott three years, and at
laſtdye on the Aſccndant to a ſham Dire&ion, called the Square
of & | for the truc-one did not come up till about 22 years after-
ward | and at ſuch a time too, when the © was by Dire&ion within
a very little of the Body of #, the great and only Balſamith- Star in
the Heavens, whoſe ill Rays always faves, and certainly mach more
his Body in the aſcending part of Heaven z buris it not very ſtrange
that he ſhould contidently take the DircQtons to the Horoſcope to
_ give Death, when the © is fo near itz for the Aſcendant cannot be
Giyex of Life, nor can it kill with bad Dizections ro it; when the ©
| 45


; Opus Reformatum.
fone X nf winrar | bd i ar; Srvngs {how
| hisCatholick Soul judgeth in the caſe, I cannot: tell } that the Square

of & ſhould kill, Levy ter ta to-the Square. of the © ſhould
not at about $2 years of Age: z and ingeed,- by- John's good leave
[if Prolomy is allowed to be true ] the Square of & cannot kill, bes
_ cauſe he is under the Szx-beams; but-any Tooth good Barber, fo
vee.can but make Cardinal &igns.on the Angles of this, or any other
Nativity, .In ſhort,. I idge he will find but. few of his: own pa
{I mean as tothe Principles of Aftrology.] that will believe the Af
cendant to.the-Square of the Sun ſhould paſs by and give nothing ;
and a few-years after, the Square of Mars kill; and this at ſuch a.
time too; when the Sun in the Aſcendant wasdireQed to the Body
of Fzpiter,— but indeed he was Lord of the Eighth. — Oh! —


A


that alters the caſe mightily — Hz, ba, bs. + |
But to tell you'the-truth; the-Mvon is Hileg, or Giver of Life in
his Figure, and for that reaſon, neither Sn nor Alſcendant can kill
by Dire&ion; and at the time of his Death, fhe was direed to no
ill Aſpe& or Rays:* The firſt thing ſhe meets,” is the K of © in-X,
which would touch at or abont 95. years of Age. And fo] leave it,
till he ſhall chink fit to ſore other Cauſetor his Death, and tell
us what Authority he hath for the time of Birth, and by what Au-
thority he will prove this Figure, or any other true ; ;afſuring you,
that this is not Mr. Hobbr's truc Nativity z 1 will not ſay it is not the
* day, but I am fure it is not the hour, only a time pitcht upon, and
choſen by his'unerring Judgment,. to prove one falliry by inventing
of another; or to ſpeak more to the purpoſe, he calls far help to
Saddle his Hobby-horſe. * I could pur divers other things to him,
which I am ſure would puzzle his fertile Brain to find ſecurity for
cher truth ; as, who he will conclude to be Hileg, and then the Lord
of-the Alchecoden, whom they chuſe from the former ? and whether
the Native lived that number of years deſigned by that Star, and no
more; and whether & | who mult be Lord of the Alchocoden,” ac-
-- cording to their notions-| being Combat in his detriment, and
efied by h, can give any more than his mean years, which are
Forty, thothis Native lived Twenty five yeats-beyond his greateſt
ears, which are Sixty ſix. With more of this Nature, that I paſs
y, luppoling there is enough mentioned to convince any ratio-
m_ ney, that the Figure of Birth by him aſſerted , is all Sham
2 SS | |


I


The


| "Op es, | Bt.
The cer tis brings, is thatof the Famous Mr. Bart, Author of |
Ti nary Mah, to prove hisftcius Notion


iJ Jo belleve he hath taken this Figure & Mr. Berta, 45 near the


Account he himſelf gaye of it, as can and do therefore judge,
if ;thiry isn0t trite, It , not Mr. Fohbr's fa ro {rh ance Native |
if ;, who gayc it to the 'orld ke bh Lurel Ste
ry of Mclaneholly and a5 I am inforined, dig alſo giye order
| when Living, for thc infcribing icon a eeecun 104 wr
Dae (when hich/di ,not only the ks


'in le the World ynderftand hi
| eniedare 3 frigis a Herb leſt ſome Ingenic


| makeror other, ſhould ſurreptitiouſly bave, trumpe-ap a {parious
one after his Death; which 1s a thing very common, -not only i in
on Nation, ot yn me: 3 and EE a we come N :
velo many mens atare'r a imagioa
and phpret yet for; abſolute trurb, which the unskilfill, |
ingenuous men run away with, and believe them to be as reported _
" to them. And to-conyince you _ thisis true, take an Exammplein
one


- > "= v -
_ © : — % .* G
ty *, . * 'd |
, ky


1


WVAsy, Was plated


as % WP
| _ A Calls 1 Woes mY 22 23 5g: of. m


and-the timc Hr dF EXE : et he sBirms
yg RE ee Peron ooh A Lok: bay Concurrent -
Accidents, as may be ſcen' ton. Morin, he prints his
panes: Gathea;” p.555. inwhich he makes almott
m, and the. av ray 15 minute: after Eleven of the
Ba, "the ſameda year, and proves his alfo'by twa.or
eQionsz, to amidey a he'addeth another Argument of-cruth,
on din time © day was known, per 4ltitudinem Solis ftrolabis
Pen Pa » GIL and this a'man would thipk were -
from a Learngd Pgn, and-he-alfo a Lover.of the
ps as yell as 4 Profeſſor thereof. And, yet after all chis, I have
'  - had an account from Adriano, the preat Mathematieios at Favis, that
; theFrobKipg wasbomn at 15 minutes after Four of the Clock the
- Gameday inthe fn che Mpeying. whichis Gaificient to ws 9 he: us, that
there'is n miſtake; or a little: Knavery in this Account givci fo va-
rioaſly 3 and 1 onily In this man, but others likewiſc -of which
more in my D Genttur arm:
But aso Mr. Burton'SNativity, I amnot willing.to make a ſearch
- into the truth office * ory fox two Reaſons... The 1 is, The Re-
I have to that d Gentleman, being unwilling to.call his
ill in queſtion. becauſe I think he gave it us to the beſt of his
" knowledg, without any: Rene Trick or Iatereſt; either to _
| \ : World under the Notion of Aſtral
'Becauſ ſep ho eres Oat alk coder
L 0. the verity: oi an A cither
ment, or us. . which are the only /


true or falls,


"according 'ro
&6.cle; ns the moft he ca make


3


it; 6 Hot abort 36 minuces below the Culp of the Acendart, tht
' the Sign V. hath to riſey; and in bk Figwre; there isthe whole
©, and'6 degrees of IT, an thar pare, called the: Afcendint ov
roſcope : Hence it follows, that he lays the whole ſtreſs of the
raiter on;the very Culp of the Angle, of Line'of the Horizon, to
provethe Myſtery of Cardinal Signs, which if crae, 1 chink he pu ir
upon a very dubious proof, both in this Lg, and alſo in that of
Charles Gigtrvis Belorementioned 3. for very few
minutes pu and co a very hy ka bor won you will _e
G alce
will mightily =


4 in the other; and.in my

I not wholly confourid the very Principl of
his deſign; for I dg not believe every Figure of a Nativity to be
true, that he ſays is @; and therefore, if theſeſhould be cprrefted,
what will becoge of his Nation? Ad fot that of the King of Swe
den, Tamure jtis nottrue, and that for the Reaſons there alledged.

But beſides all theſe things, he may have his h inthe zock, and %
- his 6th Hodſe nay, and & in & with 5m ors for all


that ”-_ ern - ng: and ky to my a _ ſeems
Berton's


Munners,


ing, for 3 is a oft 1


c ce in//chat me, , as
and then ra ſhifeto tickle his Ad-
mirers in , and their E this Na-


_ tivity ? ton} is put to
it to. day a "Nativity nay, og to the laſt degree of Y | to im-
pole in Error on. the orld, and to' chedt us himſelf alſo into
the'belief' bf a lye, © 00090
Min. there's one thin itek$1 Obſerie inthe na Gt Pa raph;and
thit is, he went ro Dr. F/ak'to'know what the meanitig of '# iv the
«th Houſe was,and this int] year 16509, of whorrids heph he fearie
- hat little of Aſtrology that he hath. rg teidey his « beſt
Maſter, Mr. Tilly, by whoſe Aﬀfiftance [ he fays ka the Epiſileys ths
Ditivine of N. anq/Favours, he was enabled to /compledt
thatBook; Th wr e thyegr 4837: "Now'dv you think
that Mi, Fth's Acquaimtabes hw dowe him no Sexvice, befid: the
nfe of Books in that* Seven years? Or do you'Þdlicve his acking
Dr. Fik that onequeſtion, bad fe fer him ina Station above the wane
of other InfterStions? If fo, EEE PIESs £5 one, _


" che ol} OY tothe other of any ERP But I (hall for-
beat anyfurther Aggravation of thatIngratitude, becauſe the whole
Nathes __ willeoquiiaine was ing.


His Sevench Nathv /be brings to bb ng Neto
tf Mad tle Fo: _


HO 8A ' ©
/ &>
| he's 4 > 4 L >
4 oftradamus. |
/R . | -Natus die 14. Decett-
> Og Pp | |
Wit nb IMUS v * ©.” Hy [gn
be VERY, 1


"in
Nor ule s,
,a Town in
t Noon, 1593s |


| na
Ag, cod |
the 208 Houſe, gn

—Brarunhgr opus how us hq F'wj EE I en the
Midhea will be about four of Y aſcending; but that Error
Lullt paſs by, OT EEO EEOY


| .. Opus Reformatums.”
or falſe; nor will it defice* or confound his deſign that the thing” |
is brought to prove'y/ 'tho the reſt of the Houles are likewiſe Erro- __
ricous, and therefore | ſhall proceed in another-method. Wo
_. I perceive by the Auchors'Expreflion aboxt Noon, that-the Natiy
did not leave's particutar Account, at what time in that day he-
was born; for that ahowt Nom, might be about an hour or more
before or after it, or cl{e the Stars in this. mans Nativity had not:
the uſual force'and effe&, that Mr. Gadbuyy allows, and afferts they
have in other'Mers Genitures, of which more anon, when 1 come
to thoſe Objectjons: -The Sign 'Y. is well-known'to be but 1 hous
and 5 minutes aſcending on the Horoſcope in that Elevation; and
therefore the error of half-an hour in-time ſooner, and 56 minates
in time later than this Figure, wilt very much-alter the Cafe, and-
extreamly (hike the:'Authority: both of his Aphoriſm and Skill, fo
fat 25 they are both concerned-in this Figure and Nativity ;, and if
I miſtake not; his Dear-Uranie will ſuffer a deliquium alſo, by the:
Confidence and<Credality of her over-forward and bouncing, Se-
cxetary z- but it is no range thing to ſee honeſt Maſters abuſed by:
the knavery of their-fawning; 'glavering Servants. : |
*:/Hbwever, if this Figure ſhould beirrue | which is very uncertain-.
andJubious} it is far ferche; andiat the beſt giverrin a general term.
dbyut Noon ,* which 'no man'ought to, rely. on without Corection,,;
by as many Accidentsas the Calc requires, or can be gotten ; and-
peg hr lorahr- Nativity, without oma = 19 57 Ta Autho-
rity, eſpecially a Caſeas this is,. it is made a-principal
Pillar toſapport fo greata StruQure, as he here endeavours to ball
upon it, is to rhe a/great Argament, -cither of the mans Weakneſs,.
or his Confidence, believing his ipſe dixit is over and-above ſuffici.
ent to ſtem the 'Forrent of all other Authority z and therefore I will-
bring it;tothe Tonchftone, as the real teſt of its truth' or falſhood 3.
and fn that trial; ſhall reſt my ſelf very-well ſatisfied of either;
without troubling you. with many Argaments, which at the beſt;
ſerves but to ſpoil Paper, and tire your Patience. Yet, Ict me tell,
you, this is as notorious a piectof Falſhood and Impoſition, asavy
he hath brought._t6 this puzpoſe and/proof,, -
{ BurbeforeF begin to examine'the:Figiire in general, it will be
very neceflary to fettle the Figure t6 ſome paxticular degreeon the,
idhcaven'and Aſcendant ;'fur-{ as | faid before } if we allow 2 de-.
s:of V$'on the-Tenth, there will be but 4 degrees of Y on the :
Teendane 3. and if 'we ſhould allow 11 degrees of Y ty 4
. tRere..


oY.


_ that which ſtands faireſt los his ay,


: Gon; and therefore we muſt couclade [ ſecing]


' than :none3/ and for:


Places; and it is certain one;of theminaaſt be


Gy Conia.


thete wittbe about 5 degrs.30 minutes of V3.0 the- Tenth.” And-
bectuſe Toll ge nn ths fair, land} rings 1 will take
did not ſerve.


me 'when I was id Hellend } ye 17.degreesof Y
_on'the Aſcendanc; for do ; as out-of the:dbwmdonce- of "his.
Ignorance, he doth conclude +the Aſcendant to the 60f che © as
the -DizeQion upon which this Native did expires now,-if {þ, 1
would: fain be reſolved, whether the Aſcendenc to the, 8.of the ©,,
is likely to give-the Gant and Dropſy; which Diſeaſes he fathers oni
h in his Detirize of 'Natevitier, p<112.: Ahd &d1s ustherealſo, That.
the © gives Swoonings, of the Eyer ,: Palpitation of the
Hears , and Wringings at the Stomach; w þ Dilaſes are wot the,
uſual Attendaits of and Gow: "J:1

I cannot Gnd any Divottin he-can 19, that may,
be allowed to give Death, aps on ring os wig 8 of
© for the » by Diretion, is at that thine ſn.chelr-way.come tothe |


' ninth degreeof-VS, having pait the Body of ithe ©; -and her own
aye ore rar = 7 rpc :and-# of #; Lotd'ot. the


8th Houſe, that pernicious:part-of Heavcn:z and the-©. is at that


odor iy Parkes lg enema ns ofthis
pe. *,. and within Rays of the 3 's +; which is the next Dixe- —


none of theſe can
be lug'd-in'to do the buſineſs] that the Þ of the © x6 the Aﬀcen-


dant, was the fatal Point that kilfd him, Mn gratews = ay 4 L,


of the 'Þ was very mar'after, -} Thus-you. ſee a) forryqhift-is better.
we know; Hadmot this y Dire-
dion fell in fo-untowardly, he might have lived tilt chis time, un-
lefs #, Lotd of the Sch, had happened to have birded him- offs
for & being Lord of the Aſcendant, -woald without doubt pot hurt -
his own, and. h-durſt as well have car his Fingers , being under


| To mnt erin! ee rr on ae his de-- -


rriment} as moleſt or kill him; tuck a pretty fort of Aſtrology he
to be Maſter of, |; ;
a: this Nativity we find both the ©-atid I in  Aphetical
Hiteg, 'or: Giver: of.
Life; and yet the Aſcendant to the'#:of the ©:killd:the Native 3


which if (©, I am ſure it can doir always, vos gm mpr gy os |


more caſe and certainty, when the Aſcerdant is Giver of Lite. Butt
le>us have recourſe'ts his ColleQion of Genitures, and_there-you .


"RR nated where the ——_ to: the'0


- and


F *

4
- o $4.
*


42: Op Reformatum.

4nd @ of the © did not kill oln Pope Pant V.p.80. Dr. Morte,
p- 92, 'Bilhop Vſber, p.:96. -Mr. Garaher, p.'102. Mir Childrey; p,
14: Mir. Veughan, p.117;\ who had his © jo the Eighth in dire
'8 cothe3; and yet the Afceadant to the Body of the one; and


#'of the other did not killy what think you now, are theſe partial


Stars or not ? ' Sir Robert Hilhurn, p, 12.4. Sir Frech. Hitter, p. 159,
that was to/)ive-fome Decades of years, he alfo out-lived the 8 of


the © Major-General Lambert; p. 166. Vincens Wing, p. 182, an _


ever. ha}f core; that out- liv'd) the Aſcendant to the 2 of the ©;
and ſome. of them underwent its-Influence at # confiderable Age
woo. And I could farnifty you wickytriore likewiſe under; his own
hand, only I chink:rhefe/ {ſufficient to prove that DireQion falſe
and ficticious as to his Death , and the Cauſe of it ; arid £6 ſhew
this Learned Artilt's Skill, is as lirtle as his Modeſty and good N&
_ Sare.-" gDOAITUl Ny VN 14D of RILAS 2 7a

But beſides all this,” there axes fevenal Nativities in being, in


327


which our Nativity-maker zl!ows the Midheaven to the Bodies or


Oppdſitions of h and+& to kill; ſometimes by violence, and fome-
eimes other ways, and'this- done only by a fingle DireQion of ci
ther, 'is in the 'Cafe 'of /Gharle? Guftapts , and Wilizm Land, the
Midhcaven'to the'Body of Tin the one, and tothe Body of in
the other;- bur in this Nativiry the ©, who is Giver of Life, and
 theMidheaven, 'were both at once directed to the Body of 7, and
8 of #, Lord of the Sth-in- the 4th; ang then tothe # of hand
& from the 4th likewiſe s all-which had not power enough to kfſl
him fill the Afcendant came tothe 8 of the © y Ha, bs, bz, 4 pret-
ty ſortinf Stats, 'ard as prentfly ranage# bytholo that pretend an
acqudititance with them. Fridicd | cinnot blame People, when t
hear them cry out againſt the Footeries and Cheats of Aſtrology z.
for according to this kind of DoQrine,' no man would troublehis
head with the Study of « thing {o- contraditory. and uncertain,
that could find any thing &l{6 ro exerciſe his T s and Me»
ditations Mm. - Þ know the Anſwer ſome of them will make me,
and ſay, The Midbeaver never kilfr but in violent Dizthr, Collect. Ge-
nitur.. Aph. 92. - To that F anſwer, They know'nothing-of the.


Cauſe ot a violent Death, till _it.is over and paſt; and therefore -
that is but # ham, wed #tilly one $50.3 ford it hath power to kill”


at one time; it hath 2r another; and cho 2 marr may not dye by
an Ax, or a Haltes, yet-he” may dye viotently in his Bed, or
ſome other way, for the. Stars arc nut boand to # particular way:


and.


%


13 $


me


Op ys Reformer, iy
and method. And 1 do aſſertir for trath, that if it did ever kill,


it muit do ſo always { w Rules of Exception} and/I know
no-reaſon. { nor. he neither]! why. all thoſe DircQions to the Sun


| and Midbeayen ſhould nothave kill'd this Native, | And beſides, he


talks without knowledge -about the violence of Nativities ; for

what violent Poſitious-are thete more in Guſtavus A 's Nati-
vity, than in this of Noſtradamns ? And alfo, what is of vio»
lence more .iniCharle; Guftevxs , than in the Duke of Albemarle's?.
Colle}; Genit. p. 70. and yet two.of thern died violent Deaths, and
the other two, Natural ones; but. beſides, before the- are
dead, he;knows not a; word;which is a violent one fot ; and
which not 3, but-when. they-are dead, and that by idle, he cab
preſently find the Cauſe, What Nativity in his ColleQion carries
more violence With it, than that of Charles Tortenſon the Swediſh Ge-


| neral;wherc the © and & are in & in V$ in the Aſcendant, and both


in Q.to.h in bis own Dignities the I is in/& with %, Lord of
the-12th in'S,- with violent Stars, in dire © 60H; / and-in &'to
&, andthe © Loxdof the Sth, and aloto'#,. whohath Dignitics -


thete likewiſe,” Now is it not firav | that this Native under (6
- violent a Poſition ſhould dye a.quiet atuxal Death. , when thoſe


n Sweden, eſpecially Guſtaves 4 Adolpbas, under a very
eng Rio 9d ition ſhould dye violently? Which things Mr. obs


_ would very much obtige the World with, to let us know the Rea-
 ſ{onsof thein,' and to acquaint us with, thoſe curious. Noſtruo's, 'T


which we m_ be able to underſtand! theſe Deng ry
Nativitics as: Ip hey 473 Snghc

To conclude, ativity wW ao about Noon, thatis, alitde be
fore 11 a Clock, which hacRe will nackive 7 efrnting, bue |
the latter/part of *, and the Sign. on:the Tenth., And under
this Poſition and its Effects, he will at the time of his Death la-
bour underithe Influence of the ©, Giycr of Lite, to By erllone
Parallel of & and, .Dire-and Conye/as which are prope


 reions to pive the Gow and. D od-thexefore, -if Mr. LIE


doth not this a won: þ nt, - "owe ano
hea more Authentick. | ;


| Theges he he he's DMs Ta in, is tha x"
It, one of his own , - of gry


Tg c ab. exact time -when h« diopachs into the”
= The Tigaey plows, 3 | hs moio25p»


| Natus die »4 Jaws :


VY  \hor. 11, min, 30. Mane
7 - (1542.


Is Nord
NP p

ww, J, | i d? - F \
I wonder Mr. G24. ſhould have ſo much confidence on his Repu-
tation, as to think to be believed in this, and ſuch like Caſes, when
he ſays the thing is ſo; ſeeing we have found him tardy fo often in
his befzjending Mankind with fach Cygziolities as thele are, Nati-
vities I mean, and notone in forty of them true, as may be juſtified
by his Learned ColleQion, and the Opinion of every one about that
Book ; for it is not only my ſelf, but divers others alſo, that are of
the ſame Perſuation with me about the Falſities, and viſible Con-
traditions ſo openly juſtified and aſſerted 'by the Author in that
Treatiſe, and not only there, but in moſt of thoſe Books he hath
publiſhed, to inform the unlearned World. Do you think it is rea-
lonable to believe, that he ſhould obtain the true time of this man's
Birth, who was born at ſo great a diſtance, as Madrid In Sparn, and
perhaps unknown to all his Friends and Acquaintance | and pro-
bably himſelf too] till after his Death ? When we{may be certain
he could.not give us'the true Nativities of thoſe born at home in
our own. Nation, and near him, and had the opportunity of their
S Acquaine


/ 1


+ W ©
> TY


Opn {\ My a
Acquaintance beſides , as Sir Frech. Holler, Nic Cnlpepper, Mr. Lilly.
Nay, he hath given us bis own. falſe, .and. printed it three or four
\ times over belides thoſe of Otiner Gromwell, Two Kings of Swe-
den, Judge Hales, and abundance more, too.many here to relate.
Tay for thole very reaſons he ought [ſince he hath-crackt his Cre-
dit ſo] to endeavour always to prove thole Nativities he gives us,
that when they ſhall happra to be queſtioned by any in mine, or
other mens Company , we may have ſomething to ſay in his
pindlation which now we-have not, relying only upon his
F ; «fb. | x , . * Mes.

wr give us an old Lowſy Popiſh Hermit, "born 150 years ago, to
prove an Innovation of his own, that Rands in_necd of bettex Au-
thority and. Security than he is able to produce.” A Fellow born
in Spain, and not a Soul living now that ever knew him, which at
the belt tells us, it can be known no otherways , but by report
and hear-ſay ; and for ought we know -| or he either |] it may be
ſome days, but'I am ſure'fome hours diltance from this eime, or
elſe the Rules of Aſtrology that I am Maſter off, are not true. 1
admire he hath not made a Nativity for Pope Joan, His Brother
Fudas Iſcariot, St. Patzick,, 'Monſicur St, Ruth,. and the Golden Far- .
mer, for without doubt ; they had all of them Cardinal Signs
on their Angles, and 'would mightily conduce to the Probation of
that Aphoriſm, if he would but take the pains to let us know
them according to his befi and molt approved Rules of Nativity-


making.
Me Do but conſider how many People he hath told us died on the
Midhreaven-and Sun to the Square of Satwrn and. Marr, how many
he ecls us died on the Aicendant to the Square of the San, Body
of Satxrn, and Body of Mars; how many he hath affirmed went
to the filent Shades on the 'Moos to the Square of the Swn, the Op:
poſition of. Saturn, the Oppoſition of Mars, the Midheaven and
S$za to the Antiſcions of Mars and Saturn, all which have paſſed
overin this Nativicy, and none of them had: power to kill. Nei-
ther do, I know when he dicd, |yet am partly-ſure they went off
without Death, becauſe Gadbury ſays, he:was about Twenty one
years of Age befoxe he grew thus Religious 3: and he muti continue
ſome wry io this thod 6 Pegs es. clic ar parry —_
D | (0, great an. ffterm and/ Reputation to be-counted a Her-
mit. t theſe DixeFions came up, lame at Twenty; others at
Four or Five and twenty, ſame at Ghbays: Enichopelars cate =p
' . R te


of opinion he out-lived that "iÞ ever there were ſuch a man,


... and he did not ſtarve himfelf to be counted Holy.


.Beſides all chis, L ſee no reaſon why a Conjundtion of Mars and
Saturn in Scorpio, the Square of the Moon and Fin, and Moon» and
Miraoy,. the Square of Frupiter and Ferws, and alfo the- Mundane
Pazallel of Jupiter, Saturn , and Mars, ſhould make a-tman fo ex-


cp6ae9y ly Pious and Rellgious, as our Friend 7. Gad. tells us he was,
I bave heard kim- often ſay, it was a very hard: thing for him to
be good

aft


and honeſt, who had's Conjundion of Sar and Mars
e time of his Birth ; and'if 6, I am-ſure *tis the worſe for
being in Scorpio. 1 do xzeallyjudge , if this Figure is nearly true,
or within an hour and a half of it, he did-not turn Hermit for the
fake of Religion, but-for the loſs of a Mitre, or elfe a Difobli-
gation by forme Debauchery of hers; For'at the Age of twenty
years, he had his Swn to the Sextile of Venus, and $ of Mars
by Dire&ion, which is very likely to give ſuch an z and if
ſo, he only grew ſurly and ſour on that Aﬀrone; by the continu-
ance of which, and his-own forgetfulneſs,it beeame a cuſtom to be
thus Religious; to {ignify which, he labour'd under the. Moon to
the Oppotition of Satzra with and without Latitude, about four
years together, from Twenty three gr Twenty four forwards,


And tho I havenot fo good 2 proof for the fallity of this Figure,
as t have of ſeveral of the-former, yet I am partly fare it is talfe,
becauſe: he qut-lived che Sin, who is tothe Square of Satxrn
and Mas. And fo F come to his Ninth Example of Truth in the
Caſe of Cardinal Signs on the Angles, "The Figure follows, fet
Prolomarcally,


"£< TE,
| T1
lateſt, were at Thirty ſix os ſeven by this Poſition and yet 1 am +


© Opus Reformation:
. Sir Theodore Mayerne.


N


La

h 9

N% 2

of o N
[s 6
»


5


I am certain [\ſceing my good Friend 7. G, makesWiliam Land,
.and Sir Theodore Mayerne, to have almoſt the ſame Pofitions, - or
with very little difference, ſcarce conſiderable] that they cannot
be both tnie, if eicher of them be ſoz for we ſee here, that they
have both 4 degrees of =-aſcending, and. 2 Lady of the Aſcendant
in mM in both Nativitics, and the © in both their Aſcendants, and
N in £ to the degree'\afcending exaQtly, the Yin a Watery-fign in
both alſo. Hence, ſecing they are ſo much a like in their Births, why
fhould not their Bodies and Conſtitutions alſo have been ſomewhat

zonal in reference to their Statues, Corpulency, Paſſions,
general Fate in Fortunes and Misfortunes ; in all which, theſe two
men were nothing alike ;- the Biſhop being a little man, Spare bo-
died, Rafh and Furious; the DoQor a tall-grown , large Body,
extxeam Corpulent, witha gentle, ealy Temper. The Biſhop had
the latter part of his Lite fall of Trouble, Diſquiet, and Confuli-
on, and in concluſion attended with a violent Death. The Do-
Qor had the latter part of his Lite Quiet, Eaſy,- and Compoſed,
and at Chelſy "where he lived, dicd of good old Age. _ the


| Opui' Reformation.


difference in their Births is not any ways remarkable 3 whatis, you.


may obſerve in the places of the Y and $. In the Doftors, the Ys
in the beginning of Mit in & with 2, and both going to the # of &;


" In the Biſhop's, the Þ isin X in ©c0 # and to &, applying to-


both.” But why theſe ſhould cauſe ſuch vaſt difference and diſpro-
portion in their Bodies, I confeſs, I know not, nor db I believe
my.Friend is able to reconcile the. one to the other, or cither of
them to his Stars. Indeed I will 'allow the Biſhops IntelleQuals
Patron” of Religion) in & to &,* 2 with hinM, and & Retro-
grade with the Virgins Spike, do very well ſhew. And I could tell
you; what they promiſe in ſuch Poſitions too, if 1 thought 1 might
efcape the ſevere Cenfure of being maliciouſly inclin'd ; but this
I do fay, the Pofitions'are naturally like the man, as to his Tem
perature and Humour, inthe way and order of Nature.

As to the Soul, that Divine and Eternal part of Man, I can by no
means allow to be affeted, governed, or ſwayed by. the power
of the S$rars, any further than it is informed , or miſled by its
Natural Organs, 'the Senſes ] mean; for without doubt , by how
much the more braitiſh a man is, the more vicious and depraved
is his Mind and Thoughts, thoſe Preliminaries to the Soul, by
which mediam it is always converſant with, and exalted to thoſe
glotious Manfions above, or confuſedly hurried among thoſe Cor-
ruptions of Nature, which are not' only a Clog to the volatile”
Soul, but a Sink of Ruin and Deſtruction, in which {.it is to be
feared] too many, have periſhed, both Body and Soul.

Bat toeturn to our Starry-butineſs again ; There are many more
things to prove theſe two Nativities do not agree in, ' beſides theſe
wana, - The Bifbop he lived all his days fingle or unmarried.
The Doctor had both Wife and Children, f one of which married
to a French Marquels ], and the Lord of the Seventy the fame Star,
and in the ſame place ir both the Figures; and I hope myFriend
{tu will not make the) in to &, an Argument of. a ſingle

ife ; that Poſition, 1 confeſs, is often judged to be a wanton one,
but never forbids Marriage. Nor I cannot believe he will lay any:
weight br ſirefs'on the 3's Separation from the. © of h', they be-
ing now at 7 degrees diſtance, and the Y.in' Aﬀpedt both to: #' and


to be er fe-mrin from the Doctors, as his Y in O to YL, (the.


&a
Well; but how ſhall we reduce all this. into a way for Practice,


and to be ſerviceable ' another time , when we meet with ſuch
: | crabbed.


applyi g/in'the'Zodiack;- and to a Mandane Aﬀpet of. alſo. -
,


F335


Opua, Reformatum,, - |
ray fiuff, again?. Why, really I cannot tell--you which way to
Ge hat work ; it is. Oo Hi EO he Rulcs, of Aſtrology that I

I Lang $00 read.and it will props knotty, puzlivg

ce, of Wark, for which. zcalon we muſt be forced to intreat ey.

worth y Won, end,. to favour us with this Toformation, ,ard let |
the Wok now, why gy Theadore, Ml iodred he ſhould.marry, and why.

Wikam, ſbould not ; and he is the only man, able to

do it,. being farm with;;all of curious, delicate, five-ſpuu or

ions and thol ofty Noſftrums, Al, che Quinteence yrs w |

lodged only,1n. his. apagious e t mighty. 4.

ther Kiel Arun of Alizology ſp GHPE,

But be(zdes this, it wn not be improper to conſider the DixeRi-
onsin this Figure and;Nativity,z for it is certain, that Planes which
was Anarea.in the Bitey' s, mui of neceſſity do-the fame Office in
the Dodtor's, becauſe the Figures are both the ſac, -and the ſame
Hileg alſo ; and the Planets of a-Maletick Influence are in the ſame
Parts of Heayen, and Lords of the {ame Houſes in the one Figure
as well as in the other ; and ifthe Lords of the Sth 06.4 be |
power, tO Lpgrios, a and Kill.in the Buhoy's: Nativit wag

reaſon to the. contrary, why, they ſhould Fry

and ability in the ar 's, parſuant to their Dominion in chal _

fatal Houſes mn hath vr, which 'my Friend. lays a mighty

weight upan. . For if their Dominion is ſo conſiderable by being

Lords of thafe Houles, as our Friend Fobn, and ſome ether Authors

edlls us it is3 then. beypnd all doube, we may rationally judge that

the Malign Fnflucnee:that Authors (ay: is lodged ins h and 7, which
tenders thens perfeck Enemies to our Nature-and Beiog, and alfo

Authars of. Death and Sickneſs, .cauſt mightily'add to their Pawer

and Ability in. point of Death, ially'za the Doctor's Nativity :

And.yet our Learned Author kills che Biſhop on 'the Aſccudint

_ to the Bodyaf hy, and tecs.t x live tew ycars beyond that

' Direction, and dye on.the Aſcendant to the O.of &, and 9 of 2,

which. ta me ſtems a mighty Myſtery, that h ould have power

03h, 2 yet not have power to kill ; when Iam ſure there is no


We; can. _ the Commradiction to any


heat on gr  : mpranycogymnc De


ST ay. or means


\Figure, moe
: Joulry inta the reſt


wy_— ©


.111Opuyo Ref ormatum.
of his Errors, and wot onlyacknowledg my ſnort, bat do him
vightin Print nay, Eris mibi Magn Apullo, For he tellsjus in plain
terms, That the Biſhop was taken: up and impriſoned on the Mid-
heaventv the Bodyof &.; where he continied'abour fourYears, and
was'then' Beheaded' on the Alctndant to'the Body of h; and' yer
the Dor Had both theſe DireRtions! and* neither of them kill'd
him; 'tho ﬆ that time he was very Infirm and extreamily Corpalentz ©
therefore, if theſe things ſhould be true, or believed fo to be, how
thall'we reconcile 'this Dodtrine © his '92d Aphorifm , where he
fays, The DireBions of the Mithheaven 'hever kills, but where a violent
Dyfath is threatned. Which Aphoriſtz was made from the King of
Sweden's, $0 ſerve a tarn/at that time. In which-Nativity, how ſhall
we believe that his A. C. to the Body of h did kill him, when we
ſee plainly theſe two Gentlemen out-lived their MC. to the Body of
&, and Fobn himſelf his M:C. to the Body of h. |
© Put befides all-this,' my Friend hath mightily diſcovered hisTg-
norancein the DireRion affigned forthe Doctor's death, which tells
us plainly, That-tho he doth make a noiſe with P:olomy's Name,
yet he doth not underftznd one word of Ptolonty's Matter and Do-
me- © For he ſays FCollef?. Gen. p. 126,] that he died on the A(-
diteded'tothe O of & near the Antarex. Now,if you pleaſe
but to obſerve, % is 5 degr. 20m. init, and &'is 5 degr: 27 m,
in 7, whichis a very ſmal{differencein. f, where the Oppolnion .
of the one falls on the Square of the other exaQly, and both Dire-
Qions muſt be allowed to come up at the ſame time, and this inthe.
Houſe and Terms of Z. Therefore, if he or any one elſe pleaſe but
to look into the 14th Chapter of the Third Book of Prolomy's Qna--
dripartite, they may find theſe”words, he there diſcourling of thoſe
things that'do prevent Death in dapgerous and killing DireRions; .
his words are theſc, m_Y enim, cum in fines beneficatum Incur--
rant, ant cum benefica adſpexerit quadrato Aſpeftu, aut Trigono, aut oppo»
firo-gradn. Imterfeftorem. ' The Mortal EffeQts | fays he] is hindred;
when the Dire&ion happens inthe Terms of the Beneticks, or when +
a Benchck beholds the Intexfector by a Quadrate, Trine, or o
rene jp So, that by Prolomy's own Rule, this Dire&ion of the
A ant to the © of & could not kill, becauſe Z-beholds his Ra--
- dical Place, and the place of DireRtion to aminuce;' and becauſe the
Oppoſition is a more perfe# ſped? than the Square, it muſt without -
doubt have ovor-powered it, taken away the Sting of its Nature,
and prevented the Mortal Effet; had this Learned Phylictan's Na-
, tivity:


tivity true Bs exac. He: you ſer Polen ED two diftin&
'Rulcsof them; FeRges . pane, and the Terms of Jupiter, which
' "are, [ dare be cont ents GtTLAR0h Per - ballance&both the
Oof &,.and the Kh ioret ore I. ſhall: zeſt m elf. Gatis-
ticd [1]1thar worthy la pl nt rerigform myJudgmenc]
cthat-{ceing wa, did ;out-live the Midheaven to the
Body of &, my ce Alcendant to the Body of h, yrhen hare yas
not.any-thing to ſupport, aſbſt, or ſay; bims it.is high
ble this ſuppoſed DizcRion, [fox indeed it is no more |. of, vgs
cendant to the D of £0 1x ſhould. ſend; him to. =
Grave, when it was much over-(wayed þy:a Benefick Ray, and
in the Terpis of. # belides;; All which .conkadexed,, ſoaks aloud
in my Ears, that-the pretended Nativity of this: Lcarne £4 e's
15 molt notoriouſly falſe, and either igaorantly or knayiſhly obtrud-
ed upon us, to proye-one of, his ſuppoſed Mylteries, as yain as his
new-Religion he was.ſo fond of in the year 1687, &c. ;which pow
he ſeerns to be aſham'd of ;, for he denies that evex he-was a Papiit ;
but,  Oportet mendacem efſe memorem.

An yet to be more plain with my Reader, i in purſuing the Rules
of Aſtrology in the. track of. Truth give me leave to, make
further Obſervations on the fality of his Figure in, BALTES, 7+
falſe Notions and DircCtions with a great deal of flouzilh, and paf-
lg by thoſe of n.orc weight and moment jn perfc& filence, «as. if
they. were not worth ncting, or tit to be obſerved. by the ftudious
Reader. And the tirſt is, The San in the Aſcendant,which is allow-
cd by all Artiſts, {naſ,9ur Author t00] tobe Hileg, or giver of Life z
and for to chuſc a giver, of Life, and never intend any turher uſe of
X15 but to give.a man or thing a. Nick-vame to caule it to be ad-
twircd- without any peculiax uſe or Advantage, unlefs it is by chance
to ſe exvc a furn, and then its Power and Virtue. is proclaimed in
word $ at large : WO in. Zames I. King of Great Britain; in Dr. Le

eve'S., P-.119. in the Duke of Gloceſter; Þ- 17. Collef?, Genit. .and ,
alſo in that of Oliver Cromnell, where.our Author wakes ule of that
Term t0.ipforce his Argument with the greater power and probar
billity of Death, © And.to be x laio with. you, 1 know no reaſon we
have to obſerve a Hilg, if we do not make it the only, and princi-
pal point in Dircions of Life and Death ; and 1 am. ſure Prolomy
would, not haye given ſo, pages Rules. fox the more cxa&
finding of the Gitex of RE Dia i pot bren Ds roo more than ordinaty
aſe in. Nativitics, and ially;in choſe Predictions of -Life and

Death.


Death. Nay,the word it felf beſpeaks its Power and Office, which by
* -the Latin Authors is rendred, Proyogator Vize, & verbo prorogare, which
is to prolong or continue; and nothing cando that, but what hath
the full and. fole Power and Command of it. And pray obſerve,
"That all the five Hylegiack points; are not called Prorogators at the
ſame time, but that Point or Star only, that is Giver of Life. By the
Greeks, it is called, we&- + Coir, aut *Apinys, that is, the Lord of
Life, or a Meſſenger ſent out on a patticular Buſineſs ;” and it is'de-
rived from the Verb, *Apihnuu, Demitto. But by the Arabs or Chaldeer,
who ſeem to be the firſt Authors of the word, it pd Hileg or
Hilech, derived from the Radical Hebrew word, *J?7, Ambulavit ;
which ſignifies one that walks forward, as ina Journey, making a
- Tegular, Progreſs from the 4 quo to the ad quem; and beſides, a very
Eminent Author tells us it is, Planeta vel Locks Cali, ex cujus digreſſione

ſen direlione de flatn vite Judicant Aſtrologs.

- Now, if this ſhould happen to be true, That from this Point, and
from this only, we ought to judge of the length of Life, and alſo the
time of Death by the dangerous and mortal Directions ; let us ſee
what-uſe our profound Author makes of the Hileg in this Nativity,
as well -as in that of the Biſhop, in both which the Swn is certainly
Givcr of Life , bythe Rules given by Origanus, Pezelins, and Ptolomy

, nay, we may add Argol, Campanells, and the Learned Author, ec.
of the Dofrine of Nativitier, p. 90. all which agree; That the Sxn in
the Aſendat [the Moon being under the Earth ] is certainly Giver
of Life, as in the Nativity of this Learned Gentleman. Therefore,

if you dire& the O to the Body of Hh, with and without Laticude,
you will find'it comes up at or near the Age'of 51. cxm Lat. and at
the Age of almoſt 53: fine Lat. and this in M, the Dignities of &,

Lord of the Sth Houle, and not far from his Square 5 what the Effect

© of this Direction was, I know not,but this you' may be certain, that
he did not dye of it. The next is,the DireQion of the © to the O-of

F near the Scorpions Heartywith the 8 of %,Lord of the 6th, at or
about the Age of 66 years, an Age that generally brings Death z but
eſpecially when the Giver of Lite is directed to the Maleftick Rays of
& ,Dominus domus Mortis,and to the beams of # Lord of the 6th,and
theſe among violent fixed Stars of both their Natures y and yet this
ſurly old Man would not dye upon theſe neither; buc lives, expect-
ing further orders for his remove, What! not dye on the Giver of

Life, being direted,to &, Lord of the Sth Houſe, their true and
only Anareta 7 T his is a wonder _ a witneſs ; Tace, tace, it is -

| an


ff


137


.and. "2
pur pr bon a thing of
ala] tho the-Sxn to the Loa of the Be
Hoaſe didnotk him, yet the Aſceridant did his buſineſs [and ve-
riied the true Rules of Art, every whit as well as the Suu] upon its
DireRion to the Sqwere : of Mars, which you will find came up at
4 J00g:of Ap&; awt circum cires; and- therefore the” Anareta is not

be blamed. Arid for your Hileg, it may beall nouſcnce for o ught
| Tenor ncklect es Thagad co believe a pack of old mate Amben |
rene _ but the Ho Fs to


, Getting of R ren3 _— things more
of this tature, you make the-Di yr hagerpr a Yes frag:
your Corrcionof Nativities, _ And I doubt not, goo go
dance the | San and/ Moot too and fro, from ane Degree or
rmpmany wp ee ee Tn ee
In Art of Afizolo but there would be a plain reaſon to


chin, aa ind alfo'a forcible DireQtion DireQion for every Accident. Oh, 3p 54
| Horoſcope, and the excellent uſe of it ! But mydeſign
and deſire is, NE Deo cs the Be wal orb
as to let us know whencthe, to the Hileg will not kill,
and wherſ:the DireQions to the Horoſcope ſhall do it , that. the
| Or Les 6466+, dmrgx} and deluded
pangayy toy orr ofa thing: chat will never ſucceed the Operati-
And indeed, che Direction he here builds upon, of the Al-
cxedart tote Spot Kr for i was over almoſt twenty
4 En _— be. no Cauſe
affigned' fort, wpiterand Seorpione Heart ti
GbAbcalant Abd ts hayehtze not mengioned The Bilkop' hs Nas -
vity,


digion, LoG of '


G  Effecs. and £minerit Mex; A
Cordinol Signs out of the Angjer, or in ovda doin


.. | CO y e Ewan brvet. n RE
| yet, before fs =_— W 3A old worthy rind,
i $i 69 a viible Demonliration. of his Ignorance and-— 3 and


alſo. what: Credit is . to be given to his Calculations Aftzono-

mical,. 58 wall 9s He havin 4 gaeat Opiyio of his
| own Abiligs ip Aﬀrocomy, ard af his togud ba

—_— — ,avd t Fare Cat

occahion in Almanack is-written to

wpon thoſe Tables, andabtle ter ale them at, bs .

Frag gg pag rn dp |


yrows Arglvene, written Mr- Nichalas
Fs, the © en-


BE 139 -


tho wat in Garda Se. Had fo  ] cone i Examen of


EEE one LG.
| bw T 2. | min. .


53 tafo, nearan hour. In which Caſe we muſt certainly allow Mr.


-— 7


- , -
E- L 4 y wo LL.
Opus Reformatum.


"7
1


4


Greenwood to* andetftatid His 'own Tables wellz-and therefore the
other muſt be in the Error; and ' not he; which if fo, 'then what-


. need F. G. make ſach a noife about- the truth and exa&neſ(s of


afiy Tables, when he thus deals in Error by Whole-ſale, to tell/us,
;that the Caroline Tables are falſe 3 when for ought he knows, it is
nothing elſe but his weakneſs and inability in the Operation. For
here tis plain, That he hath made an Error of 58 min. and this done
too in a Controvetly for the trath, as he fays z a'very pretty way
toſupport and build the Structare of Truth upon PUlars of Error;


* juſtas the Prieſts of his Religion have done, plunged the People into


ſo many (Errors, and there keep them, that now they themſelves


know not one ſep itithe way to truth. Thus Thave fairly givenmy -


Reader an Account of the Errors in thoſe Nativities printed in the
Cardines Cels; and that they have not Cardinal Signs on Angler, as he
pretends z nor are there any of his Calculations to be credited, eſpe-
cially in Nativitics, moffof them being matle to ſervea turn,and not
founded on the true Bafis. And if the Reader will read-with care,
the Examinationof the Errors in this Book about Genitures, he may
foon difcover which'pointhe ought toSteer;to come up with Truth,
or at leaftways in gt of her; a proſped always giving foine hox

of the fruition of what they purſue; And ſo take my leave of Fobn
-at\this time, and promiſe my Reader to prefent him with my
Defetiio Genitxerarmme, in which 1 ſhall examine the Nativities in Gad-


| he renee Argot's' De Diehus Critieis', and in Morinw's
W


rologia Galles, it being already in a good forwardneſs.


- In the former partof this Treatiſe, I-promiſed to ſhew you, That ©


there was neyer-any- Eminent and Famous PrediQion made of any


' ones Death, but when the Aftrologers made uſe of the Hitey in Di-
reQion, arid did Jire& that to ome of the Malefick Rays of h and


&, &e. And you may ſce 'throughout this Book , that-my-Do-


' _Qrine there delivered is wholly purſuant to this Principle, for 1
" allow no Promittor to any Significator to kill, but tothe Giver of


Life only ; lp wry to take or cle that,” I refer you-to Book HI.
. ** And the firſt Example we have (that occurs to my Memory). is


that of Dov Jobn of Auſtria in Sixtus ab Heminga, p. 49.” whoſe Death


- the faid Hemings predicted ſeven years before, and that almoſt to-a
day; fromthe DireQion of the Þ to the # of h; for the 3 was i


the


_


1


the 7th, 'and beyord all dopbr Giver of Life. And'wefind'there,


that the Aſcendant totlie- 8 of the »; Lady of the 8th Houſe did not
| kl; nor did that ts the Oof the ©anid: Þ effect iey-nor could the
© to the DI of kill; tho-the' DireQion fell in- the 4th Houſe:,
that” faca!' pare of 'Heaven, as ſome eſteem it and the reaſon of
this'was, becauſe none- of thoſe Significators were Givers of Life,
but the'Þ (only ; and therefgre, when ſhe was direRted to'the'#& of
-h;, this Princely Native wasmade # Sacrifice to/Death';- as-you may
ſee by his Nativity, printed in the beforementioned/Freatiſe;' And
here give me leave to obſerve one thing 5 it is plain'froin Heminga's
own words; That this was done by chance too, he not knowing the
reaſor of the thing, -nor could he ever do ſo again; -and therefore


brings this Example intortfute Aſtrology; and tellsusatlaft, Unics -


birrnils non efficit vers and itis indeed no wonder, that he conld not
_ do ſo-again; whe he did' not know the true reaſon why this had
fuch an effe& as it hadz which is the fault-of too many beſide: He.
minga, who could never arrive yet at a true Rule, to judge of the
Effe&s of Dire&ions in Death and Sickneſs.: - / S75
Fhe fecond Example, is thatof Lacis Bellantize, in the Nativity
of Picws Mirandula, where you may obſerve; that the I to the of
the © did not kilf, nor the AM.C. to the £of h,.nor'the Aſcendant
to the'© of Þ# in the 4th but the Aſcendant, who is the true Hileg,
or Giver of Life, tothe Square of h, and Body of & did do it effe-
Quallyz /ſo that it isphain,- the Giver of Life isto be principally: and
only takert notice of in Directions-of Death. ' NECKS
The third Example; is that of Edward VI. King of England, who
died Fuly 16. Aano1553- being almoſt Sixteen years of Age y ahd
as it is reported, it was.predicted before by Cardan,altho he had his,
Nativity imperfeQ, as'tothe exact time; yet did (ay, Fhat the AG
cendant tothe Body of h- would kilthim, and indeed ſoit proved ;
and that becauſe the Aſcendant was Giver of Life by Ptolomys Rules
a Conjutiftion preceding, and both the Luminaries, and part of For-
tunc under-the Earth; and neither # nor 8,who are in Aphetical,
Places, do behold' the Points of Heaven that are mentioned by him
in the'lize-caſe after an Oppoſition 3 and therefore 1 do athrm, That
the y =v ar was the' real and true Hileg, and the Effect conhirmg +
it to be ſo. * ;


The fourth Example , is that of the Nativity of Vincent Wing,
where we ſhall find upon: inquiry, that neither the Aſcendant to -


the 8 of the ©, northe Y-:tathe Qof the ©, was able to kill this.
4 - Native.


141


j p F 0 7 Pat -
wh on_ 5 : 4 = < -, 4 kt @

: x G - al

| _ = . .

*. - _ »
 - IJ ' =__

- oE :
, a ®

5 . ” _ -
hy, -

A .
Cw”


RS Native3..no, onthe Miſh oth 03. doh -
NE PiraRion. (a5 Jame'chink). 30 Life, RIGS 1
| kill'd him with; the! are of &.y, aud the yealpu was,
becauſe the © is certainly Giver of Life,and this bey [di
' fo that you ſill ce the Hileg is always coucere'd, and. but ſeldom


miſſeth, and when it doth, there axe (as indeed there qught) very
- good Reaſons to be given or it, by any that underitand DircRions |
- mathe eps NDOIY epidongtponerhond them,


. -, Awhic pred by a.certain Perſon ſome years before; it hap-
Wo: pencd;; andit is well-known too, toſevcral inagd about the City
F of Limdar,,;t0::bt true, what 4 here fay 3. and, that Pexſon 10,my
; © -knowledg made uſe. of no other Signiticator, but .thetruc ivcr of
| Life z avel-in chat Nativity you my obſerve-two-'or three things
that are very remazkable. ift, The Aſcendant-to thi Body of h
Wow did notkillhim, neither did the Midbeavep to the £3 of h kill bing,
Ws - nor the.) to the Body, of:the ©4 nay,; and; what is mone, the ©

ES Hileg £© the 0. of h, did not kill neither ; (which adanits-of aque-
-— _ - _ Rion;-and that vety rational one-too , But why. did ic not kill
TT 2 * him?.Becauſe was notLogd of the 8thz-js not that a very gagd
F 4 scafbng- Ha, ba $a 1 Or lie, becauſe he was. ftrang, and like 3
- noble. Enemy, corn'd to hurt him ; by-which Rule the Stars.ae” - -

PF. --- alway tag. firong,or: too weak, accordingas' Mr, Allzologer

plealeth to turn the Scales with his Finger ; , ar. perhaps the Dine- *
Qion falling in the Houſe 'of Hope, :a fortunate Gorner of Heaven,
And {out could-not kill him s or elle, becauſe. the Þ , wha diſpo-
{chi of theplace of Direction is in Trine to the Aſccndant, whigh
fox ought we know might ſaves" avd if ;not ingly, yet certainly,
akogher maybe allowed to do it, notwithlianding the plage of |
Diec&ion was iu pitted and deep degrees z a plaguy kind of an un-
happineſs to'a-man under an All fate:!. Butco tell you the plain
truth of the matter, theſe are all Shams and Foolexics.: And as a
Learaed- Divine once {aid of: the Piures in Church-windows,
| That they ſerve en on ox. the Light, and {o do thele in their
. Andfor the teue Reaſon; why it did not kill, you, have-ic
in Book 111. Chap . 14+ of Prolomy's - panty where you may.
find 4t if you Arid fo 1 come. to tell your, That when the
© came to be. about. 9:65 pn obs by:DireRtion, he mec
Share with ———— DireQions, without any aibttance 20 xe-


lieve


Ro


Aa * Ops. Reformatum.
lieve or- ſave-'the Native, which I fay,
real and true Ek of Wort Was Have performed, what
Ipromiſcd in Page 20; and Fthink fpoke-cnough'to-the-purpole
- I intended it fox; but if any think ig-not Yufficient, or at leaſts
wikuſckfs, they have the liberty 7 either. to twprove it ,/ox res
je@&iec: 1.8 SA ned 5 bd cetek


— ,


_ EPI : —"_— PRs _ #
w —
_ k W *% % -f


Aſtrologico , was the-


'4' SuveLEMENT ſerviceable |to- tht


former Work,


B* way of Supplement, I will add a few. Nativities, to ſhew furs
LI ther how we ought to'proceed in the diſcovery oferuth, th
only thing l intend by publiſhing this ant other Treatifes, that fha
come forth in their due*time; and alſo how miſtakes doariſc i
the Aftrologick PraQtict in Nativities, which being printed and obs
".truded on the Woxld, they are received as truths by the ga
. Students, becaule not detected by thofe of more Yearsand Expo
rience. And this I ſhall endeavour to ! <a from ſome Nativitics
already printed, that the miſtakes of forne People haye-been as a
Hinge to the preſent Errors that we labour under. at this time;
thoſe Errors 1 mean, that-this Ages ſo in love with, and Ibclicve
it will be 2 very hard matrer ts ſeparate the one from the acher :
HoweverT will do my part, and let the Mulfitude believe, and the
| leffer Number at as they ſee convenient. Neither ſhall 1 be angry
with arly man, that will not believe he is in an Error z but as he
Hath lived hitherto, fo let him go on-and proceed'to the end.
FEY 7 had a Nativity of a young Min in: my hand theſe Dozen
6r Thirteen: years,” and T hear hes dead of a Conſanprion, at the
© Age of Nineteen years.2nd a half; or thezeabouts. it was given
to mhe-for a remarkable and-prodigioas Birth z one that-was to. be
of long Life , great-Repute and Fame, and alſo Rich; and this
was, becauſe aft the Players wore" in their own Dignities, and no
- MW Dircttions iti a long time. 'The Figure is as follower; (ct ro the
eſtimzte Time- of his Birth,” &s it was/given me without any Cor-
reQivn. at that time,-or fince, till now. TE
. | R. 35%


Ki 3
$4.
-


| Latirud. Planet.
"zi, - h £7 North:

% 1 33:Sourh

; & © 47 South

we oh FRESH ; 2 0-47 North--*

Mr. Flenry Dutton, | "x 5. © 5 South

» (8 S' , a ICY 1} KL = 1 153; / South * ,

25 tas 9 Natos die T2 Avg. Hor. | | T1 by - 3 34 ;

| r. Min. 30; 'Mane 1666.


* F< >


CS, £V ©: (O01 (14T TN}, THY reory Foeett1* 1 "art
—Thisis-the eſtimate Time-of this Gentleman's Birth, and.he _ *
died: of a Conſurnption-at almoſt Twenty years of Age,, , Now, the
main thing; to-inquire,” is, what was the DireRion that KF this
- Many) and why itſhould be FT $64 yg have told you'a)ready,
That-the Hileg; or Giver of Lite muſt he dixeQcd for Death ;. for
if all the other points/ are afflicted by. DireGion,, and... the ,Hileg
*h free" and befriended by a good Ray , the Native ſhall not dye ar
EE - _- "that times therefore we: wult firſi endeavour-to find: qut —_ is
SE . Givet of Life, before I proceed to determine the Cauſe and Time of
3 E: * his Death: Fixſt then,  The'© cannot be.Hileg, beczulc in the third
IE Houſe ;--nox-can the », [becauſe- the is-not. in an, Aphcetical Place,
| - unleſs-we ſhould: alter the Figure, and make it later about Nine or
Ten Minutesin time $5-but if the had been 4phera,ſhe could come to
no violent-DireRion before the O of 5. in Zydiace at about Twenty-
nine-years z and Seſquiquodrate of-&in Myndoat Thirty fix,or there-
-abouts, the-Mundane Parallel of the Swn excepted, which' comes
-up ſooner or later, according as you alter the Figure in the roth
and iſt Houſes, 4 Be E | 35: ' '4
8) aa re Therefore


/


- 4


Fey chghfhanſt


 Thereforethat Dorinign will fall on


"nr Ne'F nth Hoaley i hop aan the -- "OM
- - kitge liv the Tent we acorge” | 1 a |
_eflimate Time bf Bly 'or we mak | ork


te 1s molt yes
ae at gs


merely,” The" ioiey<" Trapper hary
the Tenth, {A aro mmag yur rea
there are no Dire&ions to that Point, nor near kt; that axe very
conſiderable 4 neither can” Jupiter be' fingly Giver of. Life; becauſe
bocek 4 of Fortune-is/ in the Tenth: Therefore Li wilk:alter the
ne os ven about 11 minutes later; and-make-25\ degroes of Piſces
Tenth Houſe, at which/time the Mowz-will rs 5 war yet
« -- Fore bear 2 ſhare alſo in the Natives Death; as you: ſhall ſee by
DireQions following: The R. £: of the M: C. to: that time, is
3554. 25 ni”and os bf Wh Mei) chan pope
ven 74z.53 d.'& m.*her- pen, e Alcettion-under hes own/Pole of
: | Poſition, £35 T:g6.m. and Temp.Hor, _—_ Ia Hnean
You have the DireQions king wroaght,:?;


<8
dof D.- M;--.: Y, MM)
— -- . # .a.:4 , F


- D / 4
Y;Þ-
32 4
» 74602 it
KE1 ok -!
Br: 13 . 22684,


LL»
p.6


U7
wi -
Eby
=


F


 Thiyolt fee here/arc Eleven Direftions;: and Nine of them to
the Aion: whois Giver of. Life,: the ptheritwo to 1have *
EEE Seine
40 ©.a' 8
Lo rpoano, ve true but _—
he ſod an hour _


a


ep Squteof Serariyh dongrbring that igesan We
of ; birt x Confurwption 3. An-Oblervation that I have wade
in divers Nativitics of thoſe that dicd mptive. And tho 1.do
but juſt-miention:ithere, and folegve. jt to the-Cenſure of the Can-
br) | Reader, tO;Five-/his inion as be-thinks fit z -yec
I to


Os 0G 6 45g neck I jg
a0 ravg "7 way b W ve wnprions. But
ſides,” if chere is ſuch pre 3s the hy governing p« hubs
Parts of the-Body which] believe they do ] then why. |

thoſe Planets dizc ed tothe Malehck;Brams of Satwrn, Mears Acc. mn
aweaknefand debilicy torhoſe Parts who govrs Fo For Lluppoſe we

. all own bad Dietin to:be an; onz avd all Aythors do
givethe principal Parts of the Body to Jupiter's Government : Pro-

'  lomyalldws Rim the Clngs, Arteries, and ds and Cardan'the Lungs,
Liver, ; fother; trke which you will, 'ris plain, hey


of the Body | that 4weysdut-
oe En 26 ea
Therefore cc


ar, end dye i gt the


rat
TE he fell into that Conſumptive habit of


Square of Satern,, and


- RE PInd, 4... | 4 ver


PF p =


s tri 65, and i in chat ale
2 Det ps, likewiſe, I miy be queſtioned, "why the Moon, Hi
ae and go of the Szn in Mxndo, "did not kill Rim 2nd
of Thirteen gr Folkfteen years, aswell as go vexsParalld
Ml: Therognd Tothat anſwer, He ha#then with thoſe DireGorss, "1
Min to the Mundane Trine' of Mercury, who ra. ir Parallel with
ters Trinewith the Moon and Satzrn alſo in his Radix; nnd be->


How, chat Mundane Squaye was mot infe cp the Todiack
fot the Moo Was then *Dirghion i. +,9.6 of Cemigs, with
-. Latitude

* Thus 1 have endeavoviredto give anAccount of the Cauſe of this
Gentleman's death, _ by the beſt of that. lagle skill,E have in Aſtrglo-
gy 3 but if it ould happen not to be erue in ſome mens Judgment
or Opinion, | ſhall cakt-it as a greatFarairts be correfted by any
mah that doth really underſtand i ic, and will allow his owe) Rules
to be General, and not contined to one Nativity only,-as moiſt of
their Rules and Aphoriſai*are ; and I ſhall be ſo far taking
it ill,or being angry @ i:hat 1 doinvise any anc,afdl.will c k him
* for his pains, that eritth may Teceive the 20eulnage ſo mgep many of. us

talk of, ard pacey mee And one thing I-ſhall of my A
gonitt,, ex he is, ar {os wy Es meg. That
if he (hall 209, other Cauſe far this Native's death,” than whar
j have done; 1 bs igtreat him.p bo, tell che World why it ſhanld be
Conſumption z, and eſpecially, if IO CuNs fit. to dy an the
Alcendanto the Sqave of Mars 7 is Death, that they would be
vhs led to Wo ngs: a Rule gr two, how welkWl know before-hand
gives Fever, when Conſumpthn, and when |
_ FPS REN Sena]-pics $, For the Auchors I bave
.exer yer top, - have not _ tnet with any.one-fo bold, as to al-


Direion to give { DOE Caaion'd por ee there any


Nacure of the Dire. |


wad Tm a kg ;hil Sw: but this diſcale, Leato


uz" ke


-


gm


The'Serond-Natlvity is that of my old Friend, Mr- 7, Bs Son,
who-4i6 of the Stine, Fever, and other Jlineſs; at the Age of Be-


- venſyears; als e $ IE and the-eſtirnate time of his Birth
arters


wag alr $i nel Were :Dee. 145
2673,” be Eh me by hisFacher above Ten or 'Rle-
ven
Fontan ;- Laticud. Planetar.
| i Tag's 9! Fi; P2213 No
$1 3 > ? } " , & ,o © No
x [ \ 2 . 1 21. No
* "| naw Be rs Dead FY 12.12: 118, $0,
poly F6, min; 43; PM; - 3.13/48” No
I 11673+ Nt ASH |
| DLIAVAdFY.
& 6 If
"5, 40
F.-
+ "MN
bee bs the elioite Fime
NO ather, he did confelsit
; and I ſhall ſtrain


urdu why a ps, and ſomake
$after 11 P. M. To which timethe 4, C. is

whoſe, A. is 804, 47 im. and the AF-
ind a half in Virgo, the O: 4, of it 170d,
> Oneont tg ve a Rational


log fix; wy cial by hole chr ae their - atreGtine fo


many hours from the eſtimate, -
| | Agd


Opt Refi


And the firſt thing I (hall fall upon by wayof Enquiry, is; why
this Child ſhould-be- of -ſo ſhort a Life, ſeei the, Moon, who is


Hike, ; was.in Tring to 7a @, in her own Houfe | Angular ?
Why,:.traly, this) is; no; nge thing. .Þt. tightly.cooſidered ;
for tho-thethaths bean i 'Tv4


poſition vary, ©) ppiying; in a MundancSquere to Satwrn,
94 all this fro nat" $;-to which we" may: add likewile,
that ſhe was-yery near the S aiquadrate of Mars in Mzndo , and
no-leſs thay three of the'H Points" afflicted by: Dire&Qions
near at hand," JT INT ntly make appear, and thoſe of the
Aron iti the Berth we thforttne which Poſitions of themiſclves
[ had the Giver of Li i batn free from the UlRays ofthe lnfortunes}
were* ſafheient to'have given great Weakneſs und Diſtempers to
"the Body, 'not only with dan Z or continuance too;-and there-
fore it nee not' remhdin's w that he _ liveno Honger,
not be more Healthy white he pa IÞric

'Seeoidly, WHytheStone?” 1 ſhall got enter into'a lovg Diſcourſe
about the Opinion of Authors concerning the Stone, -and its ge=


eration 3 Whether it proceeds from a Lapidifickſpirir, according *


to'the-Opini of 'Riveriue 3 02/4 \ſton Difpoſition,” according to
Flnniftuc : ro te a [Petite be the original wad
Cn ingry 3' but I ſhall conlider: ic
may'be- allowed to take its begin-

ir Gale pots likewiſe be ns firangerto: the recon-
. | For I look upon the Stony Spirit, the Cal-


en ore" ere Ferment, tobe'bur rhe ctfe&t of
\ g $


ity differ i their” Terins; yer
they all edn the farkie thing


2d therefore that which is the
cauſe of thern; is certainly the cle of the Diſcaſe: And do nor
underitand that the Child tad it from its birth, od therefore it had


Frime'to begins
_ I have


/\cliſteved io many Nurtvities; that whezgeves


the Stone was Produced and cauſed in the Bladder, both Saturn .
and Mars had' a"fitiger init both by! polition and Diredtion 3 as if
| Satzen afforded matter for the-Terrene ferment, and* Mears for the
petrificatibn ; © likewiſe in-this Nativity we ſhall find them both .
concerned i the Cauſe and quality of his Deach, as you may obe -
ſerve by the DircRions following. |


C0 id


= 3 10h

(11:8 3
My 46,.6--1\9,a68e 1172
8 $6, 7 I L680


gadary to the Square of Ser
ae tathe QOppoks


_ age, which did
Joleay Yar oh and an the


£e On the Radic.


Oe patural Cauſe |
the


Þ
of
: 'Þ.. p58
AT + ww <S


= midunemg ad he add. the Sum. 6
. 244m ut'5. ears ca
rian bf. Samregnd. Far ce br
fiok a little add: to
day of, his ft rey SOs was £0
rig of (day xr and dfrs.o09 the Aoi
VE,


| | ori Chit Diſeaſe Difeaſe,and RY aut


- edicad Pafniowscob th Map ip Fanareve, ms adwich-

ths in Rays of the Paealicdand © Selguiguadrate of Marr.So that] judge

fab murn St 07 about 5, years of Age, on/the Sup ad Oh,

the Mon ad Sfqrpqgugdratum Maris in Mundo; 30d

| thas te: ge Forjune tgthe Body of Saturs, hay Tar
. Paralicl Mat 1 0p the AuptÞ be Sguves of In quan

Rats, wore out his GE endo of
man object, that the Raof Fm Keeen the Pact of Nom |


"> which according 40 Pto/omy's Roftrine ought to fave es

F Lifts Larhfelo 9d his Dovirine, got th ale 3, [ps
-wherethee ofthe Hilegiac ce Rog of Power aeoigct' py and
the fourth very wear it,-t IVE;
She might indeed /protratt ps a wy 6: SA | Diſcale z


' and thercfore ſhe ami ag neat his Expizatian ſeg flux of the
Bowels, diſtemper of the Liver, and by accident, as. vcing ig. CON
papel ns: \ Godt. 68. HYArY. byAhs Ike 12 23 994 "of {


I | Thememis Chil tee di widinte jibe gent
Months, of before it; and was giycn.me by an-accident ; he chat


+ they that ſent it, & Trick apon.me,
ved-in.the concluſion. one wu Ves.s, Th Flows of the
GI altradGs cath.


e is as tolloweth, and


»
«t


Tt


_


7 Ic þ k S —
ol > vs PX be Mr
_—


Es Tre, by br ot x!

Tv os
DEE utes {ooner
hin the yea: 4s


pot vi35 45 0p” pe X.
ig F, Sr -.
geo theme


de
1&& 4 |


|


oe OY ter. Z n wy ” "Y 4 ” 3 f 3
= &. : i © ./
| _— ,


Ty +


»*4
«A 2
o
Sy
-
_ & ©
P,
* :
wn


live til 60 years of age, and Mr. $. ſajd it
7 ird told Him! it live till all his


- , 4
4 "SE , 2
Ids $, OSA
a . l I 4 *
7 4. lr: EM
LT £% 8 v- W ”
; - > "


31, (het; - Fre ob ale


4 «7 o by =
©)", give: ke
k EOS. 2, _ : ” I : [
f _—— | l y G Im
B- bd yu 6 Tx — 4; » g R - :
. C » i —» A A ”
© ” 8D L5 VN F,1 a4 1 aft


RF "fot "iti the yr oa brides, if a Direction ts able to kill: _
Fitts «021463 coly 8 F; Py . monit


pa + : — - wh
C - -vY l 2
be + *; - - - w
# FF . Fg

*;

 -


ka "Jahn which did: And whit we were — he pulls. out-a Pa-
_—


TR
wi” :


er] had Tr:
i him toy aefion) I told


 Sobiidered the Figure begs, Q


"R-- him1 ſhopld-make a 18 on ity without the. conſide-
IS Preferwent, far; did. judg os,
* Ru} bout's mo! h Def zand: Aelred %;,


Rebel rc which Toefated. For, aps he, of,


|: j5: cheer ly faw | Seater


_belgel al, r Judge) pinion, _ ES my
ace on the form with ther. bi |
| Ryo here oy not trac; ſhall hear) of It, on both £ Th


ay
-


vis 47 « '4; Tye?


as to the 6


"On - ISS | VSE | - af <> |
--. "the Fortunes helped no: r bind) red rv allthis Aﬀairs neither can . 4
25, WB. r Yom kill by direction, let.chem govern-what Houſes: Lark S
| df: wehetice dhcte ure Die GP not; |
re Dera wilt find'no' direQions To Chien ok


ry : -


Opus Refoianmd


3 colic fer Birth, "that Poſition certainly affes the Child all the
[ti off


Life, forthe Child yt ns me
| ri Y, hag wel bn yo
| and þ fee the Child Cotes Fa erage


af Say, *and' there is Mickeem 'degrees almoſt between


weed yo = "nd! that. lived Tol ; weeks 57tmake the'beſt
ble you of this TriſtiuQtion, ''Thelet 5: WRT cnag nano cod
Po a printed'in Eqgit already. 54/79 | |


The next is that of Jahauner Ba ptifl Cordatine; the Son of the
Great Cardan, which hath been pripted by his Father already, by
| Sivtur ah Heminga,) who brings it as @nArgument againſt Aſtrology,
becauſe there was gp reaſon given by him, nor Naibod, nor Magi
n&s (who had the ſurveying of it, and were, I really believe, three
* = et Men, -and Maliens of Aftrolo OBY that have appeared
) for fris violent death:* And it is alſo brought

int  ogolics nd\confound the Art,” and its Profeſſors,

by Sian lis, ; Poſt 301. lo- his Treaciſe again Altro-


b- ory-is thus. > This Baptiſts Clrdengt was the cldeſt Son of
his Father, brought/up to was, of and- ed hirnſelf in the
fiady of Phyfick; hh pfrerzoaed he profekt and lived by ;- But in”
the. 24th'year of<his age} he | without the Advite of his Father
or other Friends] wie a Wife-with a {mal} Fortune; and- leſs
Modeſty z and v4 incambred,” and overcharged with her Re-
lations, and his PrdQce = $eins ſmath,” they fell into,neceſhty, ant.


thence into difference, which difference delhi "g F aggravated by
content on the one 5 a fr increaſed by greater Provocations on
the other, . they at laſt came to down-right hate of cach other ; and *
* under this Perturbatfon-of Mind hg contrived-how to deſtroy her
'atd the method he. itch'd upon, 1 was Poyſon,” This Poyſon he put -
< "ad. Cake, an and: (en ines her v1.3 en a Payee, ſhe bein then in


nas tage ear (The.
next bers jee, and examinedy  *
nt far ary that /he'cornfefſed he had been


two months contriving Kow how-to Yo ic and irs that time'had made
- , o'Atteripes at-it-,' miſt of bis deli, For this /Grinie he


was


Opinion,-as well as tha efned Me
counſed of is." /: The: Figt


) ©. od. ar | "F'Y EE.


© Trith;-which hath: beet a]


| rn Tut


- Wage, which perceive Hining cov taken from Leovitius,; and


7


-


YL #) wilt ob-
v=o Meth iti


pe


- and when you have done
that next follows, which, [.


calon Lexpetd-$0 -fox. an. typos
' be thanked; there are no Pena) Laws in the-Gale,:. 1 ES to


be cenſured eek Kr know that the money Namber


the ſooner they wilt top my Pen; for I intend to call-ci6ſ} of their
. Authors tothe Bar, - anti {ce what Defence they can make for thruſt-


ing fo. many: Errors upon us, a d uding the People fromthe


long uſed. # Per Relee Poon:


ode nn is eh eh Time
Ve done,” is by e of the eſtitnate Time,
| without any CorreRton, and the every-well 3-may,
e rior, it Dil apo: þ 95


oper 'of Age, with'divers other things
"be 'obſerved3"but Twillleave 'that"eo" the ingenious
Reades & Exerciſe his Thoughts'on whetthe thinks it cohyenient.


Y v7» &; "+ 4x »,
4


Thie'next Þ haſt conſider , is that of: Lewis King of Bilemnia and
printed


She Tins of Fon for bly Mer-


printed chat very Figard, which on


- Oar age that Ale ——_ Re on pies


| he was put to Flight in a Battel 3gair)


nay Hewinge Set At; and WE and Sel ke Mp.


a ** Opiit _* p.\ IS |
es. to be half an hour'be-
__— it cannot on Aa


fore Noon; and for that
was; decals che Clironten'vE My Hſe


n LEO en cory
them becoming tang Men as they* eere, ke ok Lonkdag


[ as ſays _— tells ug, it was the Moon to the Tqaievs of Mars
that kill'd him;- A very likely.Gom -atooind,

. The Hiſtory of him ts thushe 1 zathaf June ; 3f Noon,
it the-year 1506; and in the Mon , inthe year 2526; -
Tarks® and y the weight
of his Armour, patling/a River, he was Jroed: t others fay,
That his Horſe threw him | in the xk in wet; muddy Place,


where he was ſuffocated 3. and.this w ws but TwentyYeary
and a Month old. Comminiſcetvr rd Aftrologus #dcidentis
bujus Canſam, Direftionew Corporis Lunaris ad Mare
tir... But if any Atrologer Qould i imagine ach a Cauſe of ce


dent, in. my inion he would. ſhew hinelf but 2 |
man.in his Profeſſion, becauſe the Moor is not Giver of L ,
ther did that DireQion-kill>in-thole. ro. preceding Lk: |
of Six. Theggare | , avd Mx. Hobby x. yet | t will. not\difown,
but that this'Dire&Qtion of the Mon to the. Squ of. Nr: #, might
add- to the no of the, other,” but in, ri6 Wiſe kilf” without
key 127 |


ki X 266 ue «fs
of ours 5.05 hls 'kis Eicths. ch Fri FT, ef fi


cauſe it'was not ;
ſelf Py. not ot women to be exactly 5 ah gs go ore
wards, Fab about Noon; L hope then, ifTmake'a Title -


Aﬀetovon from hy exad time of Twelve, hs: be pardoned by


the Candid, jf Debby the Sceptical Render YE 1; Fond Hon


whoever., 't&his e e
neverbe NE het hin "acer hn er


'- . nutes/from Nobn, the Time he php z Hd I evel cant give


a better; Account, of his Death, , then the-Moop-to I of o oa |
IE! fob.


ee AARELUSLL an ve,
\CExz .


Not fy v2 $449


(YH 119 = uy WW F: 36 w/o
" BN. Aozack if | \ '
| PR


Ceroline
te wete true In the
oats


ih Bon


n die, THF ra,

the g GneartheT path nge as

2 "hw he & not Lord hed
: 1s bad,


F221
24 12


5 ; © *®J " _— E G
13 + Ls ts *> / 4 TE a FR. RY - ws 45.Þ: p;
4 i L3Þ* vans ia <, w} =
AFIENTS. © - = ds.
a+. - |
d
: .


the Sens Fr! f Sat y
Thrqoa fri oa Are rg 4 at the fe tim


Wb deary W:
elſe. is to be found to


—x


,


rl the Ml af Comin Pre; bh Hinge


n 1 with a-grezt many
"i MT Odleratins Teo! 4237
PRs POBOTeR We y04c x repos :


5) 1 ha 7 the. Tong Schenas. oe.


AW MM


LL
A, ”


7 971) W80S Truly
124 METH

GEE * Cow "8407 239
>" | Natus'die'8-
410! -10,"Min. 53 PM
- #1 ri, KI VO! 2
1 ves apiy"00 on calc


| 3995
w Hojlo


4"$1ri +


te ” ay


at lealt 5.deg
annex}


© of en


; MF T:, »
/ © Latien) Planen
: wn bas af rt
#1 0.45


h-4..9 North


BY $I RE


:
1 art? be 4* $4 £4*)


$83730113 *


«as V3
b 2 t3 [ obvi FH
ayes 03 2m 1509
fl, Mo ty mort. ol,”
> el Ls on art TL


1 ned 3 '
err) (): rn


—


" 9 ts. ws | Y
” , þ ; ©, 4 627 8
. -  - «6 L b of : 7”
- Y 6d Cot Links ne tr rr — {35j47 $ $50
p 6 Þ: : _ ——_—_— bf
«4; j :
| ; vl | —_— G
=— : 5s 4


cn half 4n9.k


v1 "J's Io M.V: '(M-A.C; x)


phich judged ot
n to the Trine of the $xn kills but Ido


as|
| og ww;  oerek ang apefull taken
ſhes 3c that Trine was indeed a e, if
Ngtivities wh ata ahraunlly V Violence IT Butf lay
| to inforce { The baſis;
roo Why the
> *Tis {iran ;


man.f his Read ask two ſuch


ſilly Queſtions
in that Caſe, becauſe


Arc Tyan Decetts ie
bee Dotrina O&- mendacii.. Bat indead
ao the At tees aculable. £972} alabis »
-Anvcherd T arecabea tens Heats: DO IT,
Trp
Cp


raiſeth many


=


r6z.


_ Mcafire of T


== orciſe neryls nora in Aſtrolo z yet ſome
of his tin Aol 1] have
choſen re, becauſe he-was al bene Honig" Acquaintatce and |
Neighbour in OR Cewardia, forwhich -
I fuppoſe the che Fſfithate Time was Tite, and theDiredtion of
the dant to the Oppoſitzow of Mars Was allo traefor his Death;
and yet ay brs can ha ' Heminga hath not offered a, The |
ocrvrpuraerantt 0 $
but | have altetbd the Minaces later cthanhHis, and yerwe


both agree up the fare Deachz. we only differ ivour
Nene of gardifference in the Figare,


allows this Direaion, yet he var
NE not-dye wy roxthe Dypufinier'of the.Fur,


rat Pr 7 Be? Anbertejtho gin ink younger


—_—


k 2 En
years to the Bodies of Marr and Saturn did not kill, Saturs being
Lord of the Sth, arid ine 4 inte; wit loche vid way hath a mighty foray


1 wilt give you an Anſiver to theſe Sefornine-feave then.
rf, TS to-the ore Sur coals nick kill be-
cauſe the ron of Venus did fo foon ſucered it; and for the Pra-


goons Taile, 1'know ris. reafors why thee ſhould felt, nor-cannot be
perſuaded that It ever i Kita any one yet, or ever will, for it is an
empty void p js 612 Henvers belng barthe fntceedhiorns of meg
, and can have nolnflnence of its own, becauſe it
is no body, nor isit viſible, and therefore very to give
in] Sree poud nol be And for the Sun to the Body of Mars
$2t6rn;could not kill, becauſe the Smr is not Giver of Life ; buc
I judgeche firſt pf thoſe might give the Small-pox and the ſecond,
ſome little kind of Hineſs, but neither of them any thing. very Re-
riiarksble or Eminent, as to the Native's Health.
oaks kg very rationally asked, why the Afcendant to the
ral thinly a, 0,4 Which Henrings takes no .
Mie of in fits Objedtions , and 1s far more proper to be asked in
my Opinion, than all thole' that he after. In this
Caſe weare to take the Time of Death from and his DireQi-
on, bat not the Qualityof itz for that is taken from the other Di-
reQions that do operate with, and are next in direti-
ons! Motion to the Giver of Life.” ' And in this Caſe, Jupiter doth
ern the place of Death, both by Dignity gnll Prefence ; ard for
that reaſon ſpecificates it, who you find in with Satan,
and in $ to the Mom, an{ the Moon ir! the Terms of Z
and both Mars, , and Satern in the Terms of Veaxs, all which
add to the of Redundance,' and Repletion of Humours;-
and behides, bs dothnaturaly give an Apoplexy, and Difcaſes of
ſach a Pofition. as this is; as you may ce, if yoa
conſider MET Ota in cher mage ond rr
Opinion of DixeRions , this of Mary
a Flax of the Bowels, i Fever, or ſome Diſcaſe
ed with loflamation or'Heat, continual or intermit-


1g- |
2dly, If the Eighth Houſe is the Houſe of Death, and that every
Phacrbniding to his Dominion muſt do'his Officez why did not


the Aſcendant to the of Venus kill, ſhe being aflicted, and
affifted by the Beans Sn and Mary, an4 Lady of the ſo-fam'd
fam) Fourth Houſe,


Y 2 - 3dly,


ang TN ous


eo


an DE fome-
thing ts * -Matter;-'and in" my
Mite Wn <4 eg Trath, = þ. Eurious new Invention


5 72 No 17 55
r bo'No 18 12
"2:29 No 7 23
-4. 45 No 10 44


'b | von yary,
ny a D


"then the exinentajon began that


bw a bong of SoneNe
force, that it often times | bebe Va; oputrpony


allow me bur
r_- kewl are
To poſitive a to
rcible 88 thighs] © | |
ve; which in |


| becauſe it is avital view Jud


mott * eftiob [2s 6
6 and thatis the $ |
IV me. : il; but Hee it
>dant is G fer of Life," w it kere is nÞt ;
pe RI oh tn Gaby of
_—_— od em re of Venus, the =
bs 1 < the "© 18
XC | ant og all ”T t
pxovey That the Aſſettibyg,
when he! deliz d fthec
at vety NireRiol 'of
or t0 King Charle |


> 244743 25513 3s watt
alledged in this Caſe, to inform
\a5\when is H , and


ice of us. *


right. be
abgut thi


whatiParts,of {Heaven are,mokt -for-that Power and Domi-
nion z Let us ſuppoſe the,.M Tey hr, the Sau is ;the AC
cendant, then the h nivſt bein the Seventh. Now th


ed to/be Giver of Life, ſce-
+... Again, 'how we ſhall know
/power to kill, and when
he Barch 19-the Hetiocenrrick place of Mars
doth m_ give a Fever, or the jo yt es For-if it hath not al-
$ an adequate EffeR,, or Rules laid down toſhew when it will,
when it will not do it, I am'/ſfure no Man of reaſon will be-
lieve that, nor many other things in Aſtrology.


ARES <a © L


'" I. LIT.


Loftly,


= =


his Comin to this vu "«


7 ſuxce(s anſiver-


_ =  ), v4 Dr RE
x: «ni lat Ss fo.
: kf" 4 yp; ”


iP : , - ” 4 __ A " x FS "
TE IT INGO W HLH AINY? we; C6 1,00) © 9 321 |
: KOAE 2 ” & 5 ., , - SOS 4 y FS 4 | W . - : _ k —_—
Ta d Wander bo mf 09; ubens Tl 19 1:51toe ag
- ho = wy 2 4
