The Provincial Letters (Blaise Pascal, 1657)
==========================================================
Pascal's eighteen (plus two fragmentary) letters demolishing Jesuit casuistry — the prose masterpiece that made French satire an art form. Translated by George Pearce (1849). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/cu31924029444456).

mmmi.: 

1 L,L, 

CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 

THE  PASCAL  COLLECTION 

OF 

GEORGE  L.  HAMILTON 

Cornell  University  Library 
BX4720.P36  P3  1849 

Provincial  letters  o*  Pafpal  /.wtli  an 

3   1924  029  444  456 

The  original  of  tliis  book  is  in 
tine  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 

http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029444456 

PROVINCIAL  LETTERS. 

6' 

fi 

11 

'  W  ' 

<    I 

Wf^ 

)    \ 

X 

'-■\ 

Jtci?>j7^r  ^.  f"°Ij7,tho.I,r)T,,i.t>r. 

P-^"       ^   T. 

\ 

U-,*' 

,=^-' 

^  ^   ^  £  A   L 

'^i^fe  ilfiwi 

'lovr  p.a'-r 

THE  PROVINCIAL  LETTERS 

PASCAL; 

AN   "ESSAY  ON   PASCAL,  CONSIDERED  AS  A  WRITER 
AND    MORALIST," 

BY  M.  YILLEIAIN, 

PEER    OF    FRANCE,    LATE    MINISTER    OF    PUBLIC    INSTRUCTION,    &C. 

NEWLY  TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  FEENCH, 
WITH    MEMOm,    NOTES,    AND    APPENDIX. 

BY  GEORGE  PEARCE,  ESQ. 

'  Un  monument  qui  n'est  qu'une  oeuvre  de  restauration,  mais  qui  durera,  puisqu'il 
enferme  les  reliquea  d'un  des  plus  beaux  genies  qui  aient  lionor^  la  France  et 
l'liumanit6." — Faugere. 

I 

LONDON : 

LONGMAN,  BROWN,  GREEN,  AND  LONGMANS, 

PATERN  OSTER-RO  W. 

MDCCCXLIX. 

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE. 

In  bringing  anew  before  the  English  pubUc  the 
present  work,  the  Translator  feels  it  to  be  proper 
briefly  to  state  the  motives  which  have  led  to  the 
undertaking. 

The  only  translation,  of  a  comparatively  late 
date,  with  which  he  is  acquainted,  was  published 
in  London,  as  far  back  as  the  year  1816.  The 
writer  has  no  means  of  knowing  what  was  the 
amount  of  popularity  which  that  work  obtained ; 
but  it  seems  to  have,  at  present,  entirely  lapsed 
from  circulation,  it  being  only  by  accident  that 
he  was  able  to  procure  access  to  a  copy.  As  a 
period  equal  to  an  entire  generation  of  man, 
therefore,  has  elapsed  since  that  publication  ap- 
peared, while  the  great  subjects  of  which  it  treats 
have,  in  the  intervening  years,  lost  undoubtedly 
no  part  of  their  interest  or  importance,  it  may  be 
justly  deemed  not  unseasonable  now  to  recal 
attention  to  a  work,  which  has  ever  held,  and  still 

vi  translator's  preface. 

continues  to  hold,  the  highest  rank  among  the 
ornaments  of  French  Uterature. 

The  translation  referred  to  is  also  singularly 
incomplete;  inasmuch  as,  besides  other  import- 
ant deficiencies,  it  has  entirely  omitted  the  two 
closing  Letters,  Nos.  19  and  20,  of  the  original 
series.     The    one   of  these  (No.  20),     contain- 
ing a  masterly  argument  against    the    contem- 
plated formation  of  an  inquisitorial  tribunal  in 
France,   under  the   auspices   of  the   Society  of 
Jesuits — although  attributed  to  another  member 
of  the  Port  Royal,  the  accomplished  Le  Maitre* — 
was  evidently  put  forth  with  the  entire  concur- 
rence, and  probably  with  the  aid,  of  Pascal ;  and 
always  formed  part  of  the  original  publication. 
The   other  (the  19  th)  is  a  short  but  beautiful 
fragment,   undoubtedly  from  his  pen,  in  which 
Pascal  bears  a  closing  testimony  to  the  virtues  of 
the  persecuted  Port  Royalists,    and  records  his 
last  indignant  protest  against  their  oppressions. 
The  portion  extant  is  composed  with  exquisite 
grace  and  polish — to  such  a  degree,  that,  from 
its  imperfect  state,  it  might  seem  as  if  even  his 
practised  pen  could  scarcely  satisfy  itself  with  the 
performance — and  it  abruptly  breaks  oif  in  the 

*  Anthony,  the  Advocate ;  not  Isaac,  his  brother  (more  commonly  desig- 
nated De  Sacy)  the  translator  of  the  Scriptures,  &c. 

TRANSLATORS  PREFACE.  vii 

midst,  probably — as  it  is  without  date — from  the 
rapid  advance  of  his  last  oppressive  and  fatal 
maladies  !  *  These  valuable  papers  are  now  sup- 
plied ;  as  well  as  the  two  supplementary  Letters 
following  the  12th  and  the  17th,  which  are  not 
given  in  all  the  editions,  and  are  thought  to  have 
been  partly  the  work  of  some  of  Pascal's  friends 
in  conjunction  with  himself  (probably  Nicole  and 
Le  Maitre),  but  which  are  full  of  interest,  and 
cannot  be  omitted  without  materially  impairing 
the  effect  of  the  series. 

The  present  work  has  also  the  advantage  of 
being  enriched  with  the  Prefatory  Essay  which 
its  latest  and  most  distinguished  French  editor, 
M.  Villemain,  has  contributed  to  the  edition  from 
which  this  translation  has  been  made,  together 
with  explanatory  Notes  from  the  same  able 
source.  The  latter  will  excite,  in  all  who  are 
interested  in  the  period  to  which  the  work  refers, 
regret  that  they  are  not  more  numerous.  Of  the 
former,  eulogium  would  be  here  superfluous :  it 
has  but  to  be  read  to  commend  itself  to  every 
one  capable  of  appreciating  sound  taste  and  ele- 
gant criticism. 

*  Fortunately  the  manuscripts  of  Pascal  supply  some  memoranda — although 
imperfect  and  disjointed,  of  the  course  of  argument  and  illustration  further 
intended  to  be  pursued,  could  the  Letter  have  been  completed.  (See  Appen- 
dix, No.  8.) 

vm 

But  the  principal  inducement  to  the  present 
undertaking  arises  from  the  inadequate  manner 
in  which  this  noble  work  has  been  hitherto  ren- 
dered. In  translating  a  composition  that  rises 
little  above  the  ordinary  level,  fidelity  to  the 
author's  meaning,  and  correctness  of  language, 
are  sufficient.  But,  if  the  work  be  one  of  a 
high  order  of  literary  beauty — one,  whose  pages 
delight  not  less  from  intrinsic  excellence — their 
power  of  reasoning  and  variety  of  illustration, 
than  from  felicities  of  diction  and  graces  of  style 
— ^in  such  a  case,  the  effort  to  do  justice  to  the 
great  original  should  rise  proportionably  higher. 
The  ear  should  be  carefully  relieved  from  the 
unpleasing  effect  of  foreign  idiom.  Where  the 
genius  of  the  native  tongue  has  sanctioned  ex- 
pressions, that,  in  a  bolder  vernacular,  seem  in- 
sipid, they  should  be  raised :  where,  to  a  more 
sober  taste,  the  language  appears  too  exalted,  it 
should  be  subdued.  Especially  should  sympathy 
be  shown  by  the  translator  with  the  higher  excel- 
lences of  the  original  composition.  He  should 
kindle  with  its  ardour,  and  rise  with  its  elevation. 
In  those  passages,  in  which  genius  is  wont  to 
gather  up  her  powers,  and  carry  with  resistless 
orce  the  passions  of  the  reader — and  in  such 
passages   none   abound  more  than  Pascal — on 

translator's  preface.  ix 

such  occasions — when  the  loftiest  reach  of 
thought  pours  its  conceptions  into  a  mould  of 
classic  beauty — he  should  then  aim  at  something 
of  a  kindred  vigour,  and  give  his  humbler  aid  to 
transfer  with  fidelity  the  features  of  his  great 
model.  His  art  is,  after  all,  but  an  imitative  one. 
The  thought — the  argument — the  eloquence ;  the 
spirit  and  Ufe,  are  all  the  author's.  But  yet,  in 
the  subordinate  sphere  he  occupies,  there  is  a 
measure  of  excellence  to  be  aspired  to ;  a  merit 
analogous  to  that  in  the  sister-arts,  in  which  the 
painting  or  the  statue  wiU  be  so  skilfully  copied, 
that  the  practised  eye  of  the  connoisseur  only  can 
detect  the  imitation.  The  difference,  however, 
here  is,  that  if  any  measure  of  resemblance  be 
achieved,  no  deception — as  in  the  other  cases — 
can  be  contemplated.  The  object  in  view  is  only 
to  court  respect  and  admiration  for  the  master- 
mind that  is  attempted  to  be  traced. 

And  if,  indeed,  no  more  than  a  very  slight 
approach  to  such  a  standard  as  is  now  prescribed 
has  been  accompUshed  in  the  present  work,  it 
has  been  fi-om  no  want  on  the  part  of  the  trans- 
lator of  an  admiration,  approaching  to  enthu- 
siasm, for  the  great  writer,  whose  steps  he  has 
endeavoured  to  follow ;  and  if  he  should  succeed 
in  diffusing  a  taste  for  his  excellences  and  beau- 

a  s 

X  translator's  prefack. 

ties  throughout  a  larger  sphere  than  that  in 
which  they  have  been  hitherto  appreciated,  he 
will  feel  himself  amply  rewarded. 

In  another  part  of  the  volume  will  be  found  a 
short  Biographical  sketch  of  Pascal,  together 
with  a  few  remarks  upon  his  compositions,  more 
especially  with  reference  to  the  work  now  pre- 
sented to  the  reader.  Occasional  notes  have 
been  appended  by  the  translator;  and  in  the 
Appendix  are  put  together  some  particulars  re- 
lating to  the  persons  and  the  circumstances  most 
prominently  referred  to  in  the  course  of  this 
volume,  with  documents  which  will  further  tend 
to  its  elucidation. 

Blackheath,  November,  1846. 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

PAGB 

Notice  of  M.  Villemain xvii 

Essay  of  M.  Villemain,  '  On  Pascal  as  a  Writer 
AND  A  Moralist'         ......    xxiv 

Memoir  op  Pascal xlvii 

PEOVINCIAL  LETTERS. 

Letter  I.  On  tte  Disputes  of  the  Sorbonne,  and  the  device 
of  the  '  Pouvoir prochain,'  (the  '  proximate  power,') 
of  which  the  Mohnists  availed  themselves  to  bring 
about  the  censure  of  M.  Amauld  ....    page  1 

Letter  IT.  On  '  Sufficient  Grace.' — Reply  of  the  '  Provincial ' 
to  the  two  first  Letters  from  his  Priend      .    page  14 

Letter  III.  (Intended  as  a  Eeply  to  the  preceding.) — The 
injustice,  absurdity,  and  impotency  of  the  Censure  on 
M.  Amauld        page  29 

Letter  IV.  On  Actual  and  ever-present  Grace,  and  on  Sins 
of  Ignorance page  40 

XU  CONTENTS. 

Letter  V.  Object  of  the  Jesuits  in  establishing  a  new  System 
of  Morality.  Two  sorts  of  Casuists  among  them ; 
many  relaxed,  and  some  severe  :  reason  of  the  differ- 
ence. Explanation  of  the  doctrine  of  '  Probability.' 
Multitude  of  modem  and  obscure  Authors  substituted 
for  the  ancient  Fathers page  57 

Lettee  VI.  Various  artifices  of  the  Jesuits  to  elude  the 
sanctions  of  the  Gospel,  the  Councils,  and  the  Popes. 
Certain  consequences  deducible  from  their  doctrine 
of  '  Probability.'  Their  laxities  in  favour  of  Incum- 
bents, Priests,  Monastic  Orders,  and  Servants.  Story 
of  Jean  D'Alba page  77 

Letter  VII.  On  the  contrivance  of  the  Casuists  for  '  regu- 
lating the  Motive.'  Their  permission  to  take  Life  in 
defence  of  Honour  and  Property,  extended  even  to 
Priests  and  the  Eehgious  Orders.  Curious  question 
proposed  by  Caramuel,  whether  a  Jesuit  may  lawfully 
kill  a  Jansenist        ........    page  96 

Letter  VIII.  Corrupt  Maxims  of  the  Jesuits  respecting 
Judges,  Usurers,  the  Mohatra  Contract,  Bankrupts, 
Restitution,  &c.  Various  other  extravagances  of  the 
Casuists page  117 

Letter  IX.  On  the  Corruptions  introduced  by  the  Jesuits 
into  the  worship  of  the  Virgin.  Various  facilities 
invented  by  them  for  attaining  Salvation  without 
trouble,  and  whUe  in  the  indulgence  of  the  enjoy- 
ments and  conveniences  of  life.  Their  doctrines 
respectibg  Ambition,  Envy,  Gluttony,  Equivocation, 
Mental  Eeservation,  licence  to  be  permitted  to  Young 
Eemales,  Female  Dress,  Play,  Eules  for  attending 
Mass      ..•..• page  137 

CONTENTS.  Xlll 

Letter  X.  AHeviations  introduced  by  tie  Jesuits  into  the 
Sacrament  of  Penance  by  their  maxims,  respecting 
Confession,  Eestitution,  Absolution,  proximate  occa- 
sions of  Sin,  Contrition,  and  Love  of  God     fage  156 

Letter  XL  (Addressed  to  the  Eeverend  the  Jesuit-Fathers.) 
— ^Errors  of  a  ridiculous  nature  may  properly  be  refuted 
by  ridicule.  The  restrictions  that  ought  to  be  observed 
in  the  use  of  it :  that  these  have  been  observed  by 
Montaltius,  and  over-passed  by  the  Jesuits.  Impious 
buffooneries  of  Pere  Le  Moine  and  Pfere  Garasse. 

page  177 

Letter  XII.  Refutation  of  the  chicaneries  of  the  Jesuits 
respecting  Alms-giving  and  Simony     .     ,    page  197 

Letter  Supplementary. — Eefatation  of  the  Jesuits'  Eeply  to 
the  12th  Letter joafire  218 

Letter  XIII. — The  Doctrine  of  Lessius  on  Homicide  identical 
with  that  of  Victoria.  How  easy  it  is  to  pass  from 
Speculation  into  Practice.  Why  the  Jesuits  availed 
themselves  of  this,  futile  distinction,  and  its  ineflScacy 
for  their  justification        page  237 

Letter  XIV. — Eefatation,  from  the  Fathers,  of  the  Jesuit- 
Doctrines  of  Homicide.  Passing  Eeply  to  their  various 
Calumnies,  and  comparison  of  their  Eegulations  with 
the  Formalities  observed  in  the  condemnation  of  cri- 
minals      VO'Se  257 

Letter  XV.— The  Jesuits  exclude  Calumny  from  their  Cata- 
logue of  Crimes,  and  make  no  scruple  of  availing 
themselves  of  it  to  molest  their  Enemies    .    page  278 

XIV  CONTENTS. 

Letter  XVI. — ^Atrocious  Calumnies  of  the  Jesuits  against  emi- 
nent Ecclesiastics  and  devout  Women        .    Tpage  300 

Letter  XVII.— (Addressed  to  the  Pere  Annat).  By  exposing 
the  doubtfidness  of  Jansenius'  Sentiments  it  becomes 
clear  that  there  is  no  Heresy  in  the  Church.  The  una- 
nimous consent  of  aU  Theologians,  and  chiefly  the  Jesu- 
its, proves  that  the  authority  of  Popes  and  Councils  is 
not  infaUible  upon  questions  of  Faith  ,     .    page  HX 

Letter  Supplementary. — (To  the  Pere  Annat),  on  his  work 
entitled  "  The  Good  Eaith  of  the  Jansenists,"  &c. 

•page  359 

Letter  XVIII. — (To  the  Pere  Annat)  Yet  more  incontestible 
proofs,  even  from  the  Eeply  of  Pere  Annat,  that  no 
Heresy  actually  exists  in  the  Church ;  every  one  con- 
demns the  Doctrine  attributed  to  Jansenius,  and  there- 
fore aU  the  Paithful  are  agreed  upon  the  sentiments 
contained  in  the  Five  Propositions.  Important  dif- 
ference between  Questions  of  Pact  and  of  Principle, 
and  Demonstration  that  in  Matters  of  Pact  we  should 
rather  rely  on  the  evidence  of  Sight  than  on  any  Hu- 
man Authority page  369 

Letter  XIX. — (Addressed  to  Pere  Annat),  a  Fragment 

page  400 

Letter  XX. — Published  under  the  title  of  "  Letter  of  an  Ad- 
vocate of  Parliament  to  one  of  his  Friends,  respecting 
the  Projected  Inquisition  in  France,  on  occasion  of 
the  recent  Bull  of  Pope  Alexander  VII."       page  402 

CONTENTS.  XV 

APPENDIX. 

NO.  PAGE 

1 .  Papal  and  State  Condemnation  of  the  Provincial  Letters  425 

2.  Memoir  of  Amauld        431 

3.  Nicole 443 

4.  De  Sacy  (Isaac  Le  Maitre) 446 

5. Pfere  Annat,  Royal  Jesnit  Confessor      .     .453 

6. Duke  de  Eouannez 454 

7.  Extract  from  "  Essay  on  the  Passion  of  Love  "       .     .457 

8.  Supplementary  Memoranda  for  Provincial  Letter  No.  19  459 

9.  Extract  from  "  Essay  on  Eloquence  " 464 

10.  Profession  of  Eaith 465 

11.  Paper  found  on  the  person  of  Pascal,  styled  "Amulet "  466 

12.  Autograph 467 

13.  Epitaphs 468 

M.   VILLEMAIK 

The  following  brief  Notice  of  the  distinguished  writer  of  the 
following  Essay  (derived  from  the  most  authentic  sources), 
will,  it  is  presumed,  he  acceptable  to  the  English  Reader. 

M.  Abel  Francois  Villemain,  was  born  in  the  year  1791. 
He  commenced  his  studies  at  an  early  age  in  the  University 
of  Paris,  and  soon  attracted  the  notice  of  M,  Fontane,  then  at 
its  head,  by  his  superior  capacity,  and  the  merits  of  his  college- 
exercises.  He  was,  in  consequence,  when  only  in  his  nine- 
teenth year,  appointed  to  the  Professorship  of  the  Belles 
Letters  in  the  Normal  School ;  and  two  years  after — in  1812 
— acquired  high  distinction  by  a  Latin  oration,  pronounced 
according  to  annual  custom,  before  the  whole  University. 

From  that  period  dates  the  commencement  of  his  eminent 
literary  career.  The  first  of  his  performances  that  came 
before  the  public,  was  his  "  E16ge  on  Montaigne,"  which 
gained  the  prize  awarded  by  the  class  of  "  Language  and 
Literature;"  his  competitors  being  some  of  the  most  consider- 
able names  then  on  the  roll  of  the  University.  In  1814  he 
was  appointed  "  Supplementary  Professor  of  History,"  and 
his  opening  discourse  in  that  department  tended  greatly  to 
enhance  his  reputation.  In  this  essay  he  gave  an  elaborate 
portraiture  of  the  state  of  Europe  during  the  fourteenth  cen- 
tury, the  subsequent  revival  of  literature  and  civilization,  the 
encroachments  of  regal  prerogative  by  which  it  was  accom- 

XVIIl  MEMOIR  OP   M.   VILLEMAIN. 

panied,  and  the  rapid  growth,  notwithstanding,  of  industry, 
commerce,  and  arts. 

In  the  same  year,  M.  Villemain  acquired  further  distinction 
by  carrying  a  similar  university  prize,  for  an  Essay  "  On  the 
advantages  and  inconveniences  of  Criticism."  His  preceding 
efforts  had  given  much  promise  of  literary  eminence,  and  the 
present  was  regarded  as  its  full  realization.  The  production 
in  .question  rendered  essential  service  to  the  cause  of  good  taste 
and  correct  criticism,  and  tended  greatly  to  lower  the  preten- 
sions of  those  who,  while  literature  had  fallen  to  a  low  ebb, 
had  assumed,  with  very  insuificient  qualifications,  to  be  the 
directors  of  the  public  mind.  On  this  occasion,  it  being  the 
eventful  period  of  the  meeting  of  the  Allied  Sovereigns  in 
Paris,  the  youthful  author  was  awarded  the  prize  for  his  per- 
formance in  the  presence  of  those  distinguished  personages  ; 
and,  contrary  to  the  custom  of  the  University,  was  allowed 
himself  to  read  his  essay  from  the  rostrum.  This  he  did  with 
great  effect,  prefacing  its  recital  with  an  eloquent  exordium, 
adapted  to  the  remarkable  occasion  of  the  assembly. 

His  next  production  was,  an  "  E16ge  on  Montesquieu," 
containing  a  luminous  analysis  and  commentary  upon  his 
great  work,  the  "  Spirit  of  the  Laws ; "  which  also  obtained 
the  Prize  of  Eloquence  of  the  French  University  in  its 
sitting  of  August  1826.  Shortly  after  this,  M.  Villemain 
passed  from  the  chair  of  Modern  History  to  that  of  "  Elo- 
quence," where  his  reputation  was  progressively  augmented 
by  the  stores  of  learning,  both  ancient  and  modem,  which  he 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  studies  and  duties  of  his  important 
office.  From  this  period  his  history  belongs  less  to  the 
annals  of  the  University  than  to  those  of  the  literature  and 
politics  of  France. 

His  next  important  publication  was  a  "  History  of  Oliver 
Cromwell,"  in  two  volumes.  This  production  has  been,  as 
was  to  be  expected,  the  subject  of  much  criticism,  according 
as  the  political  views  of  the  reader  varied  ;  but  all  agree  that 
it  bears  the  stamp  of  originality  and  genius.     It  was  simul- 

MEMOIR  OP  M.   VILLEMAIN.  xix 

taneously  translated  into  German  and  Italian.  He  was  at  this 
time — August  1821 — elected  a  member  of  the  "  Academie 
Frangoise"  in  the  place  of  M.  Fontane,  deceased;  whose 
funeral  oration  and  eulogism  (a  custom  pecuUar  to  France)  he 
pronounced. 

In  the  same  year  he  published  a  translation  of  the  newly- 
found  manuscript  of  Cicero  "  De  Republic^,"  accompanied 
by  a  series  of  notes,  showing  much  learning  and  research, 
illustrative  of  the  ancient  Roman  policy  and  habits.  This 
was  followed,  in  1823,  by  a  work  of  still  more  general  interest, 
entitled  "  Discours  et  Meldnges  literaires  ; "  and  that,  a  few 
years  after,  by  another,  viz.  "Nouveaux  Meldnges  historiques, 
et  literaires."  These  volumes  contain,  among  many  other 
papers,  such  as  that  on  "  Funeral  Orations,"  "  Discourses 
before  the  University,  &c."  a  Series  of  critical  notices  of  the 
most  eminent  writers  of  France  and  other  countries — Fenelon, 
Milton,  I'Hopital,  Shakspeare,  Pope,  &c. ;  and  among  these 
is  the  eloquent  composition  now  presented  to  the  public,  his 
Essay  on  the  genius  and  writings  of  Pascal.  In  these  VO' 
lumes,  also,  a  prominent  place  is  occupied  by  a  course  of 
essays  on  the  "  Decline  of  Polytheism,"  "  Effects  of  the 
stoical  philosophy  of  the  Antonines,"  and  the  "  Progress  of 
Christianity  and  of  Christian  eloquence  ; "  all  of  which  ex- 
hibit an  extent  of  erudition  and  a  depth  of  thought,  which 
combine  to  place  their  author  in  the  very  highest  rank  of  mo- 
dern writers.  The  translations  also  interspersed  throughout 
these  works,  especially  those  from  the  Fathers,  are  distin- 
guished by  purity  and  elegance ;  and  his  portraitures  of  St. 
Jerome  and  Augustin  are  drawn  with  the  force  and  eloquence 
of  an  accomplished  biographer,  and — which  enhances  their 
interest — the  enthusiastic  warmth  of  one  who  knew  how  to 
appreciate  the  excellences  of  those  holy  men, 

M.  Villemain's  poUtical  and  official  course  remains  to  be 
briefly  noticed.  His  earliest  appointment,  in  1816,  was  one 
especially  suited  to  his  hterary  talents — that  of  Director  of 
the  Press  and  Superintendent  of  the  State  Library,  a  duty 

XX  MEMOIR   OP  M.   VILLEMAIN. 

which  is  placed  in  France  under  the  department  of  the 
Minister  of  the  Interior.  This  office  he,  however,  in  1820 
relinqvdshed,  on  the  retirement  of  M.  de  Gazes  ;  but  still 
retained  that  of  Master  of  Bequests  to  the  Council  of  State, 
which  had  been  conferred  upon  him  simultaneously  with  the 
former.  In  1825,  he  commenced  an  ardent  advocacy  of  the 
cause  of  the  Greeks  against  their  Turkish  oppressors,  on 
which  occasion  he  published,  with  a  view  to  impress  the 
public  mind  on  their  behalf,  his  "  Lascaris,"  together  with 
a  Resume  of  the  history  of  modern  Greece.  The  active  part 
that  he  took  after  this,  in  defence  of  the  liberty  of  the  press, 
contrary  to  the  views  of  the  existing  administration,  lost  him 
the  favour  of  government ;  and  in  1829  he  was  deprived  of 
his  last  remaining  office,  that  of  Master  of  Requests  to  the 
Council :  on  the  other  hand,  the  line  of  conduct  he  thus  adopted 
raised  him  in  public  favour,  and  marks  of  popularity  and  dis- 
tinction were  lavished  upon  him. 

A  change  of  administration,  however,  taking  place  shortly 
after  this,  the  course  of  affairs  became  more  favourable  to 
enlightened  liberty,  and  the  appreciation  of  literature.  At 
that  period  M.  Villemain  formed  an  intimate  union  with  the 
present  distinguished  Minister  of  France,  M.  Guizot ;  and 
they  combined  their  efforts  with  much  effect  for  the  promo- 
tion of  these  objects.  A  fresh  course  of  lectures  on  a  variety 
of  interesting  subjects,  was  entered  upon  by  Villemain,  which 
were  afterwards  revised  and  pubhshed.  Among  these  appear 
— ^which  will  invest  them  with  especial  interest  to  the  English 
reader — his  striking  essays  on  the  genius  of  Richardson  (treat- 
ing more  particularly  of  his  "  Clarissa,")  and  those  upon  the 
writings  of  Gibbon,  Robertson,  &c. 

A  short  time  previous  to  the  Revolution  of  1 830,  he  had 
been  elected  to  a  seat  in  the  Chamber  of  Representatives,  as 
deputy  for  St.  Eure.  At  that  important  epoch  he  again  acquired 
distinction  by  maintaining  in  the  Chamber  the  law  for  the 
independence  of  the  Judges ;  and  his  efforts  were  considered 
to  be  mainly  instrumental  in  carrying  that  measure.     Being 

MEMOIR   OF   M.    VILLEMAIN.  XXI 

shortly  after  this  appointed  to  the  office  of  VicePresident  of 
the  Royal  Council  of  Public  Instruction,  and  a  re-election 
being  required,  on  his  taking  office,  to  his  seat  in  the  Cham- 
ber— as  is  the  case  in  our  own  country — he  was  unsuccessful 
in  obtaining  again  the  suffrages  of  his  constituents.  The 
government,  however,  too  well  appreciated  his  talents,  and 
his  effectiveness  in  debate,  to  be  willing  to  dispense  with  his 
assistance  in  the  legislature,  and  he  was  immediately  elevated 
to  the  dignity  of  the  peerage,  by  ordonnance  dated  fifth  May 
1832.  In  that  new  sphere  of  duty  he  continued,  as  he  had 
done  in  the  lower  Chamber,  to  take  a  leading  and  influential 
part  in  public  proceedings,  and  was  especially  distinguished 
by  a  quality — far  less  common  in  the  French  parliament  than 
in  ours — the  force  and  brilliancy  of  his  extemporaneous 
speeches. 

On  the  13th  May  1839,  M.  Villemain  was  appointed  to  the 
important  office  of  Minister  of  Public  Instruction ;  but  re- 
signed the  Department,  in  company  with  his  colleagues  in 
office,  at  the  latter  end  of  February  in  the  ensuing  year,  in 
consequence  of  the  rejection  of  the  dotation  to  the  Duke  of 
Nemours. 

In  addition  to  the  publications  of  M.  Villemain  already 
noticed  are,  a  "  Treatise  on  the  Literature  of  the  eighteenth 
century ; "  "  Reflections  on  the  French  language,"  form- 
ing the  preface  to  the  French  Academy's  dictionary ;  a 
collection  of  Funeral  Orations ;  a  History  of  the  EngUsh  lite- 
rature of  Queen  Anne's  reign  ;  a  variety  of  discourses,  essays, 
memoirs,  and  reviews,  too  numerous  to  be  here  described ; 
and,  last,  his  edition  of  Pascal's  Provincial  Letters  (from 
which  the  present  translation  has  been  made,)  with  illustrative 
notes,  and  the  Preliminary  essay  now  brought  before  the 
Enghsh  reader,  and  which  originally  formed  the  introduction 
to  that  work.  A  striking  feature  in  the  literary  labours  of 
this  justly  distinguished  person  is  the  interest  evinced  by  him 
in  the  great  writers  of  our  country,  and  his  efforts  to  diffuse 

XXll  MEMOIR  OP  M.   VILLEMAIN. 

an  acquaintance  with,  and  a  taste  for  those  fine  models  in 
France. 

In  reviewing  M.  Villemain's  career,  thus  hastily  sketched, 
a  remarkable  similarity  suggests  itself  between  its  leading 
features — and  even  the  principal  incidents  of  his  life — ^and 
those  of  an  eminent  countryman  of  our  own.  Lord  Brougham. 
In  both,  the  predominant  qualities  are  seen  to  be,  an  untiring 
energy  of  mind,  and  activity  of  intellect ;  both  have  exhibited 
a  like  ardent  pursuit  of  literary  and  political  distinction ; 
the  fortune  of  both  has  been  to  enjoy,  in  their  respective 
countries,  the  two  departments  of  the  legislature  for  the  dis- 
play of  their  great  powers  of  debate  ;  and — as  if  to  complete 
the  parallel — ^both  have  temporarily  attained  to  dignified, 
but  short-lived  official  eminence.  The  literary  achievements 
of  the  French  minister  have  been  perhaps  the  most  diversified 
and  matured;  but  that  superiority  is  compensated,  in  the 
case  of  his  English  contemporary,  by  a  legal  acumen — if  not 
depth — which  the  nature  of  M.  Villemain's  education  and 
early  habits  could  not  have  enabled  him  to  acquire.  It  is  not 
necessary  to  pursue  the  comparison  with  more  minuteness ; 
and  it  must  be  left  to  posterity  to  decide  which  of  the  two 
has  best  improved,  for  the  benefit  of  their  respective  countries, 
the  high  gifts  and  qualifications  with  which  both  are  endowed. 

This  short  notice  cannot  be  more  appropriately  concluded 
than  with  the  elegant  tribute  paid  to  M.  Villemain  by  a 
fellow-labourer  in  one  branch  of  his  studies — M.  Faugfere — 
the  indefatigable  and  enthusiastic  Editor  of  the  latest  and 
most  accurate  collection  of-  Pascal's  "Thoughts"  and  mis- 
cellaneous writings.  To  that  work  the  then  Minister  had, 
in  his  official  capacity  in  connexion  with  the  public  archives, 
rendered  much  valuable  asssistance,  and  his  services  are  thus 
recorded  by  its  grateful  author :  "  Nous  aimons  k  consigner 
ici  1' expression  de  notre  gratitude,  ancienne  et  nouvelle,  envers 
un  illustre  6crivain,  dont  I'amiti^  est  pour  nous  un  charme  et 
im  honneur.     Au  miheu  des  soins  et  de  la  fatigue  des  affaires, 

MEMOIR  OF  M.   VILLEMAIN.  XXIU 

il  trouve  place  encore  pour  ces  conversations  pleines  de  bon 
sens  et  d'esprit,  d' Erudition  et  de  grdce,  on  nous  avons  puis6 
plus  d'une  fois  des  conseils  et  des  encouragemens.  Nous  le 
remercions  non  seulment  de  I'empressement  qu'il  a  montr^ 
comme  Ministre,  a  faire  mettre  k  notre  disposition  les  manu- 
scripts de  la  Bibliothfeque  Royal,  et  k  nous  autoriser  a  les 
publier ;  mais  surtout  de  I'int^r^t  amical  qu'il  n'a  cessd  de 
nous  t^moigner  dans  cette  occasion." 

ON   PASCAL, 

CONSIDERED  AS  A  WRITER  AND  A  MORALIST. 
BY  M.  VILLEMA.IN, 

PEER  OF  FRANCE,  LATE  MINISTER  OF  PUBLIC  INSTRUCTION, 
ETC.,  ETC. 

In  surveying  the  varieties  of  human  knowledge,  we  perceive 
two  great  divisions,  under  which  all  the  acquirements  of  the 
intellect  arrange  themselves.  In  the  one,  the  mind  is  occupied 
upon  matter ;  in  the  other,  upon  itself.  The  one  comprehends 
the  whole  science  of  external  objects,  from  the  most  ordinary 
piece  of  mechanism,  to  the  great  frame-work  of  the  heavens  ; 
the  other  takes  for  its  study  the  heart  of  man ;  and  the 
instruments  of  its  research  are.  Morality,  Eloquence,  and 
Poetry. 

Can  the  same  mind,  it  may  be  asked,  acquire  the  mastery 
of  both  these  great  fields  of  knowledge  ?  Or,  is  their  sepa- 
ration as  insurmountable  as  their  diversity  is  manifest  ?  "When 
physical  science  was  elementary  and  imperfect,  it  did  not  suf- 
fice to  give  active  exercise  to  a  powerful  understanding ;  and, 
in  that  stage  also,  it  was  compelled  to  call  in  the  aid  of  the 
imagination,  in  order  to  conceal  its  own  ignorance  and  mis- 
takes. Pythagoras,  who  conveyed  to  the  Greeks  the  science 
of  numbers,  inculcated  his  system  in  harmonious  verse  ;  and 
the  divine  Plato  rested  his  brilUant  metaphysics  on  geometri- 
cal conclusions.  But  when  Science  had  succeeded  in  gathering 
into  her  domain  a  large  store  of  observations  and  facts,  she 

BY    M.    VILLEMAIN.  XXV 

was  compelled  to  retire  within  herself,  and  to  maintain,  hence- 
forth, an  independent  existence.  Thus,  the  advance  of  human 
knowledge  produced  a  divorce  hetween  Science  and  Literature ; 
and  the  enlargement  of  our  understanding  led  to  a  separation 
in  its  pursuits ;  as  an  empire,  growing  too  extensive,  falls 
necessarily  into  independent  provinces. 

If  we  look  at  the  individuals  who  have,  at  any  time,  endea- 
voured to  challenge  an  exemption  from  this  common  law  of 
human  weakness  and  limitation,  we  find  our  observation  the 
more  confirmed.  Where  they  have  succeeded  in  achieving 
some  exceptions,  they  have  never  brought  them  to  bear  upon 
the  same  points.  Perfection  in  the  one  object,  has  ever  been 
gained  at  the  expence  of  another ;  and  the  same  mind  has 
alternately  exhibited  mediocrity  and  greatness.  One  man 
there  was — just  presented  upon  this  our  earthly  scene,  as  if 
aspiring  to  claim  for  the  human  intellect,  simultaneously,  both 
these  titles  to  glory — ^but,  alas  !  the  first  efforts  of  genius  ex- 
hausted the  powers  of  nature  ;  and  time  was  denied  him  for 
the  further  development  of  his  wondrous  powers.  Yet,  what 
a  majestic  spectacle  is  presented,  in  the  mere  rudimental 
achievements  of  this  man,  thus  arrested  and  cut  off  in  the 
midst  of  his  labours !  What  an  imperishable  monument 
is  formed  by  these  first  shoots  and  early  efforts  of  his 
genius ! 

It  is  proposed  now  to  submit  a  few  remarks  upon  those 
works  of  Pascal,  which  are  unconnected  with  the  mathematical 
sciences.  Writing  to  one  of  the  profoundest  geometricians  of 
his  day,  he  says,  "  I  call  geometry  the  very  best  occupation 
in  the  world  ;  but  still  it  is  only  an  occupation ;  and  as  I  have 
often  said,  it  is  an  excellent  thing  for  the  trial  of  mental 
strength,  but  not  for  its  full  exercise."  Without  entirely 
acquiescing  in  this  strong — and  perhaps  eccentric  anathema — . 
it  may  be  allowable  to  regard,  as  the  loftiest  efforts  of  the 
human  mind  alone,  those  master-pieces  of  acute  reasoning 
and  persuasive  eloquence,  which  address  themselves  alike  to 
every  age,  and  hand  down  to  posterity  a  transcript  of  immortal 

b 

XXVI  ESSAY 

genius.  In  the  exact  sciences,  the  discovery  severs  itself — so 
to  speak — from  the  inventor ;  it  is  corrected,  extended,  per- 
fected, hy  other  hands  ;  and  becomes  a  mere  chain  in  the 
order  and  succession  of  truths,  which  the  patient  labour  of 
ages  is  destined  to  discover.  But  the  writer — ^be  he  poet, 
historian,  or  moraUst — who  records  in  burning  words  his 
mighty  thoughts,  or  ennobling  sentiments,  leaves  his  task 
complete,  and  remains,  himself,  immortal  as  his  work. 

In  reflecting  upon  that  precocity  of  instinct,  which  from 
his  tenderest  age  directed  the  genius  of  Pascal  towards  geome- 
trical studies,  and  led  him  unconsciously  to  invent  the  very 
elements  of  the  sciences  of  which  he  was  enamoured,  it 
would  be  superfluous  to  inquire,  whether  that  faculty  which 
was  thus  the  earliest  developed,  was  in  him  the  strongest  and 
the  most  consonant  to  the  quality  of  his  mind.  Every  talent 
presupposes  an  innate  mental  predisposition  ;  but  a  multitude 
of  external  circumstances  and  foreign  impressions — a,  thousand 
unforeseen  and  incalculable  changes — may  determine  the  de- 
velopment of  the  mental  powers  in  a  certain  order,  without 
proving  a  predominance  of  one  over  the  other.  Pascal's 
father  wished  to  engage  his  son  exclusively  in  literary  studies ; 
but  he  himself  was  passionately  addicted  to  mathematics  ; 
and  his  life  was  absorbed  in  the  science.  Denying  his  child 
that  pursuit  at  the  outset  of  his  education,  he  held  it  out  to 
him  as  the  reward  of  application  in  the  future  :  he  announced 
geometry  to  be  the  fitting  study  for  the  man.  Daily  expe- 
rience shows  us — and  in  less  important  instances  than  the 
present — that  children  are  prone  to  imitate,  rather  than  to 
obey ;  they  adopt  our  actions,  and  forget  our  advice :  their 
curiosity,  in  short,  is  most  active  upon  objects  that  are  prohi- 
bited. Is  it  not  then  probable,  that,  in  an  intellect  active 
and  penetrating  like  Pascal's,  the  very  eagerness  to  acquire  a 
secret  and  forbidden  science  would,  itself,  tend  to  draw  out 
the  mathematical  talent  that  existed  within  him  ?  Once  ex- 
cited, the  passion  for  the  exact  sciences — of  all  others  the 
most  powerful  in  minds  over  which  it  has  once  gained  the 

BY   M.   VILLEMAIN.  XXvii 

mastery — kindled  the  ardour  of  Ms  genius,  by  its  fascinating 
revelations,  by  the  novelty  of  its  experiments,  and  by  the  cer- 
tainty of  its  demonstrations  ;  and  ended,  by  consuming  with 
excessive  labours  the  larger  portion  of  his  brief  and  fugitive 
existence ! 

But,  in  what  way,  we  ask,  in  the  midst  of  these  benumbing 
and  withering  studies,  was  formed  the  able,  the  impassioned 
orator — the  master  of  language — the  creator  of  our  style? 
Our  great  writers  have  all  been  produced,  either  by  an  im- 
pulse of  early  and  absorbing  inspiration,  or  by  a  long  and  per- 
severing devotion  to  their  one,  undivided  pursuit.  Pascal, 
emerging  from  the  profoundest  mathematical  studies,  came  at 
once  before  the  world,  the  sublimest  of  writers.  In  those 
eloquent  pages,  which  formed  the  occupation  of  a  portion 
only  of  the  years  allotted  to  this  extraordinary  man,  we  per- 
ceive neither  the  commencement  nor  the  progress  of  genius  : 
the  goal  is  reached  at  once ;  the  intermediate  traces  of  the 
advancing  footsteps  are  lost ! 

This  singular  phenomenon  may,  in  part,  be  attributable  to 
the  very  influence  of  those  exact  studies,  to  which  Pascal  had 
been  addicted,  at  a  period  when  high  intellectual  attainments 
of  that  nature — as  yet  comparatively  immature  and  unme- 
thodized — imposed  upon  the  mind  the  effort  of  a  continual 
creation.  All  was  originality,  in  a  study  incomplete  and 
progressive.  A  species  of  enthusiastic  impulse,  and  a  vivid 
excitement  of  imagination,  accompanied  all  those  early  essays 
of  science.  It  may,  thence,  be  supposed  how  much  more 
powerful  and  inspiring  would  be  such  contemplations,  than 
those  frivolous  objects  to  which  literature  had  been  Umited 
under  the  protection  of  Richelieu.  Could  the  language  and 
the  genius  of  France  be  properly  developed  by  writers,  who 
thought  of  nothing  beyond  mere  language ;  and  made  the 
study  of  words,  alone,  an  important  science  ?  To  produce  true 
eloquence,  the  thought  of  man  must  be  elevated.  It  was  the 
liberty  of  the  ancients  that  formed  the  oratory  of  the  ancients. 
Poetical  imitation  reproduced  the  forgotten  art  in  the  verses 

b2 

XXVIU  ESSAY 

of  Corneille ;  but  the  nature  of  our  institutions  left  no  place 
for  it  any  where,  except  on  the  boards  of  the  theatre. 

When  the  contemplations  of  men  are  unoccupied  with  the 
great  concernments  of  their  country  and  of  liberty ;  when 
deprived — so  to  say — of  the  very  existence  derived  from  the 
exigences  of  public  interests  ;  there  will  yet  be  left  to  real 
genius  many  pregnant  sources  of  ennobling  inspiration.  There 
are  the  hidden  emotions  of  the  soul,  and  the  elevated  sympa- 
thies of  nature  ;  there  are  the  inexhaustible  delights  of  specu- 
lative truth.  It  was  from  sources  such  as  these,  that  the 
sublimity  of  Pascal's  eloquence  was  drawn.  His  purity  of 
taste,  his  contempt  for  the  tinsel  ornaments  of  a  specious  rhe- 
toric, sprung  in  him,  from  the  greatness  of  the  objects  which 
filled  his  mind.  Originality  followed  him  from  the  mathema- 
tics to  the  belles-lettres.  He  invented  his  language,  as  he 
had  discovered  the  principles  of  science,  under  the  same  un- 
changeable influence  of  justice  and  truth.  Had  he  received 
from  nature  a  less  fervent  imagination,  it  might  have  been, 
perhaps,  for  ever  extinguished  amidst  the  frosts  of  abstract 
studies.  But  a  mind  such  as  his,  far  from  succumbing  under 
the  influence  of  such  pursuits,  was  rather  raised  by  them  the 
more  forcibly  to  that  closeness  of  deduction  and  that  vigour  of 
reasoning,  which  became  the  irresistible  arms  of  his  dialectics. 

And  who  shall  say  further,  how  much  Pascal  owed  of  en- 
couragement and  animation  to  his  communion  vidth  those 
illustrious  solitaries,*  whom  it  was  his  high  vocation  at  once 
to  defend  and  to  surpass  ?  I  well  know,  how  easy  it  is  to 
refuse  admiration  to  virtues  no  longer  in  fashion — to  disparage 
talents  which  have  left  but  a  name.  In  these  days,  the  high- 
est praise  of  the  Port  Royal  is,  that  it  was  the  school  of  Ra- 
cine. The  laborious  productions  of  Nicole,f  of  Hermant,  of 
Sacy,  J  are  read  no  more.  The  glory  of  Arnauld  §  is  a  problem  : 
his  controversies  provoke  a  smile.  Yet  there  was  a  time, 
when  the  highest  inteUigence  of  a  polished  age  studied  with 

*  The  Members  of  the  Port  Royal.  t  Appendix,  No.  3. 

t  Appendix,  No.  4.  §  Appendix,  No.  2. 

BY   M.   VILLEMAIN.  Xxix 

admiration  these  writers,  now  so  despised  ;  and  Louis  XIV. 
found  himself  obliged  to  arm  his  policy  and  his  power  against 
the  unyielding  firmness  of  a  few  humble  theologians.  The 
Port  Royal  possessed  then,  a  reahty  of  greatness,  attested 
both  by  the  relentless  persecutions  they  sustained,  and  by  the 
enthusiasm  with  which  their  wrongs  were  endured. 

At  the  commencement  of  an  epoch  in  which  religion  was 
destined  to  shine  forth  in  all  the  splendour  of  art  and  genius, 
a  body  of  men,  austere  in  manners,  free  and  elevated  in  mind, 
and  united  to  each  other,  for  the  most  part  by  the  ties  of 
blood  or  friendship,  agreed  to  retire  from  the  world,  and 
form  a  society  devoted  to  study  and  meditation.  Enthusiastic 
lovers  of  antiquity,  their  writings  bear  all  the  impress  of  its 
manliness  and  strength.  Excelhng  more  in  force  of  reasoning 
than  in  elegance  of  diction,  they  yet  exhibit  the  finest  models 
of  purity  of  taste,  and  sound  literature.  They  were  not  unac- 
quainted with  life  and  worldly  affairs.  Their  refuge  had  been 
sought  by  men,  tossed  by  the  winds  of  faction,  and  wearied 
with  party-strife.  Those  pious  recluses  were  the  innocent, 
but  faithful  friends,  of  the  ambitious  coadjutor  of  Paris.* 
Port  Royal  received  into  its  bosom  more  than  one  noble  wreck 
of  the  desolating  tempests  of  the  Fronde  ;t  and  the  victims  of 
that  effort  for  political  independence,  at  once  violent  and  abor- 
tive—which agitated  the  State,  without  reforming  her  abuses 
— sought  here  at  last,  an  asylum,  in  the  practices  and  the 
consolations  of  reUgion.  There,  were  united,  like  one  of  the 
tribes  of  old,  almost  all  the  members  of  the  family  of  the  Ar- 
naulds,  so  distinguished  by  the  variety  of  their  talents,  and 
their  elevation  of  character.  If  the  difference  of  times  per- 
mitted the  parallel,  they  might  be  styled  the  Appii  of  Rome, 
so  ardent,  so  able  and  resolute  were  they  in  character  and 
disposition.  Like  them,  the  Arnaulds  had  to  endure  one  of 
those  continuous  persecutions,  which,  in  ancient  republics, 
were  often  the  heritage  of  successive  families.     Anthony  Ar- 

*  Cardinal  de  Retz. 
t  The  civil  contentions  of  that  period,  so  called. 

XXX  ESSAY 

nauld,  himself  an  undaunted  antagonist  of  the  Jesuits  in  a 
celebrated  process  of  past  days,  had  drawn  upon  his  children 
the  hatred  of  that  vindictive  and  powerful  body;  but  he 
transmitted  to  them,  with  the  disastrous  legacy,  also  the 
courage  and  the  talent  that  enabled  them  to  brave  its  re- 
lentless fury. 

But,  it  may  be  said,  in  what  way  are  we  now  concerned  in 
the  five  abstruse  Propositions  of  Jansenius  ;  and  the  long  and 
sterile  controversies  to  which  they  gave  birth  ?  Such  flip- 
pancy of  retort  savours  of  a  shallow  philosophy.  Circum- 
stances and  forms  are  perpetually  fluctuating ;  the  occupations 
of  the  mind  vary  ;  but,  in  all  periods,  and  under  differing 
names,  there  is  ever  waging  a  conflict  between  arbitrary  au- 
thority, and  the  independence  of  the  thought ;  between  those 
who  would  impose  absolute  submission  upon  the  domain  of 
the  mind,  and  those  who  challenge,  as  a  natural  right,  the  free 
exercise  of  the  reason.  It  is  the  dispute  between  Socrates 
and  Anytas,  between  the  Stoic  Philosophers  and  the  Empe- 
rors, between  Henry  IV.  and  the  lieague,  between  the  Dutch 
and  Philip  II.  Be  it  speculative,  religious,  political,  literary ; 
modified — as  it  may  be — transformed,  aggravated,  or  relaxed, 
by  a  hundred  fortuitous  circumstances,  by  numberless  acci- 
dents of  civilization  or  manners ;  this  controversy  still  sub- 
sists. It  partakes  of  the  very  dignity  of  our  nature,  of  that 
noble  prerogative  which  constitutes  the  thought  of  man  the 
foremost  and  most  precious  good  that  his  fellow-men  can  in- 
vade— the  dearest  that  he  can  be  called  upon  to  defend. 

In  the  part  they  took  in  this  perpetual  debate,  the  recluses 
of  the  Port  Royal,  while  to  appearance  discussing  only  scho- 
lastic subtleties,  represented  the  liberty  of  the  conscience,  the 
spirit  of  free  investigation,  and  the  cause  of  justice  and  truth. 
Their  adversaries,  in  opposing  them,  supported  a  bhnd  domi- 
nation over  the  human  spirit  and  soul.  Pascal  resented  the 
yoke  which  these  doctrines  aimed  to  impose  upon  the  reason 
of  man.  His  lofty  genius  spurned  submission  to  such  inso- 
lent usurpation  of  the  noblest  of  our  faculties,  seeking  vainly 

BY  M.  VILLEMAIN.  XXXl 

a  refuge  in  the  sanctuary  of  conscience  and  faith.  He  saw 
those  exemplary  men  (bound  himself  to  them  by  the  ties  of 
an  endearing  friendship)  absorbed  in  the  profoundest  researches 
into  the  first  sources  and  early  monuments  of  religion  ;  he 
marked  with  admiring  sympathy,  their  isolation,  their  pa- 
tience, their  humility,  their  fear  of  mingling  ambition  with 
the  ecclesiastical  function ;  and  their  meek  preference,  rather, 
of  the  persecutions  that  had  vexed  the  early  ages  of  Chris- 
tianity. The  Society  of  the  Jesuits,  on  the  other  hand,  was 
at  that  time,  high  in  favor,  and  intoxicated  with  power  ;  the 
exclusive  fountain  of  favour  and  disgrace  ;  and  bent  upon 
pursuing  with  slander  and  persecution  a  body  of  men,  too 
wise,  too  devout,  too  blameless,  to  be  tolerated  by  them ;  and 
whose  only  crime  was  their  determination  to  maintain  invio- 
late their  opinions,  and  to  preserve  their  integrity  of  con- 
science. Could  the  pure  and  noble  spirit  of  Pascal  look  on 
with  indifference,  while  such  a  conflict  was  gathering  around 
him? 

On  his  first  introduction  to  the  Port  Royal,  his  mind  was 
filled  with  the  philosophy  of  Epictetus,  and  the  laxities  of 
Montaigne.  The  frankness  of  the  virtuous  Sacy,  the  vast 
erudition  and  indefatigable  spirit  of  Arnauld  ;  the  polished 
reasoning,  the  grace  and  sweetness  of  Nicole,  (who  presided  as 
the  Melancthon  of  this  orthodox  and  tempered  reformation) 
the  natural  eloquence  and  flowing  imagination  of  Le  Maitre* — 
all  conspired  vehemently  to  agitate  a  spirit,  whose  every  power 
was  already  enhsted  on  the  side  of  truth.  In  his  pregnant 
conversations  vpith  minds  which  he  found  worthy  of  his  con- 
fidence, Pascal  exhibited— whatever  the  subject — the  superi- 
ority of  his  own  intellect ;  and  those  men,  whose  memories 
laboured  under  the  stores  of  immense  reading,  were  wont  to 
recal,  as  their  most  precious  treasures,  thoughts  extempo- 
raneously thrown  out  by  Pascal ;  as  if  he  was  destined  to 

*  Le  Maitre  and  the  Sacy  referred  to  above,  were  brothers ;  the  latter 
taking  his  surname  by  way  of  distinction,  from  an  inversion  of  his  Chris- 
tian name,  Isaac.    (See  Appendix.) 

XXXU  .  ESSAY 

exhibit,  on  every  subject,  that  species  of  inspiration  with  which 
his  mathematical  studies  had  been  pursued.  Theology,  in 
its  deepest  forms,  was  the  especial  pursuit  of  the  recluses  ; 
but  every  thing  interesting  to  the  human  mind — philosophy, 
history,  antiquities — formed  the  exhaustless  subjects  of  their 
discourse.  Arnauld  was  a  profound  geometrician  ;  and  that 
logical  clearness  and  vigour,  that  inflexibihty  of  deduction, 
which  had  captivated  Pascal  in  the  mathematics,  seemed  to 
be  the  uniform  attribute  of  the  language,  the  books,  the  doc- 
trines, and  perhaps,  the  mistakes  of  the  Port  Royal.  What  ties 
must  have  been  formed  by  this  universal  community  of  feehng, 
between  minds  of  so  high  an  order,  thus  brought  together  by 
a  common  love  of  meditation  and  study  !  What  faithfulness 
of  attachment — not  of  party,  but  of  principle  and  virtue — was 
cemented  by  this  elevating  communion  !  It  may,  thence,  be 
easily  conceived,  that  the  theological  studies  of  his  friends 
became  the  favorite  ones  of  Pascal ;  and  that  the  exhaustless 
brilliancy  of  his  genius,  without  any  injury  to  its  strength, 
contributed  to  clothe  with  the  charms  of  nature  and  elegance 
those  weighty  demonstrations,  with  which  the  riper  experience 
of  his  companions  supplies  him. 

It  was  thus — in  the  necessity  which  soon  arose,  of  making 
an  appeal  from  the  Sorbonne  to  the  public,  and  of  explaining 
those  subtle  questions  respecting  the  doctrines  of  Grace,  which 
served  as  the  pretext  for  the  persecution  of  Arnauld,  the 
-most  illustrious  member  of  the  Port  Royal — that  the  "  Pro- 
vincial Letters "  had  their  origin.  These  papers  were  first 
brought  out  under  a  feigned  name,  and  came  upon  the  public 
by  surprise.  They  took  up  the  cause  of  a  distinguished  and 
persecuted  man  ;  they  attacked  a  flagrant  abuse  of  ecclesias- 
tical power,  at  a  period  when  religion  was  a  predominant  object 
of  attention  :  if  their  tone  at  first  was  light,  their  character  was 
not  ephemeral ;  they  touched  the  most  vital  interests  of  the  day. 
Their  brevity,  their  lucid  arrangement,  the  unwonted  eloquence 
of  diction,  the  air  of  keen  but  graceful  pleasantry  that  per- 
vaded them  ;  the  originality  and  force  of  phrases  and  senti- 

BY   M.    VILLEMAIN.  XXXUl 

ments  that  became  the  current-coin  of  discourse,  and  rooted 
themselves  in  the  memory — all  conspired  to  win  for  these 
productions  success  and  popularity.  Pascal  states  the  ques- 
tion at  issue  with  such  transparency,  that  our  assent  to  his 
conclusions  is  irresistibly  secured.  I  should  admire  the 
Provincial  Letters  less,  had  they  not  been  written  before 
Moliere.  Pascal  anticipates  the  era  of  genuine  comedy.  He 
introduces  various  actors  upon  his  stage.  First,  there  is 
a  listener,  who  receives  indifferently  all  the  passionate  or  pre- 
judiced revelations  made  in  confidence  to  him.  Then  we  have 
men,  sincere  to  their  party ;  men  without  trust-worthiness,  yet 
more  zealous  in  party- spirit  than  any  others  :  the  candid  and 
conciUatory,  everywhere  repelled ;  hypocrites,  every  where 
courted.  It  is  a  perfect  drama,  with  some  deviation  from 
ordinary  costume. 

But  the  scene  becomes  still  more  animated,  when,  the  actors 
being  reduced  to  two,  it  exhibits  the  unsuspecting  interpreter 
of  the  Casuists,  in  communication  with  an  ostensible  disciple, 
who,  partly  by  ingenious  suggestions,  partly  by  assumed  doci- 
lity, eKcits  and  encourages  the  indiscreet  zeal  of  the  well- 
meaning  but  simple  Father.  Excited  by  so  facile  an  auditor, 
the  Jesuit  develops  with  eager  self-complacency,  all  the  prin- 
ciples of  his  school ;  fancies  his  hearer's  admiration  to  rise 
with  their  increasing  extravagances  ;  and,  by  his  praises,  gives 
probability  to  that  which  would  otherwise  appear  incredible. 
The  dialogues  of  these  two  confidential  interlocutors  are  pur- 
sued to  considerable  length  ;  but  the  form  assumed  is  so  happy 
in  itself,  is  carried  out  with  such  variety,  and  produces  so  tho- 
rough an  illusion,  that  it  never  wearies.  Plato,  in  his  contest 
with  the  subtleties  of  the  Ehetoricians,  furnishes  the  model  of 
this  ingenious  satire.  His  "Euthydfeme,"  which  boasts  of 
teaching  virtue  by  an  abstract  method,  resembles  the  Jesuit 
Father  explaining  the  "  Devotion  made  easy."  But  it  is  un- 
questionable that,  for  richness  of  humour,  Pascal's  Casuists 
far  surpass  the  Sophists  of  Plato. 

It  will  be  obvious,  then,  that  the  subject  of  the  "  Provin- 
b  5 

XXXIV  ESSAY 

cials,"  is  far  from  barren,  or  unsuited  to  display  the  genius  of 
the  author,  as  some  of  his  admirers  have  gratuitously  appre- 
hended. Pascal  possessed,  not  only  a  power  to  create,  but  to 
choose  well,  his  materials.  Of  all  the  obUquities  of  the  human 
mind,  that  is  doubtless  the  most  remarkable,  the  endeavour 
systematically  to  justify  vices  by  a  principle  of  virtue  ;  to 
commit  the  vrorst  actions  on  the  plea  of  good  motives  ;  to  vio- 
late all  morality,  under  a  simulation  of  respect  for  it ;  and,  at 
length,  by  means  of  the  most  bare-faced  subtilties,  to  discover 
in  the  laws  of  God  himself,  justification  and  merit  in  doing 
injury  to  man.  Nothing,  also,  can  be  more  felicitously  touched 
than  the  contrast  between  the  austerity  of  the  men,  and  the 
laxity  of  their  principles :  these  are  ihe  resources  that  lay 
before  Pascal ;  and  he  has  availed  himself  of  them  vpith  un- 
sparing effect.  In  attributing  to  his  opponents  a  settled  and 
premeditated  intention  to  undermine  morality,  he  has,  doubt- 
less, fallen  into  some  exaggeration  ;  but  this  gives  to  all  his 
attacks  a  point  and  concentration,  whence  they  derive  increased 
efficiency  and  support.  Can  it,  likewise,  be  affirmed,  with 
Voltaire,*  that  the  work  proceeds  on  an  entire  fallacy,  since 
no_society  has  ever  sought  to  establish  its  authority  by  the 
destruction  of  morals  ?  Is  the  moral  instinct  then  so  fixed 
and  unchanging,  that  it  may  never  be  warped  or  perverted  by 
the  weight  of  influence  and  authority?  Where  is  the  man 
that  has  never  faltered  in  the  path  of  duty,  or  felt  a  secret 
wish  that  he  could  deviate  without  censure  or  remorse  ?  This 
experience  of  our  own  weakness  may  well  explain  the  attrac- 
tions of  a  flexible  morality.  Have  we  not  known  more  than 
one  writer,  who  has  propagated  his  philosophy  by  means  of 
his  moral  system,  and  owed  the  success  of  his  theory  to  the 
profligacy  of  his  principles  ? 

It  is  not  difficult  to  conceive — while  we  lament  the  evil — 

that,  in  an  age  of  religious  zeal,  but  of  imperfect  information, 

a  Society  which  aspired  to  rule  the  conscience,  and  sought  to 

extend  its  influence  over  countries,  differing  in  manners,  in 

*  Age  of  Louis  XIV. 

BY    M.    VILLEMAIN.  XXXV 

habits,  and  in  national  and  domestic  prejudices,  should,  under 
the  influence  of  these  ambitious  motives,  have  been  led  to 
accommodate  its  moral  rules  to  these  various  and  opposing 
dispositions.  We  are  tempted  to  doubt  the  writer's  veracity, 
when,  in  these  letters,  we  hear  the  strange  recital  of  priests — 
the  ministers  of  humility  and  peace — sanctifying  the  duel, 
and  authorizing  homicides.  But  the  authors  of  these  maxims 
were  not  Jesuits  only.  They  were  Spaniards,  or  Sicilians  ; 
they  were  men  of  every  country  where  the  rules  of  revenge 
were  hereditarily  consecrated ;  and  devotion,  which  was 
wrought  into  the  very  habits  and  manners  of  the  people,  could 
obtain  from  them  every  sacrifice,  short  of  those  passions, 
which  were  indigenous  and  national  like  their  religion  itself. 

It  cannot,  however,  be  doubted,  that  these  unworthy  Casu- 
ists, in  their  scheme  to  flatter  the  varying  prejudices  of  the 
populace,  had  incalculably  debased  that  richest  quality  of  the 
Christian  law,  its  sublime  uniformity  of  moral  principle — a 
rule  wholly  independent  of  places,  times,  or  manners.  It 
was,  therefore,  a  righteous  and  salutary  enterprize  of  Pascal, 
boldly  to  oppose  himself  to  these  lax  condescensions,  so  dero- 
gatory to  true  religion ;  and  to  expose  that  fantastic  code, 
which  had  introduced  into  the  great  truths  of  morals  and 
conscience  the  subtilties  of  chicane,  and  the  crafty  forms  of 
legal  pettifogging.  With  what  an  easy  brilliancy,  what  piti- 
less irony,  what  richness  of  humour — worthy  of  the  classic 
times  of  comedy — has  Pascal  fulfilled  this  high  vocation  ! 
The  doctrines  of  "  Probability,"  and  of  "  Regulation  of  Mo- 
tive," have  acquired  an  immortality — equivocal  as  it  is — 
through  his  ridicule.  It  is  this  art  of  pleasantry,  which  the 
ancients  deemed  essential  to  true  eloquence ;  this  terse  and 
graceful  humour,  in  which  Socrates  excelled ;  these  sly  and 
well-directed  provocatives,  which  give  so  much  point  to  the 
Cynicism  of  Rabelais  ;  the  innate  and  sahent  gaiety,  that 
overflowed  in  Moliere,  and  which  often  gilds  the  pages  of 
Le  Sage;  that  perfection  of  wit,  in  short,  which  is  the 
play   and  the   enjoyment   of  superior  intellects  :    all  these 

XXXVI  ESSAY 

constitute  the  imperishable  charms  of  the  earlier  "  Pro- 
vincials." 

When  we  contemplate  the  Life  of  Pascal,  so  brief  in  dura- 
ration,  so  oppressed  by  suffering,  and  by  the  langour  insepara- 
ble from  profound  study  ;  when  we  read  the  collection  of  his 
detached  "Thoughts,"  which  seem  like  the  troubled  heavings 
of  a  mighty,  but  uneasy  spirit ;  we  find  it,  at  first,  difficult  to 
conceive  whence  sprung  that  exuberance  of  gaiety,  which  the 
same  mind  has  scattered  over  subjects  so  dry  and  scholastic. 
Does  mirth,  then,  so  nearly  border  upon  sadness,  in  those 
lofty  intelligences,  which  look  down,  as  from  an  elevated  and 
distant  region,  upon  their  chosen  study — the  nature  of  man  ? 
One  might,  indeed,  entertain  such  a  belief,  in  reading  Pascal, 
Shakspeare,  and  Moliere.  To  explain  the  combination,  it  has 
been  said  that  the  habit  of  profound  observation  tends  to 
inspire  sadness.  It  is  a  feeling  which  most  pervades  the 
highest  order  of  faculties ;  because  those  minds  feel  more 
acutely  than  others  the  limitation  and  weakness  of  human 
thought ;  they  are  saddened  by  a  consciousness  of  their  own 
powers,  while  they  alternately  smile  or  grieve  over  the  follies 
of  all !  * 

Pascal  had  issued  his  Six  earlier  Letters  :  Arnauld  was 
defended,  and  avenged.  His  apologist  had  carried  the  war 
into  the  enemy's  camp  ;  and  the  rapid,  humorous,  familiar 
exposition  of  the  eccentric  principles  of  their  doctors,  on  moral 
questions,    had   delighted  the  public,  and  covered  with  the 

*  If  I  have  succeeded  in  correctly  rendering  the  elegant  language  of 
the  original  in  this  passage,  the  solution  of  the  mental  phenomena  re- 
ferred to  does  not  seem  quite  satisfactory.  That  an  elevated  mind  should 
be  impressed  with  melancholy  by  the  follies  of  his  fellow-men  is  evident ; 
but  it  does  not  seem  equally  clear,  why,  in  connection  with  this  feeling, 
his  sadness  should  be  excited  by  the  limitation  of  his  ovjn  powers.  A 
more  obvious  reason  seems  to  be,  that  in  men  of  great  genius  the  percep- 
tions hoih  of  the  mournful  and  of  the  ludicrous  in  objects  around  them, 
are  more  acute  than  in  others,  and  imagination  heightens  and  enlMges 
those  impressions.  Many  of  the  finest  writers,  besides  those  named  in  the 
text,  have  consequently  excelled  in  ludicrous  as  well  as  pathetic  or  sublime 
composition ; — among  others,  Cervantes,  Cowper,  Byron,  &c.— (Transl.) 

BY   M.   VILLEMAIN,  XXXvii 

rankling  wounds  of  ridicule  that  hitherto  invulnerable  body. 
It  was  then  that  the  controversy  took  an  ampler  range ;  and 
Pascal  once  more  showed  the  versatility  of  his  powers.     The 
Jesuits,   though  intent  upon  the  prohibition  and  suppression 
of  these  dangerous  writings,    yet  could  not  forbear  making 
attempts  to  refute  them ;  but  with  little  skill,  and  weak  logic, 
as  if  stunned  and  disconcerted  by  the  surprise  of  so  bold  an 
attack.     It  must  be  acknowledged,  likewise,  that  the  Society 
did  not  then  number  in  its  ranks  names  so  distinguished  as 
those  that  have  since  illustrated  its  annals.     Bourdaloue  was 
unknown,    and  had  not   studied   his   powerful   dialectics  in 
Pascal's   own   pages.     The  Society's  champions,    feeble,  in- 
experienced, abusive,  and  dull,  served  only  to  rouse  the  genius 
of  their  terrible  adversary.     It  was  in  his  replies  to  them  that, 
stiE  preserving  the  simple  form  of  Letters,   Pascal  rose  with 
easy  wing  to  the  loftiest  flights  of  eloquence,  of  reasoning,  and 
of  burning  indignation.     Who  has  ever  tired  of  that  exquisite 
passage,  *  in  which,  after  describing  with  matchless  force  the 
long  and  deadly  contest  between  Violence  and  Truth — "  two 
powers,"    he  says,  "  whose  forces   have   hitherto   remained 
but   too   nearly   balanced,"—  predicts,    notwithstanding,    the 
inevitable  triumph  of  Truth,  "  because  she  is  eternal  and  omni- 
potent,  as  God  himself !  "     Neither  Demosthenes,  Chrysos- 
tom,  nor  Bossuet,  under  the  inspiration  of  applauding  audi- 
tories,   ever   produced    anything    more   sublime   than  these 
sentences,  which  form  the  close  of  a  polemical  letter. 

This  noble  eloquence  is  the  habitual  tone  of  the  later  of  the 
"Provincials."  Every  part  in  them  is  severe,  vehement,  impas- 
sioned. The  very  same  questions,  on  which  Pascal  had  at  first 
amused  himself  and  his  reader  with  banter,  and  which  he  had 
illuminated  with  pleasantries,  are  now  taken  up  afresh,  and 
treated  with  such  seriousness  and  warmth,  as  to  make  his 
opponents  wish  to  recal  the  lighter  style  of  discussion,  which 
had  at  first  called  forth  their  complaints.     Now  it  is,  that  he 

*  Letter  12th. 

XXXVJU  ESSAY 

vexes  and  ulcerates  the  wounds  he  had  previously  inflicted 
upon  their  self-love.  Those  hateful  doctrines  of  homicide,  to 
which  he  had  then  seemed  almost  to  show  some  indulgence 
by  only  exposing  them  to  contempt,  he  now  confronts  with 
all  the  force  of  inexorable  argument,  as  a  crime  against  the 
State,  and  the  Church ;  against  Nature,  and  Religion.  His 
vehemence  kindles  as  he  pursues  another  offence — too  com- 
mon in  every  period  of  division  and  strife — slander ;  that 
moral  assassination,  of  which  his  adversaries  had  made  the 
most  copious  use,  while  they  devised  for  it  an  ingenious 
apology — two  things,  which  correct,  although  they  do  not 
redeem  each  other.  In  this  controversy  Pascal  seems  some- 
times to  overpass  the  bounds  prescribed  by  Christian  charity. 
In  repelling  calumny,  he  lavishes  invective.  His  generous 
spirit,  stung  by  the  injuries  of  his  friends,  is  unable  to 
restrain  its  reproaches.  Strong  in  mental  power,  in  well- 
grounded  resentment,  and  in  the  mystery  with  which  his 
name  was  still  shrouded,  he  exclaims,  in  defiance  of  his  foes — 
"  You  find  yourselves  struck  by  an  invisible  hand,  which 
exposes  your  delinquencies  to  the  whole  world ;  and  you 
endeavour,  in  vain,  to  wound  me,  in  the  person  of  those  to 
whom  you  believe  I  belong.  I  fear  you  not,  for  myself,  or 
for  others !  I  am  attached  neither  to  communities  nor  to 
individuals.  All  your  power,  all  your  influence  are  directed 
against  me  in  vain  !  From  the  world  I  have  nothing  to  hope 
— nothing  to  fear — nothing  to  desire.  Endued  by  a  grace 
which  is  from  above,  I  need  nothing  that  the  wealth  or 
authority  of  man  can  supply.  .  .  .  Never  could  you  have 
encountered  one  so  screened  from  your  assaults,  and  so  fitted 
to  combat  your  errors — one,  independent — isolated — without 
party — without  tie — ^without  professional  bias — without  en- 
cumbering occupation  ; — one,  also,  well  versed  in  your  prin- 
ciples, and  determined — as  God  shall  enable  him — to  expose 
and  denounce  them,  without  suffering  any  earthly  consideration 
to  avert  or  mitigate  his  hostility ! "  * 

•  Letter  17. 

BY   M.    VILLEMAIN.  XXXIX 

Is  it  then  surprising,  that,  in  a  position  so  elevated — the 
only  one  worthy  of  his  powers — Pascal  should  have  been 
transported  to  emulate  the  impassioned  declamation  of  the 
ancient  tribunal  ?  Subjects  and  circumstances  change,  but 
eloquence  is  ever  the  same. 

And  was  his  inspiration  some  mighty  interest  of  patriotism 
or  glory  ?  No  ;  his  cause  was  the  defence  of  a  few  obscure 
devotees,  whom  malice  had  assailed  in  their  cloistered  seclusion 
with  a  false  charge  of  heresy.  What  matters  then  the  dignity 
or  the  lowliness  of  his  subject  ?  Listen  again  to  the  fervor  of 
the  oratory,  and  the  kindliness  of  the  heart ! 

"  Cruel  and  dastardly  persecutors !  Could  the  hallowed 
privacy  of  the  cloister  furnish  no  shelter  from  your  calumnies  ? 
Whilst  these  holy  women  were,  in  punctual  obedience  to  the 
rules  of  their  Institution,  adoring,  night  and  day,  their  Re- 
deemer in  his  Sacrament, — ^it  was  your  magnanimous  effort, 
by  day  and  by  night,  to  proclaim  to  the  world,  that  they 
believed  Him  not  to  be  present  in  his  own  appointed  office, 
or  even  in  his  ascended  glory  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  ; 
and,  at  the  very  time  that  they  were  pouring  out  their  secret 
prayers  for  yourselves,  and  for  the  universal  Church,  your 
unremitting  aim  was  to  thrust  them  out  from  her  maternal 
bosom  !  You  calumniate  those  who  have  no  ears  to  listen — 
no  mouth  to  reply  !  "  * 

If  Pascal  has,  in  these  writings,  succeeded  in  combining  all 
the  elements  of  the  most  energetic  and  ardent  eloquence,  there 
are  portions  of  his  "  Thoughts,"  which  show  that  his  emi- 
nence had  been  acquired  by  patient  meditation  upon  all  the 
resources  of  the  art,  and  rested  on  a  theory  of  a  most  pro- 
found nature,  formed  entirely  for  himself.f  Nothing  can  be 
more  useless  than  rules  and  axioms  of  taste,  as  laid  down  by 
men  without  genius.  But  when  a  great  writer  unfolds  his 
ideas  upon  the  science  of  language,  he  necessarily  evolves  them 
from  the  character  and  habits  of  his  own  mind ;  he  throws 
himself,  as  it  were,  into  his  instructions  ;  and  such  a  revela- 
*  Letter  16.  t  Appendix,  No.  9. 

xl  ESSAY 

tion  is  more  improving  than  any  system  of  principles  and 
rules.  Pascal — himself  a  profound  geometrician — had  con- 
ceived, hy  his  superiority  of  intelligence,  the  use,  as  well  as 
the  limits,  of  scientific  principles,  as  applied  to  the  arts. 
What  he  has  written  on  the  spirit  of  geometry  and  of  the 
imagination,  is  a  complete  refutation  of  the  literary  paradoxes 
which  Fontenelle,  D'Alemhert  and  Condillac  put  forth  in  the 
subsequent  century.  His  mind,  free  from  prejudice,  because 
it  embraced  every  subject,  assigns  the  several  characteristics  of 
the  positive  sciences  and  of  letters,  without  evincing  any  fear 
of  impairing  his  own  pretensions,  in  determining  the  limits  of 
each  individual  faculty  ;  and,  as  if  confident  of  retaining  his 
due  place  in  every  distribution  of  the  human  powers. 

Pascal,  indeed,  possessed  in  the  very  highest  degree,  the 
mastery  over  the  two  extreme  provinces  of  thought, — rea- 
soning and  imagination.  His  life,  his  character  and  his 
writings,  all  gave  proof  of  this  combination ;  and  it  was 
especially  marked  in  the  greatest  of  the  works  which  he 
ever  contemplated.  None  had,  perhaps,  in  the  period  in 
which  he  lived,  embraced,  with  more  ardour  and  sincerity, 
the  great  truths  of  Christianity ;  but  his  reasoning  habits, 
mingling  inseparably  even  with  his  enthusiasm,  disturbed 
his  mind  with  doubt.  Can  any  other  solution  be  given 
of  that  far-sightedness,  which  discovers  to  him  so  many 
objections,  little  thought  of  at  that  period,  and  leads  him  to 
fortify  and  defend  positions  which  none  had  then  assailed  ? 
The  illustrious  contemporaries  of  Pascal,  whose  convictions 
were  not  less  sincere  although  more  tranquil  than  his,  were 
content  to  develop  the  tendencies  of  a  creed,  whose  principles 
were  then  little  controverted :  they  occupied  themselves  in 
rearing  the  temple,  without  fear  that  any  would  attempt  to 
undermine  its  foundations,  or  shake  its  pillars.  Pascal  alone, 
conscious  from  innate  experience  of  dangers  unfelt  by  others, 
meditated  a  production,*  in  which  all  the  sceptical  doubts 
that  his  own  restless  genius  had  explored  and  fathomed, 
*  Memoir,  p.  58. 

BY   M.   VILLEMilN.  xli 

should  be  effectually  encountered  and  overthrown.  The  hand 
of  the  architect  is  yet  visible ;  but  where  is  he,  who  shall 
attempt  to  carry  into  execution  his  vast  conceptions  ;  to  mould 
and  inform,  with  flagging  and  unequal  spirit,  the  copious 
but  rude  materials,  which  the  master-builder  has  thus  abor- 
tively collected  ? 

Amid  the  sands  of  Egypt  have  been  discovered  stately 
porticoes  once  leading  to  palaces,  which  the  lapse  of  ages  has 
destroyed ;  mighty  ruins,  the  vestiges  only  of  gigantic  cities  ; 
capitals,  covered  with  fair  designs,  whose  brilliant  hues  retain 
all  their  early  freshness,  and  aspire  to  a  fragile  immortality  in 
the  midst  of  age  and  desolation :  such  may  be  deemed  some 
of  those  "Thoughts"  of  Pascal — the  mutilated  rudiment 
and  wreck  of  this  his  stupendous  undertaking ! 

It  was  commenced,  as  is  well  known,  when  its  author  was 
already  under  the  attacks  of  that  afflicting  disease,  which  was 
destined  soon  to  cut  short  his  immature  existence.  Medita- 
tion being  with  him  the  great  end  and  business  of  life,  he 
could  not  be  prevailed  upon  wholly  to  abandon  his  task,  till 
death  deprived  him  of  the  power  to  think.  Such,  however, 
was  the  violence  of  his  sufierings,  that  some  other  occupation 
than  the  resolution  of  moral  truths  became  necessary  to  him. 
More  than  once,  say  his  biographers,  he  resumed,  with  ardour, 
the  most  abstruse  mathematical  studies,  and  sought  an  entire 
absorption  in  those  contemplations,  for  the  relief  of  his 
physical  suffering.  Yet,  might  it  not  have  been  as  a  remedy 
for  other  griefs  than  these,  that  he  availed  himself  of  this 
resource?  Did  he  not  perhaps  seek  in  such  employments 
repose  from  the  restless  activity  of  a  mind  obnoxious  to 
disturbing  suggestions  ? 

Hear  him — the  mighty  intellect  imprisoned  in  a  sickly 
frame— exhausted  by  the  intensest  mental  labours — his  con- 
templations unceasingly  fixed  upon  those  great  problems  of. 
man's  destiny,  which  baffle  all  learning  and  all  science — ^hear 
him  thus  exclaiming;  "  How  know  I  who  placed  me  in  the 
world;  or  what  is  the  world  ;  or  what  I  am  myself?     I  am 

xlii  ESSAY 

fearfully  ignorant  of  all  things.  I  know  not  what  is  my 
body — what  my  senses — what  my  soul ;  and  that  very  part 
of  me  which  thinks  that  which  I  am  now  uttering,  and  which 
reflects  upon  every  thing,  and  upon  itself  also,  is  as  ignorant 
of  itself,  as  of  every  thing  besides  ! " 

It  was  this  fearful  ignorance,  which  he  depicts  with  all  the 
vividness  of  personal  experience,  that  was  the  enemy  of 
Pascal's  peace  ;  and  that,  from  whose  bondage — ^more  oppres- 
sive than  the  most  unreasoning  faith — he  was  ever  seeking 
deUverance.*  Similar  doubts  had  agitated  the  ancient  philo- 
sophers ;  and,  from  time  to  time,  had  driven  them  almost  to 
despair.  This  disquietude — ever  incident,  in  a  greater  or  less 
degree,  to  the  highest  order  of  minds — continually  increased 
in  strength  during  the  successive  developments  of  civilization, 
up  to  that  period,  when  men,  who  had  hitherto  found  a 
resting-place  upon  the  ancient  systems  of  belief,  perceived 
them  gradually  giving  way,  and  were  equally  incapable  of 
dispensing  with,  or  deriving  support  from  them.  Then  it 
was,  that,  towards  the  latter  ages  of  the  empire,  when  Poly- 
theism was  falling  prostrate  on  all  sides,  and  the  remaining 
disciples  of  Plato  sought  in  vain  to  re-create  a  faith,  and  to 
establish  a  system  of  worship  by  efforts  of  reasoning — Por- 
phyry,— the  most  eloquent  of  his  school — is  described  as 
labouring  under  a  melancholy,  bordering  upon  loss  of  reason ; 
and  ready  to  embrace  death  itself  as  a  refuge  from  the  tor- 
ments of  doubt.f  Thus  also,  in  the  case  of  many  of  the 
speculative  Germans,  of  more  recent  times,  exhausted  by 
groping  amidst  the  accumulated  rubbish  of  sceptical  ages, 
their  minds  seem  to  have  succumbed  under  the  too  habitual 
exploration  of  the  great  mysteries  of  human  existence.  The 
barrenness  of  doubt  seems  to  impel  these  too  inquisitive  spirits 
into  the  labyrinth  of  mysticism ;  as  if  some  species  of  belief — 
of  whatever  nature — was  necessary  for  the  repose  of  their 
minds  ;  as  if  the  illusions  of  enthusiasm  were  to  them  the 
next  best  thing  to  the  realities  of  truth. 

*  Memoir,  p.  50.  f  Platonius,  in  Vitse  Porphyrii. 

BY   M.    VILLEMAIN.  xliii 

Pascal,  whose  intellectual  acuteness  had,  in  anticipation, 
traversed  the  whole  circle  of  doubt  and  scepticism,  which 
after  ages  of  civilization  were  to  complete ;  warned  by  the 
conflicts  in  which  his  own  spirit  had  been  engaged,  sought 
with  eagerness  a  refuge  in  the  asylum  of  the  Christian  faith. 
That  alone  was  capable  of  unfolding  to  him  the  mystery  of 
man's  origin,  and  his  mingled  greatness  and  misery.  Yet 
what  were  his  efforts  and  disquietude  ere  he  attained  to  this 
repose !  "  Contemplating,"  he  says,  "  this  silent  universe  ; 
and  man,  powerless,  dark,  without  guidance,  cast  upon  a  mere 
point  in  its  surface ;  unknowing  who  has  placed  him  there, 
what  is  the  purpose  of  his  existence,  what  his  destiny  on  its 
termination  ;  I  shrink  in  terror  from  myself,  like  one  that  has 
been  cast  sleeping  upon  a  desert  land,  and  wakes  unconscious 
where  he  is.  I  see  around  me  others,  possessing  natures  like 
my  own.  I  ask  them,  if  they  are  better  informed  than 
myself :  they  answer,  no  ;  and,  straightway — unhappy  wan- 
derers !  they  look  around  them,  find  certain  objects  which 
they  think  can  give  them  pleasure,  attach  themselves  to  those 
objects — ^become  absorbed  in  them.  But  I — I  cannot  rest  in 
such  things ;  nor  can  I  find  satisfaction  in  the  society  of 
beings  like  myself — like  me  feeble, — like  me  miserable ! " 

Do  we  not  see  in  these  expressions  a  portraiture  of  the 
labour  and  conflict  which  his  mighty  spirit  sustained  in  its 
laborious  search  after  truth  ?  Can  we  now  be  surprised  at 
that  depth  of  sadness — that  eloquence  of  melancl^oly — with 
which  his  reflections — ^hasty,  and  fugitive,  and  abrupt — were 
habitually  invested  ?  What  are  all  the  interests  of  this  world, 
what  all  its  passions,  in  comparison  with  the  researches  of  an 
immortal  being  into  its  own  destinies  .-'  In  a  mind  from 
whose  perceptions  nothing  is  hid,  the  combat  with  unbelief  is 
the  greatest  effort  of  humanity.  Pascal  himself  seems  some- 
times to  sink  under  it :  he  is  found  taking  extravagant  pre- 
cautions against  the  danger.  At  one  time  we  see  him  with 
astonishment,  staking,  as  it  were,  upon  a  chance  the  existence 
of  God,  and  the  immortahty  of  the  soul ;  and  determining  his 

xliv 

ESSAY 

convictions  by  a  calculation  of  probabilities.  We  are  thus 
reminded  of  Rousseau  (but  with  greater  weakness  and  extra- 
vagance) making  his  hope  of  eternal  safety  depend  upon  the 
throwing  of  a  stone  !  * 

It  is  this  which  compels  us  to  recognize  the  impotence,  and, 
as  it  may  be  called,  the  despair  into  which  the  human  mind 
lapses,  in  its  fruitless  eiforts  to  penetrate  that  which  is  incom- 
prehensible. This  was  the  burthen  sustained  by  Pascal — a 
burthen,  the  greater  in  proportion  to  the  exaltation  of  his 
genius.  A  system  of  belief — ^positive  and  definite — could 
alone  relieve  and  sustain  his  spirit.  Its  dogmatic  authority 
allayed  the  restlessness  of  his  own  enquiries,  and  gave  him 
the  security  he  sought.  When  we  read  that  Pascal  carried 
under  his  garments  a  symbol  formed  of  mystical  characters — 
a  kind  of  amuletf — it  is  e^ddentthat  his  powerful  intellect  had 
sunk  to  superstitious  practices,  as  a  refuge  from  the  misery 
of  uncertainty.  This  constituted  his  terror.  The  precipice, 
which,  after  the  occurrence  of  an  alarming  accident,  seemed 
continually  opening  under  him,  was  but  a  faint  image  of  that 
abyss  of  doubt  from  which  his  conscientious  spirit  ever 
recoiled. 

Thus  passed  away  the  too  brief  existence  of  this  great  man. 
In  its  earher  stage,  his  aim  was  to  emancipate  human  reason  : 
he  proclaimed  the  independence  of  thought,  and  the  authority 
of  conscience.  Afterwards,  he  exhausted  himself  in  labours 
to  erect  dikes  and  barriers  against  the  desolating  floods  of 
scepticism.  His  powerful  and  fearless  spirit  embraces  as  its 
best  safeguard,  and  from  the  depths  of  conviction,  the  doc- 
trines of  Christianity,  and  by  that  submission  stamps  upon 
their  authenticity  the  largest  measure  of  probability  that  they 
can  derive  from  human  testimony.  But  if  his  conviction  is 
entire,  the  demonstration  is  imperfect ;  the  proofs  are  some- 
what wanting  in  harmony  ;  the  reasoning  fails  in  consecutive- 
ness  :    and  there  may  be  perceived  in  them  still   some  in- 

*  Memoir,  page  61.  t  Ibid. 

BY    M.    VILLEMAIN.  xlv 

dications  of  the  conflict  to  which  he  had  heen  himself  exposed. 
They  remain  proof,  rather,  of  the  vastness  of  his  powers,  than 
trophies  of  complete  victory.  Be  they  what  they  may,  how- 
ever, these  mighty  fragments  are  there,  to  inspire  a  salutary 
diffidence,  while  they  excite  the  astonishment  of  frivolous 
Pyrrhonism,  and  to  supply  lasting  food  for  the  meditations  of 
the  learned  and  the  vpise. 

It  has  been  said  that  Pascal  does  not  succeed  in  touching 
the  heart ;  that  his  religion  has  the  air  rather  of  imposing  a 
yoke  than  supplying  consolation.  Vincent  St.  Paul  and 
Fenelon  would,  doubtless,  have  made  more  converts  than  he. 
We  do  not  find  in  him  all  that  tenderness  of  spirit,  that  sym- 
pathy with  humanity,  which  breathes  throughout  the  Gospel, 
and  binds  the  heart  in  willing  sway  to  the  new  dispensation. 
The  interest  he  excites  is  ever  profound.  Free  from  rhetorical 
artifice,  invested  with  all  the  reality  of  truth,  his  severities 
upon  man's  nature  have  in  them  nothing  of  invective :  they 
are  the  extorted  pangs  of  painful  meditation  upon  self.  We 
are  impressed  with  a  mournful  reverence  at  witnessing  the 
inward  sorrows  of  so  mighty  an  intelligence.  His  misanthropy 
seems  the  expiation  of  pre-eminence  in  genius  :  in  him,  the 
transcendency  of  mental  power  is  the  source  of  humility  rather 
than  of  boast.  His  is  no  antique  stoicism — no  passionless 
contemplation  of  the  miseries  of  his  race.  He  bears  them  all 
on  his  own  bosom.  "  Yet,"  says  he,  "  notwithstanding  all 
the  sufferings  we  see  around  us,  and  which  press  us  to  the 
very  ground,  we  feel  within  us  an  irrepressible  instinct,  that 
supports  us  under  them  ! "  It  is  this  etherial  principle,  as 
opposed  to  our  feeble  mortality,  this  contrast  of  grandeur  and 
nothingness,  that  fills  and  informs  the  sublime  chapters  of 
Pascal  upon  the  nature  of  man.  It  inspires  him  with  emo- 
tions of  matchless  eloquence,  and  thoughts  of  startling  depth. 
We  are  astonished  at  seeing  the  profoundest  of  metaphysicians 
condescending  to  the  most  minute  observations,  laying  bare 
the  closest  secrets  of  the  heart,  and  penetrating  the  whole 
nature  of  man  with  keen  and  mournful  scrutiny. 

xlvi 

ESSAY    BY   M.    VILLEMAIN. 

Pascal  does  not,  like  La  Bruyere,  exhibit  descriptions  and 
portraitures ;  but  he  is  accustomed  to  seize  and  delineate 
some  leading  principle  of  human  action.  He  gives  the  his- 
tory of  the  species,  not  of  an  individual.  Estimating  every 
thing  terrestrial  with  philosophic  freedom  and  disinterested- 
ness, he  often  arrives — ^but  by  an  entirely  different  path — at 
conclusions  identical  veith  the  boldest  innovations :  but  he 
does  not  pause  there  ;  he  goes  far  beyond  them.  Sometimes, 
he  seems  as  if  about  to  shake  the  very  foundations  of  society, 
of  order,  and  of  justice ;  but  he  soon  rallies  around  them 
again  by  some  yet  deeper  suggestion.  He  possesses  the 
sublime  of  sense,  as  well  as  of  genius.  Thus  his  style  ex- 
hibits, also,  two  distinct  characteristics.  In  every  part  is 
found  a  union  of  boldness  and  of  simplicity,  of  elevation  and 
of  easy  grace,  of  enthusiasm  and  of  familiarity.  A  celebrated 
writer  has  remarked  that  he  is  perhaps  the  only  author  of 
original  genius,  against  whom  the  fastidiousness  of  taste  has 
found  nothing  to  object :  as  we  read,  we  are  conscious  of  a 
charm ;  but  so  refined  are  the  graces,  that  we  can  scarcely 
trace  the  sources  of  our  gratification. 

MEMOIR. 

.     .     .     .  .     .     .     "  Dead  ere  his  prime ! 

Young  Lycidas,  and  hath  not  left  his  peer ! " — Milton. 

The  leading  incidents  in  the  brief  but  eyentful  life  of  Pascal 
have,  from  various  sources,  *  been  rendered  familiar  to  the 
English  reader.  Its  most  prominent  features  may  also  be 
traced  in  the  glowing  pages  that  precede  this — not  drawn 
indeed,  with  biographical  exactness,  but  sketched  with  the 
freedom  and  boldness  of  a  master's  hand.  In  reproducing, 
however,  to  the  public,  one  of  his  greatest  works,  it  may  be 
presumed,  that  a  brief  summary  of  a  biography,  which  can 
never  be  contemplated  without  sympathy,  or  remembered 
without  benefit,  will  not  be  altogether  inappropriate. 

Blaise  Pascal  was  born  in  Clermont,  in  the  Province  of 
Auvergne,  on  the  19th  of  June,  1623.  His  family  was  one 
of  considerable  distinction,  his  grandfather  having  held  the 
office  of  a  Treasurer  of  France,  at  Riom  ;  and  his  father, 
Stephen  Pascal,  that  of  President  of  the  Court  of  Aids,  in 
Auvergne.  His  mother,  of  whom  little  is  related,  was  An- 
toinette Begon  :  she,  after  giving  birth  to  four  children,  died 
at  an  early  age,  when  Blaise  had  only  attained  his  third  year. 

*  The  Memoir  of  Madame  Perier,  his  sister,  written  with  much  piety 
and  simplicity,  and  published  shortly  after  his  death,  has  formed  the  chief 
material  of  most  of  the  subsequent  biographies.  Condorcet's  celebrated 
Eloge,  gives,  in  its  characteristic  way,  a  luminous  history  of  his  scientific 
and  literary  labours.  A  memoir  of  much  excellence  appeared  in  a  series 
of  papers  in  the  Christian  Observer,  in  the  year  1815. 

xlviii  MEMOIR. 

Her  other  surviving  children  were  Gilberte,  Pascal's  eldest 
sister  and  affectionate  biographer,  who  was  married  to 
M.  Perier,  an  Advocate  of  the  French  Courts ;  and  Jacque- 
line, five  years  his  junior,  who,  early  in  life,  took  the  veil  in 
the  Convent  of  Port  Royal  in  the  Fields,  and  died  in  her 
thirty-fifth  year. 

The  loss  of  his  maternal  parent  at  so  tender  an  age  was  an 
irreparable  one  to  the  infant  Pascal.  Throvrai  by  that  event 
entirely  upon  the  care  of  his  father,  who,  though  devoted  to 
his  children,  was  chiefly  bent  upon  their  mental  proficiency — 
especially  of  one  who  he  early  saw  would  well  repay  his 
labour — his  health  and  physical  improvement  seem  to  have 
been  regarded  as  secondary  objects  ;  and  the  seeds  of  languor 
and  disease  were  early  implanted  in  his  constitution.  Be- 
sides this  misfortune,  the  amenities  of  the  domestic  circle,  if 
a  mother's  society  had  been  spared  to  him,  might,  probably, 
have  much  tended  to  counteract  the  tendency  to  ascetic  habits 
which  showed  itself  in  him  with  so  much  strength  in  after  life. 

The  father,  after  Madame  Pascal's  death,  formed  the  de- 
termination to  devote  himself  to  the  care  of  his  children's 
education,  especially  that  of  his  beloved  and  only  son.  Con- 
trary to  usual  experience,  he  found  a  residence  in  the  metro- 
polis afford  him  more  freedom  from  interruption  than  a  country 
life ;  besides  that  it  yielded  him  more  advantages  in  books 
and  literary  society  :  and,  consequently,  in  1631 — Blaise  being 
then  in  his  eighth  year — he  relinquished  the  office  he  had 
held  in  Auvergne,  in  favor  of  a  brother,  and  took  up  his  abode 
in  Paris.  To  this  resolution,  solely  to  conduct  his  child's 
education,  he  strictly  adhered ;  and  Pascal,  therefore,  presents 
the  singular  instance  of  achieving  his  mental  greatness  entirely 
without  the  aid  of  school  or  college.  To  his  father,  or  still 
more  to  himself — for  self-education  ordinarily  forms  the 
largest  share  of  the  training  of  superior  minds — he  owed, 
under  the  guidance  of  the  great  Source  of  all  Wisdom,  who 
doubtless  designed  and  directed  him  for  his  own  service,  the 
entire  development  of  his  eminent  powers. 

MEMOIR.  Xlix 

The  elder  Pascal's  interest  in  his  son's  studies,  was,  as  has 
been  seen,  early  quickened  by  the  discovery  in  him  of  an 
extraordinary  measure  of  acuteness.  He  was  himself  a  man 
of  no  inconsiderable  attainments,  and  had  in  an  especial  man- 
ner devoted  himself  to  mathematical  pursuits.  The  method 
he  followed  in  the  instruction  of  his  pupil,  was  characteristic 
of  his  own  originality  of  mind,  and  evinced  his  high  estimate 
of  his  child's  aptitude.  He  aimed  in  every  way  to  develop 
his  mental  powers,  rather  than  to  burden  unduly  his  memory 
with  matters  beyond  his  ability.  He  fixed  his  attention  upon 
things  rather  than  words  ;  and  explained  to  him  the  princi- 
ples of  language,  and  the  laws  of  grammar,  long  before  he 
was  taught  any  other  tongue  than  his  own.  He  did  not  allow 
him  even  to  begin  the  Latin  language  till  he  had  reached  his 
twelfth  year.  He  encouraged  his  enquiries  into  the  pheno- 
mena of  nature,  and  the  most  familiar  objects  around  him, 
and  continually  led  him  to  seek  the  reasons  of  whatever  met 
his  view,  nor  to  rest  till  he  had  made  some  approach  to  the 
discovery  of  truth  in  his  investigations,  All  these  stimulating 
methods — however  questionable  their  expediency  might  be  in 
ordinary  cases — served  as  a  kind  of  hot-bed  to  the  growth  of 
a  mind  so  adapted  to  the  process  as  his  son's  :  yet  his  was 
one  of  those  few  instances  in  which  there  seemed  no  diminu- 
tion of  strength  from  the  rapidity  with  which  his  intellectual 
powers  were  matured. 

The  circumstances  which  led  to  the  early  development  of 
Pascal's  mathematical  powers  are  well  known  ;  but  cannot  be 
passed  over  in  any  narrative,  however  summary,  of  his  re- 
markable history. 

In  pursuance  of  the  plan  of  education  which  the  father  had 
laid  down,  though  himself  passionately  addicted  to  the  mathe- 
matics, he  determined  to  confine  his  son's  studies  to  languages 
and  general  hterature,  till,  according  to  his  views,  his  mind 
should  have  acquired  strength  and  capacity  for  pursuing  the 
exact  sciences  with  advantage.  In  this  resolution,  he  with- 
held all  books,  and  refrained,  in  his  presence,  from  all  con- 

c 

1 

MKMOm. 

versation  which   might    lead   his   hoy's   thoughts   to   those 
objects. 

Notwithstanding  these  precautions,  however,  Pascal  when 
about  the  age  of  twelve,  showed  a  restless  anxiety  for  inform- 
ation upon  these  interdicted  subjects.  He  importuned  his 
father  repeatedly  to  be  allowed  to  begin  the  study  of  geome- 
try, but  was  constantly  refused ;  while  the  indulgence  of  his 
wish  was  held  out  to  him  as  a  reward,  at  a  future  time,  for 
diligence  in  his  present  pursuits.  At  last,  when  in  answer  to 
his  enquiries,  he  had  gained  some  very  general  ideas  of  the 
nature  of  the  mathematics,  as  being  the  science  of  figures  and 
substances,  and  their  relative  proportions,  his  mind  began  to 
work  upon  these  imperfect  hints.  He  shut  himself  up  in  a 
room  in  which  he  was  allowed  to  play  alone,  and  began  a 
series  of  rude  but  ingenious  experiments,  covering  the  floor 
with  figures  drawn  in  charcoal,  of  squares,  triangles,  circles, 
and  other  forms  which  constitute  the  subjects  of  geometrical 
calculation.  So  strictly  had  the  very  rudiments  of  the  science 
been  kept  from  him,  that  he  was  unacquainted  even  with  the 
technical  names  of  these  figures;  but  called  a  circle  a  "round," 
a  line  a  "  bar,"  &c. 

Having  drawn  these  figures,  he  proceeded,  step  by  step, 
from  definitions  to  axioms,  and  thence  to  demonstrations  ; 
and  was  deeply  engaged  in  his  calculations,  when  his  father 
accidentally  entered  the  room,  and  for  some  time  watched 
unperceived  his  occupation.  To  continue  the  description  in 
the  artless  words  of  his  sister,  "  It  was  difiicult  to  say  which 
of  the  two  experiencd  the  most  confusion — ^the  son,  to  be  thus 
surprized,  after  the  interdict  under  which  he  had  been  laid,  or 
the  father,  to  see  the  various  objects  with  which  his  child  was 
surrounded.  But  his  astonishment  was  increased  when  he 
found,  in  answer  to  his  enquiries,  that  he  was  finding  out  the 
pToportion  of  the  angles  formed  by  a  triangle,  one  side  of 
■which  is  produced ;  which  forms  the  subject  of  the  32nd  Pro- 
position of  the  2nd  book  of  Euclid.  He  questioned  him  again 
as  to  what  had  led  him  to  that  enquiry  :  this  elicited  further 

MEMOIR.  ll 

explanations  ;  he  recapitulated  various  of  his  demonstrations, 
and  then  went  back ;  still  using  his  own  rude  nomenclature 
of  '  rounds,  bars,'  &c.,  throughout  the  whole  of  his  self-taught 
definitions  and  axioms  ;  until,  as  has  been  stated,  he  arrived  at 
Euclid's  32nd  Proposition." 

His  father  was  overwhelmed,  even  to  tears,  with  the  dis- 
covery. He  hastened  to  communicate  his  feelings  to  an 
intimate  friend,  and  fellow-mathematician  ;  and,  acting  on  his 
advice,  he  at  once  removed  all  the  barriers  that  had  been 
interposed  against  his  son's  desired  studies. 

It  is  foreign  to  the  purpose  of  this  brief  memoir  to  trace 
the  progress  of  Pascal's  mathematical  researches,  or  of  the  va- 
rious treatises  in  which  they  are  recorded.  The  scientific  reader 
will  find  an  interesting  enumeration  of  them  in  Condorcet's 
Eloge,  although  not  unmixed  with  an  obvious  disposition  to 
disparage  the  merits  of  his  discoveries  ;  a  disposition  which  he 
shared  with  Voltaire  *  and  the  other  sceptical  Literati  of  the 
last  century,  who  could  not  forgive  the  piety  of  Pascal,  even 
in  consideration  of  his  scientific  and  literary  greatness.  At 
about  the  age  of  sixteen  he  was  admitted  a  member  of  a 
Society  in  Paris  for  the  cultivation  of  mathematics,  in  which 
his  father  took  an  active  part,  together  with  most  of  the  lead- 
ing geometricians  of  the  day  ;  and  at  once  found  his  opinions 
listened  to  with  marked  attention  and  deference.  At  about 
the  same  period  also,  he  pubhshed  his  Treatise  on  "  Conic 
Sections,"  which  was  considered  by  his  contemporaries  as 
a  master-piece  of  reasoning  and  science.      On   his   father's 

*  Voltaire,  in  his  difficulty  in  dealing  with  the  religious  writings  of 
Pascal,  while  his  vanity  would  not  allow  him  to  appear  insensible  to  his 
eminent  literary  merits,  had  the  indecency,  in  his  last  years,  to  publish  a 
pretended  edition  of  his  "  Pensees,"  in  which,  preserving  just  sufficient 
of  the  original  work  to  keep  up  appearances,  he  made  numberless  inter- 
polated alterations  in  the  text,  to  suit  his  own  views,  together  with  ad- 
ditions of  the  most  infidel  character ;  besides  appending  a  series  of  notes 
which  show  an  unmitigated  hostility  to  truth,  yet  with  obvious  symp- 
toms of  declining  powers.  An  edition  of  this  work  was  published  in 
London  in  1785. 

C  2 

lii  MEMOIR. 

removal  again  to  Rouen,  where  owing  to  some  reverse  in 
circumstances,  he  accepted  another  official  appointment,  Pascal, 
being  then  in  his  nineteenth  year,  invented  his  celebrated 
calculating  machine,  upon  which  he  consumed  two  years  of 
unintermitted  labour.  This,  though  much  improved  upon  in 
subsequent  periods  by  Leibnitz  and  others,  and  brought  to 
still  greater  perfection  in  the  present  day  by  our  own  distin- 
guished countryman  Babbage,  was  at  that  time  justly  regarded 
as  an  astonishing  effort  of  mental  labour.  The  last-named 
undertaking  was  followed  by  his  profound  researches  iuto  the 
weight  and  elasticity  of  air,  and  their  effects  upon  the  equili- 
brium of  fluids,  in  which  he  followed  up  the  experiments  of 
Torrecelli ;  and  succeeded  in  establishing,  in  a  great  measure, 
the  present  philosophical  theories  upon  these  subjects,  in 
opposition  to  the  long-prevalent  notion  of  "  Nature's  abhor- 
rence of  a  vacuum  ;  "  although  he  himself,  at  the  outset  of  his 
investigations,  was  a  firm  believer  in  that  doctrine.  The 
results  of  these  enquiries  were  published  by  him  in  a  series  of 
Tracts  upon  "Vacuum,"  &c.  &c.  in  1647,  at  about  the  period 
that  he  attained  his  twenty-fourth  year. 

Little  information  is  left  by  his  biographers  of  the  plan  of 
miscellaneous  reading  pursued  by  Pascal  up  to  this  time.  He 
still  remained  under  his  father's  roof,  whose  pleasure  and 
pride  it  was  to  continue  to  superintend  his  studies ;  and 
it  was  doubtless  during  this  period  that,  in  addition  to  his 
mathematical  labours,  he  amassed,  by  intense  application,  the 
larger  part  of  those  stores  of  learning,  both  ancient,  and  what 
was  then  modern,  which  his  writings  exhibit.  As  early, 
however,  as  his  eighteenth  year,  his  failing  health  began  to 
show  the  ill  effects  of  excessive  mental  labour ;  the  symp- 
toms of  complicated  disease  progressively  increased  with 
advancing  age ;  and  he  was  often  heard  to  say,  that  from  that 
time  to  the  close  of  his  earthly  course,  he  had  never  expe- 
rienced a  day  of  entire  exemption  from  suffering. 

He  had  now,  as  has  been  seen,  attained  his  twenty-fourth 
year  ;    and  then  ensued  the  most  important  ,  epoch  of  his 

MEMOIR.  liii 

existence.  Up  to  that  period,  although  a  mind  such  as  he 
possessed  could  not  have  wholly  shut  out  rehgious  reflections, 
or  have  been  entirely  regardless  of  his  eternal  interests,  yet 
it  was  evident  that  his  attention  had  been  chiefly  absorbed  by 
the  pursuits  of  literature  and  science.  He  was  happy  in 
having  been — mainly  owing  to  the  instructions  and  example 
of  his  father — preserved  from  all  temptation  to  a  sceptical 
opposition  to  revealed  truth  ;  and,  in  an  equal  degree,  had  the 
convictions  of  conscience,  and  the  beneficial  influence  of 
paternal  restraint,  withheld  him  from  the  irregularities  and 
vices  too  incidental  to  his  age  and  station.  But  at  this  time, 
partly  from  increased  indisposition,  which  began  to  assume 
the  form  of  paralytic  affection,  and  partly  in  consequence  of 
the  perusal  of  some  devotional  works,  the  particulars  of  which 
are  not  related,  his  mind  became  deeply  impressed  with  reli- 
gious convictions.  He,  from  that  period,  implicitly  embraced 
the  method  of  salvation  revealed  in  the  Gospel :  he  saw  the 
insuificiency  of  worldly  pleasures  or  honours  to  yield  him 
happiness ;  and  determined,  in  the  strength  of  God,  to  live 
only  for  his  service,  and  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the 
welfare,  spiritual  and  temporal,  of  his  fellow-men. 

It  was  then  also  that  he  reaped  the  fruit  of  another  invalu- 
able benefit  which  he  had  derived  from  his  exemplary  parent. 
The  elder  Pascal  had  habitually  inculcated  upon  him  the 
principle,  that  objects  of  faith  should  be  regarded  as  wholly 
distinct  from  those' of  reason,  and  ought  never  to  be  subjected 
to  her  deductions.  In  this  great  truth  he  had  implicitly 
acquiesced ;  and  it  had  the  more  weight  with  him,  as  his 
instructor  was  himself  eminent  in  scientific  attainments.  In 
consequence  of  this  important  instruction  it  was,  that  Pascal 
ever  exhibited  the  impressive  spectacle  of  a  mind  intently 
inquisitive  in  every  thing  that  relates  to  material  objects,  and 
testing  all  by  the  most  rigid  experiment ;  yet  submitting  his 
capacious  intellect,  with  child-like  simplicity,  to  every  dictate 
and  discovery  of  revealed  truth. 

Every  one  will  be  here  at  once  reminded  of  those  illustrious 

liv  -MEMOIR. 

names  with  wHich  our  own  annals  are  adorned — our  Bacon, 
and  Boyle,  and  Herschel,  in  whom  this  union  of  pure  faith 
and  profound  science  is  so  eminently  displayed. 

The  ascendancy  of  Pascal's  great  powers  showed  itself  more 
strikingly,  now  that  he  had  thus  devoted  himself  to  the 
service  of  religion,  than  when  he  was  a  candidate  for  the 
honours  of  human  learning  and  philosophy.  He  became  the 
teacher  and  the  guide  of  the  circle  in  which  he  moved  ;  and 
the  members  of  his  own  family,  in  an  especial  manner,  felt  and 
acknowledged  the  value  of  his  instructive  example.  To  use 
the  touchiug  language  of  his  sister  and  biographer,  "  his 
father  was  not  ashamed  to  place  himself  under  the  teaching 
of  his  son ;  and  devoted  himself  thenceforth  to  a  more  exact 
and  holy  life,  up  to  the  period  of  his  decease,  which  was 
cheered  by  Christian  consolation  and  faith ;  *  and  his  sister, 
who,  from  an  early  age,  had  displayed  extraordinary  talents, 
was  so  impressed  by  her  brother's  conversation,  that  she 
resolved  to  renounce  all  her  cherished  advantages,  and  devote 
herself  entirely  to  the  service  of  God."  She,  in  fact,  as  has 
been  stated,  afterwards  carried  out  this  resolution,  in  a  way 
that  her  religious  system  led  her  to  believe  would  be  most 
acceptable  to  her  heavenly  Master,  by  taking  the  veil  in  the 
convent  of  Port  Royal  in  the  Fields  ;  where  she  distinguished 
herself  by  the  exemplary  discharge  of  her  conventual  duties, 
and,  after  attaining  to  the  office  of  Sub-Prioress,  died  there 
at  the  early  age  of  thirty-five. 

From  this  time  Pascal  seems  to  have,  in  a  great  measure, 
renounced  all  the  studies  to  which  he  had  been  hitherto  so 
devoted,  and  to  have  given  himself  up  to  those  of  theology 
and  polemics,  and  most  especially  to  the  profound  investigation 
of  the  Scriptures.  In  reading  the  latter,  he  was  accustomed 
to  avail  himself  of  the  works  of  the  ablest  commentators  ;  and 
at  length,  by  means  of  his  extraordinary  memory — so  great, 
that  he  was  said  never  to  have  forgotten  any  thing  he  had 

*  He  died  in  the  year  1651,  when  his  son  was  in  his  28th  year. 

MEMOIR.  Iv 

read — he  became  so  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  language  of 
Holy  Writ,  that  he  was  never  at  a  loss  respecting  any  passage 
that  became  the  subject  of  discussion. 

He  then  also  entered  upon  that  course  of  self-denial,  and 
renunciation  of  the  world,  which  characterized  the  remaining 
years  of  his  life.  The  leading  principles  (as  described  by  his 
sister)  which  he  laid  down  for  the  government  of  his  conduct, 
were,  to  forego  pleasure,  and  to  indulge  in  no  superfluity. 
He  gradually  withdrew  from  much  of  the  society  which  had 
hitherto  cultivated  his  intercourse,  and  devoted  a  continually 
increasing  proportion  of  his  moderate  independence  to  the 
purposes  of  charity.  Many  persons  of  high  worth  and  attain- 
ments, and  some  of  the  most  elevated  rank,  continued  however 
to  seek  his  conversation  and  counsels,  and  to  them  he  was  al- 
ways accessible.  Among  the  most  distinguished  of  these  was 
the  youthful  Duke  de  Rouannez,*  who  was  a  few  years  the 
junior  of  Pascal,  and  who  seems  to  have  been  early  fascinated  by 
his  talents,  and  won  by  his  engaging  deportment.  He  conceived 
for  him  the  most  devoted  friendship,  which  continued  un- 
abated during  his  life,  and  was  evinced  long  after  death  had 
dissolved  their  intercourse,  by  the  most  sedulous  efforts  for 
bringing  before  the  pubUc,  in  a  proper  form,  the  posthumous 
collection  of  his  manuscripts.  To  this  accomphshed  and 
virtuous  young  nobleman,  Pascal  addressed  one  of  his  most 
beautiful  compositions,  entitled  "  Discourse  on  the  condition 
of  the  Great." 

To  these  sacred  studies,  and  holy  course  of  conduct,  he 
added  the  most  fervent  and  unintermitted  devotional  exer- 
cises ;  and  from  this  period  to  that  which  closed  his  earthly 
existence,  he  seems  to  have  progressively  improved  in  every 
Christian  grace,  till — as  his  sister  again  beautifully  remarks—; 
"  that  reverence  for  rehgion,  which  had  been  the  characteristic 
of  his  youth,  was  changed  into  an  ardent  and  sensible  love  for 
all  the  great  truths  of  the  Christian  faith,  not  less  those  which 

*  Appendix,  No.  6.  . 

Ivi  MEMOIR. 

influence  the  spirit,  than  those  which  direct  the  Ufe  and  conduct 
in  the  world — the  great  end  and  object  of  all  religion  ;  and 
this  holy  fervor  urged  him  ever  to  contend  against  every 
thing  that  was  opposed  to  these  great  and  vital  truths." 

It  is  painful,  however,  to  add  to  these  affecting  and  im- 
pressive details,  that  (if  we  implicitly  adopt  the  testimony  of 
Madame  Perier)  Pascal  superadded  to  this  holy  devotedness, 
so  instructive  to  all  who  can  appreciate  Christian  piety,  in 
whatever  church  it  is  found, — much  of  personal  austerity, 
which  is,  to  say  the  least,  unsanctioned  by  Scriptural  authority. 
It  was  this  which,  among  other  evils,  tended  to  withdraw  him 
from  much  of  that  intercourse  vpith  society,  v/hich  would  have 
been  not  injurious  to  himself,  and  certainly  beneficial  to  others. 
Although,  in  their  nature,  accordant  with  the  spirit  of  the 
church,  in  whose  bosom  he  had  been  nursed,  and  to  which  he 
still  continued  devoted,  these  rigours  were  carried,  especially 
in  his  closing  years,  to  such  an  extreme,  as  to  form  a  fruitful 
subject  for  the  sneers  of  the  irreligious  ;  while  they  have  been 
very  unduly  relied  upon  as  evidence  of  his  merits  by  the  more 
bigoted  members  of  his  church.  Happily  for  the  beneficial 
influence  of  this  great  and  holy  man's  example,  his  faith,  as 
every  page  of  his  writings  testifies,  rested  on  far  surer  foun- 
dations than  those  of  uncommanded  asceticisms  ;  and  it  may 
be  much  questioned  whether,  if  his  voice  could  have  been 
heard,  he  would  have  approved  of  the  prominence  with  which 
such  details  have  been  put  forth  to  the  world. 

But  it  should  be  always  borne  in  mind  that  the  Sister's 
Memoir,  though  evidencing  much  pious  feehng,  and  an 
amiable  devotedness  to  her  brother's  memory,  appears  to 
have  been  drawn  up  under  some  strong  and  peculiar  influence, 
of  the  exact  nature  of  which  it  is,  at  this  distance  of  time,  not 
easy  to  conjecture.  But  when  we  find  her  suppressing  all 
reference  to  one  of  the  most  important  incidents  in  Pascal's 
life,  his  alliance  with  the  Port-Royalists,  and  his  controversy 
with  the  Jesuits  ;  and  making  only  the  most  slight  and  pass- 
ing allusion  to  the  great  work  to  which  these  occurrences  gave 

MEMOIR.  Ivii 

rise — and  that  (as  is  evident  from  the  detail  into  which  she 
enters  respecting  his  philosophical  studies,)  from  no  inability 
to  appreciate  even  the  greatest  of  his  mental  efforts — from  all 
this  it  cannot  but  be  concluded  that,  in  her  biographical  narra- 
tive, some  singular  constraint  was  laid  upon  her  pen.     And 
may  not  the  same  influence  have  led  her  to  put  forth,  un- 
consciously to  herself,  with  somewhat  of  excessive  emphasis, 
the  austerities  of  the  writer,   as  a  kind  of  set-off  to  the  inde- 
pendence of  judgment  displayed  by  him  in  this  formidable 
controversy,  and  which  was  so  much  at  variance  with  the 
spirit,  and  so  threatening  to  the  interests,  of  their  common 
church  ?     The  work  itself,  which  made  its  appearance  above 
nine  years  after  Pascal's   religious  convictions   were   deeply 
imbibed,   gives  certainly  no  internal  evidence  of  a  conscience 
so  morbidly  scrupulous  as  the  portraiture  of  his  biographer 
represents.     It  indicates  a  mind  and  a  judgment  that  knew 
well  how  to  balance  the  claims  of  God,  his  neighbour,  and 
himself.     It  combines  the  bearing  and  spirit  of  the  man  of 
the  world,  with  the  purity  and  devotedness  of  the  Christian. 
And  we  may,  at  least,  in  the  absence  of  a  proper  arrangement 
of  dates,  in  which  the  Memoir  is  singularly  deficient,   believe 
that  the  more  intense  self-inflictions,  to  which  he  is  repre- 
sented as  abandoning  himself,  must  have  occurred  in  the  few 
closing  years  of  his  aiHicted  existence,  when  his  sufferings, 
and  his  weariness  of  life,  which  served  to  deepen  his  personal 
piety  and  quicken  his  aspirations  after  a  heavenly  rest,  might 
have  somewhat  impaired  that  exact  discrimination  of  Scripture 
truth,  which  at  an  earlier  period  he  had  evinced,  and  led  him 
to  overlook  the  great  principle  that  "  bodily  exercise  profiteth 
little,"  and  that  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  consisteth  not  in 
meats  and  drink." 

Pascal  was  now  approaching  the  period  that  has  been  just 
referred  to, — that  of  his  controversy  with  the  Jesuits.  His 
father  had  been  dead  about  four  years.  On  that  occasion  he 
composed  some  impressive  reflections  upon  the  subject  of 
death,  and  the  prospects  of  the  righteous  after  this  life ;  and 

c  5 

Ivili  MEMOIR. 

addressed  them  in  the  form  of  a  Letter  to  his  sisters.  Being 
now  almostwhoUy  deprived  of  domestic  society,  and  having  again 
removed  his  residence  to  Paris,  these  circumstances,  together 
VFith  congeniality  in  rehgious  vievrs,  threw  him  into  hahits  of 
close  intimacy  with  the  Members  of  the  Port  Royal,  although  he 
never  (as  has  been  popularly  believed)  joined  their  Society, 
or  formally  avowed  himself  a  Jansenist.  The  circumstances 
which  led  to  the  publication  of  the  "  Provincial  Letters  "  are 
narrated  with  such  graphic  eifect  by  his  eloquent  commentator 
already  referred  to,*  that  any  further  details  here  would  be 
out  of  place.  A  few  remarks  upon  the  spirit  and  tendency 
of  this  great  performance,  will  be  found  in  a  subsequent  part 
of  this  memoir.  It  is  sufficient  here  to  say  that,  although 
appearing  at  first  under  a  feigned  name,  the  unanimous  voice 
of  France  soon  attributed  these  noble  papers  to  the  only  man 
then  living  capable  of  their  production  ;  and  assigned  him  at 
once  a  place — which  posterity  has  ever  since  fully  ratified — 
among  the  most  accomplished  writers,  in  ancient  or  modern 
times. 

But  the  successful  achievements  of  polemical  controversy, 
the  inculcation  of  important  doctrine,  or  the  exposure  and 
correction  of  a  corrupt  body  of  theologians — all  this  was  not 
enough  to  satisfy  his  desires  for  the  glory  of  his  Divine 
Master,  or  for  the  benefit  of  his  Church.  Amidst  the  pres- 
sure of  increasing  infirmity,  he  contemplated  (as  is  well 
known)  a  stupendous  work,  that  should  not  only  demonstrate, 
from  every  source,  the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion,  but,  by 
the  most  comprehensive  reasoning  and  illustrations,  enforce, 
from  the  nature  and  the  wants  of  man,  the  necessity  of  a 
Divine  Revelation  for  his  guidance  here,  and  for  the  satisfac- 
tion of  his  desires  hereafter.  So  copious  was  his  projected 
undertaking  that  he  calculated,  if  the  state  of  his  health  should 
enable  him  to  give  to  it  continuous  attention,  its  completion 
would  have  occupied  a  period  of  several  years.     Upon  this 

*  M.  Villemain. — For  some  further  anecdotes,  see  also  Memoir  of 
Arnauld,  Appendix  No.  2. 

MEMOIR.  lix 

scheme  he  had  long  and  deeply  meditated,  and  had  amassed 
in  his  mind  large  stores  of  materials,  in  an  imperfect  and  disT 
jointed  state,  before  even  he  commenced  the  task  of  committing 
them  to  paper.  But  it  was  the  inscrutable  will  of  Providence 
that  strength  should  be  denied  him  to  complete  this  great 
undertaking.  The  state  of  his  health  became  such,  that  his 
medical  advisers  wholly  interdicted  the  labour  of  writing  or 
even  study.  His  custom  however  was,  during  short  intervals 
of  suffering,  to  note  down  upon  detached  papers,  the  thoughts 
that  occupied  his  mind,  often  in  the  rudest  form,  and  wholly 
without  method  or  connexion.  These  papers,  collected  after 
his  death,  and  digested,  as  far  as  was  practicable,  with  great 
labour,  formed  his  well-known  "  Pens^es,"  a  work  which  has 
ever  since  been  regarded  as  among  the  richest  repositories  of 
eloquent  thought  and  profound  theology. 

While  thus  struggling  under  the  conception  of  this  great 
undertaking,  and  the  physical  inability  duly  to  carry  it  into 
execution,  a  circumstance  occurred,  which  has  fortunately 
been  preserved  with  more  of  detail  than  most  of  the  incidents 
of  his  life.  A  number  of  his  friends,  and  among  them  some 
of  high  worth  and  distinction,  joined  in  a  request  to  him  to 
furnish  them,  orally,  with  a  summary,  or  outline,  of  the 
leading  topics  of  his  projected  work.  In  an  interval  of  coniT 
parative  strength,  he  summoned  them  together,  for  the  purpose 
of  complying  ■^ith  their  desire  ;  and  then,  it  is  related,  in  an 
uninterrupted  discourse  of  from  two  to  three  hours  duration, 
and  carried  on  vrith  exquisite  method,  clearness,  and  elegance, 
he  unfolded  to  his  hearers  the  plan  of  his  contemplated 
treatise,  together  with  an  outhne  of  the  arguments  and  illus- 
trations by  which  it  was  to  be  supported.  An  account;  in  an 
abridged  form,  has  been  preserved  of  this  invaluable  oration, 
of  which  want  of  space  forbids  the  insertion  here,  but  which 
is  familiar  to  all  who  are  acquainted  with  the  works  of  Pascal 
in  their  original  language. 

Who  would  not  pause  for  a  moment  to  dwell  upon  this 
scene  ?     It  was  one  which  a  painter  loves  to  delineate,  and 

Ix  MEMOIR. 

which  none  hut  an  eye-witness  could  have  described.  Imagi- 
nation reaUzes,  on  the  one  side,  the  audience,  comprising 
various  classes  and  conditions — the  young,  the  advanced  in 
age,  the  layman,  and  (perhaps)  the  ecclesiastic,  the  noble  in 
birth,  the  devoted  relative,  the  admiring  friend  ; — their  eager 
gaze,  their  fixed  attention,  their  chastised  silence.  We  then 
seem  to  view  the  speaker ;  his  youthful  air,  his  enfeebled 
frame,  his  pallid  aspect,  his  earnest  tones :  we  listen  to  his 
discourse — the  lucid  arrangement  of  topics,  the  graceful 
diction,  the  liquid  flow  of  speech.  All  must  have  combined 
to  impress  and  subdue  the  mind,  while  over  all  was  thrown  a 
feeling  of  deep  sadness,  in  the  foreboding  that  so  noble  a 
design  was,  too  probably,  to  be  left  incomplete ;  and  that 
even  the  efforts  of  memory  would  be  incapable  of  storing,  and 
transmitting  to  posterity  the  mere  outlines  which  he  was  im- 
parting to  them !  The  classical  reader  will  be  reminded  of 
the  lectures  of  the  ancient  philosophers  in  their  academic 
bowers ;  or,  still  more  strongly,  of  the  dying  discourse  of 
Socrates  with  his  friends.  But  his  were  themes  far  more 
momentous  than  any  which  those  illustrious  men  could  impart 
to  the  greedy  ears  of  their  disciples  ;  and,  instead  of  the  faint 
guesses  which  they  were  enabled  to  send  into  the  shadowy 
abysses  of  futurity,  the  youthful  teacher  here  was  possessed 
of  the  light  of  unerring  truth,  to  illuminate  his  own  spirit,  and 
to  direct  those  of  his  rapt  and  admiring  auditors  ! 

It  may  be  here  remarked,  that  it  is  an  injustice  to  Pascal 
to  attribute  the  zeal  he  manifested  for  the  resistance  of  scep- 
ticism, to  a  continued  struggle  in  his  own  mind  against  the 
suggestions  of  unbelief.  His  comprehensive  knowledge  and 
ardent  imagination  presented  before  him,  indeed,  every  kind 
of  cavil,  which  existing  or  future  forms  of  infidelity  might 
allege  against  the  truths  of  Revelation.  But  it  was  not  surely 
to  be  thence  concluded,  that  he  himself  attached  weight  and 
importance  to  such  objections  ;  and  it  seems  by  far  the  most 
obvious  solution  of  those  fine  passages,  in  which  the  struggles 
of  man's  doubt  and  ignorance  are  so  glowingly  depicted,  to 

MEMOIR.  Ixi 

regard  them  as  rhetorical  impersonations  of  a  mind  supposed 
to  be  destitute  of  those  infallible  guides  to  truth  and  happi- 
ness, which  he  himself  possessed.  In  the  same  manner,  it  is  to 
be  regretted,  that  so  high  an  authority  as  that  of  M.  Villemain 
should  (doubtless  through  inadvertence)  have  been  given  to  the 
story  of  the  Talisman,  or  Amulet,  said  to  have  been  found, 
after  his  death,  on  the  person  of  Pascal,  or  that  he  should 
have  brought  into  an  apparent  juxta-position  some  abstruse 
and  subtle  calculations  into  which  the  mathematical  habit  of 
Pascal's  mind  impelled  him,  with  the  morbid  and  profane 
ravings  of  Rousseau.  Nothing  can  be  more  evident,  on 
inspection  of  the  first-mentioned  document  itself,*  than  that 
it  was  a  kind  of  hasty  and  fugitive  memorandum,  drawn  up 
in  a  manner  that  was  habitual  with  him,  for  the  purpose  of 
recording,  for  his  own  eye  alone,  a  species  of  resolution  or  vow 
which  he  had  formed  in  some  moment  of  ardent  communion 
with  the  Divine  Being  ;  and  instances  of  these  kind  of  solemn 
transactions  are  by  no  means  uncommon  with  minds  of  devo- 
tional elevation  such  as  Pascal' s.f 

The  last  four  years  of  Pascal's  life  presented  an  almost 
unbroken  series  of  bodily  suffering.  Incapable  of  mental 
exertion,  his  soul  was  absorbed  in  devout  exercises  ;  and, 
when  his  little  remaining  strength  permitted,  his  delight  was 
to  pass  from  one  church  to  another,  to  partake  of  the  various 
religious  solemnities,  of  which  the  metropolis  afforded  an  un- 
interrupted succession.  He  seemed,  at  those  times,  almost 
to  realize  the  fond  aspiration  of  the  Psalmist ;  and,  like  the 
bird,  of  whose  privileges  he  was  envious,  to  make  his  habita- 
tion in  the  courts  of  the  Lord  !  It  is  touching  and  instructive 
to  contemplate  him  in  these  scenes.  Who  does  not  follow 
with  interest  one,  with  whose  name  Europe  was  resounding, 
the  victorious  polemic,  the  scourge  of  error — on  whose  brow 

*  Appendix,  No.  1 1 . 
t  It  is  pleasing  to  see  this  view  of  the  circumstance  referred  to,  ener^ 
getieally  supported  by  the  latest  French  editor  of  Pascal's  miscellaneous 
writings,  M.  Faugfere. 

Ixii  MEMOIR. 

literature  and  science  had  twined  their  blended  wreath — ^whom 
the  world,  for  his  genius  and  his  learning,  was  eager  to  court 
and  caress  ; — to  see  him  thus — his  days  numbered,  the  un- 
erring premonitions  of  decay  borne  within  him — pierced  by 
the  "  Arrows  of  the  Almighty," — stealing,  in  sickness  and 
solitude,  like  the  stricken  deer,  from  sanctuary  to  sanctuary  ; 
and  finding  his  only  remaining  comfort  in  the  services  of  that 
Church,  which  he  had  so  earnestly  sought  to  purify,  but 
which  he  yet,  perhaps,  too  fondly,  too  blindly  loved  !  Was  he, 
in  that  solitude  and  amidst  those  sufferings,  really  unhappy, 
and  an  object  of  our  pity  ?  He  himself  was,  from  his  inmost 
heart,  pitying  the  unthinking  world,  upon  which  he  had 
turned  his  back.  He  possessed,  in  those  moments,  "  a  peace 
that  passed  all  understanding,"  "  a  joy,  with  which  no  stranger 
might  intermeddle."  He  bore  within  him  "  a  hope  full  of 
immortality ; "  his  was  a  "  sober  certainty  of  bliss."  In 
those  services,  alloyed  by  superstition  and  error,  yet  changed 
by  the  alchemy  of  his  spiritualized  mind  into  the  sacred 
nutriment  for  which  alone  his  soul  hungered,  he  found  the 
foretaste  of  those  pure  and  stainless  adorations,  on  which  he 
was  about  eternally  to  enter ;  and,  in  the  approaching  extinc- 
tion of  his  earthly  hopes,  he  welcomed  the  commencement  of 
an  existence,  which  was  alone  commensurate  with  the  large 
desires  of  his  aspiring  spirit ! 

Yet  even  at  this  period  of  suffering  and  decay,  an  occasion 
arose  in  which -his  genius  blazed  up  once  more  in  all  its 
wonted  splendour.  His  nights  were  rendered  almost  sleepless 
through  unceasing  pain  ;  and,  after  a  longer  period  than  usual 
of  insomnolency,  he  entered  almost  involuntarily  upon  a  train 
of  profound  meditation  upon  the  properties  of  the  "  Cycloid." 
He  was  for  a  long  time  indisposed  to  make  the  problems  that 
resulted  from  his  investigations  public ;  but  at  last,  the 
intreaties  of  his  friends  prevailed,  particularly  those  of  his 
young  and  devoted  admirer  the  Duke  de  Rouannez.  He  set 
to  the  work  with  the  haste  and  impatience  of  one,  who  felt  that 
the  time  could  be  ill  spared,  and  was  taken  from  other  and 

MEMOIR.  Ixiii 

more  congenial  occupations.  In  a  few  days  the  treatise  was 
prepared  for  the  press ;  and  the  world  of  science  was  again 
astonished  at  the  appearance — as  before,  under  a  fictitious 
name,  but  one  of  which  the  key  was  soon  discovered — of  a 
work  which  equalled,  if  it  did  not  surpass,  all  the  former 
efforts  of  his  mathematical  powers.  It  may  not  be  uninterest- 
ing here  to  state,  that  the  solution  of  the  elaborate  problems 
which  he  put  forth  on  this  occasion,  were  made  the  subject  of 
competition  among  contemporary  mathematicians  for  a  con- 
siderable pecuniary  prize,  offered  personally  by  Pascal.  Among 
the  competitors  was  our  eminent  architect  Sir  Christopher 
"Wren  ;  but  the  two  who  approached  the  nearest  to  success 
were  Lalloure,  a  Frenchman  and  a  Jesuit,  and  Wallis,  another 
Englishman.  Owing  to  some  informality  in  the  answers  of 
both  these  persons,  the  umpires  appointed  for  the  adjudication 
of  the  prize,  declined  pronouncing  in  favour  of  either,  and  it 
was  not  bestowed  at  all.  This  circumstance  is  made  the 
subject  of  sarcastic  remark  by  Condorcet  in  his  narrative — 
otherwise  a  learned  and  interesting  one — of  the  transaction ; 
insinuating,  contrary  to  the  well-known  facts  of  the  case,  that 
the  prize,  although  really  earned,  was  withheld  from  the 
Frenchman  because  he  was  a  Jesuit,  and  from  Wallis  as  a 
heretic. 

The  same  spirit  of  mortification  and  self-infliction  which  he 
is  described  as  having  so  long  evinced,  characterized  with 
increasing  force  the  closing  period  of  his  life.  Yet,  if  his 
austerities  towards  himself,  were  carried  far  beyond  what  we 
beheve  to  be  enjoined  by  the  benignant  spirit  of  the  Christian 
dispensation,  his  heart  overflowed  with  love  and  charity  for 
his  fellow  men.  "While  he  was  fond  of  exhorting  his  relatives 
against  a  display  of  undue  attachment  to  himself,  his  affections 
were  ever  melting  in  tenderness  towards  them.  He  resembled 
an  infant,  in  the  humility  and  submission  of  his  spirit,  If 
ever  drawn  into  a  momentary  impatience  towards  those  by 
whom  he  was  surrounded,  he  could  not  restrain  his  eagerness 
to  atone  for  the  hasty  ebullition,  by  the  tenderest  expressions 

kiv  MEMOIR. 

and  most  gracious  acts.  Having  never  married,  and  his 
family  connexions  being  all  in  competent  circumstances,  he 
seemed  to  feel  himself  justified  in  dispossessing  himself  of  a 
large  share  of  his  moderate  property  for  benevolent  objects 
during  his  hfe ;  but,  such  were  his  eager  sympathies  towards 
the  poor  and  suffering,  that  he  was  with  difficulty  restrained 
from  the  most  disproportionate  charities.  Not  satisfied  with 
cultivating  that  first  of  Christian  graces,  "  poverty  in  spirit," 
it  was  almost  his  passion  to  resemble  also  the  poor  in  external 
condition.  He  was  always  accustomed  to  seek  out  for  the 
supply  of  his  domestic  wants,  not  such  tradesmen  and  artificers 
as  excelled  the  most  in  their  departments,  but  those  who  most 
needed  custom  and  employment.  And  one  of  his  latest  acts 
was,  when  almost  in  an  extremity  of  illness,  and  the  child  of 
his  only  domestic,  who  enjoyed  a  gratuitous  domicile  in  his 
house,  was  seized  with  small-pox,  to  cause  himself  to  be 
carried  from  his  own  dwelling  rather  than  suffer  the  helpless 
infant  to  be  exposed  to  danger  by  a  removal. 

His  closing  moments  now  approached.  The  most  intense 
sufferings  never  drew  from  him  a  murmur  of  impatience. 
The  scriptures,  which  had  been  his  exhaustless  study  during 
his  period  of  acuteness  and  vigour,  were  now,  in  his  hours  of 
weakness,  the  balm  and  consolation  of  his  spirit.  His  especial 
delight  was  in  an  unceasing  repetition  of  that  treasury  of 
spiritual  comfort,  the  119th  Psalm,  which  forms  the  "Petites 
heures"  of  the  Romish  Church.*  An  ecclesiastic,  a  friend 
of  his  family,  on  paying  him  an  occasional  visit,  returned 
from  his  chamber,  exclaiming  to  his  sorrowing  relatives,  "  Be 
comforted !  his  God  is  inviting  him  to  himself :  great  as  I 
always  thought  him,  never  did  he  appear  so  great  as  now. 
Would  that  I  were  in  his  place ! " 

His  medical  attendants,  with  an  incompetence  that  seemed 
common  to  the  profession  in  France  in  that  day,  flattered  him 

*  This  portion  of  Scripture  iias  always  been  a  source  of  instruction 
and  consolation  to  the  devout.  It  is  said  that  our  own  venerated 
"Wilberforce  could  repeat  the  whole  (176  verses')  from  memory. 

MEMOIR.  Ixv 

and  his  friends  that  his  symptoms  were  free  from  danger. 
But  he  himself  knew  the  contrary.  The  soundness  of  judg- 
ment that  distinguished  him  on  every  subject,  extended  to  a 
clear  insight  into  the  character  of  his  own  diseases.  In  the 
conviction  of  his  advancing  end,  his  only  solicitude  was  to 
partake  of  the  last  offices  directed  by  his  Church  for  those  in 
dying  circumstances.  This  was  for  some  time  opposed,  on 
the  ground  that  the  excitement  of  the  services  would  too  much 
exhaust  his  strength.  His  sufferings  however  still  increasing, 
his  sister  took  upon,  herself  to  procure  the  attendance  of  an 
ecclesiastic  in  his  chamber,  during  the  last  night  of  his  exist- 
ence ;  and  on  his  being  seized  with  a  violent  convulsive  fit, 
an  interval  of  mitigated  distress  was  embraced  to  administer 
to  him  the  sacrament  and  extreme  unction.  His  last  words 
were  expressive  of  his  habitual  humility  and  faith  :  "  Forsake 
me  not,  O  my  God  ! "  he  exclaimed  ;  and,  shortly  after,  calmly 
committed  his  spirit  to  his  Redeemer.  He  died  on  the  1 9th 
of  August  in  the  year  1662,  just  two  months  after  the  com- 
pletion of  his  thirty-ninth  year.* 

No  account  has  been  transmitted  of  jthe  figure  and  personal 
appearance  of  Pascal ;  and  the  only  authentic  portraits  that 
have  been  from  time  to  time  published  of  him  are  derived 
from  one  taken  after  his  decease.  I  esteem  myself  fortunate 
in  being  able  to  prefix  to  the  present  volume  the  copy  of  a 
sketch,  borrowed  from  a  contemporary  French  Work  already  re- 
ferred to,f  the  discovery  of  which  was  attended  with  interesting 
circumstances.  Not  many  years  since,  on  the  death  of  the 
latest  female  descendant  of  M.  Domat,  an  eminent  advocate, 
and  an  attached  friend  of  Pascal,  a  volume  was  found  in  a  box 
of  old  papers,  containing  a  legal  treatise ;  and  on  the  cover 
was  a  sketch  in  red  chalk,  by  the  hand  of  Domat  himself,  of 
Pascal's  "striking  and  noble  countenance,"  as  it  is  justly 
designated  by  the  writer,  of  whose  narrative  I  am  availing 

•  For  his  Epitaphs,  see  Appendix,  No.  13.  f  M.  Faugfere. 

kvi  MEMOIR. 

myself.  Over  the  portrait  is  the  signature  of  Domat's  son, 
with  this  inscription,  as  copied  in  the  frontispiece,  "  My. 
Father  made  use  of  this  colouring  for  the  manuscript  of  his 
■work  on  Civil  Laws ; "  and  at  the  bottom,  "  Portrait  of 
M.  Pascal  by  my  Father."  The  drawing  was  made  in  the 
year  1648,  when  Pascal  was  in  his  twenty-fifth  year,  and 
when  he  and  Domat  were  fellow- students  in  the  classes  of 
natural  philosophy.  The  countenance  does  indeed  justify  the 
epithets  here  bestowed  upon  it.  It  is  full  of  sensibility  and 
intelligence,  with  an  air  of  deep  pensiveness,  which  was 
especially  characteristic  of  the  original. 

Of  his  personal  habits,  colloquial  powers,  and  other  similar 
particulars,  httle  is  recorded.  It  is  probable  that  although, 
as  is  usual  with  minds  of  a  high  order,  he  might  be  reserved  iu 
his  intercourse  with  strangers,  when  that  restraint  was  removed, 
the  abundance  of  his  resources  would  render  his  conversation 
eminently  pleasing  and  instructive.  Habitual  silence  is  the 
resource  only  of  the  empty  or  the  misanthropic.  Of  the 
attractiveness  of  his  society  one  remarkable  instance  has  been 
already  referred  to,  in  the  devoted  attachment  of  the  youthful 
and  accomplished  Duke  de  Rouannez.  And  it  is  also  clear, 
that  to  the  number  of  his  attainments  he  added  one,  which  is 
rarely  found  in  such  a  combination — much  facility  of  extem- 
poraneous discourse ;  a  striking  example  of  which  has  been 
related  in  the  oral  epitome  which  he  delivered  to  his  friends, 
of  his  work  on  Scripture  Evidence. 

A  specimen  of  his  hand-writing,  derived  from  the  same 
source  as  the  portrait,  will  also  be  found  in  another  part  of 
the  volume.*  He  wrote  with  great  rapidity,  using  many  abbre- 
viations and  arbitrary  characters,  as  has  been  often  the  case 
with  writers  of  ardent  minds,  whose  ideas  seem  to  flow  too  fast 
for  the  power  of  the  hand  to  follow.f  Yet  the  characters  are 
described  as  having  almost  the  strength  and  precision  of 
engraving.     Like  all  writers   (or  with  a  very  few  exceptions) 

*  The  Emperor  Napoleon's  hand-writing  was  a  strilcing  instance  of 
this  kind.  t  Appendix,  No.  1 2. 

MEMOIR.  Ixvii 

who  have  aimed  at  the  highest  excellences  of  composition, 
his  most  finished  passages  were  elaborated  with  excessive  care 
and  pains,  and  written  and  re-written  numerous  times  before 
his  fastidious  taste  could  be  satisfied.  * 

It  has  been  generally  supposed  that  he  was  little  accessible 
to  female  attraction,  and  never,  or  very  remotely,  contemplated 
entering  into  the  married  state.  An  interesting  hypothesis 
upon  this  subject  has  however  been  raised  by  his  admiring 
commentator,  M.  Faugfere ;  and,  as  he  is  a  writer  evi- 
dently not  prone  to  take  up  opinions  without  careful  in- 
vestigation, carries  with  it  much  weight  and  probability. 
The  Duke  de  Rouannez  had  a  sister,  who  at  the  commence- 
ment of  his  intimacy  with  Pascal,  was  just  entering  womanhood, 
beautiful  and  accomplished.  Her  age  was  scarcely  sixteen, 
and  Pascal  was  in  his  twenty-eighth  year.  The  interest- 
ing Charlotte  de  Rouannez  seems  to  have  at  once  imbibed 
the  enthusiastic  admiration  of  her  brother  for  his  friend, 
and  he  became  her  confident,  her  instructor  and  correspon- 
dent. M.  Faug^re  has  brought  forward  a  series  of  touching 
letters  from  Pascal  to  his  fascinating  friend  and  disciple,  part 
of  which  were  known  before  to  exist  in  manuscript,  and  others 
which  had  been  till  now  undiscovered ;  and  these,  although, 
through  the  severity  of  ideas  of  the  Port  Royal  Brethren  and 
others,  in  whose  custody  they  had  remained,  they  have  been 
obviously  denuded  of  all  topics  but  those  of  a  religious  nature, 
bear  evidence  of  no  common  measure  of  interest,  on  Pascal's 
part,  in  the  well-being  of  his  correspondent.  M.  Faugfere 
attributes  also — and  probably  with  justice — to  the  influence 
of  this  young  lady,  the  composition  of  his  graceful  essay  on 
the  passion  of  Love,  which  was  for  the  first  time  pubhshed, 
some  years  siaccf 

*  Among  many  other  instances  it  is  recorded  of  the  present  Lord 
Brougham,  that  he  wrote  out  the  peroration  of  one  of  his  most  important 
speeches  on  the  trial  of  Queen  Carohne  a  large  number  of  times  before 
he  could  bring  it  to  his  own  standard  of  excellence.  The  effect  of  the 
production,  on  its  delivery,  is  said  to  have  been  such  as  to  reward  the 
labour  it  had  cost  the  speaker.  f  Appendix,  No.  7. 

Ixviii  MEMOIR. 

Combining  these  circumstances  together,  M.  Faug^re  comes 
to  the  conclusion — and  with  much  plausibihty — that  Pascal, 
from  the  instructor,  became  the  suitor  of  his  attractive  pupil. 
Encouraged  by  the  attachment  of  his  brother,  fascinated  by 
her  charms,  and  dazzled  by  her  rank,  he  (perhaps  rashly) 
aspired  to  an  alliance  with  one,  in  whom  esteem  seemed 
already  yerging  on  love.  The  inequahty  of  their  station 
presented  an  insuperable  obstacle ;  and  either  his  advances 
were  repulsed,  or — which  is  more  probable — he  silently  relin- 
quished his  hopes.  It  was  at  that  period  that  may  be  sup- 
posed to  date  Pascal's  return  to  the  severer  path  of  religious 
observance  and  desires,  from  which,  as  appears  by  the  intima- 
tions of  his  biographers,  he  had,  under  some  seductive  influence 
been  temporarily  induced  to  stray ;  and  then,  as  is  eloquently 
observed,  "  his  spirit,  finding  nothing  in  human  affections 
sufficiently  faithful  and  large  to  satisfy  his  aspirations,  turned 
to  the  source  of  all  excellence  and  all  love,  and  sought  the 
consummation  of  his  hopes  in  Him  who  is  alone  perfect, 
eternal,  and  infinite  ! "  This  high-born  and  accomplished 
young  female  seems  to  have  at  one  time  contemplated  the 
renunciation  of  all  her  prospects  in  favour  of  a  conventual 
life.  She  passed  a  noviciate  in  the  convent  of  Port  Royal, 
but  quitted  it  shortly  after  Pascal's  death,  and  re-entered  the 
world.     Her  subsequent  history  is  not  recorded. 

The  only  branch  of  literature  which  Pascal  seems  not  to 
have  aspired  to  was  poetry.  Indeed  there  is  a  passage  in 
one  of  his  writings,  which  directs  some  disparaging  expressions 
against  versification,  as  an  art ;  and  if,  as  is  probable,  the 
poetry  which  he  denounces  was  nothing  more  than  that  whjch 
the  French  language  then  presented,  his  derogatory  terms  need 
not  be  matter  of  surprise ;  for  the  most  accomplished  poets 
of  France  had  not  then  appeared.  It  is  little  likely  that  he 
should  have  affected  to  undervalue  the  great  master-pieces  oi 
the  classic  ages,  into  whose  literature  he  had  drunk  so  deeply  ; 
although  his  habit  was,  less  than  almost  any  other  writer,  to 
make   direct  reference  to  other   authors.     Shakspeare,  it  is 

MEMOIR. 

Ixix 

probable— as  his  works  contain  no  allusion  to  English  writers 
—he  was  unacquainted  with  ;  and  the  majestic  harmonies  of 
Milton  were  at  that  time  little  known  or  valued,  even  by  our 
own  countrymen.  Voltaire  has  descended  to  the  littleness  of 
raking  up  a  few  unlucky  verses,  which  he  is  charged  with 
having  once  perpetrated,  in  a  good-humoured  complaisance  to 
a  lady  of  whose  hospitality  he  had  been  partaking;  and, 
certainly,  if  the  production  be  Pascal's,  it  may  be  readily 
given  up  to  the  dignified  sarcasm  of  his  antiquated  critic. 

Pascal's  mind,  in  fact,  teemed  with  all  the    elements  of 
poetry  in  its  true  sense — imagination,  sublimity,  pathos,  en- 
thusiasm—unbounded command  of  language,  comprehensive 
thought,  and  large  acquaintance  with  men  and  things.     These 
gave  him  sway  over  the  passions  of  his  reader,  which  is  the 
great  attribute  of  poetry ;  and  he  may  therefore  well  afford 
to  dispense  with  the  fame  of  rhythmical  composition.     In 
short,  whether  we  regard  his   achievements   in   science,   in 
literature,  or  theology  ;  and,  especially  when  we  reflect  upon 
the  narrow  space   of  time — the  mere   segment  of  ordinary 
existence — ^into  which  all  were  crowded,   we   may   cordially 
respond  to  the   enthusiastic  language  of  his  latest   Editor, 
that  "  his  genius  was  one  that  did  honour,  not  to  France 
only,  but  to  the  human  race."     Yet  was  it  his  ardent  piety, 
his  deep  devotedness  to  God,  and  the  consecration  of  all  his 
powers  to  His  glory,  and  the  welfare  of  man,  that  form  the 
crown  and  consummation  of  his  mental  greatness.     It  is  here 
that  he  takes  the  very  highest  rank  among  those,  whose 
number  is  too  few  (but  of  whom  our  own  happy  annals  include 
no  small  proportion,)  in  whom  this  holy  and  beneficial  union 
has  been  witnessed.     He  seems  to  have  been  designed  by  the 
great  Disposer  of  man's  destinies,  to  show  that  His  gifts  are 
independent  of  all  those  circumstances  to  which  we  are  apt  to 
attach  importance  ;  and  to  have  been  placed  in  the  midst  of 
an  erring  and  corrupt  Church,   as  a  rebuke  to  her  for  her 
misimprovement  of  his  efforts  for  her  correction ;  and  as  a 
warning  to  those  who,    enjoying    the  privilege  of  a  purer 

Ixx  MEMOIB. 

faith,    do   not,    equally  with    him,    improve   their   superior 
advantages . 

It  is  thus  that  memory  loves  to  linger  over  the  imperfect 
records  of  learning,  wisdom,  and  piety.  But  imagination  has 
also  her  province ;  and  the  conjecture  forces  itself  upon  the 
mind,  whether,  if  lengthened  years  had  been  granted  to  him, 
such  a  man  as  it  has  been  thus  attempted  to  describe,  would 
have  remained  in  communion  with  the  Church  of  Rome  ? 

The  predominant  qualities  of  Pascal's  mind  were,  slowness 
in  deliberation,  and  decision  in  act,  when  his  determinations 
were  formed.  With  these  were  united  a  deep  reverence  for 
prescriptive  wisdom  and  legitimate  authority,  and  an  inex- 
haustible desire  for  the  discovery  of  truth.  Of  the  latter 
propensity,  his  whole  life  and  studies  were  an  illustration  ;  and 
his  devotion  to  the  support  of  lawful  rule  was  remarkably 
shown  by  his  energetic  efforts,  under  extreme  bodily  infirmity, 
in  support  of  the  authorities  of  Paris,  during  the  civil  dis- 
turbances that  occurred  towards  the  close  of  his  life.  Even 
exploded  systems  of  opinion,  if  they  bore  the  sanction  of 
antiquity,  lingered  tenaciously  in  his  mind ;  and,  in  one  of 
his  scientific  treatises,  he  expresses  almost  reluctance  to  aban- 
don the  ancient  doctrine  of  "  Vacuum,"  when  conviction  had 
forced  itself  upon  him  of  its  fallacy,  and  his  own  experiments 
had  chiefly  contributed  to  its  overthrow. 

The  active  period  of  his  life  may  be  considered  to  have  closed, 
as  has  been  seen,  on  the  attainment  of  about  his  thirty-fifth 
year ;  that  period,  when  the  mind  ordinarily  attains  its  fullest 
maturity,  and  after  which  it  is  wont  to  gather  in  its  richest  stores 
of  experience,  and  to  turn  its  acquisitions  to  the  most  valuable 
results.  Pascal,  with  all  his  great  powers,  was  not  exempted 
from  that  law,  to  which  a  profound  observer  of  human  nature* 
has  subjected  a  genius  of  even  a  higher  order  than  his,  when 
he  says,  "  Nature  gives   to  no   man   knowledge ;    all  must 

♦.Johnson — Preface  to- Shakspeare. 

MEMOIR.  Ixxi 

increase  their  ideas  by  gradual  acquisitions  ;  must  grow  wiser 
as  they  grow  older  ;  and  instruct  with  more  efficacy,  as  they 
themselves  are  more  amply  instructed." 

His  polemical  vigour  had  been  hitherto  exclusively  directed 
against  the  errors  of  the  Jesuits.     It  was  not  with  haste  that 
he  entered  upon  that  great  enterprize  ;  for  his  religious  con- 
victions had  been  imbibed  as  early  as  his  twenty-fourth  year, 
while  the  Provincial  Letters  were  not  commenced  till  he  had 
reached  the  age  of  thirty-three.  The  interval  had  been  doubtless 
employed  in  deep  meditation  upon  the  injurious  tendency  of  the 
tenets  of  the  Jesuit  school ;  and  in  collecting  such  stores  of 
learning  and  illustration,  as  would  he  requisite  for  the  great  con- 
flict in  which  he  was  preparing  to  engage.  Yet,  throughout  this 
controversy,  he  seems  to  have  laboured  under  the  impression, 
that  the  Jesuit  system  was,  with  all  its  evils,  but  an  excres- 
cence upon  the  Romish  Church  ;  which,  when  healed  of  its 
virulence,  or  entirely  cut  off,    would  leave  the  body  itself  in 
health  and  soundness.     But  who  can  doubt,  that  advancing 
years  and  more  mature  experience,  would  have  shown  him, 
that,  where  so  foul  a  growth  had   supervened,    the  system 
itself  must  have  been  incurably  diseased ;  and  the  offspring 
which  had  attained  to  so  portentous  a  stature,  could  not  have 
materially  differed  in  nature  from  the  parent  in  whose  bosom 
it  had  been  nurtured  ? 

Even  the  principle  of  self-defence  would  have  led  to  a  pro- 
longation and  embittering  of  the  warfare.  The  condemnatory 
Bulls  which  the  Papacy  issued  against  the  Provincial  Letters,* 
would,  if  life  and  strength  had  been  given  him,  have  led  to 
rejoinders  on  his  part ;  and,  to  use  his  own  language,  "  he 
would  have  been  obliged  to  carry  the  war  into  the  enemy's 
borders,  and  wage  it  at  his  own  cost."  Formidable,  indeed, 
to  them  might  that  cost  have  been.  One  conquest  would 
have  led  to  another.  His  own  resources  would  have  consisted 
in  the  exhaustless  stores  of  conviction  and  truth;  and  the 

*  Appendix,  No.  1. 

Ixxii  MEMOIR. 

whole  opposing  territory  would  at  length,  in  this  righteous 
war,  have  been  invaded  and  possessed. 

But  the  effect  of  advancing  years  would  have  been  chiefly 
valuable  in  the  enlarged  field  of  observation  they  would  have 
opened  to  his  mind.  Life,  with  all  its  affairs  and  interests, 
would  have  progressively  spread  out  before  him,  and  presented 
fruitful  matter  for  his  active  contemplation.  His  own  exist- 
ence had  been  hitherto  absorbed  and  divided  between  science, 
literature  and  theology.  The  world— other  than  that  of 
France  and  Jesuitism — had  been  well  nigh  shut  out  from  his 
view.  There  is  no  evidence  that  he  had  ever  travelled  in  any 
other  country  than  his  own ;  or,  indeed,  migrated  much 
beyond  the  route  between  Rouen  and  Paris.  Germany  and 
England  seem  to  have  been  little  known  to  him,  and  our 
language  formed,  at  that  time,  probably  no  part  of  a  polite  or 
learned  education.  Thus  must  there  have  been  large  subjects 
of  enquiry  and  reflection  yet  unexplored  by  his  inquisitive 
mind.  Protestantism  was,  comparatively,  only  dawning  over 
Europe  ;  and  it  is  not  easy  to  conceive  what  might  have  been 
the  effect  of  his  meditations,  in  the  stillness  of  learned  leisure, 
and  under  the  teaching  of  that  Divine  Instructor,  whose  aid 
he  ever  so  diligently  invoked,  upon  the  benefits,  social, 
moral,  and  religious,  which,  under  many  drawbacks — amidst 
chills,  and  blights,  and  tempests — her  glorious  light  was 
gradually  diifusing  throughout  those  countries,  and  espe- 
cially our  own,  which  had  early  welcomed  her  benignant  in- 
fluences. 

But,  above  all,  Pascal  possessed,  in  a  degree  greater,  per- 
haps, than  any  man  whom  the  Romish  Church  in  France  ever 
produced,  a  knowledge  of  the  guide  to  all  truth — the  Scriptures 
of  Inspiration.  They  were  written  in  his  memory,  and  sealed 
upon  his  heart.  By  their  illumination  he  would  doubtless  have 
been  shown,  in  slow  but  sure  progression,  and  in  a  manner 
accordant  with  the  constitution  of  his  own  mind,  the  unscrip- 
tural  doctrines  and  superstitious  practices  that  had  been 
engrafted  upon  his  Church ;  and,  truth  having  once  impressed 

MEMOIR.  Ixxiii 

itself  upon  his  own  mind,  conscience  would  not  have  allowed 
him  to  withhold  his  convictions  from  others. 

In  this  way  he  would  have  been  led  to  see,  in  the  Jesuit- 
code  which  he  had  combated,  only  an  exaggeration  and  con- 
centrated form  of  the  subtle  and  pernicious  policy  of  the 
church  from  which  it  sprung.  His  denunciation  of  its  cor- 
ruptions and  perversions  would  have  opened  his  eyes  to  other 
evils,  such  as  indulgences,  monasticism  and  the  Inquisitorial  tri- 
bunals, which  had  their  origin  before  Jesuitism  was  known,  and 
grew  up  independently  of  its  influences.  The  iniquities  which 
that  system  had  introduced  into  the  Confessional,  would  have 
discovered  to  him  the  vices  inseparable  from  the  Confessional  it- 
self. And  the  buffooneries  of  Mariolatry,  which  he  had  so  keenly 
ridiculed,  would  have  brought  him  to  pause  upon  the  scriptural 
evidence  for  ascribing  any  divine  honours  to  the  Virgin. 

In  the  same  manner,  his  bold  rejection  of  Papal  infallibility 
must  have  opened  the  way  to  the  admission,  that  Councils 
(composed  as  they  were  merely  of  fallible  men)  might  fall  into 
error.  His  perception  of  the  growing  tyranny  of  the  Papal 
hierarchy  would  have  induced  him  to  long  for  a  church  which 
should  acknowledge  no  head  but  the  national  and  constitu- 
tional Ruler.  And,  yet  more,  must  his  own  love  and  venera- 
tion for  the  Scriptures  have  led  him,  ere  long,  to  resent  and 
resist  that  fruitful  source  of  all  error,  the  denial  or  restriction 
of  its  sacred  pages  from  the  great  body  of  the  Church. 

But  more  than  all,  would  his  persevering  and  enlightened 
study  of  that  unerring  Directory  have  brought  to  his  mind 
fresh  revelations  of  its  pure  and  salutary  doctrines.  His 
ardent  advocacy  of  those  which  he  had  already  embraced, 
especially  that  of  the  Divine  Influences — the  "  effectual  grace," 
as  by  way  of  distinction  it  was  then  scholastically  termed — 
could  have  scarcely  failed  in  due  time  to  prepare  him  for  a 
discovery  and  recognition,  with  Luther,  of  that  great  Reformer's 
cardinal  tenet  "  Justification  by  Faith."  Waiving  also — as 
questions  the  unravelling  of  which  is,  in  reality,  little  important 
to  man's  salvation — the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  decrees,  he 

d 

Ixxiv  MEMOIR. 

would  perhaps  have, found  that  narrower  bounds  than  he  had 
supposed,  divided  him,  in  its  essential  features,  from  the 
theological  system  of  Calvin  himself.  Then,  with  the  generous 
haste  that  characterized  him,  and  which  on  a  former  occasion 
he  had  so  gracefully  evinced,*  he  would  have  eagerly  retracted 
the  harsh  epithets  f  which  he  had  before  applied  to  the 
opinions  of  both  these  great  men.  And  equally  would  he 
have  been  led  to  reverse  the  sentence  which  he  had  once  so 
dehberately  pronounced,  J  that  salvation  was  alone  to  be 
found  within  the  bosom  of  a  church,  which  he  had  at  length 
discovered  to  be  so  degenerate  and  fallen  ! 

Yet  would  his  spirit  and  temper,  in  denouncing  the  errors 
of  that  Church — heretofore  so  loved — have  been  reverend  and 
chastised.  His  aim  would  have  been,  without  compromise  of 
truth,  to  correct,  to  purify,  and  to  restore.  And  thus  he  would 
have  been  progressively  assimilated  in  spirit  and  in  design 
with  that  noble  band  of  holy  and  devoted  men,  who  (especially 
in  our  own  thrice-happy  land)  achieved  and  secured,  for  them- 
selves and  their  posterity,  the  blessed  work  of  Reformation, 
whose  benefits  we,  at  this  day,  enjoy  ! 

This  would  have  been  Protestantism ;  and  then  another 
enquiry  presents  itself,  to  which  the  patience  of  the  reader 
may  be  for  a  moment  further  solicited, — what  would  the 
character  of  that  Protestantism  have  been  ? 

To  this,  the  whole  tenor  of  his  life  and  actions  may  be 
referred  to  for  an  answer.  It  would  have  been  consistent  and 
manly,  cautious  yet  decided,  slowly  matured,  but  unflinchingly 
maintained.  As  a  controversialist  he  would  have  continued, 
as  he  ever  had  been — explicit,  direct  and  intelligible.  In  his 
writings  there  would  have  been  no  coasting  between  truth  and 
error,  no  sophistical  distinctions,  no  mystifying  of  simple 
principles,  ho  frittering  down  of  vital  doctrines.  The  author 
of  the  Provincial  Letters  would  have  ever  used  the  simplest 
(although  the  most  eloquent)  language,  to  explain  his  own 

*  Letter  16,  Postscript, 
t  Letter  18.  I  Letter  17. 

MEMOIR.  IXXV 

views,  and  to  carry  conviction  to  others.     As  a  member  of  a 
church — whether   still  a  layman,    or    (as   is   less   probable) 
clothed   with    the    ecclesiastical    office  —  the    same    charac- 
teristics would  have   distinguished  him.     The  ritual  of  his 
advocacy  would  have  been  decent,  solemn,  pure ;  adapted  to 
man  as  a  being  of  earth,  yet  an  aspirant  to  heaven.     In  it 
there  would  have  been  no  resuscitation  of  wisely-forgotten 
customs,  no  stealthy  resumption  of  interdicted  observances, 
no   attitudinizing  *    in   a  reverend   and  holy   worship ;    no 
sentimentality,  in  the  great  business  between  man  and  his 
Maker.     The  discipline  also  that  he  aimed  to  enforce  would 
have  been  such  as  suited  free,  but  sound-hearted  men.     He 
would  have  smiled  at  the  puerility  of  attempting,  in  societies 
enjoying  only  (perhaps)   too  much  of  licence,   to  re-impose 
upon  conscience  rules  more  stringent  than  even  the  law  would 
sanction  ;  and  to  revive  from  the  dust  of  ages  enactments  such 
as  the  sounder  discretion    of  jurisprudence  allows   to  sleep 
undisturbed.     Deeply   attached   to  antiquity,    he  would  not 
have  deemed  all  wisdom  and  all  piety  concentrated  in  the 
early  centuries,  or  even   in  mediaeval  times.      Versed — in  a 
degree  to  which  few  polemics  have  attained — in  ancient,  as 
well  as  more  recent  literature,  he  would  have  assigned  to  each 
its  proper  merits,  and  tested  both  by  the  standard  of  inspired 
Truth.     Revering  the  clerical  body,  he  would  have  felt  that 
the  laity  had  also  their  rights  as  well  as  their  duties.     And, 
esteeming  a  pure  church,  and  a  scriptural  ritual,  to  be  the 
greatest  blessings  bestowed  upon  man,  and  the  source  of  all 
good  for  time  and  for  eternity,  he  would  have  scorned  the 
folly,  and  resented  the  presumption,  that  dared  to  disparage 
and  revile   these   inestimable   benefits ;    that  would   seek  to 
cramp  the  noblest  powers  of  the  mind,  and  weave  about  it 
chains  which  the  wisdom  and  piety  of  ages  had  combined 
indignantly  to  throw  off  ! 

If  these  conjectures  be  admissible,  who  can  doubt,  further, 

*  Johnson  (in  BoswcU). 

Ixxvi  MEMOIR. 

what  would  have  been  the  result.  Persecution  would  have 
maTked  him  for  its  victim  ;  and,  unless  the  growing  humanity 
of  the  times  had  interposed,  the  fires  of  martyrdom  might 
have  been  kindled  for  his  destruction.  Would  he  have  shrunk 
from  these  terrors,  or  succumbed  in  the  conflict  ?  Assuredly, 
the  same  unconquerable  spirit,  the  same  zeal  for  truth,  and 
the  same  confidence  in  the  holiness  of  his  cause,  would  have 
supported  him  through  an  ordeal  like  this,  as  they  had  done 
under  his  former  controversy  ;  and  he  would  have  braved  the 
vengeance  of  an  infuriated  hierarchy  with  the  same  calm 
intrepidity,  with  which  he  meekly  awaited  the  approach  of 
premature  decay,  from  the  slow,  but  more  afflictive  process  of 
suffering  and  disease. 

It  was,  indeed,  in  this  manner,  rather  than  that  which  has 
been  thus  placed  before  the  imagination,  that  it  pleased  the 
wisdom  of  Providence  to  cut  off,  in  its  early  bloom,  the 
promise  of  so  much  good  to  France  and  to  Eeligion.  Pascal 
was  removed  from  the  errors  and  imperfections  of  earth,  to  a 
worship,  purer  than  any  to  which  his  ardent  wishes  had 
aspired ;  and  his  country  was  destined  to  remain  in  nominal 
subjection  to  a  system  of  superstition,  which  the  better  portion 
of  her  intelligence  and  piety  have  long  combined  to  reject. 

The  remarks  of  M.  Villemain,  already  referred  to,  upon 
Pascal's  writing,  leave  little  to  be  said  here,  which  would  not 
impair  the  eifect  of  his  eloquent  comments.  It  has  been  seen, 
that  this  accomplished  critic  (than  whom  none  can  be  regarded 
as  better  representing  the  taste  and  judgment  of  modern 
French  literature)  has  not  feared  to  incur  the  charge  of 
exaggeration,  in  placing  him  among  the  very  greatest  of  writers, 
ancient  or  modern.  He  calls  him  the  creator  of  the  French 
style,  compares  his  humour  to  that  of  Moliere,  and  asserts 
that  passages  in  the  serious  parts  of  his  writings  equal  the 
highest  efforts  of  Demosthenes  or  Chrysostom.  In  this  he 
does  but  echo  the  suffrages  of  all  French  critics,  particularly 
those  of  the  last  century,   who  are  now  looked  back  upon  as 

MEMOIR.  Ixxvii 

the  great  arbiters  of  literary  merit.  Voltaire,  although  affect- 
ing to  undervalue  his  scientific  eminence  (which  he  perhaps 
could  hardly  appreciate,)  and  abhorring  his  religion,  lavishes 
praise  upon  the  purity  and  eloquence  of  his  writings.  Con- 
dorcet  declares  that  his  Letters  have  become  the  property  of 
all  conditions,  all  minds,  and  all  ages  ;  states  that  he  was  the 
only  French  writer,  up  to  his  time,  that  had  cultivated  nature 
and  elegance  in  style ;  and  enumerates  (not  hypercritically, 
but  with  admiration)  about  a  half-dozen  only  of  phrases  that 
in  his  day  had  become  objectionable  to  a  fastidious  taste. 
D'Alembert  also  regards  him  as  having  fixed  the  purity  of  the 
language,  and  says  that  his  idiom  (though  he  wrote  a  hundred 
years  before)  seemed  as  fresh  as  that  of  the  most  modern  au- 
thors ;  and  will  ever  be  regarded  as  a  model  of  taste  and  style. 

The  position  which  Pascal  holds  in  French  literature  may 
be  regarded  as  similar  to  that  of  Addison  in  our  own.  Both 
contributed,  more  than  any  writers  who  had  preceded  them, 
to  the  purity  and  grace  of  their  respective  languages.  But  if 
our  own  accomphshed  countryman  may  be  regarded  as  ex- 
celling Pascal,  and  almost  every  other  writer,  in  the  variety 
and  delicacy  of  the  beauties  of  his  compositions,  the  latter  must 
be  acknowledged  greatly  to  surpass  him  in  strength  and  eleva- 
tion. In  fact  he  seems  to  have  anticipated,  in  his  own  tongue, 
qualities  which,  in  ours,  it  took  a  century  to  mature ;  and  to 
have  combined  the  ease  and  finish  of  our  Augustan  era  with 
the  fire  and  energy  of  Junius  and  Burke,  and  the  dignity 
without  the  cumbrousness,  of  Johnson.  The  more  elaborate 
passages  of  Burke's  didactic  compositions  will  especially  remind 
the  reader  of  some  of  the  noble  apostrophes  and  eloquent  bursts 
scattered  throughout  the  Provincials.  And  in  regard  to  Junius, 
it  is  curious  to  remark  how  much  his  fine  compositions  seem 
to  have  been  formed  upon  the  model  of  Pascal's,*  although  the 

*  The  imitation  extends  even  to  the  interstitial  or  parenthetical 
Letters  of  Philo-Junius  occasionilly  thrown  into  the  series.  The  anony- 
mous disguise  of  this  writer  was  however  more  successfully  preserved 
than  that  of  his  predecessor. 

Ixxviii  MEMOIR. 

latter  has  far  the  advantage  of  his  political  imitator  in  the 
more  permanent  dignity  and  importance  of  his  subjects.  * 

The  humour  of  the  Provincial  Letters,  which  is  considered 
by  his  French  eulogists  to  constitute  so  high  a  portion  of  their 
merit,  will  not  perhaps  quite  equal  the  expectations  of  those, 
whose  taste  is  formed  upon  the  breadth  and  vigour  of  facetious 
compositions  in  our  language.  The  characteristics  of  Pascal's 
satire  seem  to  be  point  and  brilliancy,  with  an  excessive 
refinement  and  delicacy  ;  and  a  fastidiousness  that  almost 
checks  his  pen,  when  he  is  on  the  verge  of  some  of  those 
"  palpable  hits,"  which  a  less  chastened  writer  would  have 
perhaps  rendered  more  effective.  His  story-telling  (witness 
his  Jean  B'Alba)  is  so  delightful,  that  #e  feel  almost  wronged 
by  his  niggardhness,  when  his  resources  must  have  been  so 
abundant.  Some  of  the  more  delicate  strokes  likewise,  may 
lose  a  little  of  their  attractiveness  by  transfusion  into  another 
language,  and  imperfect  local  and  national  knowledge ;  and 
the  nature  of  the  subjects  upon  which  he  treated,  and  his  own 
purity  and  reserve  of  disposition,  imposed  much  of  becoming 
restraint  upon  his  evident  talent  for  the  ludicrous.  As  to  the 
serious  parts  of  his  vn-iting,  however,  the  language  of  admira- 
tion can  scarcely  rise  too  high.  The  lucid  arrangement  of  his 
subjects,  the  sustained  argument,  the  keen,  yet  measured 
invective,  the  impassioned  declamation — the  abrupt  openings, 
and  the  magnificent  perorations — all  combine  to  fill  the  mind, 
to  raise  the  imagination,  and  to  satisfy  the  taste,  to  a  degree 
not  surpassed  by  any  other  efforts  of  human  composition. 

But  there  is  a  charm  occasionally  exhibited  by  these  beau- 
tiful writings  which  appears  to  exceed  any  that  have  been 

*  It  has  been  said  that  our  historian  Gibbon  was  so  attached  to  Pas- 
cal's -writings,  and  the  "  Letters  "  in  particular,  that  he  read  them  inces- 
santly. If  this  be  true,  it  is  perhaps  more  surprising  that  his  own 
artificial,  though  elegant  style  of  composition,  should  not  have  derived 
more  advantage  from  the  stady  of  so  pure  a  model,  than  that  his  rigid 
infidelity  was  in  no  degree  softened  by  the  contemplation  of  the  writer's 
simple  faith  and  piety.  In  such  a  case  as  Gibbon's  the  taste,  was  likely, 
unhappily,  to  be  more  accessible  than  the  principles. 

MEMOIR.  Ixxix 

enumerated.  It  is  those  rests  and  pauses,  that  from  time  to 
time  occur  in  the  conduct  of  his  "  high  argument,"  which  he 
seems  with  eagerness  to  embrace,  for  the  purpose  of  expatiat- 
ing upon  some  cherished  topic  of  Christian  doctrine  or  practice  ; 
or  to  pursue  a  train  of  dignified  exposition  of  some  subject  of 
universal  interest.  It  is  then  that  he  seems  to  let  the  weapons 
of  controversy  fall  willingly  to  the  ground  ;  then  the  ruffled 
and  flattering  plumage  subsides ;  and  the  expanded  wing 
floats  calmly  and  gracefully  over  the  waters  of  strife  and 
debate.  Instances  of  this  nature  will  occur  readily  to  the 
reader ;  such  as  his  repeated  inculcation  of  the  necessity  of 
spiritual  influences,  and  the  duties  of  charity  and  self-denial ; 
his  fine  analysis  of  the  laws,  civil  and  divine,  on  the  subject  of 
homicide,*  the  fallibility  of  the  Popes,f  and  many  others. 

To  conclude,  however,  these  desultory  remarks,  it  ought 
never  to  be  forgotten,  that  there  were  objects  proposed  by 
Pascal  far  higher  than  the  display  of  his  powers  as  a  writer, 
or  the  gratification  of  his  readers'  taste.  The  portraiture 
given  in  this  work  of  the  Jesuit-system  and  polity  would  be 
interesting  to  the  observer  of  human  nature,  if  the  colouring 
were  not  that  of  genius  and  eloquence ;  it  would  be  instructive 
to  posterity,  if  the  Society  of  Jesus  had  ceased  to  exist,  and 
its  principles  were  no  longer  influential  upon  individuals  or 
communities.  In  what  degree  the  exhibition  now  furnished 
has  a  bearing  upon  present  times,  upon  existing  circumstances, 
and  passing  events,  needs  here  no  further  comment,  but  may 
be  most  appropriately  left  to  the  intelligence  and  discernment 
of  the  British  public. 

*  Letter  14.  t  Letter  18. 

ERRATA. 

PAGE. 

Memoir,  Ixxvij.  Note,  for  "  occasionilly,"  read  "  occasionally." 
Letters,       67  Note,  for  "  suget,"  read  "  sujet." 

„  71  line  14,  for  "  favorabilios,"  read  "  favorabilior.' 

„  281  Note,  for  '  calomnia,"  read  "  calomnier." 

„  378  Note,  for  "  ou,"  read  "  on." 

Appendix,   432  line  12,  for  "  stage,"  read  "  state." 

PROVINCIAL  LETTERS. 

LETTER  I. 

ON    THE    DISPUTES    OF    THE    SORBONNE. 

Sir,  Paris,  Jan.  23,  1656. 

We  have  been  imposed  upon.  It  was  only  yesterday 
that  I  was  undeceived.  Up  to  that  time  I  had  enter- 
tained the  belief  that  the  disputes  in  the  Sorbonne  were 
upon  matters  of  importance ;  and  especially  so  to  the  inter- 
ests of  religion.  So  many  meetings  of  a  body  of  such  ce- 
lebrity as  the  Faculty  of  Theology  of  Paris,  and  in  which 
matters  of  such  extraordinary — such  unexampled  mo- 
ment had  been  discussed,  led,  unavoidably,  to  the  belief, 
that  the  subjects  under  deliberation  were  of  the  most 
vital  nature.  You  will  be  surprised,  then,  to  learn,  by  the 
account  I  am  about  to  give  you, — and  on  the  best  informa- 
tion,— what  has  been  the  insignificant  result  of  such  large 
preparations. 

Two  questions  were  discussed;  the  one  of  circum- 
stance, the  other  of  principle — the  facts,  and  the  merits,  of 
the  case. 

The  question  of  fact   was,  whether   M.  Arnauld  had 

2  LETTER   I. 

been  guilty  of  indiscretion  in  stating  in  his  second  letter, 
"  that  he  had  carefully  read  Jansenius'  book,  and  had  not 
been  able  to  discover  in  it  the  propositions  condemned  by 
the  late  Pope ;  and  yet,  being  himself  opposed  to  those 
propositions,  wherever  they  might  be  found,  he  vras 
ready  to  condemn  them  in  Jansenius,  provided  they  were 
really  contained  in  his  work." 

The  point  then  raised  was,  whether  he  was  justified  in 
declaring  his  doubts  that  these  propositions  were  to  be 
found  in  Jansenius,  after  the  reverend  the  Bishops  had 
asserted  that  they  were  in  the  book  ? 

This  question  was  laid  before  the  Sorbonne.  Seventy- 
one  doctors  undertook  his  defence ;  and  maintained  that 
he  was  not  bound  to  make  any  other  reply  than-  the  one 
he  did  make  to  those  who  had,  in  such  various  publica- 
tions, demanded  of  him,  whether  he  maintained  these  pro- 
positions to  be  in  the  book,  unless  he  had  actually  seen 
them  there ;  while  at  the  same  time,  he  professed  to  con- 
demn them,  if  they  should  be  proved  to  be  in  the  work 
in  question. 

Some  of  them  even  (a  little  in  advance  of  their  brethren) 
declared,  "  that  after  the  strictest  search,  they  could  find 
nothing  of  the  kind  in  the  work ;  but  on  the  contrary, 
had  discovered  sentiments  quite  opposed  to  the  proposi- 
tions." After  this,  they  categorically  demanded  that,  if 
any  of  the  learned  doctors  had  themselves  seen  them, 
they  should  point  them  out — a  thing  so  easy  as  not  to 
admit  of  a  justifiable  refusal ;  and  the  most  efiiectual  way 
to  silence  all  the  others,  and  even  M.  Arnauld  himself. 
This  however  was  uniformly  refused.  You  have  now 
the  summary  of  all  that  passed  upon  this  point. 

DISPUTES   OF   THE    SORBONNE.  3 

On  the  other  handj  there  were  twenty-four  of  the  Sepu- 
lar^  and  about  forty-six  of  the  Regular  DoctorSj  who  con- 
demned M.  Arnauld's  propositions ;  without  however, 
examining  whether  they  were  true  or  false ;  but  stating 
that  the  question  with  them  was,  not  as  to  their  truth, 
but  only  as  to  the  temerity  of  the  author  in  propounding 
them. 

There  were  fifteen  others,  not  in  favor  of  the  censure ; 
and  who  are  termed  neutrals. 

This  is  the  way,  then,  in  which  the  question  of  the  fact 
has  been  settled,  about  which  I  do  not  give  myself  much 
concern.  Whether  M.  Arnauld  had  been  rash  or  not, 
is  no  point  of  conscience  with  me.  And,  if  curiosity 
should  lead  me  to  enquire,  whether  these  propositions  be 
really  to  be  found  in  Jansenius,  his  book  is  neither  so 
scarce  nor  so  voluminous,  but  that  I  may  be  able  to 
search  through  the  whole  of  it,  without  consulting  the 
Sorbonne. 

But  if  I  were  not  apprehensive  myself,  of  appearing  in- 
discreet, I  should  be  of  the  same  mind  as  most  of  those 
around  me ;  who,  although  hitherto  impressed  with  the 
belief,  that  these  propositions  were  to  be  found  in  Janse- 
nius, begin  now  to  suspect  the  contrary,  from  the  strange 
refusal  on  the  part  of  his  accusers,  of  all  proof  to  that 
effect ;  for  never  have  I  yet  found  any  one  who  could  tell 
me  that  they  had  actually  seen  them  there.  On  this  ac- 
count I  fear  that  this  censure  will  prove  to  have  done  more 
harm  than  good  j  and  may  convey  to  those  unacquainted 
with  its  origin,  an  impression  quite  opposed  to  the  general 
conclusion.  In  truth,  people  are  becoming  suspicious, 
and  will  believe  nothing  but  what  they  have  really  seen. 

B  2 

i  LETTER   I. 

But,  as  I  have  said  already,  this  point  is  of  little  im- 
portance, since  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  any  question  of 
faith. 

As  to  the  question  of  principle  (the  merits  of  the  case) 
that  seemed  much  more  important,  inasmuch  as  it  might 
involve  one  of  faith.  On  this  account,  I  have  taken 
especial  pains  to  inform  myself  upon  the  matter ;  but 
you  will  be  much  pleased  to  learn,  that  this  also  is  as 
insignificant  as  the  preceding. 

The  question  arose  as  to  what  M.  Arnauld  had  said 
in  the  same  letter,  viz.  "  that  Grace,  without  which  man 
can  do  nothing,  had  failed  in  Peter,  at  the  period  of  his 
fall."  You  and  I  had  both  supposed  that  the  question 
was  as  to  the  great  principle  of  grace,  whether  it  had 
been  conferred  upon  all  men,  or,  at  least,  whether  it  is 
efficacious  in  all :  but  we  were  mistaken.  I  have  speedily 
become  a  great  theologian;  and  you  shall  now  see  a 
proof  of  my  proficiency. 

In  order  to  get  at  the  truth,  I  procured  an  interview 
with  M.  N ,  a  Navarrese  doctor,  and  my  near  neigh- 
bour; who,  as  you  know,  is  one  of  the  most  zealous 
opponents  of  the  Jansenists :  and,  as  my  curiosity  ren- 
dered me  almost  equally  ardent  in  the  matter  with  him- 
self, I  asked  him,  whether  it  had  not  been  formally  de- 
cided, "  that  grace  is  given  to  all  men ; "  in  order  that 
this  question  might  be  no  longer  one  of  controversy.  He 
replied,  however,  with  some  abruptness,  that  this  was  not 
the  point  at  issue ;  that  there  were  some  among  his  party 
who  held,  that  grace  has  not  been  bestowed  upon  all ; 
that  the  Examiners  themselves  had  said,  in  full  College, 
that  this  opinion  is  a   problematical  one;  and  that  he 

DISPUTES   OF   THE   SORBONNE.  5 

himself  entertained  the  same  view.  Tn  confirmation  of 
this  he  cited  a  celebrated  passage  of  St.  Augustine,  "  We 
know  that  grace  is  not  given  to  all  men." 

I  begged  his  excuse  for  having  misapprehended  his 
opinioUj  and  requested  him  to  inform  me,  whether  he  did 
not,  at  least,  condemn  that  other  position  of  the  Jan- 
senists,  which  had  caused  so  much  excitement,  viz.  that 
"  Grace  is  effectual,  and  operates  upon  our  will  for  the 
production  of  good  works  ? "  But  I  was  not  more 
fortunate  in  this,  than  in  my  previous  enquiry.  "  You 
are  quite  mistaken,"  he  replied;  "this  is  no  heresy  j  it  is 
an  orthodox  opinion  :  all  the  '  Thomists '  hold  it ;  and  I 
myself  have  entertained  it  as  a  member  of  the  Sorbonne." 
I  did  not  dare  to  explain  my  doubts  to  him — and  indeed 
I  began  to  be  not  very  clear  wherein  my  difficulty 
lay ;  but  in  order  to  get  further  information,  I  re- 
quested him  to  inform  me,  in  what  the  heresy  of  M. 
Arnauld  consisted.  "  It  is  in  this,"  he  replied, — "  he 
does  not  acknowledge  that  the  just  have  power  to  perform 
the  commandments  of  God,  in  the  way  in  which  we  un- 
derstand the  matter." 

I  left  him  after  this ;  and,  proud  of  having  penetrated 

to  the  bottom  of  the  question,  I  found  out  M.  N 

who  was  getting  gradually  better,  and  was  sufficiently  re- 
covered to  take  me  to  his  brother-in-law,  a  Jansenist, 
(if  ever  one  was  to  be  found,)  yet  notwithstanding  that, 
a  very  good  man.  To  insure  a  favourable  reception,  I 
professed  myself  quite  of  his  own  views,  and  accosted  him 
thus,  "  Is  it  possible  that  the  Sorbonne  has  introduced  into 
the  Church  such  an  error  as  this,  that  '  the  just  have 
always  power  to  keep  the  commandments  ?'  "     "What  do 

6  LETTER   I. 

you  mean  ? "  said  the  doctor  to  me,  "  do  you  call  such  a 
Catholic  sentiment  as  this,  error — a  sentiment  that  none 
hut  Lutherans  and  Calvinists  oppose  ?  "  "  "What,"  said  I, 
"  is  this  not  your  opinion  ?  "  "  No,"  he  replied,  "  we 
anathematize  it,  as  impious  and  heretical."  Surprised  at 
this  reply,  I  saw  that  I  had  carried  the  Jansenist  too 
far,  as  I  had  before  assumed  too  much  of  a  Molinist ; 
but  feeling  still  uncertain  of  the  real  meaning  of  his 
answer,  I  requested  him  to  tell  me,  in  confidence,  whether 
he  held,  "  that  the  just  always  possess  an  actual  power  to 
keep  the  commandments  ?  "  My  friend,  upon  this,  be- 
came  warm,  (though  his  zeal  plainly  originated  in  devout 
motives) ;  and  said,  he  should  never  conceal  his  opinions, 
such  as  they  were  ;  "  this  was  his  belief,"  he  said,  "  and 
he,  and  all  his  party  would  defend  them  to  their  last  hour, 
for  they  were  the  pure  doctrines  of  St.  Thomas  and  of  St. 
Augustine  their  master."  He  spoke  so  seriously,  that  I 
could  doubt  no  longer ;  and  after  this  confirmation,  re^ 
turned  to  my  learned  friend,  and  said,  with  much  satisfac- 
tion, I  was  sure  peace  would  soon  be  restored  in  the 
Sorbonne;  that  the  Jansenists  were  agreed  as  to  the 
power  of  the  just  to  keep  the  commandments ;  that  I 
would  answer  for  them ;  and  had  their  own  word  for  it, 
that  they  would  seal  the  opinion  with  their  blood. 
"  Softly,  my  friend,"  said  he;  "  you  ought  to  be  a  theolo' 
gian,  to  understand  this  matter.  The  difference  between 
us  is  so  subtle  that  we  can  scarcely  explain  it  ourselves  : 
you  would  have  difficulty  in  apprehending  it.  Be  satisfied 
to  be  informed  that  the  Jansenists  are  right  when  they 
assert  that  the  just  have  power  to  keep  the  command- 
ments    this  is  not  the  matter  in   dispute  :  but  they  do 

DISPUTES   OP    THE   SORBONNK.  7 

not  tell  you  that  this  power  is  a  '  proximate '  one.*  This 
is  after  all  the  great  point." 

This  word  was  to  me  new  and  unknown.  Up  to  this 
time  I  had  seen  my  way ;  but  I  was  now  involved  in 
darkness  ;  and  I  believe  the  expression  was  invented  only 
to  perplex  the  enquiry.  I  requested  him  to  explain  him- 
self ;  but  he  became  mysterious,  and  dismissed  me,  with- 
out further  satisfaction,  to  enquire  of  the  Jansenists, 
whether  they  allowed  of  this  '  proximate  power  ; '  I  taxed 
my  memory  to  recal  the  word ;  for  as  to  the  understand- 
ing it,  it  was  out  of  all  question.  And  lest  it  should  escape 
me  again,  I  repaired  immediately  to  my  friend  the  Jan- 
senist;  and,  after  the  first  civilities  had  passed,  said 
abruptly,  "  Tell  me,  I  beg,  do  you  allow  of  a  '  proximate ' 
power  ?  "  He  laughed,  and  drily  said,  "  Tell  me  your- 
self in  what  sense  you  understand  the  term,  and  then  I 
will  tell  you  what  I  believe  about  it."  As  my  knowledge 
did  not  extend  so  far  as  this,  I  was  little  prepared  with  a 
reply ;  but,  not  willing  wholly  to  fail  in  the  object  of  my 
visit,  I  said  at  a  venture,  "  I  understand  it  in  the  same 
sense  as  the  Molinists."  "  Who,  my  friend  ? "  said 
he,  still  coolly,  "  which  of  the  Molinists  do  you  refer  to  ?  " 
I  knew  of  no  distinction  between  them,  but  supposed 
them  to  be  all  of  one  party,  and  to  hold  the  same  views. 

He  rejoined  however,  "  You  are  under  a  mistake.  So 
far  from  being  the  same,  they  hold  opinions  quite  opposed 
to  each  other.  United  only  in  the  one  object  of  ruining  M. 
Arnauld,  they  have  all  agreed  to  adopt  this  term  '  proxi- 
mate,' that  they  may  appear  to  hold  the  same  language, 
although  they  put   different  constructions  upon  it;  and 

*  'Prochain.'  (Fr.) 

8  LETTER  I. 

thusj  through  an  apparent  conformity,  may  form  one 
large  and  united  body  for  the  purpose  of  oppressing  him 
the  more  effectually." 

I  was  surprised  at  this  reply ;  but  being  unwilling  to 
adopt  these  unfavourable  impressions  of  the  Molinists 
upon  his  word  only — and  in  fact  having  no  interest  my- 
self in  the  matter, — I  persisted  in  my  endeavours  to  ascer- 
tain the  various  senses  in  which  they  used  this  mysterious 
word. 

He  replied,  "I  would  inform  you  with  all  my  heart; 
but  you  would  find  such  gross  inconsistency  and  contra- 
diction as  you  would  be  scarcely  able  to  credit.  You 
would  think  I  was  deceiving  you.  You  would  be  more 
satisfied  in  questioning  the  parties  themselves  j  and  for 
this  purpose,  I  will  refer  you  to  some  of  them.  Call 
separately  upon  M.  Le  Moine  and  Pere  Nicolai."  "  I  am 
not  acquainted  with  either,"  I  said.  "  See  then,"  he  re- 
joined, "  whether  you  know  some  of  these,"  naming 
others:  "  for  they  hold  the  same  opinion  as  M.  Le  Moine." 
I  found  I  was  acquainted  with  some  of  these,  and  deter- 
mined to  follow  his  advice,  and  sift  the  affair  further.  I 
left  him ;  and  first  of  all  repaired  to  one  of  the  disciples  of 
M.  Le  Moine. 

I  entreated  him  to  inform  me  what  was  the  meaning  of 
a  "  proximate  "  power  to  do  any  thing.  "  Nothing  is 
more  easy,"  he  rephed, — "  it  is  to  have  every  thing  that 
is  necessary  to  do  any  thing,  so  that  nothing  is  wanting 
for  proceeding  to  action."  "Then,"  said  I,  "to  have 
the  '  proximate '  power  of  fording  a  river,  is  to  be  pro- 
vided with  a  boat,  boatmen,  oars,  and  so  on  ;  in  fact,  with 
every  thing  needful."     "Exactly  so,"  he  rejoined.    "And 

DISPUTES   OP    THE   SORBONNE.  9 

to  have  the  '  proximate '  power  to  see,"  I  addedj  "  is  to 
have  good  sight  and  a  clear  noon-day  ;  for  any  one  having 
a  good  sightj  in  the  midst  of  darkness,  would  not,  as  we 
hold,  have  a 'proximate'  power  of  seeing;  light  being 
wanting,  without  which  no  one  can  see."  "  Very 
just,"  he  said.  ''And,  consequently,"  I  continued, 
"  when  you  say  that  the  just  possess  a  '  proximate  '  power 
to  keep  the  commandments,  you  must  understand,  that 
they  have  all  the  grace  required  for  obedience,  so  that 
nothing  is  deficient  on  the  part  of  God."  "  Listen  to 
me,"  said  he,  "  they  have  all  that  is  necessary  for  obedi- 
ence, or  at  least  they  may  ask  it  of  God."  "  I  understand 
you,"  I  said,  "  they  have  all  that  is  required,  to  pray  to 
God  for  assistance,  without  requiring  any  further  grace 
from  God  to  enable  them  to  pray."  "  You  understand 
the  point,"  he  replied.  "  But  is  it  not  necessary  to  have 
an  effectual  grace  in  order  to  pray  to  God  ?  "  "  No,"  he 
replied,  "not  according  to  M.  Le  Moine." 

That  I  might  lose  no  time,  I  next  proceeded  to 
the  Dominicans,  and  enquired  for  some  whom  I  knew 
to  be  of  the  party  called  "  New  Thomists."  I  begged 
them  to  tell  me  the  meaning  of  the  "  proximate " 
power.  "  Is  it  not  that,"  said  I,  "  in  which  nothing 
is  deficient,  but  every  thing  prepared  for  action?" 
"No,"  they  answered.  "What,  my  Father,  if  any 
thing  should  be  incomplete  in  the  'power  '  in  question, 
would  you  then  call  it  '  proximate '  ?  For  instance, 
would  you  say  of  a  man  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  and 
without  light  of  any  kind,  that  he  had  the  '  proximate  ' 
power  to  see  ?  "  "  Doubtless,  that  is  our  opinion,  if  he 
were  not  blind."     "Very  good,"  said  I,  "  but  yet  M.  Le 

B  5 

10  LETTER   I. 

Moine  seems  to  think  otherwise."  "  It  may  be  so,"  they 
rejoined,  "  but  this  is  our  view."  "  I  understand  you  per- 
fectly," I  said,  "  as  for  me,  I  am  not  fond  of  disputing 
about  terms,  provided  I  have  a  correct  idea  of  the  sense 
in  which  they  are  used.  But,  I  now  see,  that  when  you 
say  the  just  have  always  a  '  proximate '  power  to  pray  to 
God,  you  mean  that  they  require  some  further  assistance, 
or  else  they  cannot  pray  at  all."  "  Admirable,"  cried  the 
Father,  embracing  me,  "  Admirable !  you  know  very 
well  that  there  is  an  effectual  grace  required  (and  which 
is  not  conferred  upon  all  men)  to  incline  their  will  to 
prayer;  and  it  is  therefore  heretical  to  deny  the  necessity 
of  this  '  effectual  grace  '  to  enable  us  to  pray." 

"  This  is  all  very  clear,"  said  I,  in  my  turn,  "  but, 
according  to  you,  the  Jansenists  are  catholic,  and  M.  Le 
Sloine  heretical ;  for  the  Jansenists  say,  the  just  have 
power  to  pray,  but  nevertheless  require  effectual  grace  to 
do  so :  and  this  seems  to  be  your  opinion.  Now  M.  Le 
Moine  holds,  that  the  just  pray  without  any  effectual 
grace ;  and  this  you  condemn."  True,"  said  they,  "  but 
M.  Le  Moine  calls  this  power,  a  '  power  proximate.'  " 

"  What !  reverend  sir,"  I  cried,  "  why,  this  is  mere  tri- 
fling with  words,  to  talk  of  agreement  on  account  of  making 
use  of  certain  common  terms,  when  you  differ  on  the  sense 
of  them."  The  Father  made  no  reply :  and  at  this  mo- 
ment, by  a  most  fortunate  coincidence,  as  I  considered  it, 
my  friend,  M.  Le  Moine' s  pupil  arrived ;  although  I  have 
since  found  that  their  meetings  are  not  infrequent. 

Upon  this,  I  said  to  my  friend,  "  I  am  acquainted  with 
a  person  who  maintains  that  all  just  persons  have  the 
power  of  praying  to  God;  but  that,  nevertheless,  they 

DISPUTES   OP   THE   SORBONNE.  11 

will  never  pray  without  an  effectual  grace  to  incline  tliem 
to  do  so;  and  this  God  does  not  grant  to  all  just  persons. 
Is  he  a  heretic?"  "Stay,"  said  the  Doctor;  "you  take 
me  by  surprise ;  let  us  proceed  quietly ;  '  distinguo.'  If 
he  call  this  a  '  proximate  power,'  he  is  a  Thomist,  and 
so  far,  a  Catholic ;  if  not,  he  is  a  Jansenist,  and  then  a 
Heretic."  "  He  does  not  call  it,"  said  I,  "  either  '  prox- 
imate,' or  '  not  proximate/  "  "  Then  he  is  a  heretic," 
he  rejoined;  "ask  these  worthy  Fathers."  I  was  not 
disposed  to  refer  again  for  their  judgment,  as  their  as- 
senting nods  had  already  declared  their  opinion ;  but  I 
said  to  them,  "  He  refuses  to  admit  this  word  '  proxi- 
mate ; '  for  he  can  get  no  explanation  of  it."  On  this, 
one  of  the  Fathers  was  about  to  make  another  attempt  at 
explanation,  but  he  was  interrupted  by  the  pupil  of  M. 
Le  Moine,  saying,  "  Do  not  let  us  begin  our  broils  again. 
Have  we  not  agreed  not  to  explain  this  word  '  proximate,' 
but  to  pass  it  on  from  one  to  another  without  saying  what 
is  meant  by  it  ?  "     To  this  the  Dominican  assented. 

By  this  time  I  saw  their  design;  and  rising  to  take 
leave,  I  said,  "  Truly,  reverend  Fathers,  I  am  greatly 
afraid  that  all  this  is  mere  trickery  on  your  part ;  and, 
whatever  else  may  result  from  your  councils,  I  venture  to 
predict  that,  when  your  censures  shall  be  pronounced,  peace 
will  not  be  restored.  For  when  you  have  decided  that  these 
mere  syllables  'pro-chain, '  (proximate)  shall  be  adopted, 
who  can  doubt,  that — no  definite  meaning  being  attached 
to  them,  each  of  you  will  claim  the  victory  ?  The  Domi- 
nican will  say  that  the  word  is  to  be  understood  in  their 
sense;  and  thus,  there  will  be  more  dispute  upon  its  pro- 
per explanation,  than  upon  its  introduction  :  for,  after  all, 

13  LETTER   I. 

what  great  danger  will  there  be  in  receiving  it  when  no 
particular  sense  is  assigned  to  it?  It  is  the  meaning 
only  that  can  make  it  hurtful.  But  surely  it  would  be 
unworthy  both  of  the  Sorbonne  and  of  the  theology  they 
teach,  to  use  equivocal  and  deceptive  terms,  without 
affording  any  explanation  of  them.  Therefore,  Fathers, 
for  the  last  time,  I  entreat  you  tell  me,  what  it  is 
that,  as  a  Catholic,  I  ought  to  believe?"  "You  ought," 
said  they,  speaking  all  together,  "  to  acknowledge  that  all 
the  just  have  the  '  proximate  power,'  but  in  a  certain 
abstract  sense  ;  ahstrahendo  a  sensu  Thomistarum,  et  a 
sensu  aliorum  theologorum." 

"  That  is,"  said  I,  as  I  departed,  "  you  must  pronounce 
certain  words  with  the  lips,  to  avoid  the  stigma  of  heresy. 
But,  after  all,  is  this  word  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures  ?  " 
"  No,"  they  replied.  "  Is  it  then,  in  the  Fathers,  or  the 
Councils;  or  authorised  by  the  Papacy  ?  "  "No."  "Is 
it  in  St.  Thomas?"  "No."  "Why  then  must  it  be 
used,  if  there  is  no  authority  for  it,  and  no  meaning  in 
it?"  " You  are  obstinate,"  said  they,  "You  must  use 
it,  or  you  are  a  Heretic,  and  M.  Arnauld,  also :  for  we  are 
the  most  numerous  party ;  and  if  necessary,  we  can  get  as 
many  Grey-Friars  as  we  wish,  and  carry  the  day  upon 
the  question." 

On  hearing  the  last  reason,  I  left  them,  to  send  you 
the  preceding  account ;  by  which  you  will  see,  that  there 
is  no  real  controversy  upon  any  of  the  following  points, 
but  that  they  remain  uncondemned  on  one  side  as  well  as 
the  other,  viz,  "  1.  Grace  is  not  given  to  all  men.  2. 
The  just  have  always  the  power  to  obey  God's  command- 
ments.    3.  They  need,  nevertheless,  for  obeying  the  com- 

DISPUTES   OF   THE   SOEBONNE.  13 

mandmentSj  and  even  to  enable  them  to  pray,  an  effectual 
grace,  to  constrain  and  influence  the  will.  4.  This  effec- 
tual grace  is  not  bestowed  upon  all  men,  but  results 
from  the  pure  mercy  of  God."  So  that,  after  all,  there  is 
no  danger  but  in  the  mere  word  '  proximate ; '  and  that, 
without  having  any  definite  meaning  attached  to  it. 

Happy  those  who  never  heard  it  !  happy  those  who 
lived  before  its  invention  !  For  I  see  no  remedy,  but  for 
the  Academy,  by  the  exercise  of  their  prerogative,  to  banish 
from  the  Sorbonne  this  barbarous  word,  which  occasions 
so  much  discord.  Unless  this  be  done,  the  censure  will 
certainly  be  pronounced ;  but  I  consider  that  it  will  have 
no  other  effect  than  to  lower  the  Sorbonne,  and  to  dimi- 
nish its  authority  in  carrying  on  successfully  future  con- 
troversies. 

As  to  yourself,  I  leave  you  full  liberty  to  adhere  to  the 
term  '  proximate,''  or  not ;  for  I  love  you  too  well  to  make 
this  a  source  of  molestation.  If  these  details  should 
prove  not  unacceptable,  I  will  continue  to  inform  you  of 
what  passes ;  and,  in  the  meantime,  I  am,  &c.  &c. 

LETTER  II. 

ON   A    SUFFICIENCY   OP   GRACE. 

SiK,  Paris,  Jan.  39,  1656. 

Just  as  I  had  closed  my  last  letter,  I  was,  fortunately 
for  the  satisfaction  of  my  curiosity,  visited  by  your  old 
friend  M.  N.,  for  he  is  thoroughly  well-informed  upon 
the  popular  topics,  and  intimately  acquainted  with  all  the 
secrets  of  the  Jesuits ; — in  fact  he  is  on  terms  of  fami- 
liarity with  their  Principals,  and  sees  them  all  continually. 
After  mentioning  the  object  of  his  visit,  I  requested  him 
to  tell  me  precisely  what  were  the  points  in  debate 
between  the  two  parties. 

He  proceeded  at  once  to  satisfy  me,  and  informed  me 
there  were  two  especial  questions :  the  one  respecting 
the  "proximate  power ;  "  the  second  respecting  "  sufficient 
grace."*  I  gave  you  in  my  last  letter,  the  history  of  the 
former ;  I  will  now  proceed  to  acquaint  you  with  that  of 
the  latter. 

I  found  then,  in  a  word,  that  the  controversy  respecting 
this  "  sufficient  grace,"  consists  herein.  The  Jesuits 
maintain  that  a  certain  measure  of  grace  is  given  to  men 

*  '  Grace  sufEsante' (Fr.) 

SUFFICIENCY    OP   GRACE.  15 

generally,  yet,  so  far  subjected  to  their  free  will,  as  to  be 
rendered  either  effectual  or  otherwise,  without  any  further 
aid  from  God ;  and  that  it  needs  nothing  more  to  render 
it  productive  and  efficient ;  which  gives  rise  to  the  appel- 
lation "  sufficient,"  it  being  of  itself  sufficient  for  active 
purposes.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Jansenists  hold  that 
there  is  no  sufficient  grace,  which  is  not  effectual  also ; 
in  other  words,  that  grace  which  does  not  incline  the  will 
to  effective  action,  is  insufficient  for  action ;  because  as 
they  maintain,  none  can  act  without  "  effectual  grace." 
This  is  their  point  of  difference. 

And,  in  reference  to  the  doctrines  of  the  new  Sect  of 
Thomists,  he  gave  me  the  information  which  follows. 
They  were  eccentric  and  inconsistent ;  they  agree  with 
the  Jesuits,  that  a  sufficiency  of  grace  is  enjoyed  by  all 
men  ;  but  they  assert,  nevertheless,  that  none  can  produce 
works  with  this  grace  alone,  and  that,  for  this  purpose, 
God  must  bestow  upon  them  an  "effectual  grace,"  by 
which  their  will  must  be  impelled  to  act ;  and  which 
latter  is  not  bestowed  upon  all  men.  "  Therefore,"  said  I, 
"  according  to  this  doctrine,  the  grace  in  question  is 
sufficient,  and  insufficient." — "Just  so,"  he  replied, 
"  for  if  it  be  sufficient,  nothing  more  can  be  required  ; 
if  insufficient,  why  then — it  is  insufficient." 

"  But  then,"  I  said  again,  "  what  is  the  difference 
between  them  and  the  Jansenists  ? "  "  There  is  this 
difference,'^  he  said,  "  the  Dominicans  are  entitled  to  this 
credit,  that  they  never  fail  to  say,  that  all  men  have 
sufficiency  of  grace."  "I  understand  you,'^  he  replied, 
"  but  they  say  this  without  reflection ;  for  they  add,  that, 
in  order  to  act,  it   is  necessary   to    enjoy   an  '  effectual 

16  LETTER   II. 

grace/  whicli  is  not  bestowed  upon  all  men,  Thus  they 
agree  with  the  Jesuits,  in  using  an  unmeaning  term ; 
they  differ  from  them,  and  hold  with  the  Jansenists,  in 
substance  and  reality."  "  You  are  right,"  he  said. 
"  How  is  it  then,"  I  enquired,  "  that  the  Jesuits  have 
made  common  cause  with  them,  and  that  they  do  not 
oppose  them,  as  they  do  the  Jansenists  ?  Surely  they 
must  find  them  powerful  adversaries,  holding  as  they  do  the 
necessity  of  an  effectual  grace  to  determine  the  will,  and 
thus  opposing  their  own  favorite  positions  ?  " 

"  The  Dominicans  are  powerful,"  he  added,  "  and  the 
society  of  Jesuits  are  too  politic  to  crush  them  openly. 
It  is  sufficient  for  their  purpose  that  they  have  been 
brought  to  allow  the  term,  "  sufficient  grace  ;  "  although 
they  understand  it  in  a  different  sense.  They  thus  have 
this  advantage  over  them,  that  their  opinions  are  put 
down  as  untenable,  whenever  it  serves  a  purpose  to  do 
so — a  thing  easily  accomplished.  For  supposing  all  men 
to  have  a  sufficiency  of  grace,  nothing  is  more  natural 
than  the  inference,  that  effectual  grace  is  not  necessary 
for  good  works ;  since  the  sufficiency  of  this  general 
grace  would  supersede  the  necessity  of  any  other.  The 
very  term  "  sufficient,"  denotes  all  that  is  necessary  for 
action;  and  it  would  little  avail  the  Dominicans,  to 
allege  that  they  attach  a  different  sense  to  it.  The 
public,  accustomed  to  understand  it  in  a  natural  and  ordi- 
nary way,  would  pay  no  attention  to  their  explanatory 
glosses.  The  society  thus  derives  an  important  advantage 
from  the  reception,  by  the  Dominicans  (in  common  with 
themselves)  of  the  term  in  question  j  and  have  no  wish 
to  push  it  further.     If  you  were  acquainted  with  all  that 

SUFFICIENCY   OF   GRACE.  17 

passed  in  the  Papacies  of  Clement  VIII,  and  Paul  V, 
and  to  what  an  extent  the  Society  was  thwarted  by  the 
Dominicans,  in  its  endeavours  to  establish  a  "  suffi- 
cient grace,"  you  would  not  wonder  that  they  are  not 
willing  to  embroil  themselves  with  them  again;  and 
allow  them  to  maintain  their  opinions,  provided  their  own 
remain  free.  And  this  the  more  especially,  as  the  Do- 
minicans themselves  encourage  them,  by  consenting  pub- 
licly to  the  use  of  the  term  in  question. 

The  society  is  well  pleased  with  their  docility.  They 
do  not  demand  a  denial  of  the  necessity  of  "  effectual 
grace," — this  would  be  pressing  them  too  hard  :  friends 
should  not  be  treated  with  harshness  :  the  Jesuits  have 
obtained  sufficient  advantages.  The  world  uses  words  as 
its  coins ;  few  investigate  for  themselves  :  and  thus,  the 
term  "  sufficient  grace,"  being  received  on  both  sides, 
although  in  different  senses,  none  but  acute  Theologians 
suppose  that  the  thing  signified  by  the  words  is  not  held 
equally  by  Jacobins  and  Jesuits ;  and  the  result  will  show 
that  the  latter  are  not  among  the  greatest  of  the  dupes. 

I  confessed  that  they  were  ingenious  people ;  and  in  order 
to  avail  myself  of  the  information  I  had  acquired,  I  repaired 
at  once  to  the  Dominicans.  At  their  door  I  found  a  friend 
of  mine — a  great  Jansenist — (for  I  have  friends  of  all 
parties,)  who  was  enquiring  for  one  of  the  Fathers, 
although  not  the  one  of  whom  I  was  in  search.  I  pre- 
vailed upon  him  however,  to  accompany  me,  and  enquired 
for  one  of  my  new  friends  the  Thomists.  He  was  de- 
lighted to  see  me.  "  Well,  my  Father,"  I  said,  "  it  is 
not  sufficient,  it  seems,  for  all  men  to  possess  a  '  proxi- 
mate power,'  by   means   of   which,   however,    they   do 

18  LETTER   II. 

nothing ;  they  must  have  also  a  '  sufficient  grace/  by 
which  they  still  do  little  enough.  Is  not  this  the  opinion 
held  by  your  school  ? "  "  Yes, "  replied  the  good  Father, 
"  I  have  this  very  morning  asserted  the  position  at  the 
Sorbonne.  I  occupied  my  half-hour  in  descanting  upon 
it ;  and,  without  the  assistance  of  my  hour-glass,  I  could 
have  disproved  the  saucy  -proverb,  which  is  circulating 
through  Paris,  "  He  votes  blindfold,  like  a  Monk  of  the 
Sorbonne.^'  "  Hour-glass,  half-hour  !  what  is  all  this 
about?"  I  said;  "are  your  speeches  regulated  by 
measure  and  time  ?  "  "  Yes,"  he  replied,  "  for  some 
days  past  they  have  been  so."  "  And  do  they  compel  you 
to  speak  for  exactly  half  an  hour  at  a  time  ?  "  "  No  : 
we  may  speak  for  as  short  a  time  as  we  please."  "  But 
not  as  long  as  you  like  ?  "  I  rejoined :  *"'  Oh,  fortunate 
regulation  for  the  ignorant  !  Oh,  most  considerate  ar- 
rangement for  those  who  have  nothing  to  say  \" 

"  But,  after  all,  my  good  Father,  tell  me,  is  this  grace 
which  is  bestowed  upon  all,  '  a  sufficient  grace  ?  '  "  "  Cer- 
tainly," he  replied.  "  And  yet  it  is  of  no  use  without 
the  '  effectual  grace  ?  '  "  "  Quite  true,"  said  he.  "  That 
is,"  I  said,  "  all  men  have  grace  enough,  and  not 
enough ;  that  is  to  say,  the  grace  is  sufficient  and  not 
sufficient ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  sufficient  in  name,  but  in- 
sufficient in  reality.  Truly,  Father,  your  doctrine  is 
sufficiently  refined.  In  shutting  yourself  out  from  the 
world,  have  you  forgotten  the  meaning  of  words  ?  Don't 
you  remember  that  "  sufficient "  implies  all  that  is  re- 
quired for  action  ?  You  cannot  have  lost  all  memory  in 
these  matters,  for,  (to  give  a  familiar  illustration)  if,  at 
table,  you  were  helped  to  two  ounces  of  bread,  and  one 

SUFFICIENCY   OF   GRACE.  19 

glass  of  water  a  day,  would  you  be  satisfied  with  your 
Prior,  stating,  that  this  would  be  sufficient  to  support 
you  :  and  that,  provided  you  had  a  few  other  articles 
(with  which  however  he  did  not  supply  you)  you  would 
then  have  all  that  would  be  necessary  for  your  sustenance  ? 
How  can  you  then  pretend  to  say  that  all  have  a  suffici- 
ency of  grace  for  producing  good  works,  while  you  ac- 
knowledge that  there  is  a  further  grace  required  for  such 
works,  which  all  men  do  not  enjoy  ?  Is  such  an  article 
of  belief  unimportant ;  and  do  you  leave  it  to  men's  own 
fancy  whether  effectual  grace  is  necessary  or  not  ?  Is  it  a 
matter  of  indifference  to  say  that  with  sufficient  grace  we 
can  work  effectually  ?  "  How,''  said  this  worthy  man, 
"  '  indifference  !  ■"  It  is  a  heresy — a  deliberate  heresy  ! 
The  need  of  an  effectual  grace  for  effective  working  is  a 
point  of  faith  :  it  is  heresy  to  deny  it.'' 

"  Where  are  we  then  ?  "  I  exclaimed ;  "  and  what  side 
am  I  to  take  ?  If  I  deny  a  sufficient  grace,  I  am  a 
Jansenist,  If  I  admit  it,  like  the  Jesuits,  and  hold 
that  an  effective  grace  is  not  necessary,  you  say  I  am  a 
heretic.  And  if  I  admit  it  like  yourself,  and  maintain 
that  effectual  grace  is  necessary,  I  offend  against  common 
sense ; — I  am  '  absurd,'  say  the  Jesuits.  What  am  I  to  do, 
under  this  inevitable  dilemma  of  being,  either  absurd,  or 
heretical,  or  a  Jansenist  ?  And  to  what  a  situation  are  we 
brought,  if  it  is  only  the  Jansenists  who  are  not  perplexed 
between  faith  and  reason,  and  who  alone  escape  from  folly 
and  error  ?  " 

My  Jansenist  friend  considered  these  remarks  a  good 
omen,  and  thought  me  already  won  over  to  his  side.  He 
said    nothing    however    to    me;    but,    addressing   the 

20  LETTER   II. 

'  Thomist/  "Tell  me,  Father,"  he  said,  "in  what  it  is 
that  you  agree  with  the  Jesuits  ?  "  "  It  is/'  he  replied, 
"  in  this  j  the  Jesuits  and  ourselves  hold  '  sufficient  grace  ' 
to  be  bestowed  upon  all  men."  "  But,"  rejoined  the 
Jansenistj  "  names  only  are  empty  sounds — it  is  the  things 
signified,  that  is  reality  and  substance.  And  thus,  when 
you  agree  with  the  Jesuits  in  using  the  word  '  sufficient ' 
and  differ  from  them  in  its  meaning,  it  is  evident  that 
you  are  opposed  to  each  other  respecting  the  substance  of 
the  term,  and  agreed  only  as  to  the  sound.  Is  this  acting 
sincerely,  and  in  good  faith  ?  "  "  Well,"  said  the  worthy 
man,  "  what,  after  all,  have  you  to  complain  of;  we 
deceive  no  one  by  our  way  of  speaking.  For  in  our 
schools  we  openly  say  that  we  understand  the  matter  in  a 
different  way  from  the  Jesuits."  "  My  complaint  is,"  re- 
plied my  friend,  "  that  you  do  not  declare  every  where, 
that  you  understand  by  '  sufficient  grace,'  what  is  in 
reality,  not  '  sufficient.'  You  ought  in  conscience,  while 
you  thus  change  the  meaning  of  the  ordinary  terms  in 
Theology,  to  explain,  that,  in  allowing  a  '  sufficient ' 
grace  to  exist  in  all  men,  you  mean  that  in  reality,  they 
have  not  a  '  sufficient '  grace.  All  the  world,  except 
yourselves,  understand  the  word  '  sufficient '  in  the  same 
way :  it  is  the  new  '  Thomists '  alone  who  interpret  it 
differently.  All  the  women  (who  compose  half  the 
world)  all  court-persons — Soldiers — Magistrates — all  the 
people  about  the  palace, — merchants, — artizans — the  lower 
classes;  in  short,  persons  of  all  description  (except  the 
Dominicans)  understand  by  '  sufficient,'  that  which 
includes  every  thing  necessary.  "Who  has  ever  been  ap- 
prized of  this  peculiarity  in  their  belief  ?     Nothing  more 

SUFFICIENCY    OF   GRACE.  21 

is  known — and  that  all  over  the  world — than  that  the  Domi- 
nicans hold  '  all  men  to  enjoy  a  sufficiency  of  grace.'* 
What  are  we  to  conclude  they  mean  by  this,  but  that 
all  have  grace  sufficient  for  the  production  of  works  ;  the 
more  especially,  as  they  are  seen  to  be  united  in  common 
interests  and  policy  with  the  Jesuits,  who  understand  the 
matter  in  the  same  way  ?  The  identity  of  their  expres- 
sion, together  with  this  union  in  party  feeling,  is  surely 
a  proof  of  a  similarity  of  interpretation;  and  cannot 
but  tend  to  a  belief  of  the  entire  uniformity  of  their 
opinion." 

"The  faithful  constantly  enquire  of  Theologians — 
What  is  the  real  state  of  nature  since  the  fall  ?  St. 
Augustine  and  his  disciples  reply,  that  it  no  longer  enjoys 
grace,  except  in  such  measures  as  God  may  please  to  dis-' 
pense  it.  The  Jesuits  hereon  affirm,  that  all  have  in 
reality  sufficiency  of  grace.  The  Dominicans  are  con- 
sulted upon  this  contrariety :  what  part  do  they  take  ? 
They  make  common  cause  with  the  Jesuits ;  by  this  union 
they  constitute  a  majority.  They  separate  from  those 
who  deny  the  sufficiency  of  grace ;  they  declare  that  all 
men  are  endowed  with  it.  What  are  we  to  conclude  from 
this,  but  that  they  give  their  sanction  to  the  views  of  the 
Jesuits  ?  And  then  they  add  that,  notwithstanding  all 
this,  the  '  sufficient '.  grace  in  question  is  useless,  without 
that  efficiency,  which  is  not  bestowed  upon  all ! 

Would  you  behold  a  portrait  of  a  church  in  which 
these  various  opinions  are  held  ?  I  consider  it  to  be  like 
a  man,  who,  setting  out  on  a  journey  from  his  own  country, 
is   encountered  by  robbers,    who   overpower   him   with 

*  '  Dea  graces  sufEsantes.'  (Fr.) 

22  LETTER   II. 

wounds,  and  leave  him  half  dead.  He  sends  for  aid  to 
three  surgeons  in  the  neighbouring  town.  The  firsts  on 
examining  his  wounds,  pronounces  them  mortal,  and 
tells  him  that  God  alone  can  restore  him.  The  second, 
coming  up  forthwith,  proceeds  to  comfort  him ;  tells  him 
he  has  strength  enough  to  carry  him  back  to  his  dwell- 
ing, and  taunts  his  rival  on  the  opinion  he  had  just  ex- 
pressed. The  patient,  perplexed  between  the  two,  per- 
ceives the  third  approaching  him,  and  beckons  to  him  to 
relieve  his  anxieties.  This  latter,  after  examining  the 
case,  and  weighing  the  opinions  of  the  two  others, 
makes  common  cause  with  the  second ;  and  the  two 
thus  agreed,  unite  against  the  first,  and  chase  him 
with  opprobrium  from  the  field.  The  patient  sup- 
poses from  this  that  the  third  doctor  had  agreed  in 
opinion  with  the  second  ;  and,  in  fact,  receives,  in  reply  to 
his  anxious  enquiries,  an  assurance  that  he  has  strength 
sufficient  to  prosecute  his  journey.  The  poor  man,  how- 
over,  conscious  of  his  weakness,  asks,  on  what  his  con- 
clusions are  founded  ?  "  Because,"  said  he,  "  you  still 
have  your  legs,  and  the  legs  are  the  natural  organs  for 
walking."  "  But,"  says  the  sick  man,  "  have  I  strength 
to  make  use  of  them ;  for  they  seem  to  me  useless,  in 
my  state  of  weakness?"  "Certainly  not,"  replied  the 
doctor ;  "  and  in  reality  you  never  will  walk,  unless  God 
shall  send  you  supernatural  aid  to  sustain  and  lead  you." 
"  What !  "  cries  the  patient,  "  Have  I  not  then  in  myself 
sufficient  strength  for  walking  ?  "  "  Very  far  from  it," 
replied  the  surgeon.  "  Your  opinion  then  is  entirely 
opposed  to  your  companion's  respecting  my  state  ?  "  "I 
confess  it  is,"  he  replied. 

SUFFICIENCY   OF   GRACE.  33 

What  do  you  suppose  the  patient  said  on  this  ?  He 
complained  of  the  inconsistency,  and  ambiguous  expres- 
sions of  the  third  of  these  doctors.  He  blamed  him  for 
allying  himself  with  the  second,  to  whom  he  was  in  reality 
opposed,  and  with  whom  he  had  no  apparent  ground  of 
agreement ;  and  for  having  repudiated  the  first,  with 
whom  he  actually  agreed.  And  when  he  had  tried  the 
extent  of  his  strength,  and  ascertained  its  failure,  he  dis- 
missed them  both  ;  and,  recalling  the  first,  placed  him- 
self implicitly  in  his  hands.  Then,  in  conformity  with  his 
advice,  he  entreated  of  God  the  strength,  of  which  he  was 
in  himself  destitute  ;  he  found  mercy  ;  and  by  the  aid  he 
received  from  above,  arrived  in  safety  at  his  own  home. 

The  good  Father  was  struck  with  the  fable,  and  made 
no  reply.  To  encourage  him  to  proceed,  I  said,  quietly, 
"  But,  after  all,  my  father,  how  is  it  that  you  gave  the 
name  '  sufficient '  to  this  grace,  while  you  regard  it  as 
an  article  of  faith,  to  believe  it  to  be  in  reality  insuffici- 
ent ?  "  "  It  is  easy  for  you  to  talk  thus,"  he  replied, 
"  you  are  only  an  individual,  and  independent ;  I  am  a 
member  of  a  religious  community.  Do  you  not  perceive 
the  difference  ?  We  depend  upon  our  superiors,  they 
in  their  turn,  look  to  others.  They  have  made  them- 
selves answerable  for  our  votes ;  what  would  you  have 
me  do  ?  "  We  understood  him  at  once,  and  remembered 
his  brother,  who  was  exiled  to  Abbeville,  on  occasion  of 
a  similar  controversy. 

"  But,"  said  I,  "  how  is  it  that  your  community  was 
prevailed  upon  to  acknowledge  this  doctrine  of  grace  ?  " 
"  That  is  another  question,"  said  he,  "  all  I  can  say  is, 
that  our  order  did  all  that  was  in  their  power  to  support 

24  LETTER  II. 

the  doctrine  of  St.  Thomas,  respecting  efficacious  grace. 
How  ardently  did  we  oppose,  at  its  very  birth,  the  doc- 
trine of  Mohna !  How  did  we  strive  to  establish  the 
necessity  of  the  effectual  grace  of  Christ !  Are  you  not 
aware  what  was  done  during  the  popedom  of  Clement 
VIII,  and  Paul  V ;  and  that  when  death  had  prevented 
the  one  from  publishing  his  Bull,  and  important  affairs 
of  government  the  other,  we  still  continued  our  impor- 
tunities with  the  Vatican  ?  But  the  Jesuits,  who,  from 
the  commencement  of  the  heresies  of  Luther  and  Calvin, 
had  taten  advantage  of  the  scanty  measure  of  ability  in 
the  people  to  distinguish  the  error  from  the  truth  in  the 
doctrines  of  St.  Thomas,  soon  succeeded  in  diffusing  their 
own  view ;  and  that  to  such  an  extent  that  they  became 
masters  over  their  faith  ;  and  we  were  in  danger  of  being 
decried  as  Calvinists,  and  treated  as  the  Jansenists  are  at 
present,  unless  we  modified  the  dogma  of  an  '  effectual ' 
grace,  by  some  acknowledgment — (at  least  in  appearance) 
of— that  which  is  termed  '  sufficient.'  In  this  emergency, 
what  could  we  do  better,  to  assist  in  supporting  the 
truth  without  sacrificing  our  own  credit,  than  to  admit 
the  term  '  sufficient '  grace,  while  we  denied  it  in  reality  ? 
This  is  the  real  fact  of  the  case." 

The  father  said  all  this  with  so  melancholy  an  air, 
that  he  excited  my  pity.  Not  so,  however,  that  of  my 
companion,  who  exclaimed ;  "  Flatter  not  yourselves  that 
you  have  supported  the  truth  :  had  she  found  no  better 
protectors  than  you,  she  would  have  perished  under  hands 
so  feeble  !  You  have  admitted  into  the  church  an  enemy 
in  name ; — where  is  the  difference  between  that  and  admit- 
ting the  enemy  himself?     Names  are  inseparable  from 

SUFFICIENCY   OF   GRACE.  25 

things.  If  the  term  sufficient  grace  be  once  allowed, 
you  may  affirm  as  you  please,  that  you  mean  a  grace 
that  is  insufficient — you  will  not  be  believed.  Your  ex- 
planation will  but  procure  you  the  contempt  of  the 
world ;  they  are  more  sincere  in  matters  of  less  impor- 
tance. The  Jesuits  will  exult  j  they  will  establish  their 
'  sufficient '  grace  in  reality,  while  yours  will  be  discarded ; 
and  they  will  succeed  in  enforcing  an  article  of  belief 
wholly  opposed  to  your  own  !^' 

"We  are  all  ready  to  endure  martyrdom,'"  replied  the 
father,  "  rather  than  consent  to  the  imposition  of  a 
'  sufficient '  grace  in  the  sense  of  the  Jesuits;  St.  Thomas, 
whom  we  have  sworn  to  follow  even  to  death,  is  directly 
opposed  to  it."  Upon  this  my  friend,  more  zealous  upon 
the  question  than  myself,  thus  exclaimed  :  "  Away ! 
away  with  these  sophistries  !  Your  order  has  had  an 
honour  committed  to  it,  of  which  it  proves  itself  un- 
worthy. It  abandons  that  doctrine  of  grace  which  was 
entrusted  to  its  keeping,  and  which  has  never  been 
wholly  lost  since  the  creation  of  the  world  !  That  all- 
conquering  grace,  which  was  waited  for  by  the  patriarchs, 
predicted  by  prophets,  brought  in  by  Jesus  Christ ; 
preached  by  St.  Paul,  expounded  by  St.  Augustine  (the 
greatest  of  the  fathers,)  embraced  by  his  successors , 
which  was  confirmed  by  St.  Bernard  (the  latest  of  the 
fathers,)  maintained  by  St.  Thomas  (the  head  of  your 
own  school,) — from  him  transmitted  to  your  order,  and 
maintained  and  gloriously  defended  by  multitudes  of  your 
fathers,  under  the  popedom  of  Clement  and  Paul.  That 
effec^al  grace,  committed  as  a  sacred  deposit  to  your 
custody,  that  in  a  holy  order  and  perpetual  succession  it 

26  LETTER   II. 

might  be  published  to  the  world  to  the  end  of  time- 
that  precious  doctrine  is  now  cast  off  and  abandonedj 
for  the  most  unworthy  considerations !  It  is  time  that 
other  champions  should  arm  for  the  conflict !  It  is  time 
that  the  Almighty  should  summon  new,  and  more  in- 
trepid disciples,  for  the  inculcation  of  His  grace;  men, 
who,  knowing  nothing  of  the  conventional  subtleties  of 
the  day,  shall  serve  God  for  His  own  sake.  Grace  may 
no  longer  have  the  Dominicans  for  defenders,  but  she 
will  never  want  support.  She  will  herself  mould  and 
inspire  her  scholars  by  her  own  omnipotent  power.  She 
asks  for  hearts,  pure  and  unfettered  by  worldly  trammels ; 
she  sanctifies  and  disengages  them  from  interests  and 
entanglements  incompatible  with  the  truth  of  the  gospel. 
Weigh  this,  my  father,  and  take  heed  lest  God  should  re- 
move your  light  from  its  place,  and  leave  you  in  darkness 
and  dishonoui',  as  a  punishment  for  coldness  and  treachery 
to  a  cause  so  momentous  as  this  to  his  Church  !  " 

He  would  have  added  more,  for  he  was  kindling  fast 
with  his  theme ;  when  I  interposed,  and  rising  to.  depart, 
said,  "  Truly,  my  father,  if  I  were  a  person  of  importance, 
in  France,  I  would  proclaim  as  with  a  trumpet,  '  Thi§  is  to 
give  notice,  that  when  the  Dominicans  say  that  sufficient 
grace  is  given  to  all,  they  mean,  that  all  have  not  grace, 
'  effectually  sufficient.'  After  which  you  may  say  what 
you  please :  but  not  otherwise."     Thus  ended  our  visit. 

You  see  from  this,  that  there  is  a  political  '  sufficiency, ' 
as  there  is  a  '  proximate  '  power.  Nevertheless,  you  may 
take  my  word  for  it,  that  we  may  without  risk  entertain 
doubt  of  a  '  proximate  '  power,  as  well  as^  of  a  '  sufficient ' 
grace,  provided  we  are  no  Dominicans. 

SUFFICIENCY    OF   GRACE.  27 

Just  while  I  am  closing  my  letter,  I  am  informed  that 
the  Censure  has  been  pronounced;  but  as  I  have  not 
heard  the  particulars  of  it,  and  it  will  not  be  published 
till  the  15th  of  Feb.,  I  will  say  no  more  on  the  subject  till 
the  next  post.     In  the  mean  time,  I  am,  &c. 

Reply  of  the  "Provincial"  to  the  two  preceding  Letters 
from  Ms  Friend. 

Sir,  Feb.  2,  1656. 

Your  two  letters  have  not  been  kept  to  myself.  Every 
one  sees  them,  every  one  hears,  every  one  believes  them. 
They  are  not  only  valued  by  theologians,  but  they  are 
agreeable  to  men  of  the  world ;  and  even  intelligible  to 
female  readers. 

The  following  has  been  addressed  to  me  by  a  member 
of  the  Academy — one  of  the  most  eminent  among  so 
many  distinguished  men — and  who  has  seen  only  the  first 
of  the  letters.  "  I  wish  the  Sorbonne,  which  is  so  much 
indebted  to  the  memory  of  the  late  Cardinal,  would  ac- 
knowledge the  authority  of  its  own  '  Academic  Francaise.' 
The  author  of  the  letter  should  then  be  satisfied ;  for  in 
the  capacity  of  an  academician  I  would  condemn,  I  would 
proscribe,  I  would  banish — -I  could  almost  say,  I  would 
exterminate  this  '  proximate  power,'  which  causes  so  much 
disturbance  for  nothing,  and  as  to  which  none  can  tell 
what  it  is  that  it  requires.  The  evil  is  that  our  academical 
authority  is  very  weak  and  limited.  I  am  sorry  for  it ; 
and  I  am  equally  so  that  I  have  so  little  power  to  dis- 
charge my  obligations  to  you,  &c.  &c." 

c  2 

28  LETTER   IT. 

And  thus  again  writes  a  person  (whom  I  abstain  in  any 
way  from  designating),  to  a  lady  who  had  communicated 
to  him  your  first  letter : — 

"  I  am  more  obliged  to  you  than  you  can  imagine,  for 
the  letter  you  have  sent  me  :  it  is  highly  ingenious,  and 
admirably  written.  It  narrates,  without  aiming  at  narra- 
tive ;  it  elucidates  matters  of  the  most  complicated  de- 
scription ;  its  raillery  is  delicate ;  it  is  instructive  to  those 
who  are  slenderly  informed ;  and  it  affords  pleasure  to 
the  learned.  It  is  besides,  an  admirable  apology,  and — to 
those  who  will  apply  it — a  delicate  and  gentle  censure. 
In  short,  there  is  so  much  skill,  so  much  wit  and  judg- 
ment in  the  letter,  that  I  should  be  glad  to  know  who  is 
the  author,*  &c.  8cc." 

You  would  like  also  to  know  who  it  is  that  writes  to 
me  in  this  manner,  but  be  contented  to  honour  without 
knowing  him ;  and  when  you  know  him  you  will  honour 
him  more. 

Continue  your  letters  on  my  recommendation ;  and  let 
the  Censure  come  when  it  may,  we  shall  be  well  prepared 
to  meet  it.  These  words — their  '  proximate  power '  and 
'  sufficient  grace,^ — with  which  they  threaten  us,  occasion 
us  no  apprehension.  We  are  too  well  acquainted  with 
the  Jesuits,  the  Jacobins,  and  M.  Le  Moine — how  many 
aspects  they  can  exhibit,  and  the  little  value  of  the  new 
terms — to  give  ourselves  much  concern  about  them.  Not- 
withstanding, I  remain,  &c.  &c." 

*  No  exp'anation  as  to  the  authorship  of  this  letter  is  giren  in  the  French 
edition ;  but  it  was  probably  by  a  different  hand,  as  it  is  little  likely  that 
Pascal  would  have  applied  expressions  so  laudatory,  although  just,  to  his  own 
composition.     (Translator.) 

LETTER  III. 

(intended  as  a  reply  to  the  preceding.) 

injustice,  absurdity,   and   insignificance  of  the 
censure  of  m.  arnauld. 

Sir, 
I  HAVE  just  received  your  letter ;  and  at  the  same  time 
was  furnished  with  a  manuscript  copy  of  the  Censure.  I 
seem  to  be  as  well  treated  in  the  one,  as  M.  Arnauld  is 
treated  ill  in  the  other.  I  am  afraid  there  is  some  ex- 
aggeration on  both  sides ;  and  that  we  are  neither  of  us 
sufficiently  known  to  our  judges.  If  it  were  otherwise,  I 
am  satisfied  that  M.  Arnauld  would  be  found  to  deserve 
the  approbation  of  the  Sorbonne,  and  I  the  censure  of 
the  Academy.  Our  interests  are  consequently  different. 
He  ought  to  be  better  known,  that  his  innocence  might  be 
made  apparent ;  whereas,  I  must  remain  in  concealment, 
in  order  not  to  lose  my  character.  Under  these  circum- 
stances, being  unable  to  discover  myself,  I  look  to  you  to 
keep  up  my  favour  with  my  celebrated  eulogists ;  and  it 
shall  be  my  business  now  to  give  you  all  necessary  infor- 
mation respecting  the  Censure. 

I  must  confess  to  you,  Sir,  that  I  was  much  surprised 

30  LETTER   III. 

at  it.  I  expected  to  find  in  it  a  condemnation  of  the 
most  dreadful  heresies ;  but  you  will  wonder  with  me  to 
see  such  vast  preparations  subside  into  nothing,  when 
they  seemed  on  the  point  of  producing  such  important 
results. 

All  this  will  however  be  a  source  of  satisfaction  to  yoUj 
if  you  remember  the  extraordinary  impressions  which  so 
long  prevailed  respecting  the  Jansenists.  Recal  to  mind 
the  intrigues,  the  factions,  the  errors,  the  schisms,  the 
plots,  which  were  so  long  attributed  to  them ;  how  they 
were  decried  and  calumniated  in  pulpits  and  publications ; 
and  how  the  torreiit  of  aspersion,  so  violent  and  long- 
continued,  was  aggravated  of  late  years  by  open  and 
public  charges,  not  only  of  heresies  and  schism,  but  of 
apostacy  and  infidelity — "  that  they  disbelieved  the  mys- 
tery of  transubstantiation,  and  denied  both  Christ  and  the 
gospel." 

After  all  these  extraordinary  accusations,*  it  was  de- 
termined, in  order  to  come  to  a  solemn  conclusion,  to 
institute  an  examination  into  their  works.  The  second 
letter  of  M.  Arnauld  was  selected  for  the  purpose,  it  being 
alleged  to  contain  the  most  signal  errors.f  His  avowed 
enemies  were  appointed  examiners;  all  possible  diligence 
was  used  to  discover  the  object  of  their  search ;  and  they 
report  one  proposition  respecting  the  doctrine  in  ques- 
tion, which  they  deem  of  a  censurable  nature. 

What  was  to  be  inferred  from  these  proceedings,  but 
that  this  proposition,  selected  under  such  peculiar  circum- 
stances, must  contain  the  essence  of  the  darkest  heresies 

*  Var.  Edit.  1667.    '  Si  atroces.'  t  Idem.    '  Detestabiles.' 

CENSURE   OF   M.    ARNAULD.  31 

that  could  possibly  be  imagined  ?  Nevertheless,  nothing 
was  in  reality  found  in  it,  but  what  had  been  so  clearly 
and  distinctly  laid  down  in  passages  from  the  fathers, 
cited  by  M.  Arnauld,  that  I  have  never  been  able  to  find 
any  one  who  could  see  any  difference  between  them.  It 
was  fancied  however  that  there  could  not  but  be  a  great 
difference,  because  the  passages  from  the  fathers  were 
incontestibly  catholic,  but  M.  Arnauld's  proposition  must 
be  heretical,  and  therefore  opposed  to  them. 

The  Sorbonne  was  looked  to  for  the  solution  of  the  dif- 
ficulty. All  Christendom  had  its  eyes  fixed  upon  these 
learned  doctors,  anxious  to  see  how  their  decision  would 
discriminate  this  point,  so  imperceptible  to  ordinary  ob- 
servers. In  the  mean  time,  M.  Arnauld  put  forth  his 
Apology,  in  which  he  gave,  in  parallel  columns,  his  own 
proposition,  and  the  passages  fi;om  the  Fathers  on  which 
it  was  based ;  in  order  that  understandings  of  the  lowest 
order  might  perceive  the  conformity  between  them. 

He  shows  that  St.  Augustine  says,  in  a  passage  which 
he  quotes,  "  Jesus  Christ  exhibits  to  us  an  instance  of  a 
just  person  in  St.  Peter,  and  teaches  us,  from  his  fall,  to 
beware  of  presumption."  He  cites  again  from  the  same 
Father  what  follows  :  "  God  left  St.  Peter  without  grace,  in 
order  to  show  us,  tbat  without  grace  we  can  do  nothing." 
He  gives  another  extract  from  St.  Chrysostom  in  the  follow- 
ing terms :  "  The  fall  of  St.  Peter  was  not  caused  by  any 
want  of  affection  towards  Christ,  but  by  failure  of  grace ;' 
it  was  the  effect,  not  so  much  of  his  own  negligence,  as  of 
God^s  abandonment  of  him ;  to  teach  the  Church  that 
without  Him  we  can  do  nothing."  Hereupon  he  produces 
his  own  condemned  proposition,   which  runs  as  follows  : 

32  LETTER    III. 

'' The  Fathers  exbibit  to  us  in  St.  Peter  a  just  person, 
who  failed  of  grace,  without  which  we  can  do  nothing." 

This  then  is  what  they  adduce,  to  prove  that  M.  Ar- 
nauld's  expressions  are  as  much  opposed  to  the  Fathers  as 
truth  is  to  error,  and  faith  to  heresy.  Now,  where  lies  the 
difference?  Is  it  in  this — "  The  Fathers  exhibit  to  us  a 
just  person  in  St.  Peter?"  Why,  St.  Augustine  says 
the  same,  and  in  the  same  words.  Is  it  where  he  asserts, 
"  Grace  failed  him  ? "  The  self-same  Augustine,  who 
stated  that  St.  Peter  was  a  just  person,  adds,  "  Under 
that  temptation  he  had  no  grace."  Is  it  again  in  the 
following,  "  Without  grace  we  can  do  nothing  ? "  Have 
we  not  here  the  very  same  thing  which  St.  Augustine 
aiBrms  in  the  same  place  (and  St.  Chrysostom  had  de- 
clared it  before  him),  with  this  difference  only,  that  he 
expresses  himself  yet  more  strongly  :  "  His  fall  was  not 
caused  by  any  coldness  or  negligence,  but  by  failure  of 
grace,  and  abandonment  of  God." 

Every  one  therefore  continued  in  undiminished  sus- 
pense, to  learn  in  what  these  differences  consisted ;  when 
they  found  a  censure  pronounced  by  so  high  an  authority, 
and  after  such  mature  deliberation.  Alas!  our  expecta- 
tions have  been  little  fulfilled.  Whether  the  doctors 
would  not  condescend  to  enlighten  us,  or  whatever  was 
the  cause,  they  did  nothing  more  than  pronounce  these 
words,  "  This  proposition  is  rash,  impious,  blasphemous, 
accursed,  and  heretical." 

Was  it  probable.  Sir,  that  the  generality  of  persons, 
finding  their  expectations  thus  disappointed,  would  take 
part  with  the  censurers  ?  They  drew  from  their  conduct 
inferences   the   most  favourable   that   were   possible   for 

CENSURE  OP  M.   ARNAULD.  33 

M.  Arnauld's  innocence.  "  What !  they  said,  is  this  all 
that  comes  of  the  proceeding  ?  After  such  lapse  of  time, 
with  persons  of  such  learning — so  many,  also,  conspiring 
against  one— to  find,  throughout  all  his  writings,  but  three 
lines  to  censure ;  and  those  drawn  from  the  very  words 
of  the  greatest  authorities  in  the  Greek  and  Latin 
Churches  !  Is  there  a  single  author  to  be  found,  who,  if 
matters  of  accusation  were  sought  against  him,  would  not 
furnish  from  his  pages  more  plausible  ground  of  censure  ? 
What  stronger  proof,  then,  can  be  furnished  of  the 
soundness  of  the  faith  of  this  eminent  man,  thus  unjustly 
accused  ?  " 

"  How  is  it,'^  they  proceeded,  "  that  such  imprecations 
are  heaped  together — '  poison,  pestilence,  horror,  rashness, 
impiety,  blasphemy,  abominations,  execrations,  anathemas, 
heresy,' — terms,  than  which  none  more  virulent  could  be 
directed  against  Arius,  or,  even  Antichrist  himself;  and 
all  to  oppose  a  heresy  absolutely  imperceptible,  and,  as 
yet,  undiscovered  ?  If  all  these  obloquies  be  directed 
against  the  actual  words  of  the  Fathers,  what  becomes  of 
faith  and  of  tradition  ?  If  these  be  opposed  to  M.  Ar- 
nauld's proposition,  let  them  show  us  wherein  lies  the 
difference :  to  us  there  seems  a  perfect  coincidence  be- 
tween them.  If  we  could  be  brought  to  see  the  error,  we 
should  hold  it  in  detestation ;  but  if  unable  to  do  so — if 
we  can  find  nothing  but  the  sentiments  of  the  Fathers, 
conceived  and  expressed  in  their  own  words,  how  can 
we  do  otherwise  than  hold  the  author  of  them  in  un- 
diminished veneration  ?  " 

This  is  the  way  in  which  some  people  canvass  the 
questions  at  issue ;  but  I  confess, .  they  are,  after  all,  too 

c  5 

34f  LETTER   III. 

difficult  for  us.  We,  not  pretending  to  penetrate  so 
deeply  into  things,,  keep,  ourselves  quiet  in  the  matter. 
Ought  we  to  be  wiser  than  our  superiors  ?  Do  not  let 
us  attempt  to  go  beyond  them — we  shall  but  get  into  a 
labyrinth.  The  line  of  truth  is  so  narrow,  that,  on  the 
slightest  deviation,  we  fall  into  error ;  then  again,  the  error 
is  so  subtle,  that  a  slight  remove  brings  us  back  to  truth. 
There  is  certainly  but  an  imperceptible  point  between  the 
proposition  in  question  and  the  orthodox  faith.  The  dis- 
tance is  so  minute,  that  I,  for  my  part,  am  fearful  lest 
(overlooking  the  boundary),  while  I  am  endeavouring  to 
prove  my  devotedness  to  the  doctors  of  the  Sorbonne,  I 
bring  myself  into  collision  with  the  authorities  of  the 
Church, 

Under  this  apprehension,  I  have  thought  it  advisable  to 
consult. one  of  those  persons  who,  from  motives  of  policy, 
had  remained  neutral  upon  the  original  question ;  and 
endeavour  to  learn  from  him  the  real  state  of  the  case.  I 
found  out  one  who  was  very  experienced  in  these  matters, 
and  begged  him  to  give  me  an  explanation  of  the  distinc- 
tion in  question,  professing  my  own  inability  to  discover 
it  myself. 

"  What ! "  replied  he,  smiling,  as  if  amused  at  my 
naivete,  "  you  are  not  simple  enough  to  think  there  is  any 
difference  ?  Where  is  it  to  be  found  ?  Do  you  believe 
that,  if  it  had  been  discoverable,  it  would  not  have  been 
held  up  plainly  to  view ;  and  that  they  would  not  have 
been  delighted  to  expose  it,  in  the  same  spirit  in  which 
they  were  found'running  M.  Arnauld  down  ?  " 

I  saw  from  these  few  words,  that  those  who  had  been 
neutral  upon  the  first  question,  had  not  been  equally  so 

CENSURE  OP   M.   ARNAULD.  35' 

upon  the  second.  I  did  not  fail,  however,  to  hear  out  his 
reasons,  and  said,  "  Why  then  did  they  attack  this  pro- 
position ?  "  Upon  which  he  rejoined,  "  Are  you  unac- 
quainted then  with  these  two  things,  which  people  the 
most  uninformed  in  the  world  know  ?  The  one  is,  that 
M.  Arnauld  has  always  avoided  saying  any  thing  that  is 
not  distinctly  founded  on  the  traditions  of  the  Church  ; 
the  other,  that  his  enemies  have,  notwithstanding,  deter- 
mined to  put  him  down,  by  whatever  means  could  be 
found  ?  Thus,  as  the  writings  of  the  one  furnished  no 
handle  to  the  designs  of  the  other,  they  have  been  obliged, 
in  order  to  satisfy  their  resentment,  to  take  the  first  pro- 
position that  came  to  hand,  and  pass  sentence  upon  it, 
without  saying  why,  or  wherefore.  Are  you  not  aware 
that  the  Jansenists  hold  them  so  much  in  check,  and 
press  them  so  hard,  that  on  the  least  word  escaping  them 
contrary  to  the  principles  of  the  Fathers,  they  are  imme- 
diately overwhelmed  by  whole  volumes  of  controversy, 
and  forced  to  surrender  ?  So  after  all  these  proofs  of 
weakness,  they  have  thought  it  more  convenient  and 
easier  to  condemn  than  to  reply ;  and  monks  are  to  be 
found  in  more  abundance  than  reasons." 

"  How  !  "  I  exclaimed,  "  if  that  be  the  case,  their  Cen- 
sure is  nugatory.  What  credit  can  be  given  to  it,  when 
it  is  proved  to  be  wholly  unfounded ;  and  annihilated  by 
the  answers  that  have  been  furnished  to  it  ?  "  "  If  you 
were  acquainted  with  the  spirit  of  these  people,"  the 
doctor  replied,  "  you  would  think  differently.  Their  cen- 
sure (although  in  itself  censurable)  will,  for  a  time,  pro- 
duce all  the  efiect  they  wish ;  even  the  very  act  of  de- 
monstrating its  weakness  will  give  it  publicity;  and  it  is 

36  LETTER  III. 

incontestible,  that  the  majority  will  be  as  much  impressed 
as  if  it  were  the  most  veracious  proceeding  in  the  world. 
If  people  were  to  cry  in  the  streets,  '  This  is  the  censure 
of  M.  Arnauld,  this  is  the  condemnation  of  the  Jansen- 
ists ;  "  the  Jesuits  would  make  their  account  of  it.  How 
few  would  read  it !  How  few,  who  read,  will  understand 
it !  How  few  will  perceive  that  it  does  not  meet  the  ob- 
jections made  to  it !  Who,  do  you  imagine,  gives  any 
attention  to  these  things  ;  and  takes  the  trouble  to  inves- 
tigate and  think  ?  See  then  how  serviceable  all  this  is 
to  the  enemies  of  the  Jansenists.  They  are  sure,  by  such 
means,  of  a  present  triumph ;  although,  as  usual,  it  will 
prove,  in  the  end,  a  vain  achievement.  It  will  last  out 
some  months — that  is  a  great  point  for  them  :  after  that, 
they  will  find-  something  also  to  subsist  upon.  They  live 
from  hand  to  mouth.  In  this  way  it  is  that  they  keep 
themselves  afloat.  Sometimes  it  is  by  a  catechism,  in 
which  a  child  is  made  to  condemn  its  opponents }  some- 
times by  a  procession,  in  which  "  sufficient  grace  "  leads  in 
triumph  "  effectual  grace ;  "  now  it  is  by  a  play,  in  which 
devils  are  seen  carrying  off  the  Jansenists;  another  time 
it  is  by  an  almanack ;  just  now  it  is  by  the  Censure." 

"  Truly,"  said  I,  "  I  could  not  much  approve  the  pro- 
ceedings of  these  Molinists ;  but  after  all  you  have  told 
me,  I  must  admire  their  prudence  and  their  policy.  I 
plainly  see  that  they  could  not  have  acted  with  more  judg- 
ment, or  in  a  way  better  calculated  to  attain  their  purpose." 
"  You  are  right,"  he  rejoined,  "  the  safe  plan  with  them 
has  always  been  to  be  silent.  As  a  learned  theologian 
said  of  them,  '  The  cleverest  among  the  body  are  those 
who  intrigue  much,  say  little,  and  write  nothing.' 

CENSURE   OF   M.    ARNAULD.  37 

"  Acting  upon  this  plan,  they  determined,  from  the 
commencement  of  their  proceedings,  that  if  M.  Arnauld 
should  appear  before  the  Sorbonne,  it  should  be  simply  to 
avow  his  tenets,  not  to  enter  the  lists  of  controversy  with 
any  one.  The  examiners  having  somewhat  deviated  from 
the  method,  found  they  did  not  get  on  the  better  for  it. 
They  were  very  summarily  refuted  by  his  Second  '  Apo- 
logy.' 

"  It  was  in  the  same  spirit  that  they  adopted  that  in- 
genious and  novel  invention  of  the  '  sand '  and  the  '  half- 
hour.'  They  escaped  by  this  method  the  importunity  of 
those  irritated  professors,  who  took  upon  them  to  refute 
all  their  reasonings,  to  produce  old  volumes  in  disproof  of 
their  falsehoods,  to  call  upon  them  for  replies,  and  yet  to 
reduce  them  to  an  incapability  of  replying. 

"They  were  not  insensible  that  this  infringement  of  the 
liberty  of  speech,  which  had  caused  so  many  of  the 
doctors  to  retire  from  their  meetings,  would  not  pro- 
pitiate favour  to  their  censure;  and  that  M.  Arnauld's 
protest,  maintaining  the  nullity  of  their  proceedings,  would 
prove  any  thing  but  advantageous  to  its  favourable 
reception.  They  were  fully  aware  that  unprejudiced  per- 
sons would  give  quite  as  much  weight  to  the  judgment 
of  sixty  doctors,  who  had  nothing  to  gain  by  defending 
M.  Arnauld,  as  of  a  hundred  others,  who  had  nothing  to 
lose  by  condemning  him. 

"  But,  after  all,  they  thought  it  was  a  great  point  to 
procure  a  censure ;  although  it  emanated  from  only  a  part 
of  the  Sorbonne,  and  not  the  whole  body ;  although  it  was 
pronounced  under  little  or  no  re^l  freedom  of  judgment, 
and   obtained   by   numerous   petty    (and  not  the  most 

38  LETTER   III. 

regular)  manoeuvres ;  although  it  entered  into  no  expla- 
nation of  the  matters  really  in  dispute;  although  it  gave 
no  indication  of  v\rhat  constituted  the  heresy  in  question ; 
and,  in  fact,  it  said  very  little,  from  fear  of  being  mis- 
understood. This  very  silence  even  carries  with  it  an 
air  of  mystery  to  the  unreflecting ;  and  the  censure 
derives  from  it  this  singular  advantage,  that  the  most 
critical  and  subtle  theologians  can  find  throughout  it  no 
bad  reasonings. 

"  Keep  your  mind  tranquil,  then,  and  have  no  fear  of 
being  set  down  as  a  heretic  for  adopting  the  censured 
proposition.  There  was  no  harm  in  it  until  the  appear- 
ance of  M.  Arnauld's  second  letter.  Do  you  doubt  my 
assertion  ?  You  will  credit  then  M.  Le  Moine,  the  most 
zealous  of  the  examiners,  who,  in  conversation  only  this 
morning  with  a  doctor,  a  friend  of  mine,  who  had  been 
enquiring  of  him  about  these  disputes,  and  desired  to 
know  whether  it  was  not  allowable  to  say  what  had  been 
said  before  by  the  Fathers,  thus  admirably  replied — 
'  This  proposition  would  have  been  Catholic  in  the 
mouth  of  any  other  person ;  it  is  only  because  it  came 
from  M.  Arnauld,  that  it  has  been  condemned  by  the 
Sorbonne.'  Admire  then,  I  pray  you,  the  policy  of 
'  Molinism,'  in  pi-oducing  such  revolutions  in  the  church, 
that  what  is  Catholic  in  the  Fathers  becomes  heretical  in 
M.  Arnauld ;  that  what  was  heretical  in  the  semi-Pelagians 
is  found  to  be  orthodox  in  the  writings  of  the  Jesuits ; 
that  doctrines  as  ancient  as  St.  Augustine  are  discovered 
to  be  an  unbearable  novelty;  and  that  the  passing 
crudities  of  the  day  are  palmed  off  as  the  venerable  tenets 
of  the  church  !  "     Upon  this  my  friend  took  his  leave. 

CENSURE   OF   M.    ARNAULD.  39 

The  information  I  thus  acquired  was  enough  for  me. 
I  learned  that  this  was  heresy  of  a  novel  description.  It 
is  not  the  opinions  of  M.  Arnauld  that  are  heretical ;  it 
is  himself.  It  is  a  personal  heresy.  He  is  no  heretic 
for  any  thing  he  has  said,  or  written,  but  simply  that  he 
is  M.  Arnauld.  This  is  all  that  can  be  charged  against 
him.  Do  what  he  will,  he  must  cease  to  be,  or  he  cannot 
be  a  good  Catholic.  The  grace  of  St.  Augustine  will 
never  be  the  true  grace,  as  long  as  he  defends  it.  Let 
him  oppose,  and  it  becomes  genuine  at  once.  It  would 
be  a  sure  game,  and  almost  the  only  way  to  establish  it ; 
as  well  as  to  destroy  '  Molinism  : '  so  fatal  does  he  prove 
to  all  the  opinions  that  he  embraces ! 

Let  us  leave  them  then  to  their  disputes.  They  are 
the  controversies  of  theologians,  not  of  theology.  We, 
who  are  no  doctors,  need  not  trouble  ourselves  with  their 
dissensions.  Acquaint  our  friends  with  this  history  of 
the  censure,  and  believe  me  ever  your  attached  friend, 
&c.  &c. 

LETTER  IV. 

OP  GRACE  '  ACTUELLE,'   AL^S^AYS  PRESENT,  AND  OP  SINS 
OP   IGNORANCE. 

Sir,  Paris,  Feb.  26,  1656. 

There  are  no  people  in  the  world  like  these  Jesuits.  I 
have  seen  Dominicans,  doctors,  and  all  sorts  of  persons ; 
but  such  a  visit  as  I  have  just  paid  I  still  needed,  to  supply 
my  deficient  information.  Others  are  but  copyists  of 
these  men.  Things  are  best  learnt  at  the  fountain-head ; 
I  have  seen  one  of  the  ablest  among  them ;  and  I  was 
accompanied  by  the  same  faithful  Jansenist  friend,  who 
went  with  me  to  the  Dominicans.  Being  particularly 
desirous  of  information  respecting  the  differences  between 
them  and  the  Jansenists,  upon  what  they  denominate 
'  Actual  Grace,'  *  I  told  this  good  Father  that  I  should  be 
greatly  obliged  to  him  to  explain  the  matter  to  me ;  that 
I  did  not  even  know  what  the  expression  meant ;  and 
begged  him  to  inform 'me.  "  Willingly,"  he  replied,  "  I 
am  fond  of  persons  of  an  inquiring  disposition.  This  is 
the  definition.     '  Actual  grace'  we  call  an  inspiration  of 

*  '  Grace  actuelle'  (Fr.) 

GRACE   ALWAYS   PRESENT.  41 

the  Deity,  by  which  he  acquaints  us  with  his  will,  and 
by  which,  further,  he  excites  in  us  the  desire  to  fulfil  it." 
"  And  what,"  said  I,  "  is  your  difference  with  the  Jan- 
senists  on  this  subject  ?  "  "  It  is  this,"  he  replied ;  "  we 
hold  that  God  bestows  actual  grace  on  all  men  upon  every 
occasion  of  temptation ;  since  if  we  had  not  in  every  temp- 
tation actual  grace  to  preserve  us  from  sin,  whatever  sin 
was  committed  could  not  be  imputed  to  us.  The  Jan- 
senists,  on  the  other  hand,  say  that  sins  committed  with- 
out actual  grace  are  certainly  imputed ;  but  in  this  they 
are  mere  dreamers."  I  perceived  what  he  intended  to 
say,  but  in  order  to  make  him  express  himself  more 
clearly,  I  said,  "  This  word  '  actual,'  father,  perplexes 
me;  I  am  not  accustomed  to  it ;  have  the  goodness  to 
state  the  point  again,  without  using  this  term,  and  I  shall 
be  greatly  obliged."  "  Certainly,"  replied  the  Father, 
"you  wish  to  have  the  substance  of  the  definition  without 
technicalities ;  this  can  be  done  without  any  change  of 
meaning;  I  shall  be  most  happy.  We  maintain,  then, 
as  an  incontestible  principle,  '  that  an  action  cannot  be 
imputed  as  sin,  if  God  do  not  give  us,  before  its  com- 
mission, the  knowledge  of  its  sinfulness,  and  an  influence 
from  himself,  by  which  we  are  excited  to  avoid  it.''  Do 
you  understand  me  now  ?  " 

Astonished  at  this  statement,  according  to  which  all 
sins  of  surprise,  and  all  such  as  are  committed  in  entire, 
forgetfulness  of  God,  are  not  to  be  imputed  to  us,  I 
turned  to  my  Jansenist  companion,  and  saw  plainly  by 
his  look  that  he  admitted  nothing  of  the  kind.  But,  as 
he  made  no  remark,  I  said  to  the  Father,  "  I  should  be 
very  glad  if  this  were  as  you  have  stated,  and  could  be 

42  LETTER   IV. 

established  by  sound  reasoning  and  proofs."  "  Say  you 
so/'  he  quickly  rejoined ;  "  I  can  furnish  you  with  them 
at  once,  and  those  of  the  most  unquestionable  kind.'""  Oii 
which  he  proceeded  to  search  for  his  books. 

In  the  meantime  I  remarked  to  my  friend,  "  Are  there 
any  others,  then,  that  hold  the  same  language  as  this 
person  ?  "  "  Is  this  so  new  to  you  ?  "  he  replied  ;  "  un- 
doubtedly neither  the  Fathers,  Popes,  nor  Councils, — 
neither  the  Scriptures,  nor  any  pious  works  (even  of 
latter  times)  have  expressed  such  sentiments ;  but  as  to 
the  casuists  and  scholastics  of  the  present  day,  he  will 
find  you  sufficient  of  these."  "  But,"  said  I,  "  these  are 
authorities  that  I  repudiate ;  they  are  opposed  to  the 
Fathers."     "  Very  true,"  he  replied. 

Upon  this  the  good  Father  came  back,  loaded  with 
books;  and  offering  me  one.  Said  "  Read  this — '  the 
Catalogue  of  Sins,  by  Father  Bauny' — the  5th  edition 
too.  Does  not  that  prove  it  to  be  a  valuable  work  ? " 
"  It  is  unfortunate,"  said  my  Jansenist  friend  to  me,  in 
a  low  voice,  "  that  this  book  was  condemned  at  Borne,' 
as  well  as  by  the  bishops  of  France."  "  Look  here,'  said 
the  Father,  "  at  page  906."  I  read,  as  he  directed,  and 
found  what  follows.  '  In  order  to  constitute  sin,  and  to 
incur  guilt  in  the  sight  of  God,  we  must  know  that  the 
act  committed  is  evil,  or  at  least  doubt,  or  fear  it  to  be 
so;  or,  believing  the  act  meditated  to  be  displeasing  to 
God,  and  forbidden  by  him,  yet,  being  notwithstanding 
bent  upon  its  commission,  we  take  the  fatal  course,  and 
pass  the  boundary  of  obedience.' 

"This  begins  well,"  said  I.  "See  nevertheless,"  he 
rejoined,  "  what  malice  will  do.    This  was  what  M.  Hallier, 

GRACE  .ALWAYS   PRESENT.  43 

before  he  came  over  to  us,  taunted  M.  Bauny  upon,  and 
applied  to  him  the  words,  'Eecequi  tollit peccata  mundi.'" 
"  It  is  certain, "  I  repHed,  "  that  according  to  Father 
Bauny,  this  is  a  new  species  of  redemption." 

"  And  now  will  you  have  a  higher  authority  still," 
added  he.  "  Here  is  a  work  of  Father  Annat ;  *  it  is  his 
book  against  M.  Arnauld.  Read  the  lines  I  have  marked, 
at  page  34 :  they  are  golden  ones."  I  read  accordingly 
as  follows :  '  He  who  has  no  thought  of  God,  or  of  his 
sins ;  nor  any  apprehension,  (that  is,  as  I  consider)  no 
consciousness  of  his  duty  to  exercise  love  to  God,  or 
peuitence ;  he  has  no  actual  grace  to  direct  his  conduct ; 
but  it  is  also  true  that  he  commits  no  sin ;  and  that  if  he 
is  condemned  it  will  not  be  as  a  punishment  of  such 
omission.'  And  a  few  hues  further,  '  The  same  may  be 
said  in  regard  to  a  culpable  act  also.' 

"  You  see,"  said  the  Father,  "  how  he  here  speaks  of 
sins  of  omission,  as  well  as  of  commission ;  for  he  leaves 
out  nothing.  What  do  you  say  to  this  I ''  "  Oh,  I  am 
dehghted,"  I  replied;  "  the  consequences  must  be  ad- 
mirable ;  I  foresee  them  already :  what  mysteries  open 
themselves  to  me  !  I  predict  that  more  people,  beyond 
all  comparison,  will  be,  justified  by  this  ignorance,  and  this 
forgetfulness  of  God,  than  by  grace  and  by  the  Sacraments. 
But,  my  good  Father,  may  you  not  be  affording  me  a 
false  satisfaction  ?  Is  there  not  here  something  that 
resembles  a  '  sufficiency '  that  suffices  not  ?  I  am  terribly 
afraid  of  the  '  distinguo  ;'  I  have  already  been  taken  in 
by  it.     Pray  be  sincere."     "  How  ! "    said  the  Father, 

*  Pere  Annat,  Confessor  to  the  King.   See  17tli  and  subsequent  Letters. 

44  LETTER  IV. 

warmly ;  "  this  is  no  matter  for  jesting ;  we  are  not  deal- 
ing in  equivocation."  "  I  am  not  jesting,"  I  said,  "  my 
anxiety  is  proportionate  to  the  interest  I  feel  in  the 
question." 

"  Look  then,"  said  he,  "  for  fuller  satisfaction  at  the 
writings  of  M.  Le  Moine,  one  of  the  highest  authorities 
of  the  Sorbonne.  He  first  learned  his  doctrine  from  us, 
indeed;  but  he  has  treated  the  matter  admirably,  and 
established  the  point  beyond  dispute.  He  teaches,  that 
to  constitute  the  sinfulness  of  an  action,  all  the  following 
things  must  pass  through  the  soul.  Read,  and  ponder 
every  word."  I  read  accordingly  in  Latin,  Tvhat  here 
follows  translated:  '  1.  On  the  one  part,  God  imparts  to 
the  soul  a  measure  of  love,  which  inclines  it  towards  the 
thing  commanded ;  and,  on  the  other,  lust  urges  it  to  the 
contrary  act.  2.  God  impiarts  to  the  soul  a  knowledge  of 
its  weakness.  3.  God  gives  a  knowledge  of  the  medicine 
which  heals  spiritual  diseases.  4.  God  inspires  a  desire 
of  the  cure.  5.  God  imparts  the  desire  to  pray,  and  to 
obtain  his  assistance.' 

"  And  if  all  these  things  do  not  pass  through  the 
soul,"  added  the  Jesuit,  "  the  act  is  not  properly  sinful, 
and  cannot  be  imputed  as  such,"  as  M.  Le  Moine  states 
in  another  place,  and  throughout  the  whole  of  the 
remainder  of  the  treatise. 

"  Do  you  wish  for  yet  further  authorities  ?  Here  they 
are."  ("  But  all  of  them  modern,"  quietly  whispered  to 
me  my  Jansenist  companion.)  "  I  see  it  plainly,"  I  said ; 
and  then  addressing  the  Father,  observed,  "  My  excel- 
lent Father,  this  will  be  good  news  for  some  people  of 
my  acquaintance ;  for  you  never  knew  any  persons  who 

GRACE   ALWAYS   PRESENT.  45 

commit  less  sin  than  they.  They  never  think  of  God ; 
their  vices  have  perverted  their  very  reason.  They  have 
never  been  aware  of  their  spiritual  disease,  or  of  the 
medicine  that  is  to  heal  it.  They  have  had  no  concern 
for  their  soul's  welfere,  and  still  less  did  they  ever  pray 
to  God  for  assistance;  consequently  they  are,  according 
to  M.  Le  Moine,  '  in  their  baptismal  innocence.'  They 
have  had  no  thought  of  love  to  God,  or  penitence  for  sin ; 
therefore,  according  to  Father  Annat,  '  they  have  com- 
mitted no  sin,  through  failure  of  love  or  penitence  : ' 
their  life  has  been  passed  in  a  constant  pursuit  of  pleasure 
of  every  kind,  uninterrupted  by  the  slightest  remorse  or 
compunction.  All  these  things  have  made  me  fear  hitherto 
that  their  destruction  was  inevitable  ;  but  you,  my  worthy 
Father,  have  shown  me  that  these  very  excesses  tend  to 
assure  their  safety.  Heaven  bless  you,  my  Father,  for 
convincing  me  thus  of  their  justification  !  Other  persons 
seek  the  cure  of  their  souls  by  painful  austerities,  but  you 
demonstrate  that  those,  supposed  to  be  the  most  danger- 
ously sick,  are  in  reality  well.  Oh  happy  prospect  for 
them,  both  for  this  world  and  the  next !  I  had  always 
believed  that  we  sinned  the  more,  the  less  God  was  in 
our  thoughts  ;  but,  from  what  I  now  learn,  when  once  we 
have  achieved  the  power  to  dismiss  him  altogetherj  all 
things  become  pure  for  ever  after.  No  more  half-sinners, 
who  retain  some  little  love  for  virtue ;  your  half-sinners 
may  be  all  lost ;  but,  for  your  free  and  easy  sinners — 
your  hardened  sinners — sinners  without  compunction — 
full  and  complete  sinners — hell  will  never  get  hold  of 
them ;  they  have  cheated  the  devil  by  the  very  act  of 
giving  up  themselves  to  him  ! " 

4G 

LETTER   IV. 

The  good  Father^  seeing  clearly  enough  the  connexion 
between  these  consequences  and  his  own  principle,  eluded 
the  difficulty  with  adroitness ;  and,  without  forgetting 
either  his  good-humour  or  his  prudence,  merely  said, 
"  Do  not  suppose  we  are  unprepared  to  meet  the  unhappy 
eases  you  describe :  know,  we  hold  that  if  those  repro- 
bates of  whom  you  speak  had  never  experienced  compunc- 
tion, nor  felt  any  desire  to  give  themselves  to  God,  they 
would  have  been  without  guilt.  But  we  maintain  that 
they  have  experienced  all  this ;  and  God  would  never  have 
left  a  man  to  his  sin,  without  discovering  first  to  him  the 
evil  of  what  he  was  about  to  do,  and  giving  him  a  desire 
to  avoid  it,  or  at  least  to  ask  assistance  to  be  enabled  to 
do  so;  and  it  is  only  the  Jansenists  that  affirm  the 
contrary." 

"  What !  Father,"  I  rejoined,  "  is  that  then  what  con- 
stitutes the  heresy  of  the  Jansenists  ?  To  deny  that  every 
time  sin  is  committed,  the  conscience  is  troubled ;  in  spite 
of  which,  men  yet  take  the  leap,  and  pass  the  boundary  of 
obedience,  according  to  Pere  Bauny  ?  If  this  be  all,  it 
is  certainly  a  peculiar  kind  of  heresy !  I  supposed  we 
were  condemned  for  being  destitute  of  good  thoughts  or 
notions ;  but,  that  we  should  be  condemned  for  not 
believing  all  the  world  to  be  endued  with  them,  did  cer- 
tainly never  occur  to  me.  But,  my  good  Father,  I  feel 
bound  in  conscience  to  undeceive  you ;  and  to  tell,  you, 
there  are  multitudes  who  are  conscious  of  no  such  desires ; 
who  sin  without  compunction ;  who  sin  with  satisfaction ; 
who  make  sin  a  matter  of  boast  and  exultation.  A.nd  who 
is  better  acquainted  with  these  things  than  yourself?  You 
have  yourself  probably  confessed  some  of  these  very  per- 

GRACE   ALWAYS   PRESENT.  47 

sons ;  for  it  is  among  people  of  distinction  that  they  are 
most  usually  found.  But  take  heed,  my  Father^  of  the 
dangerous  consequences  that  flow  from  this  principle  of 
yours !  Do  you  not  perceive  the  effect  it  will  produce 
on  libertines,  whose  great  desire  is  to  invalidate  the 
truth  of  religion  ?  What  an  excuse  do  you  not  furnish 
them  with,  in  laying  down  as  an  article  of  faith,  that  they 
must  feel  in  every  sin  which  they  commit,  a  secret  warning, 
and  an  internal  desire  to  abstain  from  it  !  Is  it  not 
obvious,  that  being  convinced  by  their  own  experience  of 
the  fallacy  of  your  doctrine  upon  this  point,  which  you 
maintain  to  be  one  essential  to  faith,  they  will  extend  the 
consequences  to  every  other.  They  will,  if  they  find  you 
not  to  be  believed  in  one  Article,  suspect  the  whole ;  and 
thus  you  will  compel  them  to  the  conclusion,  either  that 
religion  is  false,  or  that  you  are  ill-instructed  in  its 
doctrines." 

My  colleague  then,  taking  up  my  argument,  said, 
"  You  would  do  well.  Reverend  Father,  while  you  endea- 
vour to  maintain  this  doctrine  of  yours,  not  to  avow  quite 
so  plainly  as  you  have  now  done,  what  you  mean  by  '  ac- 
tual grace.^  How  could  you  openly  declare,  without 
losing  altogether  your  hold  upon  mens'  minds,  '  that 
none  can  be  guilty  of  sin,  without  a  previous  knowledge 
of  their  infirmity,  and  of  the  remedy  provided  for  it;  with- 
out a  wish  for  its  cure,  and  for  receiving  such  cure  at  the 
hands  of  God?'  Can  you  now,  seriously  and  conscien- 
tiously, say  that  those  who  are  immersed  in  avarice,  in 
lust,  in  blasphemy,  in  broils  and  animosities,  in  robbery 
and  sacrilege — that  such  have  in  reality  any  desire  of 
chastity,  of  humility,  and  of  other  similar  virtues  ? 

48  LETTER   IV. 

"  Will  any  one  believe  that  the  philosophers  who  boasted 
so  much  of  the  powers  of  nature,  knew  any  thing  of 
disease  and  medicine  ?  Will  you  tell  me,  that  those  who 
hold,  as  an  undoubted  axiom,  '  that  it  is  not  God  who 
imparts  virtue,  and  that  no  one  was  ever  found  to  seek  it 
of  Him/  would  ever  think  of  seeking  it  of  Him  them- 
selves ? 

"  Who  could  suppose  that  the  Epicureans,  who  deny  a 
Divine  Providence,  were  ever  sensible  of  an  impulse  to 
pray  to  the  Deity  ?  They  who  declared  '  that  it  was  an 
affront  to  God  to  solicit  him  in  our  necessities  ;  as  if  He 
could  be  supposed  capable  of  bestowing  a  thought  upon 
such  beings  as  ourselves/ 

"  And,  finally,  can  it  be  imagined  that  idolaters  and 
atheists,  in  all  the  temptations  to  which  they  are  urged 
into  sin — that  is,  in  times  and  on  occasions  without  number 
— have  any  desire  to  pray  to  the  true  God  (with  whom 
they  are  unacquainted)  to  bestow  upon  them  virtues,  of 
whose  nature  they  knew  nothing  V 

"All  this  we  do  maintain,"  replied  the  worthy  Father, 
in  a  determined  tone ;  "  and  sooner  than  admit  that  men 
sin  without  the  consciousness  of  doing  ill,  and  a  desire  of 
the  opposite  virtues,  we  declare  that  all  persons,  both  the 
vicious  and  the  unbelieving,  experience  such  influences 
and  desires  on  every  occasion  of  temptation  ;  for  you  can 
furnish  me  with  no  proof,  especially  from  Scripture,  to 
the  contrary." 

I  then  resumed  the  discourse  as  follows  :  "  What !  my 
Father,  must  we  have  recourse  to  Scripture  to  demonstrate 
a  matter  so  palpable  ?     This  is  no  point  of  faith,  or  even 

GRACE   ALWAYS   PRESENT.  49 

of  reasoning ;    it  is  a  question  of  fact :  it  is  matter  of 
sight,  of  knowledge,  of  feeling." 

The  Jansenist,  however,  holding  the  Father  to  his  own 
terms,  thus  continued,  "  If  you  are  desirous,  Reverend 
Sir,  to  appeal  only  to  Scripture,  I  consent ;  but  take 
care  how  you  resist  its  authority  ;  and  since  it  is  written, 
'  God  has  not  revealed  his  judgments  to  the  Gentiles,  and 
has  left  them  to  wander  in  their  ways,'  say  not  that  God 
has  enlightened  those  who,  the  sacred  writings  assure  us, 
'  are  abandoned  to  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death.' " 

"  Is  it  not  sufficient,  to  prove  the  error  of  your  principle, 
that  St.  Paul  calls  himself  '  the  chief  of  sinners ;'  on  ac  • 
count  of  sin  which,  he  says,  was  committed  in  ignorance, 
and  excess  of  zeal  ?  Is  it  not  enough  to  find  in  the  Gospel, 
that  those  who  crucified  the  Lord  Jesus,  needed  the  pardon 
that  he  himself  sought  for  them,  although  they  knew  not 
the  evil  of  their  doing,  and  would  not  have  done  it  had 
they  known  it  ?  Is  it  not  enough  that  Christ  warns  us, 
that  there  will  be  persecutors  in  the  Church,  who  will 
think  they  do  service  to  God  in  compassing  its  ruin ;  in 
order  to  teach  us,  that  this  which,  according  to  the  Apostle, 
is  the  greatest  of  all  sins,  may  have  been  committed  by 
those  who,  so  far  from  knowing  it  to  be  sin,  believed  they 
should  sin  in  not  committing  it  ?  And,  lastly,  is  it  not 
enough  that  Christ  himself  has  taught  us,  that  there  are 
two  kinds  of  sinners, — the  one,  those  who  sin  with  know- 
ledge, and  the  other,  in  ignorance ;  and  that  both  shall 
be  punished,  although  in  difierent  measures  ?  " 

The  worthy  Father,  finding  himself  somewhat  pressed 
by  these  proofs  from  Scripture,  began  to  lose  ground  in 
the  discussion ;  and  allowing  that  the  vicious  might  sin 

D 

50  LETTER   IV. 

without  the  inspirations  and  impulses  in  question,  said, 
"  You  will  not,  at  least,  deny  that  the  just  never  commit 
sin  unless  God  ordain — "  "  You  waver,"  said  I,  inter- 
rupting him,  "  You  waver.  Father ;  you  abandon  the  gene- 
ral principle,  and  finding  you  can  make  nothing  more  of 
your  case  respecting  sinners,  you  try  to  compromise  the 
matter,  and  establish  your  point  in  regard  to  the  just. 
But  now  its  application  will  be  much  circumscribed  ;  for 
it  will  avail  so  few  persons,  that  it  is  not,  so  to  speak,- 
worth  the  trouble  any  longer  to  contest  it." 

But  my  companion,  who  might,  as  it  appeared  to  me, 
have  studied  for  the  discussion  that  very  morning,  so  pre- 
pared did  he  seem  upon  all  points,  continued  thus:  "  This,' 
my  Father,  is  the  last  entrenchment,  in  which  all  those  of 
your  side  of  the  question  take  refuge.  But  you  are,  in  re- 
ality, no  safer  than  before,  even  there.  The  instance  of 
the  just  is  not  more  favourable  to  you  than  that  of  the 
wicked.  Who  can  doubt  that  the  righteous  often  fall  into 
sin  through  surprise  and  inadvertence  ?  Do  we  not  know 
that  the  saints  themselves  are  led  into  snares  by  their 
concupiscence  I  and  with  all  their  habitual  sobriety,  yield 
themselves  sometimes  up  to  pleasure,  while  they  believe, 
they  are  under  the  constraint  of  necessity ;  as  says  St.  Au- 
gustine himself  in  his  Confessions  ? 

"  How  often  do  we  see  the  most  zealous  persons  drawn 
into  acrimony  in  dispute  from  personal  feelings,  without 
reproof  from  conscience,  and  in  the  belief  that  they  were 
actuated  by  zeal  for  truth  alone ;  and  remain  insensible, 
till  long  after,  of  their  error  and  self-deception  ! 

"  But  what  shall  be  said  of  those  who  abandon  them- 
selves to  conduct  positively  evil,  while  they  believe  it  to 

GRACE   ALWAYS   PRESENT.  51 

be  meritorious  (instances  of  which,  ecclesiastical  history 
furnishes  us  in  abundance ;)  but  which  belief,  according 
to  the  Fathers,  affords  them  no  justification  of  their 
offences. 

"  And,  independent  of  this,  how  many  are  the  secret 
sins  of  the  righteous !  How  otherwise  could  it  be  said 
that  God  alone  knows  their  magnitude  and  their  number ; 
that  no  one  can  be  certain  whether  he  is  deserving  of  the 
Divine  love  or  displeasure,*  and  that  the  very  holiest  have 
cause  of  fear  and  solicitude,  although  they  may  not  be 
conscious  of  transgression  in  any  particular  instance,  as 
St.  Paul  says  of  himself  ? 

"  Do  you  not  see  then,  my  Father,  that  the  cases  both  of 
the  just  and  of  sinners  alike  oppose  this  necessity,  in  order 
to  constitute  sin,  of  knowing  what  is  evil,  and  of  loving 
the  contrary  virtues  ?  The  propensity  of  the  vicious  for 
sin  clearly  proves  that  they  have  no  desire  of  virtue ;  and 
the  love  of  the  just  to  virtue  equally  shows  that  they  have 
not  always  a  consciousness  of  the  sins  which  they  daily 
fall  into ;  as  the  Scripture  testifies. 

"  And  so  certain  is  it  that  the  offences  of  the  just  are 
of  this  nature,  that  it  is  seldom  that  the  holiest  men  com- 
mit sin  in  any  other  way.  For  how  can  it  be  believed, 
that  souls  so  pure  as  to  shrink  with  the  most  sensitive 
anxiety  from  every  thing  in  the  slightest  degree  dis- 
pleasing to  God,  as  soon  as  it  is  known  to  be  so ;  and 

*  Had  the  holy-minded  Pascal  been  permitted  to  live  till  his  Christian 
experience  had  acquired  more  maturity,  without  loss  of  its  fervour,  he  would, 
it  may  be  hoped,  have  attained  to  more  cheering  views  on  this  subject, 
There  is  a  measure  of  humble  assurance,  without  presumption,  to  be  obtained 
even  in  this  life ;  and  the  Apostle  Paul  himself,  to  whom  Pascal  often  refers, 
affords  numerous  instances' of  it  in  his  own  experience.     (Transl.). 

D  2 

52  LETTER   IV. 

who  yet  offend  many  times  in  every  day  of  their  existence 
— that  they,  on  every  occasion  of  offence,  should  have 
this  consciousness  of  weakness,  this  knowledge  of  the 
reme^dy,  this  desire  of  restoration,  and  this  dependence  on 
God  for  assistance ;  and  that,  notwithstanding  these  their 
desires  and  aspirations,  persons  so  zealous  and  watchful 
should  not  be  preserved  from  passing  the  boundary,  and 
committing  sin  ? 

"  Be  assured  then,  my  good  Father,  that  neither  sin- 
ners nor  righteous  men  are  always,  and  on  aU  occasions, 
conscious  of  these  convictions,  desires,  and  aspirations, 
whenever  they  fall  into  sin ;  that  is,  to  use  your  own  ex- 
pressions— that  they  are  not  endued  with  '  actual  grace,' 
when  they  offend.  Tell  us  no  more,  as  do  these  new 
authorities,  that  it  is  impossible  to  sin  without  the  know- 
ledge of  righteousness ;  but  rather  say,  with  St.  Augustine 
and  the  old  Fathers,  that  it  is  impossible  not  to  sin,  when 
we  know  not  what  is  right ;  '  Necesse  est  ut  peccat,  a  quo 
ignorantur  justitice'  " 

The  good  Father  seeing  his  views  thus  controverted  in 
regard  to  the  just  as  well  as  to  the  sinful,  was  still  deter- 
mined to  keep  his  ground ;  and  after  a  little  considera- 
tion :  "  I  see  now  the  way  to  convince  you,"  he  cried. 
i\nd  again  opening  Father  Bauny  at  the  place  he  had 
quoted  before,  "  See,  see  the  reasoning  on  which  his  posi- 
tion is  founded.  I  well  knew  he  would  not  be  found  de- 
ficient in  proofs.  Read  what  he  quotes  from  Aristotle, 
and  you  will  see  that,  when  he  produces  so  signal  an 
authority,  you  must  either  burn  the  books  of  this  Prince 
of  philosophers,  or  come  over  to  our  opinion.  Observe 
now  the  principles  laid  down  by  Father  Bauny.     He  says 

GRACE.  ALWAYS  PRESENT.  53 

firstj  '  An  action  is  not  blameable,  if  it  be  involuntary/ 
"  Agreed^"  said  my  friend.  "  This  is  tbe  first  time,"  said 
I,  addressing  both,  "  that  I  have  found  you  agree.  Stay 
where  you  are,  my  good  Father,  if  you  will  take  my  ad- 
vice." "  That  would  be  doing  nothing,"  he  replied,  "  for 
we  must  know  what  are  the  conditions  of  an  action  being 
voluntary."  "  I  much  fear,"  I  rejoined,  "  that  you  will 
entangle  yourself  there."  "  Never  fear,"  said  he :  "  one 
thing  I  am  sure  of — Aristotle  is  on  my  side.  Hear,  now, 
what  Father  Bauny  says ;  '  That  an  action  may  be 
proved  to  be  voluntary,  it  should  be  committed  by  a  per- 
son capable  of  seeing,  knowing,  penetrating  the  good  and 
the  evil  in  it,  '  Voluntarium  est,'  it  is  usually  said,  ac- 
cording to  the  philosopher  ('  Aristotle,  remember,'  said  he, 
touching  my  hand)  quod  fit  a  principio  cognoscente  sin- 
gula, in  quibus  est  actio ;  go  that  when  the  will,  at  random 
and  without  deliberation,  is  impelled  to  desire  or  dislike, 
to  do  or  to  omit  any  thing,  before  it  is  apprehended  whe- 
ther it  be  evil  to  desire  or  to  shun,  to  do  or  to  omit  it, 
such  action  is  neither  good  nor  evil ;  inasmuch  as,  until 
this  pre-requisite  is  fulfilled — this  scrutiny  and  considera- 
tion in  the  mind  of  the  good  or  evil  qualities  of  the  action 
contemplated — such  action  is  not  to  be  considered  as 
voluntary." 

"  Well,"  said  the  Father,  "  are  you  satisfied  ? "  "  It 
certainly  appears,"  I  replied,  "  that  Aristotle  is  of  the 
same  opinion  as  Father  Bauny,  but  that  does  not  surprise 
me  the  less.  So  !  my  Father,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  consti- 
tute a  voluntary  action,  that  we  are  aware  what  we  are 
doing,  and  that  we  do  it  because  we  intend  to  do  it  ?  But 
it  is  also  necessary  that  we  '  should  see,  should  know. 

54  .  LETTER   IV. 

should  penetrate  the  good  and  the  evil  ia  an  action  ? '  If 
this  be  so,  no  action  in  life  can  "be  voluntary;  for  no  one 
can  think  at  once  and  Bltogether  of  all  these  things.  How 
riiany  oaths  are  uttered  in  our  games — what  excesses  are 
committed  in  festivities- — what  riots  .  during  carnival  sea- 
sons, which  are  not  voluntary,  and  consequently  neither 
good  nor  bad,  if  they  must  be  accompanied  by. this  scru- 
tiny of  the  mind  upon  the  good  or  bad  quality  of  the 
action  committed  !  But  is  it  possible,  my  Father,  that 
Aristotle  should  have  entertained  such  an  idea  as  this — for 
I  have  heard  he  was  considered  an  exact  thinker  ?  '*  "  I 
will  explain  the  matter,"  said  my  Jansenist  friend.  And 
requesting  the  Father  to  give  him  Aristotle's  '  Morals,'  he 
opened  it  at  the  commencement  of  the  third  book,  from 
which  the  Father  had  taken  the  passage  he  had  quoted, 
and  said  to  him,  "  I  forgive  you  for  having  supposed, 
on  the  authority  of  Father  Bauny,  that  Aristotle  had 
delivered  such  sentiments.  You  would  have  altered  your 
opinion  had  you  looked  for  yourself.  It  is  perfectly  true 
that  he  teaches,  that  '  for  an  action  to  be  voluntary,  we 
must  be  acquainted  with  the  particulars  of  that  action, 
'  Singula  in  quibus  est  actio.'  But  what  does  he  mean  by 
this,  but  that  we  must  know  the  particular  circumstances 
of  such  an  action ;  as  the  examples  he  gives  clearly  prove  ? 
You  will  £nd  he  adduces  only,  in  proof  of  his  position, 
instances  in  which  some  such  circumstances  have  been 
unknown ;  such  as,  '  a  person,  intending  to  ascend  a 
machine,  detaches  a  missile  which  wounds  another;  or 
Merope,  who  killed  his  son,  supposing  him  to  be  an 
enemy ;  and  the  like.' 
,    "  You  thus  see  what  kind  of  ignorance  it  is  that  renders 

GRACE   ALWAYS   PRESENT.  55 

actions  involuntary ;  and  that  it  is  only  that  of  special 
circumstance,  which  is  styled  by  theologians,  as  you  well 
know,  '  ignorance  of  fact.'  *  But  it  is  '  ignorance  of  in- 
tention,' t  that  is,  unconsciousness  of  the  good  or  evil  of 
an  action,  which  alone  is  the  present  question  j— let  us  see 
whether  Aristotle  is  of  the  same  opinion  as  Father  Bauny. 
These  are  the  words  of  that  philosopher.  "  All  wicked  per- 
"  sons  are  ignorant  as  to  what  they  should  do,  and  what 
"  they  should  avoid ;  and  this  it  is  which  constitutes  them 
"  wicked  and  vicious.  We  therefore  cannot  say  that,  be- 
"  cause  a  man  does  not  clearly  know  what  he  is  in  duty 
"  bound  to  do,  that  his  actions  are  involuntary.  For 
"  this  ignorance  in  choosing  between  good  and  evil,  does 
"  not  show  his  act  to  be  involuntary,  but  only  to  be 
"  vicious.  We  may  say  the  same  of  one  who  is  in  gen- 
"  eral  ignorant  of  the  rules  of  duty,  since  it  is  that  very 
"  ignorance  which  makes  him  an  object  of  blame,  not  of 
"  excuse.  And  thus,  the  ignorance  which  constitutes 
"  actions  to  be  involuntary  and  venial,  is  alone  that  which 
"  regards  some  particular  fact,  and  special  circumstances  ; 
"  it  is  then  that  a  man  is  excused  and  pardoned,  and 
"  considered  as  having  acted  against  his  inclination." 

"  And  now,  my  good  Father,  will  you  say  that  Aristotle 
is  of  your  opinion  ?  Who  must  not  be  astonished  to  see 
that  a  pagan  philosopher  is  more  enlightened  than  your 
doctors,  in  a  matter  so  important  to  morality,  and  to  the 
welfare  of  the  soul,  as  a  knowledge  of  the  distinction  be- 
tween actions  voluntary  and  involuntary,  and  consequently 
of  the  condemnation  or  acquittal  due  to  sin  ?     Hope  no- 

*  '  Ignorance  du  fait,'  (Fr.)  f  '  Ignorance  du  droit.'  (Fr.) 

56 

LETTER   IV, 

thing  more  then,  Father,  from  this  'Prince  of  Philosophers/ 
and  rather  let  me  urge  you  to  oppose  no  longer  that  Prince 
of  Theologians,  who  thus  decides  the  point  in  his  1st  Book 
of  Retr.  chap.  15.  '  Those  who  sin  through  ignorance  do 
not  commit  the  act  involuntarily,  although  they  may  not 
deliberately  intend  to  offend.  And  thus  a  sin,  even  of 
ignorance,  cannot  be  committed  without  the  will  of  the 
offender,  although  it  be  a  will  to  act,  and  not  absolutely 
to  sin ;  which,  however,  does  not  prevent  the  action  from 
being  sinful,  inasmuch  as,  to  constitute  sin,  it  is  sufficient 
to  have  done  that  which  we  were  under  an  obligation  not 
to  do.' " 

The  Father  seemed  surprised,  and  still  more  at  the 
passage  from  Aristotle,  than  at  that  from  St.  Augustine. 
But  as  he  appeared  to  be  revolving  what  reply  to  make, 

it  was  announced  that  Madame  La  Marechale  de 

and  Madame  La  Marquise  de wished  to  see  him. 

Therefore,  hastily  leaving  us,  "I  will  mention  the. matter," 
said  he,  "  to  our  Fathers;  they  will  be  able  to  answer 
you.  These  are  delicate  questions."  We  understood 
him  ;  and  when  I  was  alone  with  my  friend,  I  expressed 
my  astonishment  at  the  tendency  of  these  doctrines  to  the 
subversion  of  morality.  He  replied,  that  he  was  astonished 
at  my  astonishment.  "  Can  you  be  ignorant,"  said  he, 
"  that  their  obliquities  are  more  ffagrant  in  cases  of  mo- 
rality than  even  in  other  matters?"  He  proceeded  to 
give  me  some  striking  instances;  and  postponed  their 
continuation  till  a  future  period.  I  propose  that  what  I 
learnt  from  him  shall  be  the  subject  of  further  communi- 
cations from,  &c.  &c. 

LETTER  V. 

DESIGN  OF  THE  JESUITS  IN  THE  INSTITUTION  OF  A 
NEW  MORAL  CODE.  TWO  SORTS  OF  CASUISTS  AMONG 
THEM;  MANY  LAX,  BUT  A  FEW  SEVERE;  THE  REA- 
SON OF  THE  DIFFERENCE.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE 
DOCTRINE  OF  '  PROBABILITY.'  A  MULTITUDE  OF 
MODERN  AND  OBSCURE  AUTHORS  SUBSTITUTED  FOR 
THE   FATHERS. 

Sir,  Paris,  March  20,  1656. 

I  AM  about  to  fulfil  my  promise,  and  to  furnish  you 
witli  some  of  the  leading  principles  of  morality  of  the 
Jesuit  Fathers  : — "  These  men,  eminent  in  learning  and 
in  wisdom,  guided  by  a  wisdom  from  above,  which  is  more 
infallible  than  all  the  rules  of  philosophy."  You  may 
suppose  I  am  jesting  in  using  such  expressions;  I  am 
quite  serious ;  they  are  their  own  words,  in  their  work 
entitled  "  Imago  primi  seeculi."  I  am  only  transcribing 
from  them,  and  from  the  close  of  their  Eulogium.  "  This 
is  the  society  of  men,  or  rather  of  angels,  predicted  by 
Isaiah  in  these  words :  '  Go,  ye  angels  prompt  and  swift 
of  wing.' "  Is  not  the  prophecy,  as  applicable  to  them, 
clear  ?  "  They  are  eagle-spirits ;  they  are  a  flock  of 
phoenixes  (a  certain  author  having  lately  demonstrated 

D  5 

58  LETTER   V. 

that  those  birds  are  numerous) :  they  have  changed  the 
face  of  Christianity."  Since  they  assert  all  this,  we  are 
bound  to  believe  them.  And  all  this,  I  proceed  to  show 
you  in  the  following  communication ;  as  well  as  to  put 
you  in  possession  of  their  maxims  for  the  conduct  of  life 
and  conversation. 

I  made  up  my  mind  to  inform  myself  thoroughly  upon 
these  matters.  I  determined  not  to  rely  solely  upon  the 
information  of  my  friend ;  but  to  see  with  my  own  eyes. 
I  found,  however,  that  he  had  told  me  nothing  but  what 
was  strictly  accurate ;  and  I  think  you  will  see  this  to  be 
the  case,  from  the  account  I  am  about  to  give  of  pur  con- 
ferences. 

In  my  various  conversations  with  him,  he  related  to  me 
such  extraordinary  things,  that  I  had  at  first  great  diffi- 
culty in  believing  them.  He  however  confirmed  his  state- 
ments by  the  publications  of  these  very  Fathers.;  so  that 
I  had  no  way  left  to  excuse  them,  but  to  suggest  that  the 
sentiments  in  question  were  only  those  of  individuals,  and 
that  it  was  not  fair  to  impute  them  to  the  society  at  large. 
And,  in  fact,  I  contended  that  I  was  acquainted  with  some 
among  them  who  were  as  strict,  as  others  whom  he  re- 
ferred to  were  lax.  Upon  this  he  proceeded  to  disclose  to 
me  the  spirit  upon,  which  the  Society's  proceedings  are 
founded  ;  and  this  being  by  no  means  generally  known, 
you  will  probably  be  interested  in  learning.  The  following 
is  his  statement. 

"  You  suppose  it  to  be  much  in  their  favour  to  be  able 
to  show,  that  there  are  among  these  professors  some  whose 
sentiments  are  as  evangelical,  as  those  of  others  are  the 
contrary;  arid  you,  theilce  come  to  the  conclusion,  that 

DESIGN  OP   THE   JESUITS.  59 

these  latitudinarian  opinions  are  not  chargeable  upon  the 
whole  body.  I  well  know  all  this ;  for  if  such  were  the 
case,  they  would  not  be  able  to  tolerate  those  who  are  so 
opposed  to  them.  But  since  they  have  among  them  a 
portion  who  hold  these  licentious  doctrines,  you  must  in 
the  same  way  conclude,  that  the  spirit  of  the  Society  is  by 
no  means  rigid  j  otherwise  it  would  not  allow  such  an 
intermixture  as  that  which  actually  exists."  ''  How  !  " 
I  inquired,  "  what  then  is  to  be  deemed  their  object  and 
aim  as  a  body  ?  It  must  be,  surely,  that  they  shall  be 
bound  by  no  fixed  principles,  and  that  each  shall  have 
liberty  to  think  and  speak  as  he  pleases."  "  That  never 
could  be  the  case,"  replied  my  friend  ; — "  so  large  a  body 
could  never  be  formed  upon  a  plan  so  desultory,  nor  exist 
without  a  governing  spirit  to  regulate  all  its  movements  : 
to  say  nothing  of  one  of  their  special  rules,  viz.  that  no- 
thing should  go  forth  to  the  world  respecting  their  doc- 
trines and  principles,  without  the  sanction  of  their 
superiors."  "  But  then,"  I  said,  "  how  is  it  possible 
that  these  very  superiors  can  give  their  sanction  to  such 
contradictory  maxims  ? "  "  That  is  what  I  propose  to 
explain  to  you,"  he  replied. 

"  Understand  then,  in  the  first  place,  that  their  object 
is  by  no  means  the  corruption  of  morals.  On  the  other 
hand,  they  are  equally  remote  from  entertaining  a  single- 
minded  aim  for  their  reformation :  this  they  would  hold 
to  be  impolitic.  Their  reasoning  is  as  follows :  They 
think  so  favourably  of  themselves,  that  they  believe  it  to 
be  useful  and — so  to  speak — necessary  for  the  interests  of 
religion,  that  their  reputation  should  stand  high  with  all 
classes,  and  their  sway  be  extended  over  every  man's  con- 

60  LETTER   V. 

science.  And  as  they  see  that  severe  and  evangelical 
principles  are  most  influential  over  some  persons,  they 
avail  themselves  of  suchj  where  they  judge  their  oppor- 
tunity favourable.  But  knowing  these  principles  to  be 
not  favoured  by  the  great  majority,  their  method  is  to 
relax  them  in  favour  of  these  latter ;  and,  thus,  they 
are  able  to  meet  the  tastes  of  all.  For  these  reasons — 
having  to  deal  with  such  varieties  of  condition,  and  even 
with  entire  nations— differing  so  much  from  each  other — 
it  is  found  necessary  to  have  casuists  adapted  to  all  these 
diversities. 

"  On  this  principle  you  will  easily  see,  that  if  they 
employed  only  teachers  of  relaxed  principles,  they  would 
frustrate  their  great  aim  of  getting  all  classes  under  their 
influence ;  as  the  severely  pious  seek  for  guides  of  severe 
views  in  their  spiritual  affairs.  But  as  that  class  is  not  a 
numerous  one,  it  does  not  require  a  large  body  of  in- 
structors :  on  the  other  hand,  crowds  of  the  more  easy 
sort  of  teachers  take  the  field,  for  the  service  of  the  multi- 
tudes that  are  more  loosely  inclined. 

"  It  is  by  this  kind  of  '  facile  and  accommodating  con- 
duct '  (as  it  is  called  by  the  Pere  Petau)  that  they  hold 
out  the  hand  of  fellowship  to  the  whole  world.  If,  for 
instance,  one  person  presents  himself  who  is  desirous  to 
make  restitution  of  some  ill-gotten  gains,  think  not  that 
they  will  repulse  him ;  they  will  applaud,  and  confirm 
him  in  so  holy  a  resolution.  But  if,  on  the  contrary, 
another  is  desii-ous  of  absolution  of  his  sin  without  resti- 
tution, it  will  go  hard  with  them  if  they  do  not  find 
means  for  accomplishing  his  object ;  and  they  will  become 
themselves  guarantees  for  their  efiicacy. 

DESIGN   OP   THE   JESUITS,  61 

"  By  these  methods  they  preserve  their  friends,  and  are 
protected  from  their  enemies ;  for,  if  reproached  with 
laxity  of  principles,  they  straightway  bring  forward  their 
austere  professors  j  together  with,  perhaps,  some  of  their 
publications,  that  enforce  the  rigour  of  Christian  prin- 
ciples ;  and  the  simple  and  unreflecting  are  satisfied  with 
such  proofs. 

"  In  this  way  they  adapt  themselves  to  all  classes.  Nay, 
they  respond  so  admirably  to  every  taste,  that,  in  counti'ies 
where  the  notion  of  a  crucified  Deity  is  esteemed  folly, 
they  suppress  the  scandal  of  the  Cross ;  preaching  only 
the  Saviour  in  his  state  of  glory,  and  not  of  sufiering.  It 
is  in  this  manner  that  they  have  acted  in  the  Indus  and 
China,  permitting  their  converts  even  to  practice  idolatry, 
by  the  subtle  contrivance  of  directing  them  to  conceal  an 
image  of  Christ  under  their  garments,  and  mentally  to 
render  to  it  those  public  devotions,  which  were  professedly 
paid  to  the  idol  Cachinchoam,  and  their  Keum-fu-cum. 
These  are  facts,  which  rest  on  the  authority  of  Gravina,  a 
Dominican,  as  also  of  the  Spanish  memorial  presented  to 
Philip  4th  of  Spain  by  the  Grey  Friars  of  the  Philippine 
Isles,  as  related  by  Thomas  Rastado  in  his  work  of  '  The 
Martyrs  of  the  Faith,'  page  427.  In  the  same  manner, 
the  congregation  of  the  Cardinals  '  de  Propaganda  fide ' 
was  obliged  to  interdict  the  Jesuits,  specially,  and  on 
pain  of  excommunication,  from  permitting  the  adoration  of 
idols  on  any  pretence  whatever,  as  well  as  from  concealing 
the  doctrines  of  the  Cross  from  their  students  in  theology ; 
expressly  directing  them  to  admit  none  to  baptism,  but 
on  a  full  explanation  of  those  holy  mysteries ;  and  ordering 
them  to  exhibit  crucifi}^es  in  all  their  churches ;  as  is  fully 

62  .  LETTER   V. 

set  forth  in  the  decree  of  that  congregation,  of  July  1646, 
signed  by  Cardinal  Carponi. 

"  It  is  in  this  way,  and  by  virtue  of  the  doctrine  of 
"  probable  opinions,"  *  the  source  and  the  foundation  of 
every  species  of  disorder,  that  they  have  spread  themselves 
over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth.  You  may  hear  the 
same  things  from  themselves  ;  for  they  affect  no  conceal- 
ment of  them ;  nor  of  various  other  facts  with  which  I 
am  about  to  acquaint  you ;  with  this  difference  only,  that 
their  prudence  (which  is  in  reality  worldly  and  political) 
is  masked  under  the  pretext  of  a  prudence  divine  and 
spiritual;  as  if  true  faith,  and  the  tradition  by  which  it  is 
supported,  were  not  one  and  unchangeable,  in  all  times, 
and  all  places ;  as  if  it  were  allowable  to  bend  its  requisi- 
tions, to  accommodate  those  who  ought  to  conform  them- 
selves to  its  obligations  ;  and  as  if  the  soul,  in  order  to 
cleanse  itself  from  its  pollutions,  might  dare  to  corrupt 
the  Law  of  the  Lord ;  whereas  we  know,  that  '  the  Law 
of  the  Lord  is  pure,  converting  the  soul,  and  making  wise 
the  simple  ! ' 

"  I  should  wish  you  then  to  make  the  acquaintance  of 
these  worthy  Fathers ;  and  take  my  word  for  it,  you  will 
easily  perceive,  in  the  laxity  of  their  morals,  the  results  of 
their  doctrines  respecting  grace.  You  will  find  in  them 
the  Christian  virtues  almost  extinct,  and  stripped  alto- 
gether of  that  grace  of  charity,  which  is  their  soul  and 
life.  You  will  see  so  many  crimes  palliated,  and  so  much 
irregularity  allowed,  that  you  will  be  no  longer  surprised 
to  find  them  maintain,  all  men  to  have  grace  sufiicient 

*  '  Opinions  probables.'  ( Fr. ) 

DESIGN   OP   THE   JESUITS.  63. 

for  sucli  a  measure  of  piety  of  life,  as  their  principles 
propose.  For  a  morality  such  as  theirs — little  better 
than  Pagan — the  light  that  Nature  supplies  is  indeed 
enough.  When  we  inculcate  the  necessity  of  an  efficacious 
grace,  we  assign  other  virtues  for  its  exercise.  It  is  not 
simply,  to  eradicate  some  kinds  of  vices  by  the  cultivation 
of  others ;  it  is  not  merely,  to  induce  an  observance  of  the 
external  duties  of  religion  ;  it  is  to  nourish  a  virtue  more 
elevated  than  the  Jewish  Pharisees,  or  the  wisest  of  Pagans 
ever  reached.  The  restraints  of  law^the  deductions  of 
reason — suffice  for  attainments  such  as  those.  But,  to 
disengage  the  soul  from  love  of  the  world,  and  allure  it 
from  all  that  it  holds  most  dear  below ;  to  annihilate  self, 
and  consecrate  the  affections  solely  and  unchangeably  to 
God ;  all  this  can  be  the  work  alone  of  an  Omnipotent 
hand  !  And  it  is,  therefore,  as  little  rational  to  pretend 
that  we  have  in  ourselves  this  sufficiency  of  power,  as  it 
would  be  to  deny  that  such  qualities  as  have  been  de- 
scribed, if  destitute  of  Divine  love,  which,  notwithstanding, 
these  Fathers  confound  with  Christian  virtues,  are  not 
within  our  own  power  of  attainment." 

It  was  thus  my  friend  discoursed  to  me,  evincing  a 
deep  concern  for  the  irregularities  he  described.  For  my 
part,  I  could  not  help  at  least  admiring  the  excellent 
policy  of  this  society ;  and  I  determined  to  follow  the 
advice  I  had  received,  to  resort  to  one  of  their  most  able 
casuists  for  further  information.  For  this  purpose  I 
found  out  an  old  friend  of  my  own,  and  proceeded  to 
renew  my  acquaintance  with  hira.  And  as  I  was  aware 
in  what  way  to  obtain  most  effectually  my  object,  we  soon 
came  to  an  excellent  understanding. 

64  LETTER   V. 

He  received  me  with  great  cordiality,  for  he  had  always 
been  attached  to  me ;  and  after  some  general  conversation, 
I  took  occasion,  in  reference  to  the  present  season,  to  ask 
him  a  few  questions  respecting  fasting,  with  a  view  to 
draw  him  insensibly  into  the  subjects  I  desired.  I  com- 
plained that  I  experienced  difficulty  in  enduring  that 
exercise. 

He  began  by  exhorting  me  to  the  duty  of  forcing  my 
inclinations;  but,  as  I  continued  my  complaints,  he  ex- 
pressed concern  for  my  case,  and  set  himself  to  find 
excuses  for  me.  He  suggested  several  causes  of  the 
inconvenience  I  suffered,  which,  however,  did  not  apply 
to  my  own  circumstances.  At  last  it  occurred  to  him  to 
ask  me  whether  I  found  any  difficulty  in  sleeping  without 
taking  supper.  "  Indeed  I  do,  my  Father,"  I  replied, 
"  and  for  that  reason  I  am  often  obliged  both  to  take  a 
collation  at  noon,  and  to  sup  in  the  evening."  "  I  am 
glad  to  say  I  can  find  a  way,"  he  replied,  "  to  relieve  you, 
without  any  sin  on  your  part.  There — you  may  dispense 
with  fasting.  I  do  not,  however,  wish  you  to  take  my 
word  only  for  it ;  come  into  the  library."  I  went  ac- 
cordingly, and  there,  taking  up  a  book,  he  said,  "  Here 
is  my  authority ;  and  heaven  knows  how  eminent  an  one 
it  is.  It  is  Escohar."  "  Who  is  Escobar  ? "  I  enquired. 
"  What !  don't  you  know  Escobar,  a  member  of  our 
society,  who  compiled  that  Moral  Theology  of  24  of 
our  Fathers  ;  respecting  which  he  makes,  in  the  Preface, 
an  allegorical  comparison  to  the  Apocalypse,  sealed  with 
seven  seals  ?  And  further  he  says,  that  Jesus  thus  offers 
it  sealed  to  the  four  living  creatures,  Suarez,  Vasquez, 
Molina,  Valentia,  in  presence  of  24  Jesuits,  representing 

DESIGN.  OF   THE   JESUITS.  65 

the  24  Elders."  He  then  read  the  whole  of  this  Allegory, 
which  he  evidently  considered  very  impressive,  and  con- 
veying a  striking  proof  of  the  excellence  of  the  work. 
Then,  finding  the  passage  relating  to  fasts — "  Here  it  is," 
said  he,  tr.  1,  ex.  13,  N.  67,  '  If  a  person  cannot  sleep 
without  having  eaten,  is  he  obliged  to  fast  ?  By  no 
means.'  Are  you  not  satisfied  ?  "  "  Not  entirely,"  I 
replied,  "  for  I  find  I  can  bear  fasting,  by  taking  a  colla- 
tion in  the  morning,  and  supping  at  night.''  "  See  what 
follows  then,"  he  said ;  "  they  have  provided  for  all  cases. 
'  And  suppose  a  person  finds  himself  enabled  to  fast  by 
taking  only  a  collation  in  the  morning,  and  supper  at 
night  ?'  Here  is  the  answer;  '  Still  he  is  not  bound  to 
fast ;  no  one  is  obliged  to  reverse  the  order  of  his  meals.' " 
"  Excellent  reasoning  !  "  I  exclaimed.  "  But  tell  me," 
he  continued ;  "  Do  you  take  much  wine  ?  "  "  No,"  I 
answered]  "  I  cannot  bear  much."  "  I  asked  the  ques- 
tion," said  he,  "  for  the  purpose  of  apprizing  you,  that 
you  may  lawfully  drink  wine  in  the  morning,  and  when- 
ever you  please,  without  violating  your  fast ;  and  that  is 
very  supporting  to  the  strength.  This  is  decided  in  the 
■  same  part,  No.  75.  '  May  we,  without  breaking  our 
fast,  drink  wine  at  any  hour  we  choose,  and  even  in  large 
quantities  ?  We  may,  and  even  of  hypocras.' "  *  "I 
don't  remember  that  hypocras  wine,"  said  I ;  "  I  must 
put  it  down  in  my  memoranda.  But  really  this  Escobar  is 
an  excellent  person."  "  Every  one  likes  him,"  replied  the 
Father ;  "  he  puts  such  striking  queries.  Look  here,  in 
the  same  place.  No.  38 ;  '  If  a  person  is  doubtful  whether 
he  has  reached  21,   is   he  bound  to  fast  ?     No.     But 

*  Probably  something  more  comforting  than  ordinary  wine. 

66  .  LETTER   T. 

supposing  I  shall  be  21  to-night^  an  hour  after  mld- 
nightj  and  to-morrow  is  fast-day,  shall  I  be  bound  to 
fast  to-morrow  ?  No ;  you  may  eat  as  much  as  you  like 
between  midnight  and  one  o'clock,  as  you  are  not  31 
till  then;  and  thus,  as  you  have  a  right  to  break  the 
fast,  you  are  not  bound  to  keep  it/  "  "  It  is  really  very 
entertaining,"  said  I.  "  Oh,  there's  no  leaving  it  off 
when  you  have  once  begun  to  read  it :  I  pass  days  and 
nights  over  it-^I  read  nothing  else."'  The  worthy  Father, 
in  fact,  seeing  how  it  interested  me,  was  delighted,  and 
went  on.  "  Look  at  this  passage  of  Filiutius,  one  of  the 
24  Jesuits,  vol.  ii.  tr.  29,  part  ii.  c.  6,  N.  143 ;  '  If  a 
person  is  exhausted,  as,  for  instance,  '  ai  insequendam 
amicam,'  is  he  bound  to  fast  ?  No.  But  if  he  has 
fatigued  himself,  expressly  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a 
dispensation  from  fasting,  will  he  still  bB  bound  to  fast  ? 
Though  he  may  have  formed  a  purpose  of  doing  so,  he 
will  be  under  no  such  obligation.'  There,"  said  he, 
"  now  you  would  not  have  believed  this  ! "  "  Indeed, 
my  good  Father,"  said  I,  "  I  do  not  believe  it  now. 
What !  is  it  no  sin  not  -to  fast  when  we  are  able  to  do 
so  ?  Is  it  lawful  for  us  to  seek  occasions  to  commit  sin  ? 
or  rather  are  we  not  bound  to  avoid  them  ?  Truly,  this 
is  a  very  accommodating  doctrine."  "  Not  always,'^  he 
replied ;  "  it  depends  upon  circumstances."  "  On  what 
circumstances  ?  "  "  Oh,  oh  !  "  he  rejoined ;  "  then  it  is 
your  opinion,  that  if  we  are  exposed  to  inconvenience  in 
avoiding  such  occasions,  still  we  are  bound  to  do  so  ? 
That  is  not,  I  assure  you,  the  opinion  of  Father  Bauny, 
as  you  will  see  here  at  page  1084,  '  Absolution  is  not  to 
be  refused  to  those  who  continue  in  a  '  proximate'   con- 

DESIGN.  OF   THE   JESUITS.  67 

dition  of  sin,  *  if  it  be  such  as  they  are  unable  to  with- 
draw fromij  without  bringing  scandal  upon  themselves  ;  t 
or  without  sustaining  personal  inconvenience.' "  "  I  am 
delighted  to  hear  it,  my  good  Father ;  there  is  nothing 
more  wanting,  but  to  say,  these  occasions  may  be  pur- 
posely aiid  deliberately  sought,  since  it  is  allowable  not 
to  avoid  them."  "  That  very  thing  is  in  some  cases 
allowed,"  rejoined  he;  "  the  celebrated  casuist  Basil 
Ponce  states  this,  and  the  Pere  Bauny  confirms  his 
opinion  in  his  tract  on  Penitence,  ix.  4,  p.  94 :  '  We  may 
seek  occasions,  directly,  and  of  themselves,  '  prime  et  per 
se,'  if  the  spiritual  or  temporal  good  of  ourselves  or  our 
neighbour  induce  us  to  do  so.''  ■" 

"  In  truth,"  I  exclaimed,  "  I  seem  in  a  dream  when  I 
find  religious  persons  holding  language  like  this  ?  My 
good  Father,  tell  me  now,  can  you  conscientiously  main- 
tain such  opinions  ?"  "  No,  indeed  I  do  not,"  he  re- 
plied. "  Then  you  are  speaking  contrary  to  your  con- 
science 1"  "  By  no  means  ;  I  say  this,  not  according  to 
my  own  conscience,  but  according  to  the  consciences  of 
Ponce,  and  Pere  Bauny ;  and  surely  we  may  follow  such 
eminent  men  as  these."  "  What  then,  my  Father,  because 
they  have  introduced  a  few  such  lines  as  these  into  their 
books,  can  you  in  your  conscience  believe  it  is  lawful  to 
seek  occa:sions  of  sin  ?  I  always  thought  that  Scripture 
and  the  traditions  of  the  Church  were  to  be  guides,  and 
not  vain  casuists."  Oh  !  bon  Dieu  ! "  cried  the  Father, 
"  this  is  just  like  the  Jansenists.  Does  not  the  authority 
of  such  men  as  Pere  Bauny  and  Basil  Ponce,  give  a  mea- 

*  '  Dans  lea  occasions  prochaines  du  pe'chd.'  (Fr.) 
+  '  Sans  donner  suget  au  monde  de  parler.' 

68  LETTER   V. 

sure  of  probability  at  least  to  these  opinions  V  "I  cannot 
be  satisfied  with  probability,"  I  replied  j  "  I  want  cer- 
tainty," "  I  see"  said  the  Father,  "  you  don't  under- 
stand this  doctrine  of  '  probable  opinions ; '  *  you  would 
think  differently,  if  you  did :  I  must  instruct  you  in  it. 
You  will  find  you  have  not  lost  your  time  in  coming  here; 
but  for  that,  you  would  have  known  nothing  about  it. 
It  is  the  very  foundation-^the  A,  B,  C  of  our  system  of 
morality." 

I  was  delighted  to  find  him  thus  fall  into  the  topic  I 
desired ;  and  eagerly  expressed  my  wish  that  he  would 
explain  to  me  the  meaning  of  a  '  probable  opinion.'  "  Our 
writers  will  furnish  you  with  an  answer  better  than  my- 
self," he  replied.  "  This  is  what  they  lay  down  generally 
on  the  subject ;  and  among  others,  our  Twenty-four,  in 
Princ.  ex  3,  N.  8.  An  opinion  is  termed  '  probable,' 
when  it  is  founded  upon  reasons  entitled  to  a  certain 
measure  of  consideration.  Thence  it  may  happen,  that  a 
single  authority  of  eminence  may  render  an  opinion  "  pro- 
bable.' "  "  And  this  is  the  reason."  ,  ..."  A  person, 
specially  devoted  to  the  'study  of  a  given  subject,  would 
not  embrace  an  opinion,  if  he  had  not  good  and  sufficient 
cause  for  it."  "  Then,"  said  I,  "  a  single  doctor  may 
turn  our  consciences,  at  his  own  pleasure,  and  without 
fear  of  consequences  !"  "  You  need  not  laugh,"  said  he  ,• 
"  this  is  a  doctrine  not  to  be  questioned.  The  Jansenists 
have  tried  to  shake  it,  but  they  have  lost  their  labour. 
It  is  too  firmly  established.  Hear  what  Sanchez,  one  of 
our  most  celebrated  Fathers,  says,  '  You  will  doubt,  per- 

*  '  Des  opinions  probables.'  (Fr.) 

DESIGN   OF   THE   JESUITS.  69 

haps,  how  the  authority  of  one  sound  and  learned  doctor 
should  render  an  opinion  probable ;  nevertheless,  such  is 
the  case,  as  we  are  assured  by  Angelus,  Sylv.  Navarre, 
Emmanuel  Sa,'  &c.  And  they  prove  it  thus.  A  probable 
opinion  is  one  that  has  weight  and  foundation.  Now  the 
authority  of  a  wise  and  pious  man  is  not  a  trifle,  but  rather 
a  matter  of  great  consideration.  And  weigh  well  the  reason. 
If  the  testimony  of  any  individual  be  credible,  as  to  a  cer- 
tain event  having  occurred  at  such  a  place — for  instance, 
Rome — why  may  not  such  testimony  be  equally  valid  in 
a  question  of  morals  ?" 

"  A  happy  comparison,"  I  exclaimed,  "  mere  worldly 
matters  with  those  relating  to  the  conscience  !  "  "  Have 
patience :  Sanchez  has  an  answer  for  this  in  the  lines  that 
immediately  follow ;  'And  I  do  not  agree  with  the  distinc- 
tion which  certain  authors  draw,  that  the  authority  of  any 
learned  man  may  weigh  in  a  matter  of  a  worldly  nature, 
but  not  in  those  relating  to  Divine  things ;  for  it  is  of 
great  weight,  both  in  the  one  and  the  other.'  " 

"  My  good  Father,"  said  I,  frankly,  "  I  cannot  make 
anything  of  this  rule  of  yours.  Who  will  satisfy  me  that, 
with  this  licence  which  your  Fathers  assume,  of  examining 
matters  by  reason  only,  that  which  will  appear  certain  to 
one,  will  be  so  to  others  ?  So  great  is  the  diversity  of 
opinion."  "  You  don't  see  the  point,"  interrupted  the 
Father ;  "  they  are  by  no  means  without  dififerences  of 
opinion;  but  that  is  of  no  importance.  We  all  know  that 
they  do  not  all  hold  the  same  sentiments ;  on  the  contrary, 
they  scarcely  ever  agree :  but  it  is  all  the  better  for  that. 
There  are  few  questions  in  which  you  will  not  find  that 
one  will  say.  Yes  j  another.  No.     And,  in  all  these  cases, 

70.  LETTER    V. 

each  of  the  two  conflicting  opinions  has  some  degree  of 
pmbabiUty ;  and  therefore  it  is,  that  '  Diana '  remarks  on. 
this  subject,  Part  III.  Vol.  IV.  p.  244,  '  Ponce  and  San- 
chez hold  different  opinions ;  but,  as  they  are  both  wise 
men,  each  of  their  opinions  rests  upon  grounds  of  pro-', 
babihty.' " 

"  But,  my  Father,"  I  said,  "  this  must  render  a  choice 
between  the  different  views  embarrassing."  "  Not  in  the 
least,"  he  replied;  "  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  follow 
that  which  agrees  best  with  our  own."  "  But  suppose 
the  other  has  the  greater  measure  of  probability  ?  "  "  No 
matter,"  he  replied.  "  And  if  the  other  should  be  the 
more  sound?"  "  No  matter  still,"  rejoined  the  Father ; 
"  here  is  an  excellent  solution  of  the  point.  It  is  in 
Emanuel  Sa,  a  member  of  our  society,  in  his  Aphorisms 
'  de  Dubio,'  p.  183,  '  We  may  do  any  thing  that  we 
believe  to  be  allowable,  if  authorized  by  an  opinion 
grounded  on  probability ;  although  the  contrary  opinion 
may  be  the  more  sound  one.  The  opinion  of  any  one 
learned  man  suffices  for  this  purpose.'"  "  Then  if  an 
opinion  be  altogether  less  probable,  and  less  sound,  is  it 
allowed  to  act  upon  that,  in  preference  to  one  which  is 
believed  to  be  more  probable,  and  more  sound  ?  "  "  Yes," 
again  he  said ;  "  hear  the  words  of  Filiutius,  the  great 
Roman  Jesuit,  Mort.  qusest.  tr.  31,  c.  4,  N.  128,  '  It  is 
lawful  to  follow  a  less  probable,  and  less  sound  opinion; 
many  authors  concur  in  this  judgment.'  Is  not  this 
explicit  ?"  "This  gives  us  sufficient  latitude,  it  must  be 
confessed,  my  reverend  Father,"  I  said :  "  thanks  to  your 
'  probable '  opinions,  we  get  a  very  comfortable  degree  of 
Ijberty  of  conscience.     And  pray,  do  your  other  casuists 

DESIGN   OF   THE   JESUITS.  71 

give  the  same  licence  in  their  replies  ? "  "  Yes/'  said 
he,  "  we  reply  just  according  to  our  own  pleasure,  or 
rather  according  to  the  pleasure  of  those  who  interrogate 
us  ;  for  these  are  but  rules,  taken  from  the  works  of  the 
Fathers,  Layman,  Theol.  Mor.  1.  6,  tr.  1,  c.  2,  §  2,  N.  7— 
Vasquez,  Dist.  63,  c.  ix,  n.  47 ;  Sanchez  in  Sam.  1.  1, 
c.  ix.  N.  28;  and  of  our  '24'  in  Princ.  ex.  3,  N.  24. 
These  are  the  words  of  Layman,  which  are  followed  by 
the  '  24 ; '  A  doctor,  when  consulted,  may  give  such 
advice  as  is  not  only,  in  his  opinion,  probable,  but  even 
contrary  to  his  opinion,  if  it  be  thought  probable  by 
others,  provided  such  contrary  opinion  will  be  more  favour- 
ably received  by,  and  be  more  agreeable  to  the  party 
asking  advice;  '  si  forte,  ex  illi favorabilios  seu  exoptatior 
sit.'  But  I  go  farther,  aud  say,  it  wiU  not  be  unreason- 
able for  him  to  give  to  the  consulter  an  opinion  that  may 
have  been  entertained  as  probable  by  some  learned  persons, 
although  he  himself  may  believe  it  to  be  utterly  false.' " 

"  Admirable !  my  good  Father,  your  doctrine  is  most 
convenient.  So,  you  may  reply  Yes  or  No,  at  your  plea- 
sure !  It  is  impossible  to  estimate  too  highly  such  an 
advantage.  I  now  see  the  use  of  the  opposing  opinions 
held  by  your  authorities  on  all  subjects ;  for  the  one  are 
always  serviceable,  and  the  other  can  never  be  injurious. 
If  you  don't  find  your  account  on  the  one  side,  you  try 
the  other,  and  are  thus  always  secure."  "  It  is  very 
true,"  be  replied ;  "  and  thus  we  can  always  say,  with 
Diana,  who  had  Father  Bauny  on  his  side,  while  Father 
Lugo  was  against  him, 

'  ScBpe,  premente  Deo,  fert  Deus  alter  opem.' 
'  Si  quelque  Dieu  nouapresse,  un  juitre  nouidelivre.' 

73  LETTER   V. 

"  I  understand  you,"  said  I  j  "  but  there  is  one  diffi- 
culty, to  my  mind ;  suppose,  after  consulting  one  of  your 
doctors,  and  receiving  from  him  a  somewhat  latitudinarian 
opinion,  you  were  to  fall  in  with  another  more  severe  in  his 
views,  and  who  would  not  give  absolution  without  a 
change  of  opinion  ?  Have  you  not  given  directions  for 
such  a  contingency  ?  "  "  Can  you  doubt  it  ?  "  he  replied ; 
"  they  are  compelled  to  absolve  such  penitents  as  hold 
the  probable  opinions  in  question,  on  pain  of  being  held 
guilty  of  mortal  sin  if  they  refuse.  This  has  been  clearly 
proved  by  our  writers,  and  among  others  Pere  Bauny, 
tr,  4,  de  poenit.  qu.  13,  p.  19.  '  When  the  penitent,'  he 
says,  '  acts  upon  the  authority  of  a  probable  opinion,  the 
confessor  must  absolve  him,  even  if  his  own  opinion  differ 
from  that  of  the  penitent.' "  "  But  he  does  not  say  it  is 
a  mortal  sin  not  to  absolve  him."  "  You  are  too  hasty !  " 
said  he ;  "  hear  what  follows  :  it  is  expressly  laid  down, 
'  To  refuse  absolution  to  a  penitent  for  an  act  committed 
in  pursuance  of  a  probable  opinion,  is  an  offence,  in  its 
very  nature,  mortal.'  And  he  quotes,  in  confirmation  of 
this  sentiment,  three  of  the  most  eminent  of  our  Fathers, 
Saurez,  Vol.  4,  dist.  33,  sect.  5 ;  Vasquez,  disp.  63,  ch.  7, 
et  Sanchez,  N.  39." 

"  Well,  my  good  Father,"  I  rejoined ;  "  this  is  truly 
excellent !  There  is  nothing  now  to  fear.  A  confessor 
cannot  dare  to  refuse  !  I  did  not  know  before  that  you 
had  the  power  to  issue  ordinances  on  pain  of  damnation. 
I  supposed  you  were  only  able  to  take  away  sins ;  I  did 
not  imagine  you  had  authority  to  make  them  also  :  but  I 
now  see  there  is  no  limit  to  your  powers."  "  You  do  not 
express  yourself  properly,"  he  replied ;  "  we  do  not  make 

DESIGN   OF   THE   JESUITS.  73 

sins  ;  we  only  furnish  the  occasion  for  bringing  them  to 
light.  I  have  several  times  observed  that  you  are  not  a 
good  scholastic." 

"  Be  that  as  it  may.  Father,"  I  said,  "  my  doubts  are 
now  all  satisfied.  But  I  have  one  more  question  to  ask 
you.  I  do  not  exactly  see  how  you  manage,  when  the 
Fathers  of  the  Church  are  opposed  to  the  opinions  of 
your  Casuists  ?  " 

"  You   do  not   understand   the   matter,"   he   replied. 
"  The  Fathers  were  well  enough  for  their  own  times ;  but 
they  don't  go  far  enough  for  ours.     Modern  morality  is 
not  to  be  regulated  by  them ;  but  by  the  casuists  of  our 
own  day.     Hear  the  words  of  our  own  Pere  Cellot,  De 
Hier.  lib.  8,  cap.  16,  p.  714,  following,  in  this,  the  famous 
Pere  Eeginaldus :  '  In  questions  of  morals  the  modern 
Casuists  are  preferable  to  the  ancient  Fathers,   although 
they  lived  at  a  period  nearer  to  the  apostolic  age.'     And, 
in  conformity  with  this  view,  Diana  thus  speaks,   pa.  5, 
tr.  8,  reg.  31 :  '  Are  the  holders  of  benefices  bound  to 
give  up  their  revenues,  if  they  make  an  ill  use  of  them  ? ' 
The  ancients  said.  Yes ;  but  the  moderns  say.  No :  let  us 
then  not  relinquish  this  decision,  by  which  the  obligation 
to  give  up  property  in  the  supposed  case  is  put  an  end 
to."     "  Admirable  sentiments  !  "  I  replied,  "  and  full  of 
comfort  for  a  large  part  of  mankind."     "  As  to  the  Fa- 
thers," said  my  friend  again,  "  we  leave  them  to  such  as 
incline  to  the    dogmatic  school;  but  we   who  have  the 
keeping  of  men's  consciences,  study  them  but  little ;  and 
quote,  in  our  writings,  none  but  the  modern   casuists. 
Look  at  Diana,  for  instance,  whose  works  are  so  copious ; 
he  has  enumerated,  at  the  outset,  the  authors  whom  he 

74 

IjETTER   V. 

refers  to.  They  amount  to  296,  the  oldest  of  their  publi- 
cations having  appeared  within  the  last  eighty  years." 
"  Subsequent  to  the  institution  of  your  Society,  then  ?  " 
I  said.  "  About  contemporaneously,"  he  replied.  "  That 
is  to  say,"  rejoined  I,  "  on  its  appearance,  at  once  were 
cashiered  St.  Augustine,  Chrysostom,  Ambrose,  Jerome, 
and  their  brethren,  as  concerns  every  thing  that  relates  to 
morals.  But  I  should  be  glad  to  be  informed  the  names 
of  their  successors :  who,  pray,  are  these  new  authorities  ?  " 
"  Oh,  they  are  most  able  and  distinguished  men — Villa- 
lobos,  Conink,  Llamas,  Achokeri,  Dealkoser,  Dellacroix, 
Veracruz,  Ugolin,  Tambourin,  Fernandez,  Martinez,  Sua- 
rez,  Henriquez,  Vasquez,  Lopez,  Gomez,  Sanchez,  de 
Vechis,  de  Grassis,  de  Grassalis,  de  Peliginnis,  de  Gra- 
phocis,  Squilante,  Bezozeri,  Barcola,  de  Bobadilla,  Li- 
mancha,  Perez  de  Lara,  Aldretta  Lorca,  de  Scarica, 
Quaranta,  Scophra,  Pedrezza,  Cabrezza,  Bisbo,  Dias,  de 
Clavasio,  Villagat,  Adam  a  Menden,  Isibaine,  Binsfield, 
Volfangi  a  Vorberg,  Vosthery,  Strevesdorf."  "  Oh,  my 
good  Father  !  "  cried  I,  alarmed,  "  were  all  these  people 
Christians  ?  "  "  Christians  !  "  said  he,  "  did  I  not  tell 
you  they  were  the  only  persons  by  whom,  in  the  present 
day,  we  regulate  our  system  of  Christianity  ?  " 

I  was  concerned  to  hear  him  say  this ;  but  made  no 
remark ;  and  only  asked  him  if  they  were  all  Jesuits  ? 
"  No,"  he  replied  ;  "  but  that  is  of  no  importance ;  there 
are  excellent  things  in  them  all.  Not  but  that,  to  say  the 
truth,  the  greater  part  are  taken  or  imitated  from  our- 
selves ;  but  we  do  not  stand  upon  punctilios ;  besides 
which,  they  never  fail  to  quote  our  Fathers  with  eulo' 
giums.     Diana,  for  instance,  who  is  not  a  member  of  our 

DESIGN   OP   THE   JESUITS.  75 

Society,  when  he  speaks  of  Vasquez,  calls  him  the  '  Phos- 
nix  of  Minds.'  And  elsewhere  he  says,  Vasquez,  alone, 
is  as  valuable  to  him  as  all  the  rest  together ;  '  Instar 
omnium.'  All  our  writers  also  make  great  use  of  this 
worthy  '  Diana ; '  as  you  will  see,  when  you  come  to  un- 
derstand our  doctrine  of  '  Probability.'  On  the  contrary, 
we  have  wished  that  others  besides  the  Jesuits  should  deal 
in  '  probable '  opinions,  that  we  may  not  alone  have  such 
things  imputed  to  us.  And  thus,  when  some  author — 
whoever  he  may  be — advances  an  opinion  of  this  kind, 
we  may,  if  we  think  proper,  weigh  it  by  the  doctrine  of 
'  probability ; '  at  the  same  time  that  we  are  not  answer- 
able for  it,  if  the  writer  does  not  belong  to  us."  "  I  un- 
derstand all  that,"  I  replied  :  "  I  see  very  well  that  every 
thing  is  made  to  suit  your  views  completely — excepting 
only  the  old  Fathers — and  that  you  are  masters  of  the 
field.     Your  course  is  clear." 

"  At  the  same  time,"  I  continued,  "  I  cannot  help 
thinking,  I  perceive  a  few  important  inconveniences,  and 
some  powerful  obstacles  in  the  way  of  your  career."  "  In- 
deed !  "  exclaimed  the  Father,  astonished.  "  They  are," 
said  I,  "  the  Scriptures,  the  Popes,  and  the  Councils ; 
all  which  you  cannot  possibly  gainsay,  and  which  are  all 
united  in  one  uniform  system  of  evangelical  truth."  "  Oh, 
is  that  all  ?  "  he  replied.  "  You  quite  alarmed  me.  Do 
you  suppose,  so  palpable  a  point  as  that  has  not  been  fore- 
seen and  provided  for  ?  I  cannot  indeed  but  admire  that 
you  should  think,  we  have  put  ourselves  in  opposition  to 
the  Scriptures,  the  Popes,  and  the  Councils  !  I  must  set 
you  right.  I  should  be  concerned  that  you  should  sup- 
pose us  so  wanting  in  our  duty.     You  have  no  doubt 

E  2 

76 

LETTER   T. 

conceived  this  notion  from  certain  sentiments  of  our  Fa- 
thers, which  bear  an  appearance  of  such  a  contradiction, 
but  are  not  such  in  reality.  However,  in  order  to  satisfy 
you  of  our  agreement  with  them,  we  must  seek  an  oppor- 
tunity of  more  leisure.  If  your  stay  here  is  not  disagree- 
able, and  you  will  let  us  meet  again  to-morrow,  I  will  give 
you  the  necessary  information.'^ 

This  was  the  conclusion  of  our  conference,  as  it  will  be 
of  my  present  communication — enough  in  all  conscience, 
for  one  letter.  I  doubt  not  you  will  be  willing  to  wait  for 
the  sequel,  and  in  the  mean  time,  remain,  &c.  &c. 

LETTER  VI. 

VARIOUS  ARTIFICES  OP  THE  JESUITS  FOR  EVADING  THE 
AUTHORITY  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES,  THE  COUNCILS,  AND 
THE  POPES.  CERTAIN  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THEIR 
DOCTRINE  OP  PROBABILITY.  THEIR  INDULGENCE  IN 
FAVOUR  OP  BENEFICIARIES,  PRIESTS,  MEMBERS  OF 
RELIGIOUS  ORDERS,  AND  SERVANTS.  HISTORY  OF 
JOHN   D'ALBA. 

Sir, 
I  INFORMED  you  at  tlie  close  of  my  last  letter,  that  my 
excellent  Jesuit  friend  Lad  promised  to  explain  to  me  the 
manner  in  which  their  casuists  had  succeeded  in  recon- 
ciling their  opinions  with  the  decisions  of  the  Popes  and 
Councils,  and  with  the  canon  of  Scripture.  On  my  next 
visit  to  him,  he  gave  me  the  promised  information ;  and  it 
was  to  this  effect. 

"  One  of  the  methods,"  said  the  worthy  Father,  "  by 
which  we  reconcile  these  seeming  contradictions,  is,  a  cer- 
tain interpretation  of  expressions.  For  instance,  Pope 
Gregory  4th,  pronounced  that  assassins  ought  not  to  re- 
ceive an  asylum  in  the  churches,  but  should  be  expelled 
from  them.  Notwithstanding  this,  our  four-and-twenty 
elders  say,  tr.  6,  ex.  4,  N.  37,  '  All  persons  who  take  life 

78  LETTER   VI. 

treacherously,  ought  not  to  be  subject  to  the  penalty  of 
this  Bull.'  Now  this  will  appear  contradictory  ;  but  they 
manage  the  matter  by  an  interpretation  of  the  term  As- 
sassin, as  follows :  '  Are  not  assassins  unfit  for  the  privi- 
lege of  sanctuary  ?  Yes,  by  the  Bull  of  Gregory  XIV. 
But  we  understand  by  the  term  Assassin,  such  as  commit 
murder  for  pay.  Whence  it  follows,  that  those  who  kill 
without  pay,  and  only  to  do  a  service  to  a  friend,  should 
not  be  called  assassins.'  In  the  same  way,  it  is  said  in 
the  Gospel,  '  Give  alms  of  your  abundance.'  But  many  of 
the  casuists  have  found  a  way  to  relieve  the  most  opulent 
persons  from  the  necessity  of  giving  alms.  You  will  think 
this  again  inconsistent.  But  it  is  easily  explained  by 
their  interpretation  of  the  word  '  abundance '  as  '  super- 
fluity : '  so  that  in  reality  scarcely  any  one  can  be  pro- 
perly said  to  enjoy  such  a  superfluity.  And  this  is  the  view 
of  Vasquezj  in  his  Tract  on  Alms,  c.  4,  N.  14.  '  Whatso- 
ever amount  of  means  persons,  living  in  society,  enjoy, 
for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  a  suitable  condition  for 
themselves  and  their  relations,  is  not  to  be  called  '  super- 
fluity ; '  and  therefore,  scarcely  any  person,  so  living  in 
the  world,  can  be  said  to  have  superfluity  of  wealth — not 
even  Sovereigns  themselves." 

"  Diana,  also,  after  quoting  these  words  of  Vasquez 
(for  he  usually  takes  his  views  from  our  authorities),  con- 
cludes in  this  sensible  manner  :  "^  As  to  the  question  whe- 
ther the  rich  are  bound  to  give  alms  of  their  superfluity, 
although  the  afiirmative  is  perfectly  just,  it  will  never,  or 
very  rarely  happen,  that  in  practice  the  obligation  is 
binding." 

."  I  see  clearly,"  my  Father,  "  I  said,  "  what  is  the  doc- 

ARTIFICES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  79 

trine  of  Vasquez ;  but  what  answer  would  be  given,  if  it 
were  objected,  that  it  would  be  as  much  for  our  souls' 
salvation,  according  to  Vasquez,  not  to  give  alms,  pro- 
vided we  had  worldly  ambition  enough  not  to  possess  any 
superfluity ;  as,  according  to  the  Gospel,  it  is  safe  to  have 
no  ambition,  that  by  that  means  we  may  have  a  superfluity 
to  dispense  in  alms-giving  ?  "  "  Why,  you  would  say," 
he  replied,  "  that  both  views  were  safe,  and  that  according 
to  the  same  evangelist ;  the  one,  according  to  the  Gospel 
in  the  more  liberal  and  obvious  sense ;  the  other,  according 
to  the  interpretation  given  to  it  by  Vasquez.  You  see 
now  the  advantage  of  interpretation." 

"  But  when  the  terms  are  so  clear,"  he  proceeded,  "  as 
not  to  admit  of  any  such  diversity,  we  then  avail  our- 
selves of  circumstances  favourable  to  us  ;  as  you  will  see 
by  an  example.  The  Popes  have  been  accustomed  to 
excommunicate  monks  who  appear  without  their  ecclesias- 
tical dress ;  notwithstanding  which,  our  twenty-four  elders 
thus  express  themselves,  tr.  6,  ex.  7,  N.  103,  '  What  are 
the  occasions  on  which  a  monk  may  leave  off  his  dress 
without  incurring  excommunication  ? '  Several  are  stated, 
and,  among  others,  these :  '  If  he  take  it  off  for  the  pur- 
pose of  pilfering,  or  going  "  incognito  "  to  places  of  licen- 
tious amusement,  or  for  any  other  scandalous  object, 
intending  however  soon  to  resume  his  dress.'  It  is  plain 
therefore  that  the  Bulls  did  not  contemplate  cases  of  this 
description." 

I  expressed  some  incredulity  upon  this  point,  and  begged 
the  Father  to  show  me  the  passages  in  the  original.  I 
found  that  the  chapter,  containing  these  words,  was  en- 
titled, "  Practices  of  the  School  of  the  Jesuits'  Society  ;  " 

80 

LETTER  VI. 

"  Praxis  ex  Societatis  Jem  Schola ; "  and  there  I  read  as 
follows  :  "  Si  habitum  demittat,  ut  furetur  occulta,  vel 
fornicatur."  He  also  showed  me  the  same  thing  in 
Diana,  as  thus  :  "  ut  eat  incognitas  ad  lupanar."  "  And 
how  is  it,  my  good  Father,"  I  asked,  "  that  they  are  ex- 
empted from  excommunication  on  such  occasions  as 
these  ?  "  "  Don't  you  understand  ?  "  replied  he.  "  Can 
you  not  perceive  what  scandal  it  would  occasion,  if  a 
monk  were  to  be  surprised  in  such  a  situation,  wearing 
his  ecclesiastical  habit  ?  And  have  you  not  heard  what 
reply  was  given  to  the  first  Bull '  contra  soUicitantes '  ? 
And  in  what  way  our  twenty-four,  also,  in  a  chapter  of 
the  '  Pratiques  de  I'Ecole,  &c.  &c.^  explains  the  Bull  of 
Pius  V.  '  Contra  Clericos '  V  "I  cannot  say  I  know 
any  thing  of  the  matter."  "  Then  you  don't  read  '  Es- 
cobar '  ?  "  said  he.  "  I  had  not  done  so  before  yester- 
day," I  replied ;  "  and  then  I  found  difficulty  in  meeting 
with  a  copy.  I  do  not  know  how  it  happens,  that  lately 
every  body  seems  to  have  been  running  after  it."  "  What 
I  mentioned,"  said  the  Father,  "  is  in  tr.  1,  ex.  8,  N.  102. 
liook  at  it  for  yourself.  You  will  see  an  admirable  spe- 
cimen of  the  method  of  favourable  interpretation  of 
'  Bulls.' "  I  had  seen  it  in  fact  that  very  evening ;  but 
I  dare  not  transcribe  the  passage  even  to  you :  it  is  abso- 
lutely horrible  ! 

The  worthy  Father  then  resumed :  "  You  understand 
now  how  we  manage  to  avail  ourselves  of  '  favourable ' 
circumstances  ?  *  There  are  however  certain  matters  so 
precise,  that  they  cannot  be  met  in  the  way  of  contradic- 

*  '  Circonstances  favorables.'  (Fr.) 

ARTIFICES  OF   THE  JESUITS,  81 

tion.  For  instance,  three  Popes  have  decreed,  that  monks 
who  have  bound  themselves  by  vow  to  the  observance  of 
Lent,*  cannot  receive  dispensation,  even  if  appointed  to 
bishoprics :  nevertheless,  Diana  says,  '  Notwithstanding 
that  decision,  they  may  obtain  a  dispensation.'  "  "  And 
how  does  he  reconcile  this  ? "  I  inquired.  "  It  is,"  re- 
plied the  Father,  "  by  the  most  subtle  of  all  the  modern 
methods,  and  by  the  most  refined  application  of  the  doc- 
trine of  '  probabihty.'  I  will  explain  it.  The  affirmative 
and  negative  of  the  greater  number  of  opinions  have,  as  I 
showed  the  other  day,  in  the, judgment  of  our  doctors,  a 
certain  measure  of  probability,  and  sufficient  to  allow  of 
their  being  followed  with  a  safe  conscience.  Not  that  the 
affirmative  and  negative  can  be  both  true  in  the  same 
sense— that  is  impossible  :  but,  both  being,  in  this  manner, 
probable,  both  are  safe." 

"  Upon  this  principle,  our  worthy  colleague,  Diana, 
thus  writes.  Part  V.  tr.  xiii.  v.  39 :  '  To  the  decision  of 
the  three  Popes,  which  is  quite  opposed  to  my  own  opi- 
nion, I  reply,  they  have  expressed  themselves  in  this  way, 
in  addressing  themselves  to  the  affirmative  of  the  proposi- 
tion, which  has,  even  in  my  judgment,  a  certain  measure 
of  probability.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  the  negative 
may  not  possess  some  probability  likewise.'  And  in  the 
same  treatise,  §  65,  on  another  subject,  in  which  he  also 
holds  a  difierent  opinion  to  that  of  the  Pope,  he  thus 
writes  ;  '  The  Pope,  I  grant,  has  said  this  as  Head  of  the 
Church  ;  but,  in  doing  SO,  he  only  gives  a  greater  exten- 
sion to  the  sphere  of  probability  of  his  opinion.'     Now 

*  '  A  la  vie  quadragdsiraale.'  (Fr.^ 
E  5 

°^  .  LETTER   VI. 

you  will  see  that  he  does  not  take  this  method^  in  order 
to  invalidate  the  sentiments  of  the  Popes.  Such  a  course 
would  not  be  endured  at  Rome,  where  Diana  is  held  in 
high  esteem;  for  he  does  not  affirm  that  what  the  Popes 
have  pronounced  has  not  a  high  degree  of  probability  : 
but,  while  allowing  to  their  opinion  the  largest  measure 
of  probability,  he  merely  asserts  that  the  contrary  is  en- 
titled to  some  measure  of  probability  also."  "  That  is 
extremely  respectful,"  I  said.  "  And  it  is  more  delicate." 
he  rejoined,  "  than  the  reply  of  '  Pere  Bauny '  when  his 
writings  were  censured  at  Rome;  for  he  was  so  unguarded 
as  to  say  in  his  publication  against  M.  Hallier,  by  whom 
he  was  at  that  time  furiously  persecuted,  '  What  is  there 
in  common  [^between  the  censure  of  Rome  and  that  of 
France  ?  '  You  see  plainly  from  all  this,  that,  what 
with  the  interpretation  given  to  terms,  what  with  the 
favour  of  circumstances,  and  what,  finally,  with  the  dou- 
ble probabilities  for  and  against  a  proposition,  we  suc- 
ceed in  reconciling  these  apparent  contradictions,  which 
occasioned  you  so  much  difficulty;  and  that,  without  vio- 
lating the  authority  of  Holy  Scripture,  the  Councils,  or 
the  Popes,  as  I  have  now  proved  to  you." 

"  My  worthy  Father,"  said  I,  "  the  world  is  too  happy 
to  have  you  for  its  guides  !  How  valuable  are  these  pro- 
babilities !  I  was  not  aware  before,  why  you  took  so 
much  pains  to  maintain  that  a  single  doctor — provided 
he  were  a  learned*  one — could  give  a  '  probable '  opinion ; 
and  that  one  opposed  to  him  might  do  the  same :  and 
that  we  are  at  liberty  to  choose  the  one  that  agrees  most 

*  '  Grave.' (Fr.) 

ARTIFICES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  83 

nearly  with  our  o\fQ,  althougli  we  may  not  be  satisfied 
that  it  is  the  one  nearest  to  the  truth.  And  all  this  with 
so  safe  a  conscience,  that  a  Confessor  who  should  refuse 
absolution  on  the  authority  of  these  casuists  would  suffer 
.the  penalty  of  damnation.  I  can  now  readily  conclude, 
that  a  single  casuist  may  at  his  pleasure  establish  new 
rules  of  morality,  and  regulate,  according  to  his  own  fancy, 
the  whole  course  of  men's  conduct." 

"  What  you  state,"  rejoined  the  Father,  "requires  some 
qualification.  This  is  a  point  you  ought  to  understand. 
I  will  explain  farther  to  you  our  method,  and  you  will 
then  see  the  progress  of  a  new  opinion,  from  its  birth  to 
its  maturity,  and  final  establishment." 

"  In  the  first  instance,  the  learned  doctor,  who  has  in- 
vented it,  promulgates  it  to  the  world — scattering  it  abroad, 
like  seed,  in  the  expectation  of  the  harvest  to  come.  It 
is  at  first  feeble ;  but  time  will  strengthen  and  ripen  it 
by  degrees ;  and,  to  this  effect,  Diana,  who  has  been  the 
introducer  of  many  such  dogmas,  remarks  in  a  certain 
passage :  '  I  advance  this  as  my  opinion ;  but  as  it  is  a 
novel  one,  I  leave  it  to  acquire  maturity  by  time — relin- 
quo  tempori  maturandavi.' 

"  In  this  waj'  it  is  seen,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years, 
insensibly  to  acquire'  confirmation ;  and  after  a  consider- 
able lapse  of  time  the  proposition  is  found  to  be  authorized 
by  the  tacit  approbation  of  the  Church,  according  to  the 
celebrated  maxim  of  the  Pere  Bauny ;  '  If  an  opinion  be 
advanced  by  several  casuists,  and  the  Church  do  not  tes- 
tify her  disapprobation,  it  is  to  be  held  that  she  approves 
it.'  And  it  is,  in  fact,  on  this  principle,  that  he  claims 
authority  for  one  of  his  own  opinions,  in  Tract  6,  p.  313."- 

84 

LETTER   VI. 

"  What,  then  !  my  Father,"  said  I,  "  the  Church,  at 
this  rate,  must  be  believed  to  sanction  all  the  abuses  she 
silently  endures,  and  to  give  currency  to  the  errors  con- 
tained in  all  the  works  which  she  does  not  publicly  cen- 
sure !  "  "You  should  dispute  the  point  with  Pere  Bau-. 
ny  "  he  replied ;  "  I  am  stating  a  fact,  and  you  contest  it 
as  against  myself  individually.  Facts,  I  repeat,  should 
not  be  made  matter  of  argument.  "What  I  was  saying  is, 
that  when  time  has  thus  ripened  an  opinion,  it  is  then 
rendered  wholly  probable  and  safe.  Thus  the  learned 
Ceramaab,  in  his  dedication  to  Diana  of  his  '  Fundamental 
Theology,'  says,  that  'the  great  Diana  has  rendered  many 
opinions  probable  which  were  not  so  before ' — '  quse  ante 
non  erant ,-'  and,  therefore,  we  now  commit  no  sin  in  fol- 
lowing them,  although  we  might  have  done  so  before ; — 
'jam  non  peccant  licet  ante  peccaverintJ  " 

"  Truly,  my  good  Father,"  said  I,  "  there  ai-e  great 
advantages  to  be  gained  from  these  doctors  of  yours. 
Thus,  two  persons  shall  commit  the  same  act ;  but  one 
who  is  not  acquainted  with  their  doctrine  shall  sin — the 
other,  who  has  the  advantage  of  knowing  it,  shall  be  in- 
nocent !  Is  their  system  then  uniformly  thus  edifying 
and  indulgent  ?  The  law  of  God,  according  to  St.  Paul, 
establishes  man's  sinfulness;  the  doctrines  in  question 
almost  exonerate  from  sin.  I  must  request  further  in- 
formation upon  these  matters  ;  I  cannot  leave  you  till  you 
acquaint  me  thoroughly  with  the  leading  opinions  and 
maxims  which  your  casuists  have  established." 

"  Ah  !  "  replied  the  Father,  "  our  chief  aim,  I  assure 
you,  would  have  been  to  establish  no  other  rules  but  those 
of  the  Gospel  in  all  their  strictness ;  and  it  must  be  evi- 

ARTIFICES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  85 

dent  from  the  purity  of  our  owu  conduct,  that,  if  we  have 
sanctioned  any  degree  of  laxity  on  the  part  of  others,  it  is 
only  from  ati  unavoidable  condescension  to  their  weak- 
ness. "We  are  compelled  to  it.  Men  are  in  these  days  so 
corrupt,  that,  being  unable  to  raise  them  to  our  standard, 
we  are  obliged  to  lower  the  standard  to  them.  But  for 
this,  they  would  forsake  us;  they  would  even  do  worse — 
they  would  abandon  themselves.  And  so,  in  order  to  keep 
them  with  us,  our  casuists  have  considered  those  vices  to 
which  persons,  in  their  several  conditions,  are  the  most 
addicted ;  with  a  view  to  establish  such  moderate  regu- 
lations, (but  without  any  violation  of  purity)  that  they 
must  be  fastidious  indeed,  not  to  be  satisfied  with  them. 
The  main  rule  of  our  Society,  in  order  to  promote  the 
interests  of  Religion,  is,  to  repel  none,  that  none  may  be 
discouraged  or  despair. 

"  With  this  view  it  is  that  we  have  laid  down  precepts 
for  all  sorts  of  persons ;  for  patrons,  for  priests,  for  monks; 
for  the  gentry,  for  servants,  for  the  rich ;  for  those  en- 
gaged in  trade,  for  the  embarrassed  in  circumstances,  and 
the  poor ;  for  females  under  vows,  for  others  at  liberty ; 
for  the  married  and  the  single :  in  short,  nothing  has 
been  overlooked  and  unprovided  for."  "  That  is,''  said  I, 
their  foresight  has  extended  to  the  clergy,  the  nobility, 
and  the  lower  classes  : — the  interest  I  feel  in  your  state- 
ments increases." 

"  We  will  begin  then,"  said  the  Father,  "  with  the  case 
of  patrons.  You  know  what  traffic  takes  place  in  the 
present  day  in  church  preferments ;  and,  if  we  were  to  be 
guided  by  the  ideas  of  St.  Thomas  and  the  ancient  writers, 
we  should  discover  many  Simonists  in  the  Church.     For 

86 

LETTER   VI. 

this  reason,  our  Fathers  have  found  it  necessary  to  temper 
these  matters  with  prudence,  as  you  will  find  from  the 
words  of  Valentia,  one  of  the  four  '  living  creatures'  of 
Escobar.  They  occur  at  the  close  of  a  long  discourse, 
suggesting  many  expedients  on  this  subject,  among  which 
I  think  the  following  is  the  best ;  it  is  in  page  2039, 
3d  vol.  '  If  a  temporal  consideration  be  given  for  a 
spiritual  benefit — that  is,  money  in  exchange  for  a  bene- 
fice— at  a  fixed  price  and  valuation,  it  is  palpable  simony ; 
but  if  it  be  given  as  the  jwo^itie,  which  shall  attract  the 
good  will  of  the  patron  to  confer  the  preferment  in  ques- 
tion, then  it  is  not  simony ;  even  though  the  money  be 
the  principal  consideration  with  the  presenter.'  Tanneras, 
another  member  of  our  society,  says  the  same  in  his 
3d  vol.  p.  1519,  although  he  acknowledges  '  that  St. 
Thomas  is  opposed  to  him,  insomuch  as  he  pronounces 
absolutely,  that  it  is  strictly  simony  to  barter  spiritual 
things  for  temporal,  if  the  temporal  be  the  consideration.' 
It  is  in  this  way  we  exclude  numberless  cases  of  simony ; 
for  who  would  be  so  unhandsome  as  to  refuse,  in  paying 
his  money  for  a  benefice,  to  assign  such  payment  as  a 
motive  to  induce  the  holder  to  relinquish  it  in  his  favour, 
instead  of  giving  it  as  the  mere  price  of  the  preferment  ? 
None  could  be  so  unprincipled,  so  abandoned  in  the 
sight  of  God  ! ' "  "I  quite  agree  with  you,"  I  replied ; 
"  every  one  would  have  virtue  sufficient  for  the  part  you 
describe."     "  Doubtless,"  rejoined  the  Father. 

"  You  now  see  how  we  soften  matters  in  regard-  to 
patronage.  As  to  ecclesiastics,  we  have  a  variety  of  pre- 
cepts, and  all  very  lenient  towards  them.  For  instance, 
this  of  the  24,  tr.  1.   ex.  11,  N.  96.     '  If  a  priest  have 

ARTIFICES   OP   THE   JESUITS.  87 

received  payment  for  saying  a  mass,  may  he  receive  a 
further  payment  for  saying  the  same  mass  ?  Yes,  says 
Filiutius,  by  applying  that  part  of  the  sacrifice  which 
appertains  to  himself,  as  priest,  to  him  who  pays  him 
anew ;  provided,  however,  he  does  not  receive  as  much  as 
for  an  entire  mass,  but  only  for  a  part,  say  a  third,  of  the 
mass.' " 

"  Truly,  my  good  Father,  this  is  one  of  those  cases 
in  which  the  '  pro '  and  '  con '  are  indeed  both  very 
probable ;  for  what  you  are  describing  can  scarcely  fail 
to  occur,  after  such  authority  as  Filiutius  and  Escobar. 
But,  leaving  it  for  argument's  sake,  in  the  mere  sphere  of 
probability,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  reverse  of  the  case 
might  be  supposed,  and  on  very  sufficient  grounds. 
While  the  church  allows  priests,  whose  circumstances  are 
limited,  to  take  payment  for  their  masses,  inasmuch  as  it 
is  right  that  '  those  who  serve  the  altar  should  live  of  the 
altar,'  she  does  not  intend  that  they  should  make  a  mere 
barter  of  the  sacrifice  for  money ;  and  still  less,  that  they 
should  deprive  themselves  of  all  the  grace  which  they 
ought  to  derivefrom4he  holy  office.  And  I  should  further 
affirm,  that  priests,  according  to  St.  Paul,  are  to  '  offer 
sacrifices,  first  for  themselves,  and  next  for  the  people  ; ' 
and  thus,  while  it  is  allowed  them  to  associate  others 
with  such  sacrifices,  they  may  not  themselves  voluntarily 
renounce  the  whole  benefit  of  them,  and  assign  it  to 
another  for  the  consideration  of  a  third  of  the  mass — 
that  is,  for  four  or  five  sous.  Really,  my  Father,  little  as 
I  am  skilled  in  such  matters,  I  could  contrive  to  give  some 
plausibility  to  this  opinion."  "  It  would  not  be  hard  to 
do  this,"  he  replied ;  "  the  real  difficulty  would  be  in 

88  LETTER   VI. 

opposing  opinionSj  whicli  have  so  obvious  an  appearance 
of  soundness ;  this  is  only  the  property  of  great  minds. 
The  Pere  Bauny  excels  in  this.  It  is  delightful  to  see 
this  profound  casuist  penetrating  the  '  pro '  and  '  con ' 
of  some  question  relating  to  the  priesthood,  and  finding 
reason  on  both  sides,  with  so  much  ingenuity  and  acute- 
ness." 

"  In  one  place  he  remarks.  Tract  10,  page  474,  '  We 
ought  not  to  make  a  rule  for  compelling  curates  to  perform 
mass  every  day,  because  such  a  rule  would  undoubtedly 
{hand  dubie)  expose  them  to  the  risk  of  sometimes  per- 
forming it,  while  under  the  guilt  of  mortal  sin.^  And 
nevertheless,  in  the  same  tract,  p.  44,  he  says,  '  Priests 
who  have  been  paid  for  saying  mass  every  day  ought  to 
do  it,  and  cannot  excuse  themselves  on  the  plea,  that  they 
are  not  always  properly  prepared  for  its  performance, 
because  they  can  always  avail  themselves  of  acts  of  peni- 
tence. And  if  they  omit  to  do  so,  the  fault  is  theirs,  and 
not  that  of  the  party  requiting  such  performance  of  mass.^ 
And,  in  order  to  obviate  the  greatest  of  the  diificulties  in 
their  way,  he  thus  resolves  the  following  question,  in  the 
same  tract,  q.  32,  p.  457 — '  May  a  priest  perform  mass, 
on  the  same  day  that  he  has  fallen  into  .  a  mortal  sin,  on 
confessing  himself  previously  ?  Villalolos  says  '  No,  be- 
cause of  his  impurity.'  But  Sancius  says  '  Yes,  and  with- 
out incurring  guilt : '  I  hold  the  latter  opinion  to  be  sound, 
and  the  one  that  Ought  to  be  followed  out  in  practice :  et 
tuta,  et  sequenda  in  praxi.' 

"  What !  Father,"  I  exclaimed,  "  followed  out  in 
practice  !  A  priest,  having  fallen  into  such  an  enormity, 
shall  dare,   on  the  very  same  day,  to  approach  the  altar  of 

ARTIFICES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  89 

religion— on  the  authority  of  Pere  Bauny !  Ought  we 
not  to  defer  to  the  ancient  laws  of  the  church,  which  ex- 
cluded from  the  sacrifice  for  ever — or  at  least  for  a  long 
period — priests,  who  were  guilty  of  irregularities  of  this 
kind,  rather  than  adopt  the  views  of  these  modern 
casuists,  who  dare  to  admit  them  to  the  altar  on  the  very 
day,  even,  of  the  commission  of  such  offences  ?  "  "  You 
have  a  very  short  memory,"  said  the  Father ;  "  did  I  not 
just  now  state,  that,  according  to  the  Per6s  CoUot  and 
Regiualdus,  in  morals  we  are  to  follow,  not  the  ancient 
Fathers  but  the  modern  casuists."  "  I  remember  it  per- 
fectly," said  I J  "  but  here  there  is  something  further ; 
these  are  the  laws  of  the  church."  "  Right,"  he  replied ; 
"  but  you  are  not  yet  aware  of  that  fine  maxim  of  our 
brethren,  '  the  laws  of  the  church  lose  their  force  when 
they  cease  to  be  observed ; '  '  cum  jam  desuetudine  abie- 
runt,'  as  is  stated  by  Fiiiatius,  t.  2.  tr.  35,  n.  33.  We 
are  better  acquainted  than  the  ancient^  with  the  actual 
necessities  of  the  church.  If  we  were  so  rigid  in  exclud- 
ing the  priests  from  the  altar,  you  must  see  clearly  we 
should  diminish  the  number  of  masses.  Now  the  number 
of  masses  tends  so  much  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
salvation  of  souls,  that  I  should  say  with  our  Pere  Collot, 
in  his  work  on  the  Hierarchy,  p.  611,  Rouen  edition,  that 
there  would  not  be  too  many  priests  '  if,  not  only  all  men 
and  women  (were  it  possible)  but  even  inanimate  bodies, 
and  the  very  brute  beasts — 'bruta  animalia — were  changed 
into  priests,  for  the  celebration  of  masses.' " 

I  was  so  surprized  at  the  oddity  of  these  fancies,  that  I 
could  make  no  reply ;  so  he  continued :  "  But  enough  of 
the  priests;  let  us  now  proceed  to  the  monks.     As  their 

90  LETTER   VI. 

main  difficulty  lies  in  the  obedience  whicli  they  owe  to 
their  superiors,  observe  how  this  matter  is  softened  down 
in  their  favour.  This  is  from  Castrus  Palaiis,  one  of  our 
brethren.  Op.  Mor.  p.  1,  Disp.  2,  p.  6.  '  It  is  beyond 
dispute — non  est  controversia — that  a  monk  who  holds  in 
his  own  mind  a  '  probable '  opinion,  is  not  bound  to  obey 
his  superior,  even  if  the  opinion  of  such  superior  should 
be  the  more  probable  one :  but  it  is,  in  that  case,  lawful 
for  him  to  adopt  that  which  is  the  most  agreeable  to 
himself  — '  qucB  sibi gratior  fuerit : ' — so  also  says  Sanchez. 
And  even,  although  the  view  of  the  superior  may  be  the 
right  one,'  he  is  still  not  bound  to  obedience ;  for  it  may 
not  be  right  in  all  points,  and  in  every  degree — '  non 
undequaque  justo  prcecipit  :^  but  only  so  'by  probability  :^ 
and  therefore  it  is  only  by  probability  that  you  are  bound 
to  obey,  and  by  probability  released  from  obedience  — 
'  jprobabiliter  obUgatus,  et  probabiliter  deobligatus.'  " 
"  Doubtless,  my  good  Father,"  I  replied ;  "  it  is  impos- 
sible to  prize  too  highly  this  valuable  fruit  of  your  double 
probabilities."  "  It  is  indeed  most  useful,"  he  said : 
"  but  we  must  be  brief.  I  will  only  give  you  one  more 
extract  from  our  celebrated  Molina,  in  favour  of  such 
monks  as  have  been  expelled  from  their  convents  for  dis- 
orderly conduct.  The  Pere  Escobar  quotes  it,  tr.  6,  ex.  7, 
N.  Ill,  in  these  terms :  '  Molina  affirms  that  a  monk, 
expelled  from  his  monastery,  is  not  obliged  to  alter  his 
conduct,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring  re-admission  :  and 
is  no  longer  bound  by  his  '  vow  of  obedience.' " 

"  Truly,"  I  exclaimed,  "  your  ecclesiastics  have  an 
easy  life  of  it !  Your  casuists  do  indeed  treat  them  with 
sufficient  indulgence.     They  do  by  them  as  they  would 

ARTIFICES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  91 

by  themselves.  I  am  afraid  persons  of  other  conditions 
of  life  will  not  fare  so  well  at  their  hands.  They  must 
take  care  for  themselves.^'  "  They  would  be  no  better 
off,"  he  replied.  "  An  equal  measure  of  leniency  is  ex- 
tended to  all,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest ;  and,  to  prove 
it,  I  must  read  to  you  the  directions  respecting  valets. 

"  We  have  weighed,  in  their  case,  the  pain  they  suffer, 
if  conscientious,  in  serving  masters  of  licentious  habits  : 
for  if  they  decline  executing  all  the  errands  of  their 
employers,  they  lose  their  situations ;  if  they  obeyj.  their 
consciences  are  wounded.  To  afford  them  relief,  then, 
our  34  Fathers,  tr.  7,  ex.  4,  N.  223,  have  indicated  the 
services  which  they  may  render,  with  safety  of  conscience. 
These  are  some  of  them.  '  To  carry  letters  or  presents ; 
open  doors  and  windows ;  to  assist  their  masters  to  climb 
into  windows ;  hold  a  ladder  while  they  ascend  : '  all  this 
is  allowable  and  innocent.  It  is  acknowledged,  that  to 
justify  holding  the  ladder,  there  should  be  some  unusual 
degree  of  risk ;  for  it  would  otherwise  be  wrong  to  the 
master  of  the  house,  to  enter  by  the  window.  You  see 
how  judicious  this  is." 

"  I  expected  no  less,"  I  replied,  "  from  a  work  composed 
by  twenty-four  Jesuits."  "  But,"  added  the  Father, 
"  our  excellent  Bauny  has  further  enabled  servants  inno- 
cently to  discharge  their  duties  to  their  masters,  by  trans- 
ferring the  question,  from  the  sins  of  which  they  render 
themselves  the  agents,  to  that  of  their  own  wages.  He 
has  admirably  explained  this  in  his  '  Summary  of  Of- 
fences,^ page  710,  1st  edition.  '  Let  confessors  well  un- 
understand,'  he  says,  '  that  they  are  not  to  give  absolution 
to  valets  for  carrying  criminal  messages,  if  they  make 

92  LETTER   VI. 

themselves  parties  to  the  sins  of  their  masters ;  but,  it  is 
not  on  the  contrary  to  be  withheld,  if  such  things  be  done 
for  the  consideration  of  their  lawful  gains.'  And  this  is 
not  difficult  to  understand  ;  for  why  should  they  make 
themselves  parties  to  the  offences  of  others,  and  suffer 
only  penalties  on  account  of  them  ? 

"  Father  Bauny  has  also  laid  down  this  important  rule, 
in  favour  of  those  who  are  not  satisfied  with  their  wages  : 
'  Summary,'  page  213,  4,  6th  edition.  '  May  servants  who 
are  dissatisfied  with  their  wages,  increase  them  by  taking 
such  a  portion  of  their  masters'  property  as  they  think 
expedient,  in  order  to  make  their  pay  equivalent  to  their 
services  ?  In  certain  cases  they  may  do  so,  as  when  they 
are  previously  so  reduced  as  to  be  obliged  to  accept  any 
terms  offered  to  them,  and  when  other  servants,  in  similar 
situations,  receive  higher  wages,  &c." 

"  Why,  my  good  Father,"  I  cried,  "  this  passage  is  ab- 
solutely the  history  of  Jean  d'Alba."  "  What  John 
d'Alba  ? "  said  the  Father,  "  who  do  you  mean  ?  "  "  Why, 
do  you  not  remember  what  passed  in  this  very  place  in  the 
year  1647  ?  Where  were  you  at  that  time  ?  "  "I  was 
giving  instruction  in  cases  of  conscience,"  he  replied,  "  in 
one  of  our  colleges  at  a  distance  from  Paris."  "  I  see, 
then,"  I  said,  "  that  you  are  not  acquainted  with  the 
affair ;  I  will  relate  it  to  you.  I  heard  it  from  a  person 
of  undoubted  veracity,  in  a  party  where  I  was  the  other 
day.  He  told  us  that  this  John  d'Alba,  being  in  service 
in  the  college  of  Clermont,  Rue  St.  Jaques,  and  not  being 
satisfied  with  his  wages,  appropriated  to  himself  certain 
property  of  the  Community,  by  way  of  compensation :  that 
the  superiors,  on  detecting  him,  threw  him  into  prison. 

ARTIFICES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  93 

on  a  charge  of  private  robbery ;  and  that  the  prosecution 
came  before  the  Chatelet  on  the  6th  of  April,  1647  (if 
my  memory  serves  me  right) ;  for  he  stated  all  these 
things  with  great  minuteness,  otherwise  we  should  hardly 
have  believed  them  to  be  possible.  The  accused  delin- 
quent, on  interrogation,  admitted  that  he  had  taken  some 
metal  dishes  from  the  monks;  but  maintained,  for  all 
that,  he  had  committed  no  theft,  quoting  in  his  justifica- 
tion the  doctrine  in  question  of  Pere  Bauny,  together  with 
an  extract  from  the  writings  of  one  of  your  Fathers,  under 
whom  he  had  studied  cases  of  conscience,  and  which  in- 
culcated the  same  thing.  On  which  M.  de  Montrouge, 
one  of  the  leading  members  of  the  Chatelet,  delivered  the 
following  opinion :  '  That  the  accused  ought  not  to  be  ac- 
quitted on  the  authority  of  writings  containing  doctrines, 
illegal,  pernicious,  and  opposed  to  all  rules  divine  and 
human ;  the  effect  of  which  was  to  destroy  the  welfare  of 
families,  and  authorize  every  domestic  fraud.  And  his 
sentence  was,  that  this  too  implicit  disciple  should  be 
flogged  before  the  college  gates  by  the  common  execu- 
tioner ;  and  all  the  works  of  the  Fathers,  treating  of  lar- 
ceny, should  be  hurnt  by  the  same  hand  ;  forbidding  all 
persons  at  the  same  time,  on  pain  of  death,  to  teach,  in 
future,  any  of  the  doctrines  in  question.' 

"  While  they  were  awaiting  the  sequel  of  this  decision, 
which  was  much  approved,  circumstances  occurred,  which 
had  the  effect  of  postponing  judgment  upon  the  pro-, 
ceedings.  In  the  mean  time,  however,  the  prisoner' 
disappeared,  no  one  knew  how,  and  without  restoring  the 
dishes.  This  was  the  sum  of  our  informant's  statement ; 
and  he  further  told  us  that  the  judgment  of  M.  de  Mont- 

94  LETTER   VI. 

rouge  is  still  in  the  Registry  of  the  Ch^talet ;  and  may  be 
seen  by  any  one.  The  anecdote  afforded  us  much  amuse- 
ment." 

"  Amusement !  What  about  ?  "  said  the  Father ; 
"  what  do  you  mean  ?  I  am  speaking  of  the  maxims  of 
our  casuists ;  I  was  going  to  give  you  those  relating  to 
the  gentry,  and  you  interrupt  me  by  stories  that  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  matter."  "  I  merely  introduced 
the  circumstance  '  en  passant,'  I  replied,  "  to  remind 
you  of  a  point  of  some  importance,  which  seems  to  have 
been  overlooked  in  establishing  your  '  doctrine  of  proba- 
bility.' "  "  What  ? "  said  he,  "  what  could  have  been 
overlooked  by  so  many  able  men  who  have  all  concurred 
in  it  ?  "  ''  It  is  just  this,"  I  replied ;  "  you  have  suc- 
ceeded in  placing  those  who  adopt  the  doctrines  quite  at 
ease  in  regard  to  God,  and  their  own  consciences  ;  for  you 
maintain  they  can  run  no  risk  in  those  respects,  while 
they  follow  the  opinions  of  a  learned  doctor :  you  have 
put  them  quite  right  with  their  confessors,  for  you  make 
it  compulsory  on  the  priests  to  give  absolution,  in  cases 
of  the  probable  opinions  in  question,  on  pain  of  mortal 
sin  :  but  you  have  not  entirely  secured  them  on  the  part 
of  the  temporal  authorities ;  in  consequence  of  which  they 
expose  themselves  to  flogging  and  the  gallows,  in  acting 
upon  your  probabilities  :  this  is  really  a  serious  defect." 
"  You  are  right  there,  I  confess  ;  I  feel  obliged  to  you 
for  the  suggestion,"  said  the  Father  ;  "  but  it  is  because 
we  have  not  the  same  power  over  the  magistrates  as  over 
the  confessors,  which  latter  are  obliged  to  report  all  cases 
of  conscience  to  us  :  there  we  are  absolute."  "  I  under- 
stand you,"  I  replied;  "  but  if  on  the  one  hand  you  are. 

ARTIFICES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  95 

judges  of  the  confessors,  are  you  not  also  confessors  of 
the  judges  ?  Your  powers  are  extensive ;  you  should 
compel  them  to  absolve  all  criminals  whose  offences  have 
been  committed  on  the  strength  of  your  probable  opinions, 
upon  pain  of  exclusion  from  the  sacraments;  lest  this 
contempt  and  scandal  should  befall  the  doctrine  in  ques- 
tion, viz.  that  persons  whom  you  have  pronounced  inno- 
cent in  theory,  should  come  to  be  flogged  in  practice. 
Unless  this  is  done,  how  will  you  succeed  in  getting  dis- 
ciples ?  "  "  We  must  think  of  this,"  he  said ;  "  it  is 
really  important.  I  will  propose  the  matter  to  our  Father 
Provincial.  In  the  mean  time  you  might  as  well  reserve 
these  opinions  of  yours  till  another  opportunity,  and  not 
interrupt  me  again,  as  I  am  now  going  to  relate  to  you 
the  maxims  we  have  established  in  favour  of  the  gentry  : 
I  positively  will  not  go  on,  unless  you  promise  to  tell  me 
no  more  of  your  stories." 

This  is  all  then,  my  friend,  that  you  must  receive 
from  me  to-day ;  for  it  will  take  more  than  one  letter  to 
communicate  the  whole  of  what  I  learned  from  my  worthy 
friend  in  the  course  of  a  single  conversation.  In  the  mean 
time  I  remain  ever,  &c.  &c. 

LETTER  VII. 

ON  THE  METHOD  USED  BY  THE  CASUISTS  IN  REGULAT- 
ING MOTIVES.  THE  PERMISSION  GIVEN  TO  THEM  TO 
TAKE  LIFE,  IP  IN  DEFENCE  OP  HONOUR  AND  PRO- 
PERTY, EXTENDED  MOREOVER  TO  THE  PRIESTHOOD 
AND  RELIGIOUS  ORDERS.  CURIOUS  QUESTION  PRO- 
POSED BY  CARAMUEL,  WHETHER  IT  IS  LAWFUL  FOR 
JESUITS   TO   KILL   JANSENISTS. 

Sir,  Paris,  April  25,  1656. 

After  appeasing  the  good  Father,  whose  discourse  I  had 
somewhat  interrupted  by  my  story  of  John  D'Alba,  he 
recommenced  it,  on  my  assurance  that  I  would  not  disturb 
him  by  anything  more  of  the  kind ;  and  he  related  to  me 
the  maxims  of  the  casuists  respecting  the  Aristocracy  in 
the  following  terms  : 

"  You  are  aware  that  the  ruling  passion  of  persons  of 
this  class  of  life,  is  the  maintenance  of  their  honour ;  by 
which  they  are  continually  hurried  into  excesses,  which 
seem,  undoubtedly,  opposed  to  Christian  piety.  This 
would  lead  to  their  almost  entire  exclusion  from  the 
confessional,  had  not  our  Fathers  somewhat  relaxed,  in 
their  favour,  the  severe  requirements  of  religion,  out  of  a 
proper  consideration  for  human  infirmity.      But   being 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  97 

desirous  of  reconciling  their  duties  to  God  and  tte 
Gospel,  and  kindness  to  their  fellow-men,  and,  amongst 
them,  the  people  of  the  world,  they  have  exerted  all  their 
ingenuity  to  devise  expedients  by  which  matters  may  be 
so  tempered  and  adjusted,  that  the  persons  in  question 
may  maintain  and  retrieve  their  honour  without  a  viola- 
tion of  conscience ;  and  by  this  means  preserve  in  a  be- 
coming harmony,  two  things  usually  regarded  as  opposed 
to  each  other — religion  and  the  point  of  honour.  But, 
in  proportion  as  this  aim  was  desirable,  so  was  it  difficult ; 
the  enterprize  was  noble  yet  laborious :  you  cannot  but 
perceive  this  yourself."  "  Surprisingly !  "  I  replied,  though 
coolly.  "  Surprisingly,"  he  cried ;  "  it  must  indeed  sur- 
prise and  astonish  every  one.  Don't  you  know,  that  the 
Gospel,  on  the  one  hand,  enjoins,  '  Render  not  evil  for 
evil,  but  leave  vengeance  to  God ;'  and,  on  the  other,  that 
the  laws  of  the  world  forbid  us  to  endure  an  injury,  but 
enjoin  us  rather  to  seek  its  redress,  and  that,  often,  by 
the  death  of  the  party  inflicting  it  ?  Was  there  ever  any 
thing  apparently  more  contradictory?  And  yet,  when 
I  tell  you,  our  Fathers  have  solved  the  difficulty,  you 
merely  say,  it  is  surprising."  "  I  did  not,  perhaps,  suf- 
ficiently explain  myself,  my  good  Father,"  I  replied  ; 
"  I  should,  to  say  the  truth,  have  held  the  thing  to  be 
impossible,  if  I  had  not  known,  from  what  I  had  before 
seen  of  your  learned  divines,  that  they  can  accomplish 
with  ease  what  other  men  find  to  be  impossibilities.  This 
satisfies  me  that  they  have,  in  the  present  case,  succeeded 
in  devising  methods,  which  I  shall  doubtless  admire,  when 
I  become  fully  acquainted  with  them.  Pray  satisfy  my 
curiosity." 

98  LETTER   VII. 

"  If  you  really  feel  such  an  interest  in  the  matter,"  he 
rejoined,  "  I  cannot  refuse.  Know  then,  that  this  great 
and  astonishing  principle  is,  our  method  of '  regulating 
the  motive ;'  *  the  importance  of  which,  in  our  system  of 
morals,  is  so  great,  that  I  could  almost  venture  to  compare 
it  with  the  Doctrine  of  Probability.  You  have  had  some 
hints  of  it  already  '  en  passant ;'  for  when  I  explained 
how  valets  might  reconcile  becoming  the  bearers  of  certain 
improper  messages,  did  you  not  observe  that  it  was  done 
by  diverting  their  intention  from  the  misconduct  of  which 
they  made  themselves  the  agents,  to  the  profit  which 
would  accrue  to  them  from  it  ?  This  is  one  instance  of 
what  is  meant  by  '  regulating  the  intention  :'  and  in  the 
same  way,  you  have  seen  that  persons  giving  money  for 
church-preferment  would  be  guilty  of  actual  Simony,  but 
for  a  similar  '  regulation.''  But  I  am  now  going  to  show 
you  this  eminent  principle  in  all  its  splendour  in  the  case 
of  homicide — a  practice  which  it  has  succeeded  in  justify- 
ing in  a  thousand  cases  of  duels;  and  you  will  at  once 
acknowledge  its  immense  capability  and  value."  "  I 
see  already,"  I  said,  "  that  every  thing  must  be  rendered 
lawful  by  means  of  it — nothing  can  escape."  "  You  are 
always  going  from  one  extreme  to  the  other,"  replied  the 
Father ;  "  you  should  cure  yourself  of  that  habit.  To 
convince  you,  now,  that  every  thing  is  not  allowed,  I  can 
tell  you,  for  example,  we  do  not  allow  of  any  one  commit- 
ting sin  with  a  deliberate  purpose  to  do  so;  and  if  a 
person  persists  in  having  no  other  end  in  a  transgression 
than  the  sin  itself,  we  break  with  him;  such  conduct  is 

*  '  Dinger  rintention.'  (Fr.) 

ON  REGULATING  MOTIVES.  99 

diabolical,  without  distinction  of  age,  sex,  or  condition. 
But,  if  such  be  not  the  unhappy  disposition  of  the  party, 
then  we  endeavour  to  put  in  practice  our  method  of 
directing  or  regulating  the  intention,  which  consists  in 
proposing  for  the  act  committed  a  lawful  motive  and  ob- 
ject. Not  that  w6  do  not  endeavour,  as  far  as  it  is  in  our 
power,  to  turn  men  from  forbidden  courses ;  but  when  we 
are  unable  to  prevent  the  act,  we  at  least,  purify  the  in- 
tention ;  and  thus,  correct  the  viciousness  of  the  means 
by  the  goodness  of  the  end. 

"  It  is  in  this  way  that  our  leaders  have  found  the  means 
to  tolerate  the  acts  of  violence  practised  in  defence  of 
honour ;  for  they  have  only  to  substitute,  as  the  motive, 
instead  of  a  thirst  of  vengeance,  which  is  criminal,  a  desire 
to  defend  our  reputation,  which  the  Fathers  allow;  and 
the  thing  is  done.  By  similar  means,  they  succeed  in  ful- 
filling all  their  duties  towards  God  and  their  fellow-crea- 
tures :  the  world  they  satisfy  by  the  permission  of  the 
act ;  and  they  comply  with  the  Gospel  in  purifying  the 
motive.  All  this  was  heretofore  unknown ;  and  for  this, 
our  Society  is  to  be  thanked.  Do  you  understand  the 
matter  now  ?  "  "  Perfectly,"  I  replied ;  "  you  give  over 
to  man  the  external  and  material  act ;  and  you  assign  to 
God  the  internal,  spiritual  intention ;  and  by  this  equi- 
table division,  you  reconcile  human  rules  of  conduct  with 
those  of  the  Divine  will.  But,  my  good  Father,  to  con- 
fess the  truth,  I  am  a  little  suspicious  of  your  premises ; 
and  entertain  some  doubt,  whether  your  authorities  will 
fully  bear  out  your  position."  "You  are  mistaken,"'  said 
the  Father ;  "  I  advance  nothing  that  I  cannot  prove,  and 

F  2 

100  LETTER   VII. 

that,  by  so  many  passages,  that  their  number,  their  au- 
thority and  force,  will  fill  you  with  admiration. 

"  To  show  you,  now,  how  our  Fathers  have  brought  the 
maxims  of  the  Gospel  into  agreement  with  those  of  the 
world,  hear  our  Pere  Reginaldus  in  Praxi,  Liv.  21,  N.63, 
p.  260.  '  Individuals  are  not  allowed  to  avenge  them- 
selves, for  St.  Paul  says,  Rom.  ch.  xii.  "  Recompense  to 
no  man  evil  for  evil ;  "  and  Eccles.  ch.  xxviii.  "  He  that 
avengeth  shall  find  vengeance  from  the  Lord,  and  he 
will  surely  keep  his  sin  in  remembrance."'  Besides, 
what  is  said  in  Scripture  of  the  forgiveness  of  injuries,  as 
in  ch.  vi.  and  xviii.  of  St.  Matthew."  "  Certainly,  my 
excellent  Father,  if,  after  this,  your  author  asserts  any 
thing  beyond  what  is  contained  in  Holy  Writ,  it  is  not 
for  want  of  knowing  better.  What  is  his  conclusion, 
however  ? "  "  It  is  this,"  said  the  Father ;  '  From  all 
this  it  appears,  that  a  military  man  may  at  the  instant, 
pursue  any  one  who  has  injured  him ;  not,  indeed,  with 
the  intent  to  return  evil  for  evil,  but  with  that  of  pre- 
serving his  honour :  '  Non  ut  malum  pro  malo  reddat,  sed 
ut  conservat  honorem' 

"  You  see,  now,  how  carefully  the  intention  of  render- 
ing evil  for  evil  is  guarded  against,  seeing  what  is  the 
prohibition  of  Scripture  upon  that  point.  It  is  never  for 
an  instant  allowed.  See  Lessius,  de  Just.  Liv.  2.  C.  9. 
d.  12.  N.  79.  '  A  person  receiving  a  blow  must  not  con- 
template revenging  it ;  but  he  may  desire  to  escape  dis- 
honour; and  for  that  purpose  may  instantly  repel  the 
injury,  even  at  the  point  of  the  sword:  '  etiam  cum  gla- 
dio.'  So  far  are  we  from  allowing  a  desire  to  take  re- 
venge on  our  enemies,  that  the  Fathers  will  not  permit 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  101 

US  ever  to  wish  for  their  death,  in  an  angry  encounter. 
See  Father  Escobar,  tr.  5.  ex  5.  N.  145.  '  If  your  enemy 
endeavours  to  injure  you,  you  must  not  desire  his  death, 
as  a  consequence  of  any  act  of  hostihty  on  your  part ;  but 
you  may  commit  such  act,  to  avoid  detriment  to  yourself. 
And  so  strictly  lawful  is  this  (provided  such  be  our  inten- 
tion) that  our  famous  Hurtado  de  Mendoza  says,  '  We 
may  pray  to  God  to  cause  promptly  the  death  of  any  one 
that  persecutes  us,  if  it  cannot  otherwise  be  averted.' 
This  is  in  his  Work  de  Spl.  Vol.  3.  d.  15.  Sec.  4. 
N.  48." 

"  My  reverend  Father,"  I  here  interposed,  "  the 
Church,  I  am  afraid,  has  omitted  to  insert  a  collect  of  this 
nature  among  her  prayers."  "  The  Church,"  he  replied, 
"  has  not  introduced  in  her  prayers  every  thing  that  may 
be  made  a  matter  of  request  to  God.  Besides,  the  thing 
was  not  possible,  for  the  opinion  in  question  is  more  re- 
cent than  the  Breviary  :  you  are  no  chronologist.  But  to 
continue  the  subject,  hear  again  this  passage  from  Pere 
Gaspar  Hurtado,  de  Sub.  pecc.  diff.  9,  quoted  by  Diana, 
p.  5.  tr.  14.  r.  99.  (He  is  one  of  the  twenty -four  Fathers 
of  Escobar.)  '  An  incumbent  may,  without  committing 
mortal  sin,  desire  the  death  of  one  who  enjoys  an  annuity 
out  of  his  benefice ;  and  a  son,  that  of  a  father  ;  and  they 
may  rejoice  when  the  event  occurs,  provided  it  be  only 
for  the  benefit  thus  accruing,  and  not  from  any  persona) 
hatred.' " 

"  Truly,  my  good  Father,"  I  exclaimed,  "  these  are 
valuable  fruits  of  your  '  regulation  of  motives.'  I  begin 
to  see  the  vast  extent  of  it ;  nevertheless  it  appears  to  me, 
that  there  are  still  certain  cases,  interesting  to  the  higher 

102  I;ETTER   VII. 

elasses,  somewhat  difficult  of  aolutioDj  although  very  im- 
portant." "  Let  me  hear  them/'  said  the  Father.  "  Ex- 
plain to  me  then,"  I  replied,  "  how,  by  means  of  this 
regulation  of  the  intent,  it  is  lawful  to  fight  a  duel  ? " 
"  The  great  IJurtado  Mendoza,"  said  the  Father,  "  shall 
satisfy  you  at  once  ,  in  a  passage  quoted  by  Diana,  p.  5. 
tr.  14.  r.  99.  '  If  a  gentleman  challenged  in  a  duel,  be 
known  not  to  be  a  religionist,  and  it  be  notorious,  from 
his  habitual  and  unscrupulous  laxity  of  conduct,  that,  if 
he  refuse  the  challenge,  it  is  not  from  any  pious  scruples, 
but  from  cowardice ;  and  he  would  thus  be  liable  to  be 
stigmatized  as  chicken-hearted  and  unmanly — '  qallina 
et  nan  vir ' — he  may,  to  preserve  his  honour,  repair  to 
the  place  of  rendezvous  ;  not  absolutely  and  with  express 
intention  of  fighting,  but  only  for  the  purpose  of  defend- 
ing himself,  if  the  challenger  should  attack  him  unjustly. 
His  conduct  will  thus  be  thoroughly  innocent.  For  what 
harm  is  there  in  going  to  the  field,  walking  about  there, 
to  meet  another,  and  defending  himself  if  attacked  ?  In 
this  way  he  commits  no  ofience,  as  he  does  not  accept  the 
challenge,  but  has  an  entirely  different  intention.  The 
acceptance  of  a  challenge  consists  in  an  express  intention 
to  fight,  which  is  not  at  all  his  case.'  " 

"  You  have  not  quite  kept  your  word  with  me,  my  good 
Father.  All  this  does  not  amount  strictly  to  permitting  a 
duel ;  on  the  contrary,  your  author  sees  the  practice  to 
be  so  absolutely  forbidden  that,  in  order  to  bring  it  within 
the  license,  he  avoids  admitting  that  it  is  a  duel  at  all." 
"  Oh  !  oh  !  "  said  the  Father,  "  you  are  beginning  to 
understand  matters ;  I  am  delighted  with  you :  I  might 
say,  however,  that  he  therein  allows  all  that  duellists  wish 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  103 

for.  But,  as  you  like  me  to  be  exact,  in  my  answers,  our 
Pere  Layman  shall  now  give  one  for  me,  in  which  you 
will  find  he  sanctions  duelling  in  so  many  words ;  pro- 
vided the  intention  be  so  adjusted,  that  the  acceptance  of 
a  challenge  shall  be  only  for  the  preservation  of  honour 
or  fortune.  It  is  in  Book  3,  pa.  3,  C.  Ill,  N.  3  and  3. 
'  If  a  soldier  in  the  army,  or  a  gentleman  of  the  court,  be 
in  danger  of  losing  his  honour  or  his  prospects  of  advance- 
ment, by  refusing  a  challenge,  I  do  not  see  that  he  is  to 
be  condemned  for  accepting  it.'  Petrus  Hurtado  says  the 
same,  as  reported  by  the  celebrated  Escobar,  in  tr.  1,  ex.  7, 
N.  96  and  98.  '  We  may  engage  in  a  single  combat  in 
defence  of  our  property,  if  no  other  way  be  left  to  us  ;  for 
every  one  has  a  right  to  defend  his  own,  even  by  the 
death  of  his  enemies.' " 

I  could  riot  but  remember  with  admiration  on  hearing 
these  passages,  how  the  piety  of  our  Sovereign  *  had 
induced  him  to  use  his  authority  for  the  abolition  of 
duelling  in  his  dominions,  while  the  piety  of  the  Jesuists 
had  suggested  to  them  the  most  ingenious  expedients  for 
sanctioning  and  authorizing  the  practice.  But  the  worthy 
Father  had  so  kindled  with  the  subject,  that  I  could  not 
bring  myself  to  check  him,  and  he  thus  continued. 
"  Lastly,  we  come  to  Sanchez — you  see  what  kind  of 
authorities  I  have  to  cite — and  he  goes  even  beyond  this ; 
for  not  only  does  he  allow  the  acceptance,  but  the  giving 
even  of  a  challenge,  provided  the  intention  be  properly 
directed.  And  Escobar  follows  him  in  his  opinion,  in  the 
part  before  quoted,  N.  97." 

"^  Louis  XIV. 

104  LETTER    VII. 

"  My  Father,"  said  I,  "  I  give  up,  if  it  be  indeed  so ; 
but  I  can  never  believe  that  be  has  written  such  a  thing 
as  this ;  I  cannot  find  it."  "  Read  it  here  yourself  then," 
he  replied ;  and,  in  truth,  I  did  read  the  following  in  the 
Moral  Theology  of  Sanchez,  Liv.  2,  C.  39,  N.  7.  '  It  is 
quite  reasonable  to  affirm  that  a  man  may  engage  in  a 
duel,  to  preserve  his  life,  his  honour,  or  his  property  (if 
the  latter  be  considerable,)  since  he  may  be  otherwise 
continually  exposed  to  the  unjust  deprivation  of  them  by 
vexatious  suits  and  chicanery ;  and  he  has  no  other  way 
than  this  to  preserve  them.'  And  Navarrus  says  most 
justly,  that,  for  such  a  purpose,  it  is  lawful  both  to  accept 
and  to  give  a  challenge ; '  licet  acceptare  et  offerre  duellum.' 
And  further,  he  may  kill  his  enemy  secretly.*  And  even 
in  such  encounters,  he  is  not  bound  to  resort  to  the 
process  of  a  duel,  if  he  can  succeed  in  killing  his  enemy 
by  secret  means,  and  thus  terminating  the  affair ;  for  in 
this  way  he  will  avoid  both  exposing  his  own  life  in  a 
conflict,  and  participating  in  the  sin  which  his  antagonist 
would  commit  by  engaging  him  in  a  duel.  "  Truly,  my 
Father,"  I  said,  "  this  is  somewhat  of  a  pious  fraud ;  but 
although  very  pious,  it  is  a  fraud  still,  to  allow  you  thus 
to  kill  your  enemy  by  treachery."  "  Did  I  say,"  he 
replied,  "any  thing  about  treachery?  God  forbid!  I 
said,  you  might  kill  him  secretly,  and  you  all  at  once 
conclude  he  may  be  killed  treacherously  :  as  if  they  were 
the  same  things.  Hear  what  Escobar  says  about  killing 
treacherously,  tr.  6,  ex.  4,  N.  16,  and  then  you  will 
understand  better ;    '  To    slay  another   treacherously   is 

*  *  Et  aussi,  qu^on  peut  tuer  en  cachette  son  ennemi/  (Fr.) 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  105 

when  the  person  has  no  suspicion  of  your  intention ; 
therefore  he  is  not  to  be  said  to  slay  his  enemy  by 
treachery,  even  if  it  be  by  striking  him  from  behind,  or 
when  taken  in  ambush — '  licet  per  insideas,  aut  a  tergo 
percutiat.^  And  in  the  same  Treatise,  N.  56 ;  '  He  that 
kills  an  adversary  with  whom  he  had  been  reconciled, 
under  a  promise  not  again  to  attempt  his  life,  is  not 
absolutely  to  be  considered  as  killing  treacherously,  unless 
there  had  subsisted  a  very  close  friendship  between  them 
— '  arctior  amicitia.'  You  see,"  he  continued,  "  that 
you  don't  understand  even  the  very  terms  in  question, 
and  yet  you  aifect  to  pronounce  authoritatively  upon  the 
matter." 

"  I  confess,"  I  replied,  "  that  this  is  all  new  to  me  ; 
I  gather  from  this  definition  that  no  one,  probably,  in  the 
world,  was  ever  destroyed  treacherously ;  we  never  think 
of  killing  any  but  our  enemies  ;  and,  according  to  Sanchez, 
we  may  freely  slay — not  to  say  treacherously,  but  by  a 
blow  from  behind,  or  by  ambuscade,  a  slanderer  who 
molests  or  prosecutes  us  ? "  "  Yes,"  said  the  Father, 
"  provided  the  intention  be  duly  regulated ;  you  always 
forget  that  most  important  point.  Molina  maintains  the 
same  thing.  Vol.  4,  tr.  3,  disp.  12.  So  also  says  the 
learned  Eeginaldus,  Book  21,  C.  5,  N.  57,  '  We  may 
_  lawfully  destroy  false  witnesses  that  are  suborned  against 
us.'  And  again,  according  to  our  illustrious  Fathers, 
Tannerus  and  Emanuel  Sa,  we  may  both  destroy  false 
witnesses  and  the  judge  also,  if  the  latter  conspires  to- 
gether with  them.  These  are  the  words,  tr.  3,  disp.  4. 
9.  8.  N.  83,  '  Sotus  and  Lessius  say,  it  is  not  lawful  to 
kill  a  false  witness  and  a  judge  who  conspire  together  to 

r  5 

106  LETTER   VII. 

cause  the  death  of  an  innocent  person  ;  but  Emanuel  Sa, 
and  other  writers,  do  well  in  disallowing  this  sentiment, 
at  least  as  far  as  the  conscience  is  concerned.'  And  he 
decides,  in  the  same  part,  that  it  is  lawful  to  kill  both 
witness  and  judge." 

"  My  respected  Father,"  I  now  said,  "  I  think  I 
understand  tolerably  well  your  principle  of  directing  the 
intention ;  but  I  should  further  be  glad  to  learn  the  con- 
sequences to  which  it  leads,  and  the  several  cases  in  which 
this  rule  gives  permission  to  take  life.  Let  us,  for  fear  of 
misapprehension,  review  all  that  you  have  enumerated ; 
for  in  a  case  like  this,  ambiguity  would  be  dangerous. 
We  ought  clearly  only  to  kill  for  a  good  purpose,  and  on  a 
probable  ground  of  lawfulness.  You  assure  me  then,  that  if 
the  motive  be  properly  regulated  we  may,  on  the  authority 
of  your  Fathers,  in  order  to  defend  our  honour  and  even 
our  property,  accept  a  challenge,  and  sometimes  give  one ; 
we  may  secretly  dispatch  a  false  accuser,  a  perjured 
witness,  and  also  the  corrupt  judge,  who  takes  part  with 
them ;  and  you  further  say  that  a  man  receiving  a  blow 
may,  without  incurring  the  sin  of  avenging  himself,  seek 
reparation  at  the  point  of  the  sword.  But  you  have  not 
told  me  to  what  extent  this  latter  may  be  done."  "  There 
can  be  no  doubt  upon  the  question,"  he  replied ;  "  to  the 
extent  of  his  death.  This  is  proved  completely  by  the 
learned  Henreques,  Book  14,  C.  10,  N.  3,  and  others  of 
our  Fathers  cited  by  Escobar,  tr.  1,  ex.  7,  N.  48,  in  these 
words;  'We  may  kill  any  one  who  gives  us  a  blow, 
although  he  flies  from  us,  provided  it  be  not  done  in 
hatred,  or  for  vengeance ;  and  also  that  We  do  not  give 
occasion  by  it  to  murders  in  excessive  numbers,  and  such 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  107 

as  would  be  injurious  to  the  State.  And  the  reason  isj 
that  we  may  in  this  way  protect  oUr  honour,  as  we  would 
pursue  a  garment  stolen  from  us;  for  although  our 
honour  cannot  be  taken  possession  of  by  an  adversary  in 
the  way  our  clothes  may  be  stoleUj  we  may  nevertheless 
recover  it  in  the  same  manner,  by  the  display  of  our  power 
and  authority,  and  thus  secure  the  good  opinion  of  our 
fellow  men.  For  is  it  not  the  fact,  that  he  who  receives  a 
blow  is  considered  to  have  forfeited  his  reputation,  till  he 
has  succeeded  in  killing  him  who  has  inflicted  it.'  " 

All  this  seemed  to  me  so  horrible,  that  I  could  scarce 
refrain  myself;  but,  in  order  to  learn  the  whole  of  the 
matter,  I  allowed  him  to  continue  his  discourse  as 
follows :  "  And  even  we  may,  in  order  to  avert  a  blow, 
kill  the  person  who  is  preparing  to  inflict  it,  if  we  cannot 
otherwise  escape.  This  is  declared  by  several  of  our 
Fathers ;  for  example,  Azos,  Instit.  Moc.  part  3,  Book  2, 
p.  105  (he  again  is  one  of  the  24  Elders.)  '  May  a  man 
of  honour  kill  one  who  is  about  to  inflict  upon  him  a 
blow,  or  strike  him  with  a  stick  ?  Some  say  No ;  and 
they  reason,  that  the  life  of  our  neighbour  is  more 
precious  than  our  honour ;  besides,  that  there  is  cruelty 
in  taking  the  life  of  a  man  only  to  escape  a  blow.  But 
others  say  this  is  lawful ;  and  I  certainly  consider  the 
opinion  'probable,'  if  there  be  no  other  way  of  escape; 
for,  without  this,  the  honour  of  innocent  persons  would 
be  constantly  exposed  to  the  malice  of  the  insolent.  So 
our  celebrated  Filiutius,  Vol.  3,  tr.  29,  C.  M.  N.  50 ;  and 
Pere  Hereau,  in  2.  2.  in  his  Treatise  on  Homicide ;  Hur- 
tado  de  Mendoza,  disp.  179,  Sec.  16  §  137;  and  Becan, 
Som.  t.  1.  9.  64.  de  Homicid.  and  the  Fathers  Flahaut 

108  LETTER   VII. 

and  Lecount  in  their  writings,  which  the  University  in 
her  third  petition  circumstantially  reported,  for  the  pur- 
pose, (although  unsuccessfully)  of  denouncing  them ;  and 
Escobar,  in  the  same  place,  No.  48 — all  these  authorities 
are  to  the  same  effect.  In  fact  it  is  so  generally  main- 
tained, that  Lessius  decides  the  matter  as  one  uncontro- 
verted  by  any  of  the  Casuists,  Book  2,  C.  4,  N.  76 ;  for 
he  cites  a  large  number  in  its  favour,  and  none  against  it. 
And  he  even  adduces  Peter  Navarre,  N.  77,  who,  speaking 
generally  of  affronts  (of  which  none  are  more  acute  than 
a  blow,)  declares  that  by  the  concurrence  of  all  Casuists 
— '  ex  sententia  omnium,  licet  contumehosum  occidere  si 
aliter  ea  injuria  arceri  nequet.'  Do  you  wish  for  further 
proofs  ?  " 

I  thanked  my  friend  :  but  I  had  heard  only  too  much 
already.  However,  to  see  how  far  this  damnable  doctrine 
might  be  carried,  I  said,  "  But  my  good  Father,  is  it  not 
allowed  to  deprive  of  life  for  less  serious  causes  ?  Might 
not  the  intention  be  so  regulated,  for  example,  as  that 
death  might  be  inflicted  for  giving  another  the  lie  ? " 
"  Certainly,"  he  replied,  "  According  to  our  Father  Bal- 
delli,  1.  3,  disp.  24,  N.  34,  reported  by  Escobar,  in  the 
same  place,  N.  49  :  'It  is  lawful  to  slay  one  that  gives 
you  the  lie,  if  he  cannot  be  reproved  in  any  other  way.' 
And,  in  the  same  manner,  life  may  be  taken  for  defama- 
tion; for  Lessius,  whom  among  others,  Pere  Hereau 
follows,  word  for  word,  says  in  the  place  before  quoted, 
'  If  a  man  endeavours  to  ruin  my  reputation  by  calumnies 
uttered  before  trust-worthy  persons,  and  I  have  no  way  to 
rid  myself  of  his  injuries  but  by  taking  his  life,  may  I  do 
so  ? '    '  Yes,'  say  our  modern  authorities  ,•  '  and  that  even 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  109 

if  the  offence  imputed  be  founded  in  fact,  provided  it 
have  been  heretofore  concealed,  and  it  be  one  that  could 
not  have  been  brought  to  light  by  the  ordinary  course  of 
justice.  And  this  is  the  proof.  If  you  seek  to  wound 
my  honour  by  the  infliction  of  a  blow,  I  have  the  means 
of  averting  it  by  strength  of  arm ;  it  follows  then  that  a 
similar  defence  is  lawful  if  you  aim  at  injuring  me  by 
word  of  mouth.  Furthermore,  we  may  protect  ourselves 
from  insults;  we  may  equally  do  so  from  defamation. 
Finally,  honour  is  dearer  to  every  one  than  life :  now,  we 
are  allowed  to  kill  another  to  defend  life,  therefore  we  may 
kill  to  defend  our  honour.' 

"  These  arguments  are  conclusive.  They  are  not  mere 
reasoning;  they  are  demonstration.  And  the  great  Les- 
sius  actually  affirms,  in  the  same  place.  No.  78,  that  death 
may  be  inflicted  even  for  an  ofiensive  gesture,  or  an  ex- 
pression of  contempt.  '  A  man's  honour,'  he  says,  '  may 
be  attacked  and  impaired  in  various  ways,  against  which 
it  is  allowable  to  defend  himself;  such  as  a  stroke  of  a 
cane,  a  blow,  or  contumelious  words  or  gestures ;  sive  per 
signia'  &c." 

"  My  worthy  Father,"  I  now  replied,  "  this  constitutes 
indeed  a  most  ample  protection  for  our  wounded  honour ; 
but  surely  life  is  sorely  endangered,  if  we  are  thus  at 
liberty  with  '  safe  consciences  to  inflict  death  upon  ano- 
ther for  a  mere  slanderous  speech  or  an  uncourteous  ges- 
ture ! ' " 

"  It  is  very  true,"  he  replied ;  "  but  as  our  Fathers 
are  prudent  persons,  they  have  not  failed  to  take  the  pre- 
caution of  forbidding  recourse  to  the  doctrine  in  question 
on  very  slight  occasions ;  for  they  are  careful  to  subjoin  : 

110  LETTER   VII. 

'  this  ought  rarely  to  be  put  in  practice ' — '  practice  vix 
probari  potest.'     And  this  is  indeed  not  without  good 

reason;  as   thus" "Who  can  doubt  it?"    I  said; 

"  Does  not  the  law  of  God  forbid  to  take  life  ? "  "  They 
do  not  go  exactly  upon  that  ground/'  he  rejoined :  "  they 
consider  it  to  be  allowed  by  the  rules  of  conscience,  and 
by  the  dictates  of  absolute  truth."  "  Then,  why  do  they 
forbid  it  ?  "  "  Listen,"  he  said  :  "  it  is  because  a  com- 
munity would  be  depopulated,  almost  to  extinction,  if  all 
the  slanderers  were  to  be  destroyed.  You  will  find  this 
set  forth  in  Keginaldus,  Book  21,  n.  63,  p.  260  :  *  How- 
ever the  opinion,  that  we  may  take  the  life  of  another  for 
defamation,  be  not  without  probability  in  theory,  we  must 
adopt  the  contrary  view  in  practice ;  for  we  ought  ever  to 
avoid  doing  injury  to  the  State  in  our  manner  of  de- 
fending ourselves.  Now  it  is  plain  that  in  killing  others 
in  this  way,  we  should  commit  too.  great  a  number  of 
murders.'  Lessius  says  the  same,  in  the  place  before 
referred  to  :  '  We  must  be  careful  that  in  carrying  out 
this  maxim,  no  injury  be  done  to  the  State  ;  for  in  that 
case,  it  must  not  be  permitted — tunc  enim  non  est  per- 
mittendus' " 

"  So  then,  my  Father,  this  is  an  interdiction  of  policy, 
and  not  of  religion  !  How  many  do  you  suppose  are 
likely  to  be  kept  in  check  by  this  caution,  especially  in 
the  heat  of  blood  ?  They  will  probably  think  they  do  the 
State  no  wrong  by  purging  it  of  a  flagitious  character." 
"  For  this  very  reason,  Pere  Filiutius  adds  to  this  con- 
sideration another  most  important  one,  tr.  39,  ch.  3, 
N.  51  .  '  it  is  that  we  might  expose  ourselves  to  the  arm 
of  justice,  by  killing  others  for  such  causes.' "     "  I  told 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  Ill 

you,  my  friend,  that  you  would  do  nothing  effectually, 
without  getting  the  judges  on  your  side."  "  The  judges," 
said  the  Father,  "  being  unable  to  penetrate  men's  con- 
sciences, regard  only  the  external  acts  ;  while  we,  on  the 
contrary,  look  chiefly  at  the  intention  ;  on  that  account  it 
is  that  our  maxims  occasionally  differ  somewhat  from 
theirs."  "  However  that  may  be,"  I  replied,  "  it  clearly 
results  from  yours,  that  provided  we  avoid  detriment  to 
the  State,  we  may  take  the  life  of  one  that  slanders  us, 
with  a  safe  conscience,  supposing  always  it  be  with  safety 
to  our  own  persons." 

"  But,  my  good  Father,  after  all  the  care  you  have 
taken  for  the  protection  of  our  honour,  have  you  done 
nothing  for  that  of  property  ?  I  know  this  is  of  minor 
importance ;  but  that  does  not  signify.  I  should  think 
there  might  be  found  means  to  regulate  the  intention,  so 
as  to  allow  of  taking  life  for  its  preservation  also." 
"  Doubtless,"  he  replied,  "  all  our  Casuists  agree  in  per- 
mitting it,  and  that,  even  if  we  are  in  no  danger,  our- 
selves, of  personal  violence,  on  the  part  of  those  attacking 
our  property ;  as  when  they  are  in  the  act  of  flight ! 
Azos,  a  member  of  our  Society,  proves  this,  pa.  3,  Book  2, 
ch.  1.  9.  20." 

"  But,  my  friend,  what  should  be  the  value  of  the 
property  thus  endangered,  to  justify  such  an  extremity?" 
"It  must  be,  according  to  Reginaldus,  Book  21.  ch.  5. 
N.  66.  and  Tannerus  in  2.  2.  disp.  4.  9,  8.  d.  4,  N.  69. 
property  of  considerable  value  '  in  the  estimate  of  an  ex- 
perienced person.'  And  Layman  and  Filiutius  say  the 
same  thing,"  "  That  is  nothing  to  the  purpose,  my  Father  ; 
where  are  we  to  find  this  rarity,  this  experienced  person. 

112  LETTER   VII. 

who  may  make  the  estimate  required  ?  Why  do  they 
not  fix  exactly  the  amount  in  question  ?  "  "  What !  " 
said  the  Father,  "  do  you  think  it  so  easy  then  to  weigh 
the  life  of  a  man — a  Christian — against  money  !  Here  it 
is,  however,  that  you  will  find  the  value  of  our  Casuists. 
See  whether  any  of  the  ancient  Fathers  will  tell  you  for 
what  sum  it  may  be  lawful  to  kill  a  man.  What  do  they 
say  but  simply,  '.  Non  occides ' — Thou  shalt  not  kill  ?  " 
"  Then  who,  pray,  has  taken  upon  himself  to  determine 
the  amount  in  question  "i  "  1  exclaimed.  "  It  is,"  he  re- 
plied, "  the  incomparable  Molina,  the  glory  of  our  So- 
ciety ;  who,  with  inimitable  discretion,  has  estimated  it 
at  six  or  seven  ducats  ;  for  which  sum  he  affirms  it  is 
lawful  to  kill  a  robber,  even  if  he  be  in  the  act  of  flight.' 
It  is  in  his  4  vol.  tr.  3.  disp.  16.  d.  6.  And  in  the  same 
place  he  further  says,  '  That  he  should  not  dare  to  pro- 
nounce a  man  guilty  of  sin  who  should  destroy  another 
for  endeavouring  to  rob  him  of  property,  even  to  the 
value  of  a  crown,  or  less — unius  aurei,  vel  minoris  adhuc 
volaris.'  And  this  has  led  Escobar  to  lay  down  the  fol- 
lowing general  rule,  N.  44.  'According  to  Molina,  a  man 
may  lawfully  take  the  life  of  another  for  the  value  of  a 
crown.' " 

"  Oh,  my  good  Father ! "  I  cried,  "  tell  me,  I  beg, 
where  Molina  has  learnt  to  decide  a  point  of  such  impor- 
tance as  this,  without  the  aid  of  Scripture,  the  Councils, 
or  the  Fathers  ?  I  see  plainly  now  that  there  are  autho- 
rities far  more  enlightened  than  St.  Augustine  (though 
very  dissimilar  to  him),  '  upon  the  question  of  homicide, 
as  well  as  that  of  grace.'  I  am  now,  however,  sufficiently 
instructed  in  this  question,  and  I  quite  understand  that  it 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  113 

is  only  ecclesiastics  who  would  have  any  scruples  to 
murder  such  as  invaded  their  honour  or  their  property." 
"  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  cried  the  Father,  "  do  you  think 
it  reasonable  that  those  who  most  need  to  stand  well  with 
society  should  be  alone  exposed  to  insolence  and  injury  ? 
Our  Fathers  have  provided  against  this  anomaly ;  for 
Tannerus  says,  t.  11.  d.  4.  9.  8.  d.  4.  N.  76.  '  Ecclesi- 
astics, and  even  members  of  religious  orders,  are  allowed 
to  take  life  in  defence,  not  only  of  their  persons,  but  of 
their  property,  or  that  of  the  communities  to  which  they 
belong.  Molina  cited  by  Escobar,  N.  43 ;  Becan  in  3. 
2.  tr.  11.9.  7.  de  Horn.  Concl.  3.  N.  5;  Reginaldus, 
1.  21.  c.  V.  n.  68;  Layman,  1.  3,  tr.  3.  p.  3,  c.  3.  N.  4; 
Lessius,  liv.  2.  c.  9.  d.  11.  N.  72;  and  others,  all  hold  the 
same  language. 

"  And  according  to  the  celebrated  Pere  Launy,  it  is 
even  lawful  for  priests  and  monks  to  take  the  life  of  such  as 
may  be  endeavouring  to  injure  their  reputation,  in  order 
to  prevent  the  completion  of  their  design — always,  how- 
ever, with  due  regulation  of  the  motive.  This  is  his  lan- 
guage, t.  5.  disp.  36.  N.  118,  '  An  ecclesiastic,  or  a  monk, 
may  slay  any  one  who  threatens  to  accuse  publicly  his 
community,  or  even  himself,  of  scandalous  offences,  pro- 
vided there  be  no  other  means  of  preventing  it ;  as  when 
(for  instance)  the  party  would  be  forthwith  proceeding  to 
a  general  publication  of  his  slanders,  if  not  promptly  de- 
stroyed ;  for,  as  it  would  be  justifiable  for  such  a  one  to 
kill  a  person  who  aimed  at  his  life,  it  is  equally  lawful  to 
take  the  life  of  one  that  threatens  the  honour  of  himself 
or  his  community ;  and  that  no  less  in  the  case  of  an 
ecclesiastic  than  a  layman.'" 

114  .  LETTER  VII. 

"  I  certainly  was  not  aware  of  tbis,"  I  said ;  "  and,  in 
fact,  I  had  ignorantly  supposed  the  very  reverse  to  be  the 
case ;  merely  looking  at  the  fact  that  the  Church  professes 
such  abhorrence  of  blood,  that  she  does  not  allow  eccle- 
siastical judges  to  assist  in  criminal  processes."  "  Do 
not  fall  into  such  mistake,"  said  the  Father ;  "  Pere 
Launy  maintains  conclusively  this  doctrine ;  although  with 
a  humility  becoming  a  great  man,  he  submits  it  to  the 
discretion  of  prudent  readers.  And  our  illustrious  cham- 
pion Caramuel,  who  cites  it  in  his  '  Fundamental  Theo- 
logy, p.  543,  regards  it  as  so  certain,  that  he  affirms, 
'  the  contrary  is  not  to  be  deemed  probable.^  And  he 
deduces  from  it  a  variety  of  admirable  conclusions,  such 
as  the  following,  which  he  styles  '  the  conclusion  of  con- 
clusions,' '  conclusionum  conclusio ; '  a  '  priest  not  only 
is  allowed,  in  certain  cases,  to  slay  a  calumniator,  but  it 
is  also  sometimes  his  duty  to  do  it, — etiam  aliquando 
debet  o.ccidere.'' 

"  He  investigates  also  various  novel  points  upon  this 
subject ;  among  others  this,  '  Is  it  lawful  for  a  Jesuit  to 
take  the  life  of  a  Jansenist  ?  ' "  "  This  is  indeed,"  I 
exclaimed,  "  a  surprising  question  in  your  theology.  I 
see  plainly  enough  that  according  to  P^re  Launy's  doc- 
trine, the  poor  Jansenists  are  dead  men."  "  Not  so  fast," 
he  rejoined;  "  Caramuel  decides  the  very  reverse,  and 
from  the  same  principles.'"  "  How  is  that  ?  "  "  Be-. 
cause,"  he  rejoined,  "  they  do  no  injury  to  our  reputa- 
tion. These  are  his  words,  N.  1146  and  47.  p.  547.  and  8 : 
'  The  Jansenists  call  the  Jesuits  Pelagians ;  might  they 
lawfully  be  killed  for  this  ?  No ;  because  the  Jansen- 
ists no  more  impair  the  reputation  of  our  Society  than  a 

ON   REGULATING   MOTIVES.  115 

mote  obscures  the  sun ;  on  the  contrary,  they  have  raised 
and  increased  it,  although  not  intentionally  on  their  part ; 
— occidi  non  possunt,  quia  nocere  non  potuerint.' " 

"  So  then,  my  excellent  Father,  the  lives  of  the  Jan- 
senists  hang  only  upon  the  question  whether  they  have  it 
in  their  power  to  injure  your  reputation  !  Slender  indeed 
is  their  tenure  ;  for  once  render  it  ever  so  little  probable 
that  they  may  do  you  harm,  and  they  are  obnoxious  to 
the  summary  proceeding  in  question  without  scruple.* 
You  may  frame  your  argument  very  logically  j  and  no- 
thing more  is  needed  (after  due  regulation  of  the  motive) 
to  dispatch  a  man  with  an  easy  conscience.  Oh  happy 
those,  who  have  learnt  such  a  doctrine,  and  who  do  not 
choose  to  brook  an  affront :  but  most  unhappy  they  who 
commit  the  offence  !  I  must  say,  however,  my  Father,  it 
is  safer  to  have  to  do  with  people  who  have  no  religion, 
than  with  such  as  are  indoctrinated  after  this  fashion. 
For  after  all,  the  motive  of  a  person  inflicting  a  wound 
affords  little  alleviation  to  him  who  suffers  from  it.  He 
knows  nothing  of  the  secret  intention ;  and  feels  nothing 
but  the  pain  to  himself  of  the  blow.  And  I  don't  know 
if  one  should  not  suffer  less  from  being  brutally  dis- 
patched by  an  assassin,  than  to  be  conscientiously  poign- 
arded  by  a  devotee. 

"  Well,  my  good  Father,"  I  added,  "  I  must  tell  you 
the  truth,  and  say  I  am  somewhat  surprised  at  all  this  ; 
and  these  propositions  of  Pere  Launy  and  Caramuel  do 
not  altogether  satisfy  me."  "  Why  not  ?  "  said  the  Fa- 
ther ;  "  are  you  a  Jansenist  ?  "     "I  have  other  reasons," 

*  '  Les  voila  tuable  sans  difRcultd'  (Fr.) 

116  LETTER   VII. 

I  replied.  "  I  am  in  the  habit  of  writing,  from  time  to 
time,  to  a  friend  in  the  country,  an  account  of  the  opinions 
of  your  Society.  And  although  I  do  nothing  more  than 
simply  and  faithfully  narrate  their  own  words,  I  cannot  be 
certain  that  I  may  not  meet  with  some  obtuse  minds  that 
would  draw  rather  sinister  conclusions  from  your  prin- 
ciples.^'  "  Never  fear,"  said  the  Father,  "  no  harm  will 
happen  from  it ;  I'll  guarantee  you.  What  our  Fathers 
have  printed  themselves,  and  with  the  approbation  of 
their  superiors,  it  cannot  be  wrong  or  dangerous  to 
publish." 

What  I  write  to  you  then  is  on  the  word  of  this  good 
Father  :  but  now  my  paper  fails  me,  although  not  my  ma- 
terials. They  are  so  copious  and  so  striking,  that  it  would 
take  volumes  to  communicate  them.     I  am,  &c. 

LETTER  VIII. 

CORRUPT  DECISIONS  OP  THE  CASUISTS  RELATING  TO 
JUDGES,  USURERS,  THE  '  MOHATRA'  CONTRACT,  BANK- 
RUPTS, RESTITUTIONS,  ETC.  VARIOUS  OTHER  OBLI- 
QUITIES  OF    THE   SAME   AUTHORITIES. 

Sir,  Paris,  May  32,  1656. 

You  would  not  suppose  that  people  would  have  had  the 
curiosity  to  enquire  who  we  are  :  nevertheless,  there  are 
some  who  are  endeavouring  to  detect  us ;  but  they  have 
not  succeeded.  Some  take  me  for  a  Doctor  of  Sorbonne ; 
others  attribute  my  letters  to  four  or  five  difi'erent  per- 
sons, who,  like  myself,  are  neither  priests  nor  ecclesias- 
tics. All  these  fruitless  efforts  convince  me,  that  I  have 
been  not  unsuccessful  in  my  aim  to  be  known  by  none  but 
yourself  and  the  worthy  Eather  who  takes  so  patiently  my 
visits;  and  whose  discourse  lam  obliged, in  return  to  endure, 
although  with  much  distaste.  I  put  however  a  constraint 
upon  myself;  for  if  he  were  to  perceive  the  disgust  his 
statements  excite  in  me  he  would  not  continue  them,  and 
thus  I  should  be  unable  to  fulfil  my  engagement,  to  make 
you  acquainted  with  their  whole  system  of  morality.  You 
may  give  me,  I  assure  you,  some  credit  for  the  violence  I 
do  to  myself.     It  is  not  a  little  painful  to  see  the  whole 

118 

LETTER   VIII. 

code  of  Christian  morals  overthrown  by  these  unhappy 
perversions,  without  daring  to  contradict  them.  But  I 
suspectj  after  having  kept  so  strict  a  guard  over  my  feel- 
ingSj  for  your  satisfaction,  I  shall  break  out  for  my  own, 
when  I  find  he  has  nothing  more  to  tell  me.  However, 
I  will  refrain  as  much  as  possible  ;  for  the  more  I  show 
myself  inclined  to  listen,  the  more  communicative  he 
will  be. 

He  gave  me  so  much  information  on  the  last  occasion, 
that  I  shall  hardly  know  how  to  report  it  all  to  you. 
You  will  now  see  what  convenient  maxims  they  inculcate, 
for  evading  the  duty  of  restitution.  For — palliate  it  as 
they  may — the  principles  which  I  am  now  proceeding  to 
relate  tend  to  nothing  less,  than  to  extenuate  the  prac- 
tices of  corrupt  judges,  of  usurers,  bankrupts,  rogues, 
abandoned  women,  and  tricksters ;  who  are  all  most 
leniently  absolved  from  the  necessity  of  restoring  the  ill- 
gotten  fruits  of  their  several  vocations.  Tiiese  were  the 
subjects  of  our  last  conversation. 

"  At  the  commencement  of  our  interview,"  he  said,  "  I 
promised  to  explain  to  you  the  maxims  of  our  Society  for 
the  direction  of  the  various  conditions  of  society.  You 
have  already  learnt  those  relating  to  beneficiaries,  priests, 
religious  orders,  servants,  and  the  aristocracy ;  we  will 
proceed  now  to  the  others,  and  begin  with  the  judges. 

"  I  must  first  of  all  tell  you  one  of  the  most  important 
and  beneficial  of  the  principles  laid  down  by  our  Fathers 
in  favor  of  this  class  of  persons.  It  is  that  of  the  learned 
Castro  Palao,  one  of  our  twenty-four  Elders ;  these  are 
his  words  :  '  May  a  judge,  in  a  question  of  equity,  pro- 
nounce judgment  according  to  a  certain  probable  opinion. 

CORRUPT    DKCISIONS   OP   THE   CASUISTS.  119 

in  preference  to  another  opinion  which  is  more  probable  ? 
Yes,  and  even  if  it  be  contrary  to  his  own  :  imo,  contra 
ipropriane  opinionem.'  And  he  is  confirmed  in  this  by 
our  Father  Escobar,  tr.  6.  ex.  6.  N.  45."  "  Truly,  my 
good  Father,"  I  exclaimed,  "  this  is  an  admirable  com- 
mencement !  The  judges  must  be  indeed  beholden  to 
you ;  and  I  am  surprized  that  they  should  ever  oppose 
your  probabilities,  as  we  find  them  sometimes  doing, 
seeing  how  favorable  they  are  to  themselves.  You  give 
them,  by  these  methods,  the  same  power  over  the  fortunes 
of  the  community,  as  you  yourselves  exercise  over  their 
consciences."  "  You  ought  to  see,"  he  replied,  "  that  it 
is  from  no  regard  to  our  own  interests  that  we  thus  act, 
but  merely  from  a  concern  for  the  quiet  of  their  con- 
sciences ;  and  this  is  where  our  eminent  Molina  has  been 
successful  in  respect  to  presents  made  to  the  judges. 

"  In  order  to  satisfy  their  scruples  in  receiving  these 
kind  of  douceurs,  he  has  taken  the  pains  to  enumerate 
the  several  cases  in  which  they  may  take  them  conscien- 
tiously, in  the  absence  of  any  special  law  forbidding  it. 
It  is  in  his  t.  1.  tr.  2.  d.  88.  N.  6.  as  follows :  '  Judges 
may  receive  presents  from  parties  when  given  from  mo- 
tives of  friendship  or  gratitude  for  justice  rendered  them  ; 
or  as  an  inducement  to  render  such  in  time  to  come  ;  or 
in  the  hope  that  they  may  take  an  especial  interest  in 
their  affairs,  or  dispatch  them  with  promptitude.'  Our 
learned  Escobar  also  says,  on  this  subject,  tr.  6.  ex.  6. 
"N.  43.  '  If  there  be  several  individuals,  none  of  whom 
have  greater  claim  to  dispatch  than  others,  is  it  a  sin  in 
the  judge  to  receive  a  gratuity  from  one  on  condition — 
'  ex  parte ' — to  give  him  the  preference  in  dispatch  over 

120 

LETTER   VIII. 

the  others  ?  Certamly  not,  according  to  Layman  ;  for, 
by  natural  right,  he  does  no  injury  to  the  others,  when 
he  concedes  to  one,  in  consideration  of  his  gratuity,  what 
he  might  have  given  to  any  other,  as  he  pleased  :  nay, 
being  equally  bound  to  all  by  the  equality  of  their  claim, 
he  is  still  more  so  to  the  giver  of  the  present  which  is 
made  for  the  purpose  of  securing  the  judge's  good  offices; 
which  services  may  lawfully  be  secured  by  a  consideration 
in  money — 'Qucb  ohligatio  videtur  pretio  cBstimabilis.'  " 

"  My  reverend  Father,"  I  here  interposed,  "  I  cannot 
but  be  surprised  to  hear  of  such  an  indulgent  code  as  this, 
unknown  too,  as  it  is,  to  the  highest  of  our  legal  digni- 
taries. Why,  our  chief  president  has  just  introduced  into 
Parliament  an  Act  for  prohibiting  certain  registers  to  ac- 
cept gratuities  for  this  very  species  of  preference  j  a  plain 
proof  that  he  is  far  from  thinking  such  practices  allowable 
in  the  judicial  office ;  and  every  one  has  extolled  a  reform 
so  salutary  to  all  parties." 

The  good  Father,  surprised  at  my  remark,  replied, 
"  Indeed,  I  was  not  aware  of  that.  Our  opinion,  under- 
stand, is  only  a  "probable'  one;  the  contrary  may  be 
probable  also."  "  Truly,  my  Father,"  I  said,  "  it  is  be- 
lieved that  M.  Le  President  has  done  a  more  than  '  pro- 
bable '  service ;  and  has  arrested  by  its  means  a  long-con- 
tinued course  of  public  corruption."  "  Well,  on  the 
whole,  I  am  of  the  same  opinion,"  the  Father  rejoined, 
"  but  let  us  proceed ;  we  will  leave  the  judges."  "  Quite 
right,"  I  said ;  "  particularly  as  they  don't  seem  very 
grateful  for  the  indulgence  you  show  them."  "  It  is  not 
exactly  that,"  rejoined  the  good  Father ;  "  but  there  is 

CORRUPT   DECISIONS    OF   THE   CASUISTS.  121 

SO  mucli  to  be  related  under  the  various  heads,  that  we 
must  be  brief  upon  each  individually. 

"  Let  us  now  go  on  to  the  case  of  men  of  business.  You 
know,  the  great  difficulty  with  them  is  to  wean  them 
from  usurious  practices :  and  this  is  what  our  Fathers 
have  the  most  assiduously  aimed  at ;  for  they  detest  this 
vice,  as  Escobar  has  it,  tr.  3,  ex.  5.  N.  1.  '  To  say  that 
usury  is  not  a  sin  is  heresy."  And  Pere  Bauny  in  his 
'  Summary  of  Sin,'  fills  several  pages  with  the  penalties 
incurred  by  usurers.  He  declares  that  they  '  are  infamous 
in  life,  and  unworthy  of  Christian  burial  after  death.'  " 
"  My  good  Father  ! "  I  exclaimed,  "  I  did  not  think  he 
coidd  have  been  so  severe."  "  He  is  so,  I  assure  you, 
when  there  is  a  necessity  for  it ;  but,  then,  this  rigid 
Casuist,  observing  that  it  is  only  a  love  of  gain  that  urges 
to  usury,  says,  in  the  same  place,  '  It  would  be  benefit- 
ting not  a  few  persons,  if,  while  secured  from  the  evil 
tendencies  of  usury,  as  well  as  from  the  sinful  propensity 
which  leads  to  it,  they  could  be  assisted  to  derive  an  equal 
profit  from  their  money  in  a  good  and  legitimate  employ- 
ment of  it,  as  from  usurious  practices.'  "  "  Doubtless, 
Father,  there  would  be  no  usurers  after  that,"  I  inter- 
posed. "  And  for  this  purpose,"  he  continued,  "  our 
author  has  furnished  a  general  rule  for  all  classes  of  per- 
sons, gentlemen,  presidents,  councillors,  &c. ;  and  one  so 
simple,  that  it  consists  of  nothing  more  than  the  pro- 
nouncing a  few  words  previous  to  a  loan  of  money ;  after 
which  they  may  receive  their  interest  without  fear  of  its 
partaking  of  the  nature  of  usury  ;  although,  otherwise,  it 
would  undoubtedly  have  been  such."  "  And  what  then 
are  these  mysterious  words,  my  Father  ? "     "  Here  they 

G 

1:23        .  Letter  viii. 

are  in  his  own  terms ;  for  you  are  aware  the  writer  has 
composed  his  work  on  the  '  Summary  of  Offences/  ia 
French,  that  every  one  may  understand  it.  They  are  as 
follows :  '  Celui  k  qui  on  demande  de  I'argent  repondra 
done  en  eette  sorte ;  Je  n'ai  point  d' argent  a  preter ;  si  ai 
hien  a  mettre  li  profit  honnete  et  licite.  Si  desirez  la 
somme  que  demandez  pour  la  faire  valoir  par  votre  indus- 
trie  k  moitie  gain,  moitie  perte,  peut  etre  m'y  resoudrai- 
je.  Bien  est  vrai  qu'k  cause  qu'il  y  a  trop  de  peine  a 
s'accommoder  pour  le  profit,  si  vous  m'en  voulez  assurer 
un  certain,  et  quant  et  quant  aussi  mon  sort  principal, 
qu'il  ne  coure  fortune,  nous  tomberions  bien  plus  tot 
d'accord,  et  vous  ferai  toucher  argent  dans  cette  heure.'* 

"  Is  not  that  now  a  most  easy  way  of  getting  money 
without  committing  a  sin  ?  And  is  not  Pere  Bauny  right 
when  he  says  in  his  concluding  part,  '  This  is,  in  my  opi- 
nion, a  method  by  which  multitudes  of  persons  who  would 
otherwise  by  their  usurious  extortion,  and  unlawful  bar- 
gains, provoke  the  just  displeasure  of  God,  may  ensure 
their  safety  in  rendering  their  gains  honest  and  lawful.'  " 

"  My  good  Father  !  "  I  exclaimed,  "  these  are  indeed 
words  of  most  wonderful  efiicacy.  They  must,  I  am 
satisfied,  possess  some  secret  virtue  in  neutralizing  the 
crime  of  usury  far  beyond  my  comprehension ;  for  I  have 
always  hitherto  supposed  the  offence  to  consist  simply  in 
receiving  back  a  larger  amount  than  that  which  had  been 
lent."  "  You  have  a  very  imperfect  notion  of  the  mat- 
ter," he  said :  "  usury,  according  to  our  Fathers,  consists 

This  being  somewhat  antiquated  French,  and  not  admitting  of  a  very- 
literal  rendering,  I  have  thought  it  best  to  leave  it  in  the  original  language. 
(Trans'.) 

COERUPT    DECISIONS   OP   THE   CASUISTS.  123 

almost  exclusively  in  an  intention  to  take  an  usurious 
profit.  And  thuSj  Pere  Escobar  lays  it  down,  that  usury 
may  be  avoided  by  a  simple  change  of  the  intention. 
You  will  find  it  at  tr.  3,  ex.  5,  N.  4,  33,  44 ;  'It  would 
be  an  usurious  act/  he  says,  '  to  take  interest  from  those 
to  whom  we  lend  money,  if  it  be  exacted  as  of  right ;  but 
if  received  as  a  matter  of  gratitude,  it  is  then  not  usury.' 
And  at  N.  3,  '  It  is  not  allowed  to  intend  directly  to 
make  a  profit  of  money  lent ;  but  when  received  by  way 
of  consideration  on  the  part  of  those  to  whom  it  is  lent — 
'  medie  henevolentia  ' — that  is  not  usury.' 

"  It  must  be  allowed,"  he  continued,  "  that  there  are 
refined  ways  of  proceeding :  but  one  of  the  best,  in  my 
opinion,  (for  we  have  several  to  make  choice  of)  is  that 
of  the  '  Contract  of  Mohatra.'  "  The  Contract  of  Moha- 
tra  ?  "  I  asked.  "  I  see,"  he  continued,  '•'  you  are  not 
acquainted  with  it.  It  is  only  the  name  that  is  peculiar. 
Escobar  will  explain  it,  in  tr.  3,  ex.  3,  N.  36.  '  The  Mo- 
hatra  Contract  is  one  by  which  persons  buy  merchandize 
at  high  prices  on  credit,  and  sell  it  again,  simultaneously, 
to  the  same  persons,  at  low  rates,  and  for  ready  money.' 
This,  you  see,  is  the  Contract  of  Mohatra ;  by  which 
means  they  acquire  a  certain  amount  in  ready  money, 
and  remain  in  debt  to  the  party  for  the  surplus."  "  But, 
my  Father,  can  any  one  besides  Escobar  have  sanctioned 
such  a  plan  ?  Do  any  other  of  your  writers  mention  it  ?  " 
"  How  little  you  are  acquainted  with  these  matters  !  "  he 
replied.  "  The  latest  work  on  Moral  Theology,  printed 
this  very  year  at  Paris,  treats  of  the  Mohatra,  and  very 
profoundly;  it  is  entitled  'Epilogus  Summarum/'  and  is 
an  abridgment  of  all  the  summaries  of  theology  of  our 

G  2 

124  LETTER   VIII. 

Fathers  Suarez,  Sanchez,  Lessius,  TagandeZj  Hurtado,  and 
other  celebrated  Casuists,  as  expressed  in  the  title.  You 
will  find  it  at  p.  54.  '  The  Mohatra  is,  when  a  man  wants 
to  raise  twenty  pistoles,  and  buys  of  a  merchant  goods  to 
the  amount  of  thirty  pistoles,  payable  in  a  year,  selling 
the  same  to  him  simultaneously  for  twenty  pistoles,  ready 
money  price.'  Thus,  you.  see,  this  Mohatra  is  not  an  ob- 
scure mode  of  procedure."  "  Well,  my  kind  Father,"  I 
asked,  "  and  is  this  sort  of  contract  allowed  ?  "  "  Esco- 
bar," he  replied,  "  says  in  the  same  place  that  there  are 
laws  which  prohibit  it  under  severe  penalties."  "  Then 
it  is  useless."  "  By  no  means ;  for  Escobar  himself  goes 
on  to  prescribe  methods  by  which  it  may  be  permitted : 
'  although  even,'  he  says,  '  the  person  who  buys  and  sells 
may  primarily  intend  to  make  a  profit ;  provided,  how- 
ever, in  the  sale  he  does  not  exceed  the  highest  price  of 
merchandise  of  that  description ;  and  (in  re-purchasing,) 
he  does  not  go  beyond  the  lowest ;  and  also,  that  no  pre- 
vious agreement  be  made,  either  express  or  implied.' 
But  Lessius,  de  Jael,  Book  3,  C.  21,  d.  16,  says,  '  Even  if 
the  sale  have  been  made  with  the  intention  to  repurchase 
at  the  lowest  price,  we  are  not  bound  to  make  restitution 
of  the  profit,  unless  in  the  way  of  charity,  in  case  the 
party  of  whom  the  advantage  has  been  gained,  be  in  a 
state  of  indigence ;  and  provided  also  it  can  be  done  with- 
out inconvenience  to  ourselves ;' — '  si  commode  potest.' 
This  is  saying  every  thing  that  is  possible."  "  In  truth, 
my  Father,  I  cannot  but  think  that  more  indulgence 
might  be  blameable."  "  Ah,"  said  he,  "  our  Fathers 
know  just   the  exact   point  where   they  ought  to  stop ! 

CORRUPT   DECISIONS  OP  THE  CASUISTS.  125 

You  see  in  that  very  circumstance  the  usefulness  of  the 
'  Mohatra.' 

"  I  could  have  furnished  you,"  he  continued, "  with  more 
of  their  opinions  upon  these  points^  but  these  will  suffice  ; 
and  I  must  now  acquaint  you  with  our  views  respecting 
persons  in  embarrassed  circumstances. 

"  Our  Fathers  were  very  desirous  of  alleviating  the 
privations  of  such  persons  ;  for  which  purpose,  if  they 
have  not  sufficient  property  to  live  respectably  upon,  and 
to  pay  their  debts  also,  they  are  permitted  to  secure  a 
part  to  themselves  by  becoming  bankrupts.  This  is  the 
decision  of  Pere  Lessius,  and  confirmed  by  Escobar,  tr.  3, 
ex.  3,  N.  163,  '  May  a  person  who  has  become  bankrupt, 
retain  with  safe  conscience  such  part  of  his  property  as  is 
necessary  for  maintaining  his  family  in  respectability — 
'  ne  indecore  vivat  ?'  I  maintain,  with  Lessius,  that  he 
may ;  and  that,  even,  if  it  have  been  acquired  by  injus- 
tice, and  notorious  offences — '  ex  injustitia  et  notorio 
delicto ;  although  in  the  latter  case  he  may  not  retain 
so  large  an  amount  as  otherwise."  "  How !  my  Father, 
by  what  strange  species  of  charity  is  it  that  you  allow 
property  obtained  in  this  way  to  remain  in  the  possession 
of  those  who  have  acquired  it  by  fraud,  rather  than  to  fall 
to  the  creditors,  to  whom,  of  right,  it  belongs  ?  "  "  We 
cannot  satisfy  every  body,"  he  replied,  "  and  our  Fathers 
have  especially  aimed  at  relieving  the  unfortunate.  And 
thus,  with  an  especial  view  to  the  indigent,  the  celebrated 
Vasquez,  quoted  by  Castro  Palao,  t.  1,  tr.  6,  d.  6,  N.  12, 
says, '  When  we  see  a  swindleir  resolutely  bent  upon  de- 
frauding a  poor  person,  we  may,  to  avert  his  purpose, 
assign  to  him  some  very  rich  person  to  commit  his  fraud 

126  .  LETTER  VIII. 

upon,  instead  of  the  other  party.'  If  you  have  not  got 
Vesquez  or  Castro  Palao,  you  will  find  the  same  thing  in 
Escohar ;  for,  as  you  are  aware,  almost  every  sentiment 
of  importance  is  propounded  in  common  by  the  twenty- 
four  Elders  :  it  is  at  tr.  5,  ex.  5,  N.  120.,  '  On  the  prac- 
tice of  our  Society,  respecting  charity  to  our  neighbour.' " 
"  That  is  certainly  a  remarkable  species  of  charity,"  I 
observed,  "  to  save  one  person  from  sustaining  loss  at  the 
expense  of  another.  But  I  should  think,  to  render  it 
complete,  the  person  giving  such  an  intimation  ought  in 
conscience  to  make  good  to  the  rich  man  the  loss  that  he 
occasions  him."  "Not  at  all,"  he  replied,  "he  does  not 
rob  him  himself;  he  only  gives  information  to  another  to 
do  so.  Hear,  now,  the  judicious  decision  of  Pere  Bauny  in 
another  case,  which  will  surprise  you  still  more,  and  lead 
you  again  to  suppose  that  restitution  ought  to  be  com- 
mahdied.  It  is  in  the  13th  chap,  of  his  '  Summary.' 
These  are  his  own  words ;  '  A  person  desires  a  soldier  to 
assault  one  of  his  neighbours,  or  burn  the  barn  of  some 
one  who  has  offended  him.  It  is  asked  whether,  in  case 
of  the  soldier  being  a  defaulter,  the  other  person  at  whose 
instance  the  wrong  was  done,  ought  to  make  it  good  ?  I 
think  not.  For  no  one  is  bound  to  restitution,  where  no 
wrong  has  been  committed.  Is  it  a  wrong  to  ask  a  favour 
of  another?  Whatever  the  request  be,  the  other  is  at 
liberty  to  grant  it,  or  refuse*  Whichever  way  he  inclines, 
it  is  purely  of  his  own  will ;  nothing  induces  him  but  his 
own  kindness  and  facility.  If  then  the  soldier  in  question 
does  not  repair  the  injury,  the  other  party  ought  not  to 
be  compelled  to  do  it,  at  whose  instance  the  innocent 
person  has  suffered  the  wrong.'  " 

CORRUPT    DECISIONS   OP   THE   CASUISTS.  137 

This  passage  had  nearly  put  a  stop  to  our  conversation, 
for  I  was  on  the  point  of  bursting  into  a  violent  fit  of 
laughter  at  the  idea  of  "  the  kindness  and  facility"  of  the 
supposed  incendiary  of  the  barn ;  and  the  absurd  reason- 
ings, which  went  to  exempt  from  restitution  the  real 
author  of  the  conflagration — a  crime  which  our  juris- 
prudence would  have  visited  with  death.  But  I  knew  if  I 
did  not  restrain  myself,  the  good  Father  would  be  offended, 
for  he  spoke  with  all  seriousness ;  and  thus  continued, 
with  equal  gravity. 

"From  these  various  instances  you  ought  now  to  be 
convinced  how  frivolous  are  your  objections.  Notwith- 
standing, we  will  proceed  with  the  subject  of  embarrassed 
persons.  For  their  relief,  several  of  our  Fathers — ^^and 
among  them  Lessius — Book  2,  Ch.  12,  N.  12,  state  '  that 
it  is  lawful  to  steal,  not  only  under  pressure  of  extreme 
want,  but  also  under  circumstances  of  heavy,  though  not 
absolute,  necessity.'  Escobar  quotes  this  also,  tr.  1,  N.  29, 
ex.  9."  "That  is  surprising,"  I  said  ;  "  there  is  nobody  in 
the  world  who  may  not  come  to  experience  this  pressing- 
necessity,  and  whom  you  would  not  in  this  way  authorize 
to  rob  with  a  safe  conscience.  And  even  if  you  were  to 
limit  the  sanction  to  those  only  who  were  really  in  such 
circumstances,  you  would  open  the  door  to  an  infinity  of 
larcenies,  which  the  judges  visit  with  punishment,  not- 
withstanding this  grave  necessity;  and  which  you  ought 
yet  more  signally  to  reprove — you,  who  are  bound  to 
uphold  in  society  not  only  the  principles  of  justice,  but  of 
charity  also,  both  which  are  overthrown  by  these  maxims. 
For,  is  it  not  a  violation  of  these  principles,  and  the 
greatest  wrong  that  can  be  inflicted,  for  one  man  to  cause 

128  LETTER   VIII. 

another  to  be  deprived  of  his  property  for  his  own  advan- 
tage ?  Thisj  at  least,  has  always  hitherto  been  my  belief." 
"  It  does  not,  however,  hold  in  all  cases,"  said  the 
Father ;  "  for  the  great  Molina  teaches.  Vol.  2,  tr.  2, 
disp.  338,  N.  8,  '  that  the  rule  of  charity  does  not  require 
that  we  forego  an  advantage  ourselves,  to  save  our  neigh- 
bour from  a  similar  loss.'  This  he  states,  in  order  to 
establish  what  he  further  advances  in  the  following  pas- 
sage, '  We  are  not  bound  in  conscience  to  make  restitu- 
tion of  property,  which  may  have  been  given  us  by 
another  person,  for  the  purpose  of  evading  his  creditors.' 
And  Lessius,  who  maintains  the  same  opinion,  confirms 
it  by  a  like  principle  in  his  2d  Book,  C.  20,  dist.  19, 
N.  168. 

"  Now  ^ou  are  not  so  considerate,"  he  continued, 
"  towards  persons  in  distressed  circumstances ;  our  Fathers 
are  more  indulgent.  They  do  equal  jus1;ice  to  the  poor 
and  the  rich.  Nay,  further,  they  are  not  unmindful  even 
of  those  who  fall  into  sin.  For  though  they  strongly 
censure  the  offenders,  they  nevertheless  do  not  hesitate  to 
inculcate,  that  property  acquired  by  evil  practices  may  be 
justifiably  retained  —  '  Quamvis  mulier  illieito  acquirat, 
licite  tamen  retinet  acquisita.'  And  to  the  same  efiect 
our  Fathers  unanimously  decide,  that  what  a  judge 
receives  from  a  party,  whose  case  is  bad,  to  induce  him 
to  give  an  unjust  decision  in  his  favour,  and  what  a  man 
of  arms  gains  for  committing  a  homicide,  and  the  money 
gained  by  other  infamous  crimes,  may  be  all  lawfully 
retained.  This  has  been  collected  by  Escobar  from 
various  of  our  authorities,  and  condensed  into  one  general 
rule,  in  tr.  3,  ex.  1,  N.  33,  as  follows ;  '  Property  gainer' 

COERUPT   DECISIONS  OF   THE  CASUISTS.  129 

by  scandalous  offences,  such  as  murder,  unjust  sentences, 
licentiousness,  &c.  becomes  a  lawful  possession,  and  is 
not  required  to  be  restored.'  And  again  tr.  5,  ex.  5, 
N.  53,  '  We  may  dispose  of  property  acquired  for  the 
commission  of  homicide,  unjust  decisions,  infamous  crimes, 
&c.,  because  the  possession  has  become  one  of  right,  and 
we  acquire  a  lawful  property  in  that  which  we  have 
ourselves  gained.' " 

"  My  worthy  Father,"  I  here  interposed,  "  I  must  say 
this  is  a  mode  of  acquisition  altogether  new  to  me ;  am  I 
to  believe  that  justice  authorizes  and  admits  as  valid  the 
reward  of  assassination,  corruption,  and  adultery  ?"  "I 
know  nothing,"  he  replied,  "of  what  law-books  may 
hold;  but  I  know  that  our  Society,  who  are  the  true 
guides  of  conscience,  affirm  what  I  have  stated.  It  is 
true,  they  except  one  case,  in  which  restitution  is  re- 
quired ;  it  is  '  when  money  has  been  received  from  such 
as  have  not  the  power  lawfully  to  dispose  of  property ; 
such  as  infants,  and  religious  orders.'  For  our  great 
Molina  excepts  them  in  t.  .1,  de  Just.  tr.  2,  disp.  94. 
'  Nisi  mulier  accepisset  ab  eo  qui  alienare  non  potest, 
ut  a  religioso  et  filio  familias.'  In  that  case  it  must 
be  restored.  Escobar  cites  this  passage  in  tr.  1,  ex.  8, 
N.  59,  and  confirms  the  opinion  in  tr.  3,  ex.  1,  N.  23. 

"  My  reverend  Father,"  I  said,  "  your  religious  orders 
are  here  better  treated  than  others."  "  Not  at  all,"  he 
replied  j  "  is  not  the  same  thing  done  by  minors  generally, 
in  which  class  members  of  religious  orders  rank  during 
the  whole  of  their  lives  ?  It  is  perfectly  just  to  except 
them.  But  in  regard  to  all  other  persons,  it  is  not 
obligatory  to  make  restitution  of  what  has  been  received 

G  5 

130  LETTER   Till. 

for  evil  actions.  Lessius  fully  proves  this  in  Ms  2d  Book, 
'  de  Just.  C.  14,  d.  8,  N.  53.'  '  For,'  says  he,  '  a  criminal 
action  may  be  estimated  by  a  price  in  money,  taking  into 
account  the  advantage  gained  by  him  vrho  causes  it  to  be 
committed,  and  the  trouble  incurred  by  him  who  commits 
it ;  and  therefore  it  is  not  compulsory  to  refund  what  has 
been  received  for  the  commission  of  the  act,  whatever  be 
its  nature — homicide,  corrupt  sentences,  impurity  (for 
there  are  instances  of  every  description,)  provided  it  has 
not  been  received  from  such  as  have  not  a  legal  power  to 
dispose  of  property.  You  will  perhaps  say  that  he  who 
receives  payment  for  an  ill  action  commits  a  sin,  and 
therefore  should  not  be. allowed  either  to  receive  or  retain 
it.  But  I  reply,  that  after  the  thing  is  done,  there  is  no 
sin  either  in  paying,  or  returning  the  payment.  The 
great  Filiutius  enters  still  more  into  detail  on  the  subject. 
He  says  *  we  are  bound  in  conscience  to  pay  on  a  different 
scale  for  actions  of  this  kind,  according  to  the  condition 
of  the  persons  committing  them ;  and  that  some  are 
entitled  to  more  than  others.  And  this  he  establishes  by 
the  soundest  reasons — tr.  31,  C.  9,  N.  33;  '  Occultse 
fornicariae  debeter  pretium  in  conscientia,  et  multo  majore 
ratione,  quilm  publicse,  Copia  enim  qxikm  occulta  facit 
mulier,.&c.  &c.  &c.' " 

He  here  showed  me,  in  the  pages  of  these  authors, 
things  of  this  description  so  detestable,  that  I  should  aot 
dare  to  transcribe  them,  and  such,  that  the  Father  was 
himself  shocked  at  them  (for  he  was  really  a  well-meaning 
man,)  although  the  respect  he  entertained  for  these 
worthies  made  him  receive  with  deference  every  thing 
that  fell  from  them.     I  remained  silent,  however,  although 

CORRUPT    DECISIONS   OF   THE   CASUISTS.  131 

less  from  a  wish  that  he  should  continue  his  details,  thaa 
from  astonishment  to  find  the  writings  of  any  religious 
men  filled  with  sentiments,  at  once  so  horrible,  so  unjust, 
and  so  absurd.  He  therefore  pursued  his  discourse  with- 
out interruption,  and  concluded  as  follows  :  "  For  these 
reasons,  our  illustrious  Molina  (T  hope  you  will  be  con- 
vinced after  this)  thus  decides  the  question ;  '  When 
money  has  been  received  for  the  commission  of  a  criminal 
act,  ought  it  to  be  restored  ?  We  must  here,'  says  this 
great  man,  '  draw  a  distinction  :  if  the  act,  for  which 
money  was  received,  has  not  been  done,  the  money  must 
be  returned ;  but  if  it  has  been  accomplished,  it  need  not 
be  :  ^  'si  non  fecit  hoc  malum,  tenetur  restituere  ;  secus, 
si  fecit ! '  This  is  cited  by  Escobar  in  tr.  3,  ex.  2, 
N.  138. 

"  These  are  some  of  our  principles  touching  restitution. 
You  have  now  had  a  good  lesson  for  one  day ;  I  should 
like  to  see  how  you  have  improved  by  it.  Answer  me 
then.  '  When  a  judge  has  received  money  from  a  party 
in  a  suit,  for  procuring  a  judgment  in  his  favour,  is  he 
bound  to  restore  it  ? '  You  will  say  '  No,'  I  replied.  "  I 
am  not  so  clear,"  he  said;  "have  I  said  any  thing  to 
that  efifect,  generally  ?  I  have  told  yoxi  he  is  not  bound 
to  make  restitution,  if  he  has  given  the  judgment  in  favour 
of  the  party  whose  right  is  not  good.  But  if  a  man  has 
right  on  his  side,  would  you  have  him  pay  for  a  decision 
in  his  favour  when  it  is  his  own  lawfully  ?  You  see  you 
are  under  a  mistake.  Don't  you  perceive  that  a  judge  is 
bound  to  do  justice,  and  therefore  ought  not  to  make  it 
matter  of  purchase ;  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  not  bound 
to  injustice,  and  therefore  may  receive  payment  for  it  ? 

132 

LETTER  VIII. 

All  our  leading  authorities  agree  in  this — Molina,  disp.  94 
and  99;  Reginaldus,  Book  10,  N.  184,  5,  7;  Filiutius, 
tr.  31,  N.  220  and  8;  Escobar,  tr.  3,  ex.  1,  N.  21  and  23; 
Lessius,  Book  2,  C.  24,  d.  8,  N.  55 — '  A  judge  is  strictly 
hound  to  restore  money  that  he  has  received  for  deciding 
justly,  provided  it  have  not  been  given  by  way  of  mere 
liberality  (per  liberality,)  but  he  is  not  bound  to  restore 
what  he  has  received  from  a  man  in  whose  favour  he  has 
given  an  unjust  judgment.' " 

I  was  amazed  at  these  fanatical  decisions ;  and  while 
reflecting  upon  their  pernicious  consequences,  the  Father 
propounded  another  question  to  me,  saying,  "  Answer  me 
now  more  circumspectly:  Is  a  man  that  has  been  en- 
gaged in  divinations  bound  to  restore  what  he  has  gained 
by  his  craft  ?  "  "  Just  as  you  please,  reverend  Father," 
I  replied.  "  As  I  please !  That  is  good :  one  would 
think,  from  your  way  of  speaking,  that  truth  was  de- 
pendent upon  our  pleasures.  I  see,  however,  you  will 
not  find  this  out  by  yourself.  Learn  now  how  Sanchez 
solves  the  difficulty — Sanchez,  remember !  First,  he 
draws  this  distinction,  Som.  Book  2.  c.  38.  N.  94,  5,  and 
6;  '  Has  the  diviner  made  use  of  astrology  and  other 
natural  means,  or  has  he  used  diabolical  arts  ?  For  in 
the  one  case  he  is  bound  to  restitution,  although  not  in 
the  other.'  Now  you  must  tell  me  which  is  that  case." 
"  There  is  no  difficulty  in  that,"  said  I.  "  I  see  what 
you  mean,"  he  rejoined  ;  "  you  think  he  ought  to  refund, 
in  the  supposition  that  he  has  been  dealing  with  demons. 
You  are  quite  wrong;  it  is  just  the  conti'ary.  This  is 
Sanchez's  solution,  in  the  same  passage  :  '  If  the  diviner 
has  not  taken  the  pains  to  ascertain  by  diabolical  means 

CORRUPT   DECISIONS   OF   THE   CASUISTS.  133 

that  whicli  lie  could  not  learn  by  any  other — si  nullam 
operam  opposuit  ut  arte  diaboli  id  sciret — he  must  make 
restitution ;  but  if  he  has  taken  the  pains  to  do  so,  he  is 
not  so  bound.^ "  "  And  how  do  you  explain  this,  my  Fa- 
ther ?  "  "  Don't  you  understand  ?  "  said  he  j  "  it  is  be- 
cause we  may  divine  by  diabolical  arts,  but  not  by  astro- 
logy, which  is  a  deceptive  system."  "  But,  my  good 
Father,  suppose  the  devil  does  not  give  a  true  answer ; 
for  there  is  no  more  truth  in  his  arts  than  in  those  of 
astrology ;  must  not  restitution  be  made  in  that  case,  and 
for  the  same  reason  ?  "  "  Not  always.  '  Distinguo,'  says 
Sanchez  on  this  point ;  '  for  if  the  diviner  be  unacquainted 
with  diabolical  arts — si  sit  artis  diahoUcce  ignorus — he  is 
bound,  in  that  case,  to  restore :  but  if  he  be  an  accom- 
plished conjurer,  and  have  done  all  that  he  could  to  get 
at  the  truth,  he  is  then  not  bound  :  in  such  a  case,  the 
diligence  of  the  diviner  is  to  be  made  a  consideration  of 
money — diligentia  a  mago  apposita  est  pretio  sestima- 
balis.' "  "  Your  plan  is  a  sensible  one,"  I  said ;  "  by 
this  means  you  will  make  the  diviners  diligent  and  ac- 
complished in  their  art ;  through  the  hope,  according  to 
your  principles,  of  making  lawful  gains  in  a  faithful  ser- 
vice of  the  public."  "  I  suspect  you  are  jesting,"  re- 
joined the  Father ;  "  that  is  very  unbecoming ;  if  you  were 
to  talk  in  this  way  where  you  were  not  known,  you  might 
be  suspected,  by  those  who  did  not  understand  you,  of 
turning  religious  matters  into  ridicule."  "  I  could  easily 
clear  myself  from  that  reproach,"  I  replied ;  "  for  I  be- 
lieve, if  any  one  were  to  take  the  trouble  to  examine  the 
real  meaning  of  my  words,  there  would  not  be  found  one 
that  did  not  imply  the  reverse ;  and  the  time  may  come 

134  LETTER   VIII. 

perhaps,  before  our  communications  close,  when  I  shall 
have  the  opportunity  of  making  it  fully  apparent."  "  Oh! 
Oh !  "  said  the  Father ;  "  you  are  not  joking  now." 
"  Indeed,"  I  replied,  "  the  reproach  that  I  was  making  a 
jest  of  sacred  things  would  be  to  me  as  painful  as  it 
would  be  unjust."  "  I  did  not  mean  exactly  to  say  as 
much  as  that ;  but  let  us  talk  a  little  more  seriously,"  he 
rejoined.  "  I  am  quite  disposed  to  do  so,"  I  replied, 
"  if  you  wish  it ;  but  it  must  rest  with  yom-self.  I  must 
confess,  however,  I  have  heard  with  surprise  that  your 
Fathers  have  so  extended  their  cares  to  all  descriptions  of 
persons,  as  to  make  regulations  for  legalizing  the  proiits 
of  soothsayers  ! "  "  We  cannot,"  he  said,  "  write  for 
too  many  sorts  of  men,  nor  particularize  too  much,  nor 
recapitulate  too  often  the  same  directions.  You  will  see 
that,  by  the  following  passage  from  one  of  our  greatest 
divines.  Judge  for  yourself ;  it  is  our  present  Pere  Pro- 
vincial, the  revered  Pere  Cellot,  in  his  8th  Book  on  the 
Hierarchy,  ch.  16.  §  2  j  '  We  know  an  instance  of  a  per- 
son,' he  says,  •  who  was  taking  a  large  sum  of  money  for 
restitution,  by  his  confessor's  order ;  and  stopping  on  his 
way  at  a  bookseller's,  asked  if  he  had  anything  new — 
'  nam  quid  novi  ? '  He  was  shown  a  new  work  on  Moral 
Theology ;  and,  turning  over  the  leaves  carelessly  and  with- 
out reflection,  he  stumbled  upon  his  own  identical  case, 
and  ascertained  that  he  was  under  no  obligation  to  make 
restitution.  Upon  which,  being  relieved  of  the  burden  of 
his  scruples,  but  retaining  that  of  his  money,  he  returned 
with  a  light  heart  to  his  home ;  '  ahjectd  scrupuli  sarcim, 
retento  auri  fondero,  levior  domum  repetiit.' 

"  Now,  say,"  he  continued,  "  whether  the  knowledge  of 

CORRUPT   DECISIONS   OF   THE   CASUISTS.  135 

our  maxims  is  not  of  some  utility  ?  Will  yon  laugh  at 
them  now  ?  Will  you  not  rather,  with  Pere  Cellot,  make 
this  pious  reflection  upon  the  fortunate  encounter ;  '  Events 
of  this  kind  are  to  be  regarded,  in  respect  of  God,  as 
proofs  of  his  providential  care  ;  in  respect  of  his  guardian 
angel,  as  an  instance  of  his  vigilance;  and  in  respect  of 
those  to  whom  they  occur,  as  the  result  of  their  predesti- 
nation. God  has  from  all  eternity  determined  that  the 
golden  chain  of  their  salvation  should  depend  upon  Cer- 
tain contingencies,  rather  than  others.  If  such  a  person 
had  not  written,  such  a  one  had  not  been  saved.  Let  us 
then  conjure,  by  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ,  those  who 
cavil  at  the  number  of  our  auth^ors,  not  to  censure  works 
which  the  eternal  election  of  the  Almighty  and  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christ  has  procured  to  be  written  for  them.' 
Sweet  words  !  by  which  this  learned  man  establishes  his 
proposition  j  how  useful  is  it  that  a  number  of  authors 
have  written  upon  moral  theology  ! — '  Quam  utile  sit  de 
Theologia  morali  multos  scribere  /' " 

"  My  Father,"  I  here  said,  "  I  will  defer  till  another 
opportunity  the  expression  of  my  opinion  upon  this  pas- 
sage, and  will  at  present  say  no  more  than  that,  as  your 
maxims  are  so  adapted  for  general  usefulness,  and  it  will 
be  so  advantageous  to  give  them  publicity,  you  must  con- 
tinue to  put  me  in  possession  of  them  j  for  I  assure  you 
that  the  friend  to  whom  I  transmit  them  will  not  fail  to 
bring  them  under  the  notice  of  very  large  numbers  of 
persons.  Under  other  circumstances  we  should  not  have 
thought  of  availing  ourselves  of  them ;  but  we  do  really 
consider  it  to  be  most  advantageous  that  the  world  should 
be  acquainted  Avith  them."    "  It  is  on  that  very  account,'' 

136  LETTER   VIII. 

he  rejoinedj  "  that  I  am  careful  to  withhold  nothing  from 
you ;  another  time  I  shall  be  willing  to  inform  you  of 
those  facilities  and  conveniences  which  our  Fathers  allow 
to  men,  in  their  passage  through  hfe,  to  render  their  sal- 
vation easy,  and  soften  the  gloom  of  devotion.  In  this 
way,  having  learnt  what  concerns  each  particular  condition 
of  society,  you  will  understand  every  thing  relating  to  men 
in  general,  and  acquire  a  perfect  insight  into  our  system." 
Having  said  this,  the  Father  left  me.     I  remain,  &c. 

P.  S.  I  have  continually  forgotten  to  say,  there  are 
several  editions  of  Escobar.  If  you  purchase  one,  get 
that  of  Lyons,  which  has^n  the  frontispiece  a  lamb  stand- 
ing over  a  book  sealed  with  seven  seals ;  or  else  that  of 
Brussels  of  1651.  As  these  are  the  latest,  they  are  more 
accurate  and  copious,  than  the  earlier  editions  of  Lyons 
of  the  years  1644  and  1646. 

*^*  Subsequent  to  all  the  above-mentioned,  there  was 
a  new  edition  published  at  Paris  by  Pegit,  more  accurate 
than  any  of  its  predecessors.  But  the  opinions  of  Escobar 
may  be  still  better  learnt  from  the  Grande  Theologie  Morale 
published  at  Lyons.    (Ed.) 

LETTER  IX. 

ON  THE  FALSE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  VIRGIN  MARY  INTRO- 
DUCED BY  THE  JESUITS.  VARIOUS  FACILITIES  IN- 
VENTED BY  THEM  FOR  ATTAINING  SALVATION  WITH- 
OUT LABOUR,  AND  AMIDST  THE  CONVENIENCES  AND 
ENGAGEMENTS  OF  LIFE.  THEIR  MAXIMS  IN  REGARD 
TO  AMBITION^  ENVY,  GLUTTONY,  EQUIVOCATION, 
MENTAL  RESERVATION,  INDULGENCES  ALLOWED  TO 
FEMALES  AND  THEIR  DRESS,    GAMING,    HEARING  MASS. 

Sir.  Paris,  July  3,  1656. 

I  cannot  give  you  any  better  salutation  than  that  with 
which  the  good  Father  greeted  me  the  last  time  I  saw 
him.  As  soon  as  he  perceived  me,  he  said,  looking  at  a 
book  which  he  held  in  his  hands ;  "  If  any  one  had  the 
power  of  opening  to  you  the  gates  of  Paradise,  would  he 
not  render  you  an  invaluable  service  ?  "Would  you  not 
give  millions  to  possess  a  key,  by  which  you  could  enter 
in  at  your  pleasure  ?  There  is  no  occasion  to  incur  aHy 
expense  :  here  is  one — nay  a  hundred,  far  more  service- 
able." I  was  not  aware  whether  the  Father  was  reading, 
or  whether  these  were  his  own  words ;  but  he  soon  set 
me  right :  "  These  are  the  opening  words  of  an  admirable 
work  of  Pere  Bauny,  a  member  of  our  Society ;  for  I  give 

138  LETTER   IX. 

you  nothing  of  my  own."  "  What  work  ? "  I  asked. 
"  This  is  its  title ;  '  Paradise  opened  to  Philagie ; '  by 
means  of  100  formularies  of  devotion  easy  to  be  per- 
formed, addressed  to  the  Mother  of  God."  "  What !  my 
Father,  each  of  these  easy  prayers  suf&cient  to  open 
heaven."  "Yes,"  he  replied;  "see  it  made  plain  in 
the  words  that  follow, '  Each  of  the  prayers  to  the  Mother 
of  God,  which  you  will  find  in  this  book,  is  a  key  of  heaven 
to  open  to  you  the  whole  of  Paradise,  provided  you  duly 
perform  it.''  And  further,  he  says  in  conclusion,  '  he 
will  be  satisfied,  if  only  one  of  the  formularies  be  re- 
peated.' " 

'•  Let  me  then  hear  one  of  the  easiest,  my  Father,"  I 
said.  "  They  are  all  easy,"  he  replied ;  for  "  instance, 
'  Salute  the  image  of  the  Virgin ;  repeat  the  little  chaplet 
'Des  Dix  Plaisirs'  of  the  holy  Maryj  often  repeat  her 
name ;  give  a  commission  to  the  angels  to  do  homage  to 
her  for  us ;  wish  more  churches  built  to  her  than  all 
Sovereigns  have  hitherto  built;  wish  her  '  Good  morning' 
and  '  Good  evening '  at  the  beginning  and  close  of  the 
day ;  repeat  every  day  '  Ave  Maria '  in  honour  of  the 
Virgin's  heart.'  And  he  affirms  that  this  act  of  devotion 
fails  not  to  secure  tis  a  place  in  the  heart  of  the  Virgin." 
"  Provided,  I  suppose,  that  our  heart  be  previously  given 
to  her  ?  "  "  That  is  not  necessary,"  he  replied,  "  in  the 
case  of  a  person  not  yet  sufficiently  detached  from  the 
world.  Listen  again  :  '  Heart  for  heart  is  indeed  what 
ought  to  be  yielded ;  but  yours,  I  may  suppose,  is  a  little 
too  much  attached — clings  somewhat  too  fast  to  the  crea- 
ture ;  I  dare  not  therefore  ask  you,  at  the  present  time, 
to  surrender  that  little  vassal  that  you  call  your  heart.' 

FALSE   WORSHIP   OP   THE   VIRGIN   MARY.  139 

So  he  contents  himself  with  asking  only  for  the  Ave  Ma- 
rias which  he  had  before  enjoined.  These  are  found  in 
the  formularies  at  pages  33,  59,  145,  156,  172,  258,  and 
420  in  the  first  edition."  "  This  is  all  admirably  conve- 
nient," I  said ;  "  surely,  no  one  can  be  damned  after 
this  !  "  "  Alas  !  "  replied  the  "Father,  "  I  see  you  are  not 
aware,  how  hard  are  the  hearts  of  some.  There  are  per- 
sons who  will  not  even  give  themselves  the  trouble  to  re- 
peat daily  these  two  little  words,  '  Bonjour,  Bonsoir,' 
because  they  require  a  certain  effort  of  memory.  And  on 
this  account  Pcre  Bauny  has  been  obliged  to  furnish  them 
with  some  still  easier  methods ;  such  as  to  carry  day  and 
night  a  chaplet  on  the  arm,  in  the  form  of  a  bracelet,  or 
wear  a  rosary,  or  even  an  image  of  the  Virgin.  This  is 
found  at  pages  14,  326,  and  449,  You  will  not  say  now 
that  I  have  not  furnished  you  with  easy  means  of  gaining 
the  favor  of  the  blessed  Virgin,  as  says  Pere  Bauny, 
p.  100."  "  Very  easy  indeed,  my  excellent  Father,"  I 
replied.  "  Why,"  continued  he,  "  it  is  all  that  could  be 
done ;  and  I  should  think  that  it  is  sufficient :  he  must  be 
a  scape-grace  indeed  that  could  not  find  in  all  his  life-time 
a  single  moment  to  put  a  chaplet  upon  his  arm,  or  take 
a  rosary  out  of  his  pocket,  and  thus  secure  his  salvation 
with  such  certainty,  that  those  who  have  tried  it  have 
never  failed  in  the  experiment,  let  them  have  lived  as  they 
will :  although  we  always  recommend  them  not  to  fail  to 
live  a  good  life.  I  will  give  you  only  one  example  (at 
page  34).  It  is  of  a  woman,  who  performed  every  day 
the  devotional  exercise  of  saluting  the  images  of  the  Vir- 
gin, while  she  passed  all  her  life  in  a  state  of  mortal  sin, 
and  died  in  the  same;  yet  was  she  infallibly  saved  by  the 

140  LETTER  IX. 

merit  of  this  act  of  devotion."  "And  how  was  this?" 
I  demanded.  "  Because  our  Lord  expressly  undertook 
to  achieve  her  resurrection,"  was  the  reply.  "  So  certain 
it  is  that  none  can  perish  who  perform  any  of  these  devo- 
tional acts." 

"  I  well  knowj  my  Father,"  I  remarked,  "  that  these 
devotions  to  the  Virgin  are  a  powerful  instrument  of  sal- 
vation J  and  that  the  smallest  of  them  possess  great  effi- 
cacy, when  they  proceed  upon  principles  of  faith  and 
charity ;  as  has  been  seen  in  the  case  of  the  holy  men 
who  have  practised  them.  But  to  teach  such  as  perform 
them,  that,  without  forsaking  their  sinfulness  of  life,  they 
shall  at  their  death  be  converted,  and  afterwards  raised 
to  glory,  appears  to  me  more  calculated  to  encourage 
sinners  in  their  evil  ways,  by  a  false  peace  and  rash  security, 
than  to  wean  them  from  their  sins  by  that  true  conversion 
which  grace  alone  can  effect."  "  What  does  it  matter," 
replied  the  Father,  "  by  what  means  we  enter  into  para- 
dise, provided  we  do  get  there  ?  As  says,  on  a  similar 
subject,  our  celebrated  Father  Benet,  formerly  our  Pro- 
vincial, in  his  excellent  work  on  the  marks  of  Predestina- 
tion, N.  31,  p.  130,  14th  edition,  '  What  does  it  matter, 
whether  by  a  leap  or  a  flight,  provided  we  enter  the  city 
of  glory  ? '  as  he  says  again  in  the  same  place."  "  Cer- 
tainly," I  replied,  "  it  is  of  no  importance ;  but  the  ques- 
tion is,  Do  we  enter  there  ?  "  "  The  Virgin  replies  for 
us  ;  you  will  see  it  in  the  concluding  words  of  P^re 
Bauny's  book ;  '  If  it  should  chance  in  your  last  moments 
that  the  enemy  should  claim  you,  and  the  little  internal 
republic  of  the  mind  be  troubled,  say  only,  the  Blessed 
Mary  shall  answer  for  you ;  and  it  is  to  her  that  he  must 

FALSE   WORSHIP   OF    THE   VIRGIN   MARY.  141 

address  himself.' "  "  Butj  my  Father,  if  this  point  were  to 
be  pressed  further,  it  might  be  embarrassing.  Who  is  to 
assure  them  that  the  Virgin  thus  answers  for  them  ?  " 
"  Pere  Bauny,"  he  rejoined,  "  answers  for  her  :  '  As  for 
the  benefit  to  accrue  to  you  1  will  be  answerable,  and  will 
pledge  myself  for  the  Holy  Mother.'  ■"  "  But,  my  good 
Father,  who  will  be  answerable  for  Pfere  Bauny  ? " 
"  Who  ?  "  cried  he ;  "  why  he  is  a  member  of  our  So- 
ciety ;  don't  you  know  that  our  Society  is  answerable  for 
all  the  writings  of  its  members  ?  You  ought  to  be  aware 
of  this — it  is  important.  There  is  an  order  of  the  Society, 
forbidding  all  booksellers  to  publish  any  work  of  the  Fa- 
thers without  the  approbation  of  the  Fraternity's  theolo- 
gians and  the  permission  of  the  Superiors  :  it  is  a  regulation 
passed  by  Henry  III.,  dated  10th  May,  1583,  and  con- 
firmed by  Henry  IV.,  30th  Dec.  1603,  and  by  Louis 
XIII.,  14th  Feb.  1613;  so  that  our  whole  body  is  re- 
sponsible for  the  writings  of  each  of  our  Fathers.  This 
is  peculiar  to  our  Order  ;  and  in  consequence  of  this,  no 
works  emanate  from  us  but  what  are  imbued  with  the 
spirit  of  the  Society.  I  repeat,  it  is  proper  you  should  be 
informed  of  this."  "  You  are  very  obliging,  my  good 
Father ;  I  am  only  sorry  I  did  not  know  it  before :  this 
information  will  induce  me  to  pay  still  more  attention  to 
your  writers.''  "  I  should  have  mentioned  it  before  if  I 
had  had  an  opportunity,"  he  answered ;  "  but  you  will 
remember  it  now :  let  us  resume  our  subject. 

"  I  think  I  have  now  furnished  you  with  methods  of 
assuring  ourselves  of  our  salvation,  sufficiently  easy,  safe, 
and  numerous.  But  our  Fathers  have  been  desirous  that 
we  should  not  rest  at  this  early  stage,  in  which  nothing 

143  LETTER   IX. 

more  is  accomplished  than  just  what  is  strictly  necessary 
for  safety.  As  they  unceasingly  aim  at  promoting  the 
glory  of  God,  they  endeavour  to  elevate  mankind  to  the 
highest  degrees  of  piety.  And  since  worldly  persons  are 
usually  deterred  from  habits  of  devotion,  by  false  ideas, 
which  they  have  imbibed  respecting  them,  it  has  been 
considered  of  the  utmost  importance  to  get  rid  of  this 
primary  obstacle.  On  this  account,  the  Pere  Le  Moine 
has  acquired  a  distinguished  reputation,  by  the  work  he 
has  compiled  with  this  view — '  Devotion  made  Easy.'  He 
has  here  drawn  a  most  delightful  picture  of  pious  habits. 
No  one  has  ever  described  them  so  well.  Hear  the 
opening  words  of  his  work  :  '  Virtue  has  never  yet  been 
properly  exhibited  to  the  world;  no  one  has  ever  justly 
delineated  her.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  so  few 
have  sought  to  obtain  a  resting-place  upon  her  firm  foun- 
dations. She  has  been  represented  as  delighting  only  in 
gloom  and  solitude ;  her  associations  have  ever  been  sor- 
row and  toil ;  and  she  has  been  held  out  as  the  enemy  of 
pleasure  and  amusement,  which  are  the  bloom  of  happi- 
ness, and  the  zest  of  life.'  You  will  find  the  passage  at 
page  92." 

"  But,  my  Father,"  I  said,  "  there  certainly  have  been 
eminent  saints,  whose  lives  have  been  highly  austere." 
"  Doubtless,"  said  he,  "  but  on  the  other  hand,  there 
have  always  been,  as  our  author  says  (page  191),  '  polished 
saints,  and  cultivated  devotees ; '  and  you  will  find  from 
what  is  said  at  p.  86,  that  the  difl'erence  in  their  manners 
arises  merely  from  diversity  of  tastes.  Listen  again  :  '  I 
do  not  deny  that  there  are  always  to  be  found  pale  and 
melancholy  Pietists,  lovers  of  silence  and  solitude,  phleg- 

FALSE   WORSHIP   OP   THE   VIRGIN   MARY.  143 

matic  in  temperament,  and  clayey  of  nature.  But  there 
are  others  also  of  more  joyous  dispositions,  abounding  in 
warm  and  convivial  tempers,  and  vi^hose  general  constitu- 
tion sympathizes  vfith  pleasure.' 

"  You  see  by  this,  that  the  love  of  retirement  and  me- 
ditation is  not  universal  with  devout  persons ;  and,  as  I 
said,  is  more  the  effect  of  natural  temper  than  of  piety. 
Instead  of  this,  the  austere  habits  of  which  you  speak  are 
rather  the  characteristics  of  a  savage  and  misanthropical 
nature ;  and  thus  you  will  find  them  classed  with  the  rude 
and  eccentric  manners  of  melancholy  extravagance,  in  the 
description  which  Pere  Le  Moine  gives  of  them  in  the 
7th  Book  of  his  Moral  Portraits.  These  are  some  passages  : 
'  He  has  no  eyes  for  the  beauties  of  art  and  nature.  He 
would  fancy  himself  insupportably  oppressed,  if  he  al- 
lowed any  object  to  yield  him  pleasure.  During  festivals 
he  seeks  converse  with  the  dead.  He  has,  on  such  occa- 
sions, more  satisfaction  in  concealing  himself  in  the  trunk 
of  an  old  tree,  or  the  shades  of  a  cavern,  than  in  glittering 
in  a  palace  or  on  a  throne.  To  affronts  and  injuries  he 
is  as  insensible  as  a  statue.  The  world's  honour  and 
glory  are  idols  unknown  to  and  un worshipped  by  him. 
Beauty  disturbs  him  like  an  apparition,  and  those  impe- 
rious and  despotic  forms,  those  seductive  tyrants,  who 
draw  all  other  men  in  willing  bondage,  have  no  more 
power  over  him  than  the  sun  upon  the  eyes  of  the  owl ; ' 
&c.  &c." 

"  My  reverend  Father,  believe  me,  if  you  had  not  told 
me  that  the  Pere  Le  Moine  was  the  author  of  this  por- 
trait, T  should  have  said  it  was  drawn  by  some  ribald 
infidel,  seeking  to  turn  the  saints  into  ridicule.     For  if 

144  LETTER   IX. 

this  be  not  the  description  of  a  man  detached  from  all  the 
objects  which  the  gospel  enjoins  him  to  renounce,  I  con- 
fess I  know  nothing  about  the  matter."  "  You  will  see 
then  how  little  you  do  understand  it/'  he  replied ;  "  these 
are  '  marks  of  a  feeble  and  untutored  mind,  destitute  of 
the  cheerful  and  natural  affections  which  it  ought  to  pos- 
sess/ as  Pere  Le  Moine  says,  at  the  close  of  his  descrip- 
tion. It  is  in  this  way  that  he  '  teaches  virtue  and 
Christian  philosophy,'  according  to  the  design  of  the  work 
in  question,  as  explained  in  the  preface.  And>  in  truth, 
it  cannot  be  denied  that  this  method  of  inculcating  de- 
votion suits  the  world  far  better  than  that  which  has  been 
hitherto  practised."  "  It  is  not  to  be  doubted,"  I  said. 
"  And  you  will  see  it  more  clearly  still  as  we  proceed.  I 
have  only  as  yet  spoken  of  piety  in  general ;  but  to  show 
how  our  Fathers  have  taken  pains  to  lighten  its  difficulties, 
is  it  not  a  most  comfortable  thing  for  the  ambitious  to 
find  that  they  may  maintain  true  devotion,  together  with 
an  unlimited  love  of  aggrandizement  ?  "  "  What,  my 
Father  !  "  I  exclaimed ;  "  to  whatever  extreme  they  may 
carry  it  ?  "  "  Certainly,"  he  replied ;  for  it  would  be 
only  a  venial  sin,  unless  honours  were  sought  to  such  a 
degree  as  to  be  offensive  to  God,  or  injurious  to  the  state. 
Now  venial  offences  are  not  incompatible  with  devotion, 
since  the  greatest  saints  are  not  exempt  from  them. 
Hear  what  Escobar  says,  tr.  2.  ex.  2.  N.  17.  '  Ambition, 
which  is  an  inordinate  desire  of  office  and  honours,  is  in 
itself  a  venial  sin  ;  but  if  these  honours  be  sought  to  the 
injury  of  the  state,  or  more  properly  speaking,  to  the  dis^ 
pleasure  of  God,  these  adventitious  circumstances  render  it 
mortal,' " 

FALSE   WORSHIP   OF   THE   VIRGIN   MARY.  145 

"  This  is  certainly  very  convenient,  my  Father."  "  And 
again,"  he  continued,  "  is  not  that  a  consolatory  doctrine 
for  the  avaricious  which  is  laid  down  by  Escobar,  tr.  5, 
ex.  5,  N.  154;  '  I  am  persuaded  that  it  is  not  a  mortal 
sin  for  the  rich  to  omit  to  give  of  their  superfluity,  to 
relieve  the  pressing  necessities  of  the  poor : '  '  scio  in 
gravi  pauperum  necessitate,  divites  nou  dando  superflua, 
non  peccare  mortaliter.' "  "  Really,"  said  I,  "  if  this  be 
true,  I  see  clearly  that  I  shall  not  know  whether  I  have 
ever  committed  a  sin  at  all."  "  To  prove  my  point  still 
more  plainly,"  he  continued,  "  would  you  not  think  that 
an  inordinate  opinion  of  our  merits,  and  complacency  in 
our  works,  is  a  dangerous  sin  ?  And  would  you  not  be 
surprized  to  learn  that,  even  if  our  self-conceit  were  quite 
unfounded,  so  far  from  an  ofi^ence,  it  is  to  be  regarded  as 
a  gift  of  God?"  "  Is  it  possible  !  "  "Indeed  it  is;  and 
it  is  thus  taught  by  the  famous  Pere  Gurasse,  in  his  work 
in  French,  entitled  '  Summary  of  the  chief  traths  of 
Religion,^  part  2,  p.  419.  '  It  is  a  result  of  commutative 
justice,  that  all  honest  labour  is  recompensed  either  by 
praise  from  others,  or  by  self-satisfaction.  When  men  of 
exalted  minds  produce  some  excellent  work,  they  are 
justly  rewarded  by  the  public  praise.  But  when  one  of 
humble  capacity  labours  much  in  the  production  of  some- 
thing of  little  value,  and  beneath  the  notice  of  the  public  ; 
that  his  labours  may  not  remain  without  compensation, 
God  confers  upon  him  a  feeling  of  personal  satisfaction, 
which  could  not  be  grudged  him  without  the  grossest 
injustice.  In  this  way  the  impartial  beneficence  of  its 
Maker  gives  even  to  the  poor  frog  a  kind  of  satisfaction  in 
its  dissonant  croak." 

146 

LETTER   IX. 

"  These  are,  indeed/'  I  said,  "  admirable  justifications 
of  vanity,  ambition,  and  avarice.  And  as  for  envy,  my 
good  Father,  would  it  be  more  difficult  to  excuse  that 
failing  ?  "  "  This  is  a  matter  of  delicacy.  We  must  here 
resort  to  the  distinction  of  the  Pere  Bauny  in  his  '  Sum- 
mary of  Sins.'  His  opinion  upon  this  point,  C.  7,  p.  123, 
5  th  and  6th  Editions,  is,  '  Envy  of  the  spiritual  welfare  of 
another  is  a  mortal  sin,  but  envy  of  his  temporal  good  is 
only  venial.'  "  "  For  what  reason,  I  pray  ?  "  "  Listen," 
he  said ; — "  For  the  good  that  is  found  in  temporal  things 
is  so  slender  and  unimportant,  as  to  be  of  no  consideration 
with  God  and  the  saints."  "  But,  my  Father,"  I  rejoined, 
"  if  this  good  is  so  slight  and  inconsiderable,  how  is  it 
that  you  allow  a  man's  life  to  be  taken  for  its  preserva- 
tion ?  "  "  You  misconceive  me,"  he  replied  :  "  the  un- 
importance is  in  the  sight  of  God,  not  of  man."  "  I  did 
not  think  of  that,"  I  rejoined ;  "  all  I  hope  is,  that  through 
these  distinctions,  no  mortal  sins  will  be  left  in  the  world." 
"  Don't  suppose  any  thing  of  the  kind,"  the  Father  said  ; 
"  there  are  some  sins  that  are  ever  mortal  in  their  nature ; 
for  instance,  indolence." 

"  Why  so,  my  Father  ?,"  I  asked. 

"  Wait  a  little,"  he  replied ;  "  hear  Escobar's  definition 
of  this  vice,  given  at  tr.  3,  ex.  3,  N.  81,  and  you  will  know 
why :  '  Indolence  is  a  species  of  sadness,  on  account  of 
spiritual  things  being  spiritual,  in  the  same  way  as  repining 
at  the  sacraments  for  their  being  the  appointed  source  of 
grace ;  and  this  is  a  mortal  sin.' "  "  Well !  "  I  remarked, 
"  I  suspect  no  one  will  ever  be  convicted  of  indolence  at 
this  rate."  "  Therefore,"  said  he,  "  Escobar  remarks, 
'  I  acknowledge  that  few  persons  in  reality  fall  into  the 

ON   EATING.  147 

guilt  of  indolence.'  You  see  now,"  the  Father  con- 
tinued, "  the  importance  of  correct  definitions."  "  Yes, 
indeed ;  and  I  remember  also  your  other  definitions,  of 
assassination,  ambuscades,  and  superfluous  wealth.  But 
do  you  not  extend  this  method  to  other  cases,  and  give 
definitions,  after  the  same  fashion,  to  every  description  of 
vice  ?  By  that  means,  we  might  enjoy  all  our  pleasures 
without  the  commission  of  sin." 

"  It  is  not  always  necessary,"  he  replied,  "  to  change 
the  definitions  of  things  for  that  purpose.  You  will  see 
this  illustrated  in  respect  to  good  eating,  which  is  con- 
sidered one  of  the  chief  pleasures  of  life,  and  which 
Escobar  sanctions  in  this  manner  in  his  '  Practice  of  the 
Society,'  N.  202 ;  '  Is  it  lawful  to  eat  and  drink  to 
satiety,  without  necessity,  and  for  pleasure  alone  ?  Yes, 
certainly,  according  to  Sanchez,  provided  health  be  not 
injured;  because  it  is  allowed  to  indulge  the  natural 
appetites  in  their  proper  satisfactions :  '  an  comedere  et 
bibere  usque  ad  satietatem,  absque  necessitate,  ob  solam 
voluptatem,  sit  peccatum  ?  Cum  Sanctio  negative  respon- 
deo,  modonon  obsit  valetudini,  quia  licite  potest  appetitus 
naturalis  suis  actibus  frui.'"  "  Truly,  my  Father,"  I 
here  exclaimed,  "  this  is  the  completest  passage  yet  pro- 
duced, and  the  most  perfect  principle  in  your  moral 
system  for  the  production  of  convenient  practice.  So, 
gluttony  is  not  even  a  venial  offence."  "  Not  in  the  way 
I  have  stated :  but  it  would  be  venial  according  to 
Escobar,  N.  56,  '  If,  without  necessity,  we  were  to  eat 
and  drink  to  such  a  degree  as  to  cause  sickness :  '  si  quis 
se  usque  ad  vomitum  ingurgitet.' 

"Enough,  however,  on  this  subject,"  he  continued; 

H  2 

1'^'8  LETTER   IX. 

"  I  will  now  acquaint  you  with  the  facilities  we  have  fur- 
nished for  avoiding  the  commission  of  sin  in  intercourse 
with  the  world,  and  in  matters  of  pleasure. 

"  One  of  the  greatest  difficulties  people  experience,  is 
to  avoid  falsehood,  especially  when  it  is  wished  to  convey 
the  behef  of  something  untrue.  Eor  this  purpose,  our 
s.ystem  of  equivocation  is  admirably  adapted ;  by  which 
'  it  is  allowed  to  make  use  of  ambiguous  expressions,  to 
be  understood  in  a  sense  different  from  that  in  which  we 
use  them  •/  as  is  stated  by  Sanchez,  Op.  Mor.  p.  2, 
Book  3,  Ch.  6,  N.  13."  "  I  am  aware  of  this,"  I  said. 
"  Why  yes,  we  have  circulated  this  doctrine  so  largely, 
that  every  one  is  acquainted  with  it.  But  do  you  know 
what  ought  to  be  done  when  you  cannot  find  equivocal 
terms  ?  "  "I  cannot  say  I  do."  "  I  thought  so,"  he 
replied  :  "  this  point  is  new ;  it  is  the  doctrine  of  '  mental 
reservation.'  Sanchez  lays  it  down  in  the  same  place ; 
'  We  may  swear,'  he  says,  '  that  we  have  not  done  a 
certain  thing,  although  we  actually  have  done  it ;  by  an 
understanding,  in  our  own  minds,  that  it  was  not  done  on 
a  given  day,  or  before  we  were  born,  or  any  similar  cir- 
cumstance, secretly  understood,  without  using  any  words 
which  may  actually  be  so  interpreted  :  this  is  convenient 
in  many  situations,  and  is  most  especially  justifiable  for 
the  preservation  of  health,  honour,  or  property.' " 

"  What !  my  Father,  and  this  not  falsehood  or  per- 
jury!" "No,"  he  replied;  "Sanchez  demonstrates  it 
in  the  same  passage,  and  Pere  Filiutius  also,  tr.  35, 
Ch.  11,  N.  331;  '  for,'  says  he,  'it  is  the  intention  that 
regulates  the  quality  of  the  action.'  And  at  N.  338,  he 
gives  another  method  of  avoiding  falsehood ;  it  is,  after 

ON   FALSEHOOD.  149 

saying  aloud.  '  I  swear  that  I  did  not  do  so  and  so/  to 
add  in  a  low  tonCj  '  to-day  ;  '  or  after  saying  aloud,  '  I 
swear/  to  whisperj  '  that  I  say ; '  and  then  to  continue 
aloud,  '  that  I  did  not  do  so.'  You  see  clearly  that  this 
is  saying  the  truth."  "  I  certainly  do,"  I  replied  ;  "  or 
at  least  it  is  saying  the  truth  '  in  a  whisper,'  and  a  lie 
'  aloud.'  But  may  it  not  be  feared  that  all  persons  might 
not  have  sufficient  presence  of  mind  to  avail  themselves 
of  these  methods  ? "  "  Our  Fathers,"  he  said,  "  have 
provided  for  the  case  of  such,  that  it  is  enough  to  avoid  a 
lie,  to  say  simply  '  they  have  not  done '  that  which  they 
really  have  done,  provided  they  have  a  general  intention 
of  using  the  words  in  a  sense  whioh  more  expert  persons 
would  give  them." 

"  Now  confess,"  the  Father  continued,  "  that  you 
have  been  often  in  situations  of  difficulty  for  want  of 
knowing  all  this  ?  "  "  Occasionally,"  I  replied.  "  And 
do  you  not  allow  that  it  would  be  then  highly  convenient 
to  have  a  conscientious  dispensation  from  keeping  your 
word?"  "The  greatest  convenience  in  the  world." 
"  Then  hear  the  general  rule  laid  down  by  Escobar,  tr.  3, 
ex.  3,  N.  48  ;  '  Promises  are  not  obligatory,  when  we  do 
not  intend  to  bind  ourselves  in  making  them.  Now  we 
never  can  be  held  to  have  such  an  intention,  unless  we 
confirm  it  by  an  oath  or  an  agreement ;  to  wit,  when  we 
say  simply  '  I  will  do  so,'  we  mean  unless  we  change  our 
mind ;  for  no  one  ought  to  have  his  free-will  fettered.' 
He  gives  other  cases  which  you  can  see  for  yourself,  and 
concludes,  '  All  this  is  taken  from.  Molina  and  our  other 
authorities : '  '  Omnia  ex  Molina  et  aliis.'  And  so  no 
doubt  can  remain  on  the  subject." 

150  LETTER   IX. 

"Well!  my  excellent   Father,"  I  exclaimed,  "I  cer- 
tainly did  not  know  till  now  that  our  private  intention 
had  the  power  to  invalidate  our  promises."     "  You  see 
now,  however,"  he  rejoined,  "  its  extreme  advantage  in 
our  commerce  with  the  world.    But  what  has  given  us  the 
most  labour  has   been  to   regulate  the   communications 
between  the  sexes ;  for  our  Fathers  are  highly  rigid  on 
the  subject  of  modesty.     Not  that  they  do  not  entertain 
certain  delicate  questions,  and  with  sufficient  indulgence." 
It  was  now,  my  friend,  that  I  learnt  from  him  some  of 
the  most  extraordinary  cases  that  can  be  imagined,  and 
enough  to  fill  several  letters :  but  I  shall  content  myself 
with  noting  the  quotations,  for  you  show  my  letters  to 
every  one,   and  I  should  not  wish  that  such  topics  should 
be  turned  into  mere  matter  of  amusement. 

The  only  thing  I  can  mark  for  you  of  what  he  showed 
me  in  these  works  (even  such  as  were  in  French)  is  what 
you  will  find   in  the  '  Summary  of  Offences,'  by  Pere 
Bauny,  p.  165,  on  certain  intimacies ;  which  he  explains 
(provided  the  intention  be  properly  regulated)  as  merely 
supporting  the  character  of  a  man  of  plfeasure  ;*  and  you 
will  be  surprised  to  find  at  p.  148,  a  principle  of  morahty 
respecting   the  right,  which  he   alleges  is  possessed  by 
daughters,  to  dispose  of  their  persons,  without  the  consent 
of  their  parents.    These  are  his  words ;  "  When  this  takes 
place  with  the  free-will  of  the  daughter,  although  the 
father  may  lament  it,  it  cannot  be  maintained  that  the 
said  daughter,  or  he  who  has  seduced  her,  has  done  such 
father  an  injury,  or  violated,   in   respect  of  him,  the  rules 

*  '  Comme  a  passer  pour  galant.'  (Fr.) 

ON   CHASTITY.  151 

of  justice  J  for  the  daughter  is  owner  of  her  own  person^ 
and  may  do  as  she  will  with  it,  short  of  death  or  the  excision 
of  any  of  her  limbs."  You  may  judge  from  this  specimen 
of  the  nature  of  the  rest. 

I  called  to  mind,  here,  a  passage  from  a  heathen  poet 
on  this  subject,  who  shows  himself  a  better  casuist  than 
these  Fathers.  "  The  person  of  a  daughter  is  not  wholly 
her  own ;  one  part  belongs  to  her  father,  and  one  to  her 
mother ;  and  without  their  consent  she  has  no  power  over 
herself,  not  even  in  regard  to  marriage."  And  I  doubt 
whether  any  judge  could  be  found,  who  would  not  uphold, 
as  law,  the  very  opposite  of  Pere  Bauny's  position. 

This  is  all  that  I  can  allow  myself  to  report  of  these 
communications,  which'  lasted  so  long,  that  T  was  obliged 
to  request  the  conversation  might  be  changed.  He  did 
so,  and  then  apprized  me  of  their  rules  for  the  adjustment 
of  female  dress  :  "  We  are  not  referring  here,"  he  said, 
"  to  such  as  entertain  immodest  designs,  but  to  a  different 
class  of  females  ;  and  Escobar  says,  tr.  1,  ex.  8,  N.  5 ;  'If 
dress  be  indulged  in,  not  with  any  ill  intention,  but 
merely  from  a  natural  inclination  to  vanity — '  oh  natura- 
lemfastHs  incUnationem' — it  is  ^either  a  venial  sin,  or 
no  sin  at  all.'  And  Pere  Bauny,  in  his  '  Summary  of 
Sins,'  ch.  46,  p.  1094,  says,  '  Even  if  a  female  be  aware 
of  the  dangerous  eiFect  both  to  the  body  and  soul  of  be- 
holders, by  her  elaborate  style  of  dress,  decked  with  rich 
and  elegant  attire,  she  commits  no  sin  in  practising  it.' 
And  he  quotes,  among  others,  Pere  Sanchez,  as  holding 
the  same  opinion." 

"  But,  my  Father,"  I  asked,  "  what  do  your  authorities 
say   to    those   passages    of   Scripture   which   censure    so 

JS2  LETTER   IX. 

Strongly  the  least  indulgence  of  this  kind  ? "  *  "  Les- 
sius,"  he  answered,  "  has  very  acutely  settled  that  point, 
De  Just.  Book  4,  C.  4,  d.  14,  N.  114,  in  what  follows: 
'  Those  passages  of  Scripture  were  only  intended  as  direc- 
tions to  the  females  of  that  particular  period,  that  their 
modesty  might  set  an  edifying  example  to  the  heathen.'  " 
"  And  where  does  he  find  this  ?  "  "  No  matter  where  he 
finds  it,"  was  the  reply ;  "  it  is  sufficient  that  the  opinions 
of  these  great  men  have  always  '  probability  '  on  their 
side.  However  the  Pere  Le  Plaine  has  somewhat  modi- 
fied the  general  permission ;  for  he  is  by  no  means  willing 
to  extend  it  to  the  old  ;  you  will  find  this,  he  says,  in 
his  '  Easy  Devotion,'  among  other  places,  at  pp.  137,  157, 
and  163;  'In  youth,'  he  says,  'dress  is  natural  and 
allowable ;  it  becomes  that  period,  which  is  the  flower  and 
spring-time  of  our  years.  But  there  must  be  its  limit ; 
roses  are  unseasonable  upon  snow.  It  is  only  the  bright 
luminaries  of  fashion  that  should  perpetually  blaze  in  the 
ball-room — gay  beings  that  seem  endowed  with  the  gift 
of  perpetual  youth.  The  best  thing  to  be  done,  as  years 
advance,  is  to  take  counsel  of  reason,  and  our  looking- 
glass  ;  to  yield  to  decorum,  and  necessity  ;  and  to  retire 
from  observation,  as  the  shades  of  night  approach.'  " 
"  That  is  certainly  judicious,"  I  remarked.  "  But,"  con- 
tinued he,  "  that  you  may  see  how  our  Fathers  have  ex- 
tended their  soHcitudes  to  all  cases,  I  must  tell  you  that, 
as  they  give  permission  to  females,  to  play,  and  yet,  re- 
membered, that  in  many  instances  the  license  would  be 
useless  unless  they  furnished   them  also  with  necessary 

*  Isaiah  iii.  1 6.    J  Peter  iii.  3,  &c. 

ON   THE   MASS.  133 

means,  they  have  laid  down  another  rule  in  their  favor, 
as  you  will  see  in  Escobar,  Ch.  du  Luvein,  tr.  1,  ex.  91, 
N.  13.  '  A  woman,'  he  says,  '  may  play,  and  may  ap- 
propriate for  the  purpose,  her  husband's  money.' " 

"  Admirable  again  !  "  I  exclaimed.  "  Yes,  and  there 
are  many  other  things  still ;  but  we  must  pass  them  over, 
to  mention  some  maxims  of  yet  more  importance,  for  faci- 
litating the  performance  of  holy  offices ;  as,  for  example, 
the  manner  of  joining  in  the  Mass.  Our  great  theolo- 
gian, Gaspard  Hurtado,  de  Sacr.  Vol.  2,  d.  5,  dist.  2,  and 
Conineh.  G.  83,  a.  6,  N.  197,  have  taught  on  this  point, 
'  That  it  is  sufficient,  at  the  mass,  to  be  present  with  the 
body,  though  we  be  absent  in  spirit,  provided  we  preserve 
a  deportment  extremely  respectful.'  And  Vasquez  goes 
still  farther;  for  he  says  that  the  injunction  to  hear  mass 
is  '  fulfilled,  even  if  there  be  no  intention  to  take  any  part 
in  it.'  This  is  also  in  Escobar,  tr.  1,  ex.  11.  N.  74  and 
107,  and  again  tr.  1,  ex.  1,  N.  116,  where  he  elucidates 
the  point  by  the  case  of  '  those  who  are  taken  to  mass  by 
force,  and  go  with  an  express  intention  not  to  listen  to 
it.'  "  "  Really,"  I  replied,  "  I  should  not  have  believed 
this,  if  any  but  yourself  had  told  me."  "  I  confess,"  he 
rejoined,  "  this  matter  does  somewhat  need  the  authority 
of  such  great  names  ;  as  also  where  Escobar  says  in  tr.  I, 
ex.  11,  N.  31.  '  An  objectionable  motive,  such  as  '  aspl- 
ciendi  libidinose  foeminas,'  together  with  the  pleasure  of 
hearing  the  service  well  performed,  does  not  invalidate 
the  duty  of  atttendance.' 

"  But  there  is  something  yet  more  indulgent  in  the 
sagacious  Turrianus,  Selec.  p.  3,  d.  16,  dub.  7.  '  A  per- 
son may  hear  the  half  of  a  mass  from  one  priest  and 

H  s 

•^°'*  LETTER   IX. 

afterwards  the  remaining  half  from  another;  and  may 
even  hear  first  the  end  of  one,  and  then  the  commence- 
ment of  another.'  And  I  can  tell  you  further,  that  it  ia 
allowed  '  to  hear  two  halves  of  a  mass  at  the  same  time 
from  two  different  priests,  if  one  is  beginning  the  mass 
when  the  second  is  at  the  elevation ;  because  we  can  at- 
tend to  these  two  divisions  at  once,  and  two  moities  com- 
pose a  whole, — '  duse  medietates  unam  missam  constitu- 
unt.'  This  is  decided  by  our  Fathers  Bauny,  tr.  6,  g.  9, 
p.  312,  Hurtado  De  Sacr.  t.  3,  De  Missa,  d.  5,  diff.  4, 
Azorius,  p.  1,  B.  7,  Cap.  3,  g.  3,  Escobar,  tr.  1,  ex.  11, 
p.  73,  in  the  Chap.,  '  On  the  performance  of  Mass  by  the 
Eules  of  our  Society.'  And  you  will  see  the  deductions 
from  it  in  the  same  work,  Lyons  Edition  of  1644  and  1646, 
as  follows  :  '  From  this  I  conclude  that  the  mass  may  be 
heard  in  a  very  short  space  of  time ;  as  for  example,  if 
you  happen  to  find  four  masses  going  on  at  once,  so  ad- 
justed that  when  one  is  commencing,  another  shall  be  at 
the  Gospel,  a  third  at  the  consecration,  and  the  fourth  at 
the  communion.'  "  "Certainly,  my  Father,"  I  remarked, 
"  at  Notre  Dame  we  may  get  through  the  mass  in  an  in- 
stant by  this  method."  "  You  must  allow  then,"  he 
said,  "  that  nothing  can  be  done  better  for  facilitating 
attendance  at  the  service." 

"  But  I  must  now  show  you  how  greatly  the  sacra- 
ments have  been  mitigated,  and  especially  that  of  penance; 
for  it  is  there  you  will  find  the  crowning  proof  of  the  in- 
dulgence of  our  Fathers ;  and  you  will  be  surprised  to 
learn  with  what  prudence  they  have  tempered  a  system  of 
devotion  which  has  challenged  the  astonishment  of  the 
world.     So  that,  having  driven  away  the  terrors  which 

ON   THE    MASS.  155 

demons  had  placed  at  her  entrance^  they  have  rendered 
her  paths  more  attractive  than  those  of  vice,  more  facile 
than  pleasure ;  and  thus  '  a  life  of  well-doing  becomes 
incomparably  less  irksome  than  one  of  evil,'  to  use  the 
language  of  the  Pere  Le  Moine,  pp.  344  and  391,  in  his 
'  Devotion  made  Easy.'  Is  not  that  a  wonderful  trans- 
formation ?  " 

"  In  truth,  my  good  Father,"  I  here  interposed,  "  I 
must  now  tell  you  plainly  my  opinion.  I  am  afraid  that, 
after  all,  your  methods  are  bad,  and  these  indulgences  are 
calculated  rather  to  disgust  the  world  than  to  attract.  As 
to  the  Mass,  for  instance,  holy  and  sublime  as  that  service 
is,  would  it  not  be  sufficient  to  destroy  all  belief  in  the 
spirituality  of  mind  of  your  authors,  to  hear  them  thus 
speak  of  its  solemnities  ?  "  "  That  may  be  true,  in  re- 
gard to  some ;  but  do  you  not  know  that  our  aim  is  to 
accommodate  ourselves  to  all  sorts  of  persons  !  You 
seem  to  have  lost  your  memory,  so  often  as  I  have  men- 
tioned this.  I  must  go  into  this  part  again  the  first 
leisure  opportunity ;  and  we  will  defer  till  then  our  com- 
munications on  the  mitigations  of  the  confessional.  I 
will  explain  the  whole  so  thoroughly,  that  you  shall  not 
forget  it  again." 

We  here  separated ;  and  I  suppose  our  next  conversa- 
tion will  be  upon  this  branch  of  their  policy.  I  re- 
main, &c. 

LETTER  X.* 

MITIGATIONS  INTRODUCED  BY  THE  JESUITS  IN  THE 
SACKAMENT  OP  PENANCE,  BY  THEIR  MAXIMS  RE- 
SPECTING CONFESSION,  SATISFACTION,  ABSOLUTION, 
PROXIMATE  OCCASIONS  OF  SIN,  CONTRITION,  AND  THE 
LOVE   OF   GOD. 

SiE,  Paris,  Avgust  3,  1656. 

The  subject  of  this  communication  is  not  the  general 
policy  of  the  Society,  but  it  is  one  of  its  grand  principles. 
You  are  now  to  learn  the  mitigations  of  the  confessional ; 
which  are  assuredly  the  best  means  that  these  professors 
could  have  employed  for  attracting  all  sorts  of  persons,  at 
the  same  time  that  they  refuse  none.  It  was  necessary 
to  premise  this  point,  before  proceeding  further,  and  with 
this  view  the  Father  thought  proper  to  commence  his  dis- 
course  as  follows. 

"  You  have  perceived,  from  all  that  I  have  hitherto 
stated,  how  successfully  our  Fathers  have  laboured  (through 
their  superiority  of  intelligence)  in  proving  the  lawfulness 
of  many  things  which  had  hitherto  passed  for  forbidden. 
But  since,  after  all,  there  will  remain  many  species  of 

*  This  letter  was  composed  in  conjunction  with  M.  Amauld. — Ed. 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  157 

offences,  which  cannot  be  thus  extenuated ;  and  the  sole 
remedy  for  which  is  in  confession,  it  has  become  espe- 
cially necessary  to  soften  the  difficulties  of  that  office,  by 
the  methods  which  I  have  now  to  unfold.  And  thus, 
hav-ing  in  our  previous  conversation  shown  how  many 
scruples,  by  which  the  conscience  was  wont  to  be  troubled, 
were  allayed,  by  proving  that  what  had  been  supposed  to 
be  criminal  was  in  reality  not  so ;  it  remains  now  to  ex- 
plain the  methods,  by  which  that  which  is  really  sinful 
may  be  easily  expiated,  in  rendering  the  confessional  less 
formidable  than  heretofore."  "  And  what  are  these 
methods,  I  pray  ?  "  "  They  are,"  he  said,  "  those  admir- 
able subtleties  peculiar  to  our  Society,  which  our  Flemish 
Fathers,  in  the  '  Portraiture  of  our  First  Century,'  Book 
3,  or.  1,  p.  405,  and  Book  3,  ch.  2,  call  '  pious  and  holy 
artifices,  and  a  sacred  scheme  of  devotion : — piam  et  re- 
ligiosam  calliditatem,  et  pietatis  solertiam  : '  Book  3,  ch. 
8.  It  is  by  means  of  these  contrivances  that  '  crimes  are 
now  absolved  (alacrius)  with  more  ease  and  promptitude, 
than  heretofore  they  were  committed ;  so  that  multitudes 
now  get  their  offences  absolved  as  speedily  as  they  were  con- 
tracted : — plurimi  vix  citius  maculas  contrahunt,  quam 
eluunt : '  as  is  stated  in  the  same  part."  "  Fray,  my  Father, 
let  me  hear  those  most  salutary  '  finesses.'  "  "  They  are 
numerous,"  he  continued;  "  for,  as  the  confessional  wit- 
nesses many  painful  things,  the  alleviations  in  question 
have  been  applied  to  all.  And  as  the  distress  experienced 
on  such  occasions  consists  chiefly  in  the  shame  of  acknow- 
ledging certain  offences,  the  difficulty  in  describing  their 
circumstantials,  the  penances  that  should  ensue,  the  re- 
solutions not  to  offend  again,  the  frequent  breach  of  such 

158  LETTER   X. 

resolutions,  and  the  consequent  compunction ;  I  hope  I 
shall  succeed  in  showing  you  that  scarcely  any  thing 
painful  has  been  left  in  all  these  things  j  such  has  been 
the  care  to  divest  of  bitterness  and  distaste  this  most 
troublesome  remedy  for  sin. 

"  Now,  to  begin  with  the  pain  experienced  in  the  con- 
fession of  certain  offences :  as  you  must  be  aware  how 
important  it  is  to  retain  the  good  opinion  of  our  confessor 
— '  uti  honam  famam  apud  ordinarium  tueatur^— is  it 
not  a  most  comfortable  thing,  with  this  view,  to  be  allowed 
— as  our  Fathers  decide,  and  Escobar  among  others,  who 
cites  also  Suarez,  tr.  7,  c.  4,  N.  135 — "■  to  have  two  con- 
fessors ;  one  for  mortal,  and  the  other  for  venial  sins ; 
provided,  however,  that  we  take  not  occasion  from  thence 
to  continue  in  the  practice  of  mortal  sins  ? '  And  he 
then  gives  another  ingenious  method  for  confessing  an 
offence  even  to  one's  regular  confessor,  without  letting  it 
be  known  that  it  was  committed  subsequent  to  the  last 
confession.  '  It  is,'  he  says,  '  to  make  a  general  confes- 
sion, and  to  mix  up  the  last  committed  offence  with  those 
of  which  we  accuse  ourselves  in  the  gross.'  He  says  the 
same  thing  again,  Princ.  ex.  2,  N.  73.  And  I  am  sure 
you  will  admit  that  this  decision  of  Pere  Bauny,  Theol. 
Mor.  tr.  4.  q.  15.  p.  137,  tends  still  more  to  mitigate  the 
shame  of  confessing  our  lapses  ;  '  With  the  exception  of 
a  few  rare  occasions,  the  confessor  has  no  right  to  inquire 
whether  the  sin  be  a  habitual  one ;  nor  are  we  bound  to 
make  such  an  acknowledgment;  since  he  ought  not  to 
cause  his  penitent  the  shame  of  avowing  frequent  of- 
fences.' " 

."Indeed!   my  Pather  :  why  I  should  as   soon   say,  a 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  159 

physician  ought  not  to  ask  his  patient  whether  he  has 
long  suffered  from  a  fever.  Do  not  all  kinds  of  sin  differ 
according  to  the  different  circumstances  under  which  they 
are  committed  ?  And  ought  not  the  object  of  a  true  peni- 
tent be  to  lay  open  the  state  of  his  conscience  to  his 
confessor,  with  the  same  sincei'ity  and  unreservedness,  as 
if  he  were  conversing  with  his  Saviour,  of  whom  the  priest 
is  the  representative  ?  And  can  anything  be  more  opposed 
to  such  a  disposition,  than  to  conceal  the  frequency  of  our 
falls,  in  order  to  extenuate  our  guilt  ?  ■" 

I  saw  the  good  Father  was  embarrassed  by  this  remark ; 
so  he  endeavoured,  this  time,  rather  to  elude  the  difficulty 
I  had  placed  him  in,  than  to  reply  to  it,  by  passing  on  to 
another  of  their  regulations.  This,  however,  only  autho- 
rized a  new  evil,  without  in  any  measure  justifying  the 
former ;  and  laid  down  what  I  consider  to  be  one  of  their 
most  pernicious  principles,  and  one  especially  calculated 
to  confirm  the  vicious  in  their  evil  courses.  "  I  by  no 
means  deny,"  he  said,  "  that  habit  tends  to  increase  the 
malignity  of  sin  ;  but  it  does  not  change  its  nature ;  and 
therefore  we  are  not  under  an  obligation  to  make  confes- 
sion of  it,  according  to  the  ordinances  of  our  Society,  as 
reported  by  Escobar,  Princ.  ex.  2,  n.  39 ;  '  We  are  only 
bound,'  he  writes,  '  to  make  confession  of  those  circum- 
stances which  change  the  nature  of  the  offence,  but  not  of 
such  as  cause  an  aggravation  of  it.'  " 

"  In  pursuance  of  this  regulation,  our  Father  Granados 
says,  in  his  5th  Part,  Cont.  7,  vol.  9,  d.  9,  n.  23,  '  If  a 
man  eats  meat  in  Lent,  it  is  sufficient  to  acknowledge  he 
has  violated  a  fast,  without  saying  whether  he  has  eaten 
meat,  or  indulged  in  two  slight  meals.''     So,  according  to 

160  LETTER   X. 

P^re  Reginaldus,  tr.  1,  B.  6,  C.  4,  n.  114,  'A  cunning 
man,  who  has  practised  the  black  art,  is  not  bound  to 
confess  that  fact ;  but  it  is  enough  to  say  he  has  practised 
divination,  without  acknowledging  whether  it  was  by 
palmistry,  or  by  dealing  with  the  devil/  And  Fagandez, 
a  member  of  our  order,  also  says,  p.  2,  B.  4,  c.  3,  n.  17; 
'  It  is  not  obligatory  to  confess  an  intrigue,  when  both 
parties  have  been  consenting  to  it.'  Our  Father  Escobar 
records  all  this  in  the  same  place,  n.  41,  61,  63,  together 
with  various  other  curious  cases,  in  which  it  is  held  that 
confession  is  not  incumbent  j  you  may  see  them  yourself 
in  the  passages  I  have  referred  to."  "  These  are  indeed," 
I  remarked,  "  devotional  artifices,  of  a  most  accommodating 
nature !  " 

''  Yet,"  he  continued,  "  all  this  would  be  nothing  with- 
out the  mitigations  of  '  penance '  introduced  by  the  Breth- 
ren ;  that  being  obviously  still  more  distasteful  even  than 
confession.  But  now,  the  most  sensitive  have  no  cause  of 
fear,  when  they  find,  as  is  laid  down  in  our  Theses,  of 
Clermont  College ;  '  If  the  confessors  impose  a  suitable 
penance  (convenientem) ;  and  a  person  be  notwithstanding 
unwilling  to  submit  to  it,  he  may  withdraw  from  the  same, 
by  renouncing  both  the  absolution  and  the  penance  to- 
gether.' And  Escobar  says,  in  his  '  Practice  of  Penance, 
according  to  our  Society,'  tr.  7,  ex.  4,  n.  188 ;  '  If  the 
party  confessing  shall  declare  that  he  is  willing  to  post- 
pone the  penance  till  the  next  world,  and  to  suffer  in  pur- 
gatory all  the  penalties  he  has  incurred  here,  the  confessor 
may  impose  upon  him  some  very  light  penance,  by  which 
the  form  of  the  sacrament  may  be  maintained ;  especially 
if  he  should  see  that  no  severe  infliction  would  be  sub- 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  161 

mitted  to."  "  I  should  think,"  I  said,  "■  if  this  be  the 
case,  it  must  no  longer  be  called  '  the  Sacrament  of  Pe- 
nance.' "  "  That  is  a  mistake  j  something  is  always  in- 
flicted, if  only  for  form's  sake."  "  But,  my  good  Father/' 
I  asked,  "  do  you  think  a  person  is  entitled  to  absolution, 
who  will  submit  to  nothing  that  shall  give  him  pain,  to 
procure  the  expiation  of  his  sins  ?  And  when  men  are  in 
that  state  of  mind,  ought  you  not  rather  to  retain  their 
offences  than  to  remit  them  ?  Do  you  entertain  a  just 
view  of  the  powers  of  your  ministry ;  and  that  it  is  com- 
mitted to  you  to  bind  as  well  as  to  loose  ?  And  can  you 
believe  that  you  are  permitted  to  give  absolution,  indis- 
criminately, to  all  who  shall  ask  it,  without  considering 
whether  Christ  will  absolve  in  heaven  those  whom  you 
absolve  on  earth  ?  "  "  What !  "  said  the  Father,  "  do  you 
suppose  we  are  not  aware  that  the  confessor  is  to  judge  of 
the  disposition  of  the  penitent ;  both  because  he  is  bound 
not  to  dispense  the  sacraments  to  the  unworthy  (Jesus 
Christ  having  enjoined  him  to  be  faithful,  and  not  give 
that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs),  and,  because  a  judge  is 
bound  to  judge  righteously,  loosing  those  who  are  worthy, 
and  binding  the  sinful ;  and  therefore  he  cannot  absolve 
those  whom  Christ  condemns,"  "  Where  do  you  get  that 
passage  from  ?"  I  asked.  "  From  our  Pere  Filiutius,"  he 
replied;  "  tr.  1,  t.  7,  n.  354."  "  You  surprise  me,"  I 
said ;  "  I  should  have  supposed  it  had  been  from  one  of 
the  ancient  Fathers  of  the  Church.  But  surely  such 
language  as  that  ought  to  startle  your  confessors,  and 
render  them  more  careful  to  ascertain,  in  dispensing  this 
sacrament,  that  the  contrition  of  their  penitents  is  sincere, 
and  their  promises  of  amendment  to  be  depended  upon." 

162  LETTER  X. 

"  There  is  no  difficulty  on  that  head/'  he  repHed  :  "  Fi- 
liutius  has  taken  care  not  to  cause  such  emharrassment  to 
confessors,  and  has  directed  the  following  method  for 
their  relief :  *  A  confessor  may  easily  relieve  himself  from 
anxiety  respecting  his  penitent's  state  of  mind ;  for  if  he 
should  not  give  sufficient  proof  of  compunctiouj  he  has 
only  to  ask,  if  he  very  sincerely  abhors  the  sin ;  and  his 
answer  being  in  the  affirmative,  he  is  bound  to  believe  it^ 
The  same  may  be  said  of  resolutions  for  the  future,  unless' 
there  should  be  some  restitution  to  be  made,  or  some 
proximate  occasion  of  sin  to  be  discontinued."  "  That 
passage  is  clearly  from  Filiutius,"  I  said.  "  You  are 
mistaken,"  replied  the  Father,  "  the  whole  is  taken  by 
him,  word  by  word,  from  Suarez,  3  Part,  t.  4,  disp. 
32,  sect.  2,  n.  2."  "  But  the  words  last  quoted  contra- 
dict the  former  J  for  confessors  will  be  unable  to  judge  of 
the  state  of  mind  of  their  penitents,  if  they  are  bound  to 
accept  this  mere  affirmation,  unsupported  by  any  actual 
proofs  of  contrition.  Is  there  such  certainty  then  in 
mere  words  ?  I  doubt  much  whether  the  past  experience 
of  your  Fathers  will  induce  them  to  put  faith  in  such 
promises ;  but  rather  to  expect  the  very  opposite  results." 
"  That  is  of  no  importance  ;  they  are  hound  to  yield  their 
belief:  Pere  Bauny,  who  has  treated  this  point  most  pro- 
foundly, in  his  '  Summary  of  Offences,'  c.  46,  p.  1090, 
2,  thus  concludes  :  '  Persons  falling  repeatedly  into  sin, 
and  exhibiting  no  signs  of  amendment,  yet,  presenting 
themselves  to  their  confessor,  and  expressing  regret  for 
the  past,  together  with  good  intentions  for  the  future,  are 
still  to  be  believed,  although  it  may  be  feared  their  assur- 
ances do  not  go  far  beyond  the  lips.     And,  even  if  they 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  163 

afterwards  give  themselves  more  license  than  ever  in  the 
same  kind  of  oflFences,  they  ought  still,  in  my  opinion,  to 
receive  absolution.'  Now,  I  think  all  your  doubts  must 
be  satisfied." 

"  But,  my  good  Father,"  I  rejoined,  "  you  surely  impose 
a  heavy  responsibility  upon  your  confessors,  in  obliging 
them  to  give  credit  to  the  very  opposite  of  what  their 
senses  testify  ?  "  "  You  do  not  clearly  see  the  point," 
he  replied ;  '■  all  they  mean  is,  that  they  are  to  act — to 
absolve — as  if  they  believed  the  resolutions  were  sincere 
and  decided,  although  they  may  not  in  reality  believe 
them  to  be  any  such  thing.  This  is  subsequently  ex- 
plained both  by  Filiutius  and  Suarez.  After  saying,  that 
the  priest  is  bound  to  credit  his  penitent  on  his  word, 
they  add :  '  It  is  not  incumbent  upon  the  confessor  to 
have  any  belief  or  even  probable  expectation  of  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  resolutions  :  it  is  sufficient  that  he  thinks 
there  is  at  the  moment  a  general  intention  to  amend, 
although  he  may  expect  him  to  relapse  into  sin  very 
shortly.'  And  this  is  the  doctrine  of  all  our  authorities 
— '  ita  docent  omnes  Auctores.'  Can  you  any  longer  en- 
tertain doubt  upon  a  point  in  which  all  our  authorities 
agree  ?  " 

"  But,  my  Father,  what  becomes  of  that  position  main- 
tained by  the  P^re  Petau  himself,  in  the  Preface  to  his 
Pen.  pall.  p.  4,  that  '  the  holy  Fathers,  the  Doctors,  and 
the  Councils,  are  all  agreed  (as  in  an  incontrovertible 
truth)  that  the  penitence  which  prepares  for  the  Eucharist 
should  be  sincere,  decided,  bold ;  not  feeble  or  indolent, 
not  subject  to  inconstancy  and  relapse  ?  ' "  "  Do  you 
not  see,"  he  replied,  "  that  the  P^re  Petau  is  speaking 

164 

LETTER   X, 

there  of  the  ancient  Church  ?  All  that  is  now  so  '  out  of 
date/  to  use  the  words  of  our  FatherSj  that,  according  to 
Pfere  Bauny,  the  very  opposite  is  really  held  to  be  the 
truth  :  you  will  find  it  at  tr.  4,  q,  15,  p.  95  ;  '  There  are 
some  writers  who  affirm  that  absolution  ought  to  be  re- 
fused to  those  who  often  relapse  into  the  same  offences ; 
and  especially  when,  after  frequent  remission,  there  still 
seems  no  improvement;  but  others  say  the  contrary. 
Now  the  true  doctrine  is,  that  absolution  is  not  to  be  re- 
fused to  such  persons ;  and  that,  even  if  they  have  disre- 
garded oft-repeated  admonition;  if  they  have  violated 
frequent  promises  of  amendment ;  if  they  have  taken  no 
pains  to  improve  :  whatever  others  say,  the  true  practice, 
and  that  which  ought  to  be  followed,  is,  that  in  all  such 
cases,  absolution  is  still  to  be  granted.'  And  in  tr.  4,  q. 
23,  p.  100;  '  We  must  not  refuse,  nor  defer  to  grant  ab- 
solution to  such  as  are  living  in  habitual  sin,  be  it  against 
the  law  of  God,  of  nature,  and  of  the  Church;  and  even 
if  we  see  no  hope  of  amendment — etsi  emendationis  fu- 
turee  nulla  spes  appareat.'  " 

"  But  surely  the  certainty  of  procuring  absolution  tends 
to  the  encouragement  of  sin."  "  I  understand  you,"  the 
Father  said ;  "  but  hear  what  Pere  Bauny  says,  q.  15  : 
'  We  may  absolve  a  person,  who  acknowledges  that  the  hope 
of  absolution  has  led  him  to  sin  with  less  restraint  than 
if  he  had  not  had  such  hope.'  And  Pere  Caussin,  de- 
fending that  proposition,  says,  at  page  311  of  his  Rep.  on 
Theol.  Mor.  '  If  this  were  not  allowed,  the  benefit  of  ab- 
solution would  be  interdicted  to  the  great  majority  of  per- 
sons ;  and  no  resource  would  be  left  to  sinners  but  a  bough 
and  a  rope.' " 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  165 

"  I  see  plainly/^  I  here  remarked,  "  that  these  doctrines 
must  prove  sufficiently  effective  in  filling  your  confession- 
als." "So  much  so,"  he  said,  "that  you  can  scarcely 
conceive  the  numbers  that  resort  to  usj  '  we  are  as  it 
•were  overwhelmed  and  oppressed  by  the  crowd  of  peni- 
tents; '  pcenitentium  numero  obruimur,'  as  is  remarked 
in  the  '  Image  de  notre  premier  Siecle,  Book  3,  ch.  8." 
"  I  know,"  I  said,  "  one  very  simple  way  of  relieving  the 
pressure.  It  is  nothing  more  than  to  compel  the  offend- 
ers to  desist  from  the  proximate  occasion  of  their  sins ;  * 
you  would  find  this  easy  method  afford  you  sensible  re- 
lief." "  We  do  not  aim  at  any  thing  of  the  kind/'  he 
replied :  "  on  the  contrary,  as  is  said  in  the  same  work, 
B.  3,  ch.  7,  p.  374,  '  Our  Society  labours  to  strengthen 
virtue,  to  war  against  vice,  and  to  save  countless  numbers 
of  souls.'  And  as  there  are  few  who  are  willing  to  quit 
these  'proximate  occasions,'  it  has  become  necessary  to 
define  in  what  they  consist ;  as  may  be  seen  in  Escobar, 
or  the  '  Pratique'  of  our  Society,  tr.  7,  ex.  4,  N.  226: 
'  That  is  not  to  be  understood  as  a  '  proximate  occasion,' 
when  a  person  falls  into  sin  on  rare  occasions ;  as,  for 
instance,  by  sudden  irritation  against  an  inmate  in  his 
dwelling  three  or  four  times  in  a  year  ; '  or,  according  to 
Pere  Bauny,  in  his  French  work,  '  once  or  twice  in  the 
course  of  a  month,'  p.  1083,  and  again,  p.  1089,  where  he 
asks,  '  What  is  to  be  done  in  the  case  of  masters  and 
servants,  or  near  relatives  living  together,  who  provoke 
each  other  to  mutual  irritation  ?  They  ought  to  be  sepa- 
rated, I  maintain.'     He  goes  on   to  say,  the  same,  '  if 

*  '  Quitter  les  occasions  prochaines.'  (Fr.) 

166  LETTER  X. 

tteir  altercations  are  frequent  and  almost  daily ;  but  if 
the  cause  of  offence  occur  seldom,  perhaps  not  more  than 
once  or  twice  a  month,  and  if  they  cannot  separate  with- 
out much  inconvenience  and  detriment,  then  they  may  be 
absolved,  according  to  these  authorities,  and  among  others, 
Saurez ;  provided  they  promise  to  offend  no  more,  and  tes- 
tify regret  for  the  past.'  Nay,  the  Pere  Bauny,  (he  con- 
tinued) allows  those  who  have  fallen  into  subsequent 
offences,  '  to  continue  in  their  practice,  if  they  should  be 
unable  to  relinquish  them  without  giving  occasion  of  ani- 
madversion on  the  part  of  others,  or  suffering  personal 
inconvenience.'  And  he  says  the  same  thing  in  his 
'Moral  Theology,  tr.  4,  de  Poenit.  q.  13,  p.  93,  and 
q.  14,  p.  95.  '  It  is  both  allowable  and  incumbent,  to 
give  absolution  to  a  female,  living  in  a  habit  of  sin, — '  Si 
non  potest  honeste  ejicere,  aut  habeat  aliquam  causam 
retinendi,' —  provided  always  that  she  entertains  an  in- 
tention ultimately  to  reform." 

"  It  must  be  acknowledged,"  I  remarked,  "  that  the 
intention  to  reform  is  much  alleviated  in  its  rigour,  when 
we  are  absolved  from  the  obligation,  on  its  causing  us  in- 
convenience. But  I  suppose  the  duty  is  enforced  by  the 
rules  of  your  Society,  when  no  such  inconvenience  is  in- 
curred ?  "  "  Why,  yes,"  was  the  reply ;  "  although  not 
without  exception.  Pere  Bauny  remarks,  under  the  same 
head, '  It  is  lawful  for  all  persons  to  resort  to  disreputable 
places,  with  a  view  to  the  conversion  of  the  abandoned, 
although  they  may  be  in  danger  of  yielding  to  temptation; 
and  even  if  they  be  conscious  that  they  have  before  fallen 
into  it.  And  although  some  of  our  brethren  dissent  from 
this  opinion,  and  hold  that  it  is  not  lawful  voluntarily  to 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  167 

endanger  our  own  salvation  for  the  benefit  of  others,  I 
most  cordially  embrace  the  opposite  view  of  the  case.'  " 

"  These  are  certainly  a  new  class  of  religionists/'  I 
said ;  "  but  on  what  ground,  I  pray,  does  Pere  Bauny 
give  this  questionable  licence  ?  "  "  It  is  on  that  prin- 
ciple," he  replied,  "  which  he  afterwards  lays  down  on 
the  authority  of  Basil  Ponce;  I  have  referred  to  it  before; 
you  cannot  but  remember  it :  it  is,  '  that  it  is  lawful  to 
seek  occasion  directly  and  immediately — primo  et  per  se 
- — for  promoting  the  spiritual  and  the  temporal  good, 
both  of  ourselves,  and  of  our  neighbours.' " 

These  passages  filled  me  with  such  disgust  that  I  was 
tempted  at  this  point  to  break  off  our  communication ; 
but  I  refrained,  that  he  might  bring  his  discourse  to  an 
end,  and  merely  said  "  How,  I  pray,  does  this  doctrine 
consist  with  that  of  the  Gospel,  which  commands  us  to 
shut  our  eyes,  and  do  violence  to  ourselves  in  every  thing 
which  may  interfere  with  our  salvation  ?  And  how  is  it 
conceivable,  that  a  man,  who  voluntarily  exposes  himself  to 
occasions  of  sin,  is  sincere  in  his  hatred  of  it  ?  Is  it  not 
on  the  contrary,  obvious,  that  he  is  not  duly  impressed 
with  its  evils,  and  has  not  experienced  that  change  of 
heart  which  produces  love  to  God  as  well  as  benevolence 
to  man  ?  " 

"  Ah  !  "  the  Father  exclaimed,  "  there  you  come  to 
actual  penitence.  You  seem  not  to  be  aware  of  the  views 
of  Pere  Pintereau,  in  the  Second  Part  of  his  Abbe  de 
Boisie,  p.  50.  '  All  our  Fathers  agree,'  he  says,  '  that  it 
is  error,  and  almost  heresy,  to  say  that  penitence  is  neces- 
sary ;  and  that  regret  *  alone,  even  if  founded  on  no 
*  '  Attrition.'  (Fr.) 

168  LETTER   X. 

other  motive  than  the  fear  of  hell,  independently  of  the 
inclinations  of  the  offender,  is  not  sufficient  with   the  holy 
sacrament.'  "     "  Indeed  !  my  Father,  so  it  is  almost  an 
article  of  faith  that  regret  for  sin,   from  a  mere  dread  of 
its  penalties,  is  available,  when  combined  with  the  sacra- 
ment :  I  apprehend  this  view  must  be  peculiar  to  your 
fraternity.     For  there  are  others  who,  though  they  hold 
that  regret  for  sin,  with  the  sacrament,  is   sufficient,  re- 
quire that  at  least  it  should  be  attended  with  some  mea- 
sure of  love  to  God.     Besides  which,  it  seems  to  me  that 
even  your  authorities  did  not  formerly  hold  this  doctrine 
so  implicitly;  for  your  own  Pere  Suarez  has  this  language 
on  the  question  in  his  '  De  Pcen.'  q.  90,  art.  4,  disp.  15, 
Sec.  4,  N.  17.     '  Although  it  may  be  probable  that  '  re- 
gret '  for  sin  is  sufficient  with  the  sacrament,  it  is  not 
absolutely  certain,  but   may   be   an   erroneous  opinion ; 
'  non  est  certa,  et  potest  esse  falsa.'     And  if  it  be  erro- 
neous, then  the  regret  in  question   does   not  suffice  for 
salvation ;  and  the  man  who  wittingly  dies  in  that  state, 
exposes  himself  voluntarily  to  the  mortal  peril  of  eternal 
damnation.     For  the  opinion  referred  to  is  not  founded 
on  antiquity,  nor  is  it  one  very  commonly  received ;  '  nee 
valde   antiqua,    nee  multum  communis.'      Neither    does 
Sanchez  seem  to  regard  it  as  authentic,  as  he  says  in  his 
Sum.  B.  1.  ch.  9,  N.  34,  '  A  sick  person,  as  well  as  his 
confessor,  would  be  guilty  of  mortal  sin,  in  acting  upon 
the  persuasion  that  '  regret '  for  sin  with  the  sacrament 
would  be  sufficient  for  salvation,  seeing  the  great  peril  of 
eternal  welfare  to  which  the  penitent  would  be  exposed,  if 
such  opinion  should  prove  unfounded.'    So  also  Comitolus 
says,  Eesp,  Mor.  B.  1,   q.   32,   N.  7,  8.     '  It  is  by  no 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  169 

meaus  certain  that  '  regret '  for  sin,  with  the  sacrament, 
suffices.'  " 

The  worthy  Father  here  interrupted  me.  "  What 
then  !  you  read  our  authors  ?  That  is  all  right ;  hut  it 
would  be  still  better  if  you  were  to  read  them  with  a 
member  of  the  Society.  Don't  you  perceive,  that  in  con- 
sequence of  having  read  them  alone,  you  have  concluded 
that  these  passages  tend  to  cast  reflections  upon  those 
who  now  maintain  our  doctrines  of  '  Regret  ?  Instead  of 
which  it  might  have  been  proved  to  you  that  nothing  can 
be  more  confirmatory  of  them.  For  what  an  honoiu'  is  it 
to  our  modern  authorities  to  have  so  universally  dissemi- 
nated their  opinions,  that,  with  the  exception  of  mere 
theologians,  there  is  scarcely  any  one  who  does  not  believe 
that  the  view  we  now  take  of  the  doctrine  in  question  is 
that  which  has  been  held  by  the  Church  from  time  imme- 
morial. And  thus,  if  you  succeed  in  proving  even  from 
our  own  Fathers,  that  until  within  these  few  years  the 
opinion  was  an  uncertain  one,  what  do  you  do  but  confer 
additional  honours  upon  the  modern  writers,  for  their 
acuteness  in  having  now  established  it  ? 

"  Thus  Diana,  with  whom  we  are  both  now  so  familiar, 
has  given  an  interesting  account  of  the  steps  by  which  he 
has  arrived  at  his  conclusions.  See  p.  5,  tr.  13.  He 
says,  '  Formerly  the  scholastics  used  to  maintain,  that 
penitence  was  necessary  after  the  commission  of  mortal 
sin  :  afterwards,  that  it  was  only  required  on  saints'  days, 
or  when  some  public  calamity  was  impending ;  and, 
according  to  others,  it  might  not  be  deferred  when  we 
seemed  to  be  drawing  near  to  death.  But  our  Fathers 
Eastado  and  Vasquez  have  conclusively  refuted  all  these 

r 

170  LETTER   X. 

opinions,  and  have  decided  '  that  it  is  only  necessary 
when  there  is  no  other  way  of  procuring  absolution,  as 
in  the  Article  of  Death/  But  to  show  you  further  the 
surprizing  progress  this  doctrine  has  made,  I  will  just  add 
the  following  passages  from  Fagundes,  praec.  3,  t.  11, 
ch.  4,  N.  13 ;  Granados  in  part  3,  Contr.  7,  d.  3,  Sec.  4, 
N.  19.  '  Penitence  *  is  not  necessary  even  at  death ;  for 
if  regret  t  with  the  Sacrament  is  not  sufficient  at  the 
hour  of  death,  it  would  follow  that  regret  with  the  Sacra- 
ment is  not  efficacious  in  itself.'  The  same  sentiment  is 
expressed  by  Escobar  in  his  '  Practice  of  our  Society.' 
And  Pere  F.  Launy  repeats  the  same  proposition,  tr.  8, 
disp.  3,  N.  13." 

"  You  astonish  me  !  "  I  said :  "  I  see  in  this  regret  for 
sin  which  you  speak  of,  nothing  but  a  natural  emotion ; 
and  thus  a  sinner  may  entitle  himself  to  absolution,  alto- 
gether independently  of  divine  influence.  Now  this,  it  is 
well  known,  is  denounced  by  the  Councils  as  heresy." 
"  I  might  have  thought  as  you  do,"  the  Father  replied ; 
"  yet  it  is  clear  that  the  contrary  is  the  case ;  for  our 
Fathers,  who  belong  to  the  College  of  Clermont,  have 
expressly  maintained  in  their  Theses  of  the  23d  May  and 
6  June  1644,  Col.  4,  N.  1,  that  '  regret  for  sin  may  be 
devout,  and  sufficient  for  the  receiving  of  the  Sacrament, 
although  not  of  a  supernatural  nature.'  And  in  that  of 
the  month  of  August  1643,  '  Regret,  although  nothing 
more  than  a  natural  emotion,  is  sufficient,  if- sincere, 
for  the  receiving  the  Sacrament.'  '  Ad  Sacramentum 
sufficit  attritio  naturalis,  modo  honesta.'  This  now  is 
surely  enough  upon  the  point,    excepting  indeed,  what 

*  '  Contrition.'  (Fr.)  +  '  Attrition.'  (Fr.) 

MITIGATIONS  IN  PENANCE.  171 

results  as  a  natural  consequence  from  the  principle  here 
laid  down,  viz.  that  penitence  is  so  little  necessary  to  the 
Sacrament  that  it  might,  on  the  contrary,  be  positively 
injurious;  insomuch  that  (it  possessing  an  efScacy  to 
efface  sin  in  itself)  it  leaves  nothing  to  be  done  by  the 
Sacrament.  This  is  the  view  of  our  Father  Valentia,  the 
celebrated  Jesuit,  t.  44,  disp.  7,  q,  8,  p.  4.  '  Contrition 
is  by  no  means  necessary  for  obtaining  the  most  important 
results  of  the  Sacrament,  but  on  the  contrary,  it  is  rather 
an  obstacle  : '  '  Imo  obstat  potius,  quominus  effectus  se- 
quatur.'  Nothing  stronger  can  be  wished  for  in  favour 
of  'Regret.'  "  "  I  believe  you,  my  dear  Father,"  I  said; 
"  but  suiFer  me  to  make  one  remark,  and  to  show  you  the 
extremes  to  which  your  doctrine  may  lead.  When  you 
say  that  sorrow,  arising  merely  from  fear  of  punishment,  is 
sufficient,  in  conjunction  with  the  Sacrament,  for  the 
salvation  of  a  sinner,  does  it  not  follow  from  thence,  that 
a  man  may  have  been  all  his  life  making  this  sort  of 
expiation  for  sin,  and  attain  to  salvation  at  last,  without 
having  ever  experienced  a  genuine  and  influential  love  of 
his  Maker  ?  Would  your  Fathers  dare  to  maintain  such 
a  position  as  that  ?  " 

"  I  see  from  that  remark,"  replied  the  Father,  "  that 
you  require  to  be  informed  of  the  doctrine  held  by  our 
Society  respecting  the  '  love  of  God.'  It  is  the  final 
article  in  their  Moral  system,  and  the  most  important  of 
all.  You  might  indeed  have  gathered  some  hints  of  it 
from  the  passages  that  have  been  quoted  upon  the  last 
topic :  but  there  are  some  others  more  expressly  bearing 
upon  the  subject.  Do  not  interrupt  me,  for  they  are 
highly  interesting. 

173  LETTER   X. 

"  Hear  now  the  sentiments  of  Escobarj  who  condenses 
the  several  opinions  of  our  greatest  authors  on  the  subject, 
in  his  '  Practical  treatise  on  the  Love  of  God,  as  held  by 
our  Society,  tr.  1,  ex.  3,  N.  31 ;  and  tr.  5,  ex.  4,  N.  8. 
'  When  is  it  necessary  for  us  really  to  possess  love  to 
God  ?  Suarez  says,  it  is  sufficient  if  it  be  at  some  period 
before  death,  without  designating  a  time ;  Vasquez,  that 
it  is  sufficient  in  the  article  of  death;  others,  at  the 
period  of  baptism ;  others,  when  we  are  compelled  to  do 
penance;  others,  finally,  on  festivals.  But  the  Pere 
Castro  Paulo  opposes  all  these  opinions,  and  on  good 
grounds — '  merito.'  Hurtado  de  Mendoza  affirms  that 
the  duty  is  obligatory  upon  us  once  every  year ;  and  that 
we  are  indulgently  treated,  if  not  required  to  practice  it 
more  frequently ;  Pere  Conink  holds,  that  it  is  required 
every  three  or  four  years ;  Henriquez,  every  five  years ; 
and  Filiutius  says,  it  is  probable  that  a  period  of  five  years 
is  somewhat  rigorous.' "  "  What  then  is  his  period  ?  " 
Why,  he  leaves  it  to  the  wise  to  decide." 

I  still  compelled  myself  to  abstain  from  comment  upon 
this  indecent  trifling,  these  impious  jests,  in  which  man 
has  dared  to  indulge  on  the  sacred  theme  of  love  to  his 
God  !  "  But,"  the  Father  continued,  "  the  great  Anthony 
Sumond,  who  deals  so  triumphantly  with  this  subject  in 
his  admirable  work  '  On  the  Defence  of  Virtue,'  and  in 
which  he  addresses  (as  he  informs  his  readers)  French  to 
the  French,  has  this  language,  tr.  3,  Sec.  1,  p.  13,  13, 14, 
&c.,  St.  Thomas  says  '  we  ought  to  commence  the  culti- 
vation of  love  to  God  immediately  on  coming  to  years  of 
reason  ; '  this  is  somewhat  early.  Scotus  says  it  should 
be  every  Sunday ;  how  is  that  proved  ?     Others,  at  times 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  173 

of  grievous  temptation  :  true,  if  there  be  no  other  way  of 
escaping  the  temptation.  Sotus  holds  it .  to  be  when  we 
receive  some  especial  benefit  at  God's  hand :  good ;  be  it 
for  the  purpose  of  showing  our  gratitude.  Others  again 
affirm  that  it  ought  to  be  at  the  time  of  death  :  that  is 
very  late.  Neither  am  I  more  disposed  to  think  it  should 
be  at  every  time  of  the  reception  of  a  Sacrament :  concern* 
for  sin  is  then  sufficient,  together  with  confession,  if  con- 
venient. Suarez  declares  there  is  a  time  for  it :  but  what 
is  that  time  ?  He  leaves  you  to  decide ;  he  does  not 
pretend  to  judge.  Then  what  so  learned  a  man  does  not 
know,  neither  can  I  tell.' — And  he  concludes  the  whole  by 
saying,  that  we  are  not,  in  strictness,  bound  to  any  thing 
more  than  to  keep  the  other  commandmeats,  without 
aspiring  after  love  to  God,  or  aiming  to  give  our  heart  to 
him ;  provided,  however,  we  do  not  entertain  any  hatred 
to  him.  This  he  establishes  in  his  '  Second  Tract ; '  you 
will  find  the  sentiment  running  through  every  page,  but 
especially  at  16,  19,  24,  38,  where  he  has  such  expres- 
sions as  these ;  '  God,  when  he  commands  us  to  love  him, 
requires  us  only  to  obey  his  other  commandments.  If  he 
had  said,  '  However  complete  be  your  obedience,  you 
cannot  be  saved  unless  your  heart  be  given  to  me,  would 
this  motive,  in  your  opinion,  have  been  commensurate  with 
the  object  which  God  had  in  view  ?  Then,  it  is  said,  we 
shall  show  our  love  to  God  in  performing  his  will,  in  the 
same  way  as  if  we  had  a  real  afiection — as  if  the  force  of 
love  constrained  us.  If  that  be  really  the  case,  well  and 
good ;  if  not,  let  us  not  the  less  apply  ourselves  to  strict 
obedience  in  good  works  ;  seeing  that,  through  the  good- 

*  '  Attrition.'  (Fr.) 

174  LETTER   X. 

ness  of  God,  the  obligation  we  are  laid  under  is  not  so 
much  to  love,  as  not  to  hate  him  ? 

"  It  is  in  this  way  that  our  Fathers  have  relieved  men 
from  the  penal  ^obligation  actually  to  love  God ;  and  this 
doctrine  is  so  comfortable,  that  Peres  Aunat,  Pintereau, 
Le  Moine  and  A.  Simond  have  vigorously  defended  it, 
when  attacked.  You  have  only  to  look  to  their  replies  to 
the  '  Moral  Theology ; '  and  that  of  Pere  Pintereau,  2d 
Part  of  the  Abbe  de  Boisee,  p.  53,  will  enable  you  to 
judge  of  the  value  of  this  dispensation,  by  the  price  which 
he  says  it  has  cost — that  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  It 
is  the  master-piece  of  the  doctrine.  You  will  see  from 
these  passages,  that  the  dispensation  from  the  irksome 
obligation  to  the  love  of  God  is  the  privilege  which  the 
Gospel  dispensation  possesses  over  the  Judaical.  '  It  is 
only  reasonable,'  he  says,  '  that  in  the  Law  of  grace, 
under  the  New  Testament,  the  Lord  should  waive  the 
severe  and  difficult  obligation  which  existed  under  the 
legal  system,  of  exercising  complete  penitence  for  obtain- 
ing justification;  and  that  the  more  lenient  initiation  of 
the  Sacraments  should  have  been  substituted.  Otherwise, 
Christians,  who  have  succeeded  to  the  place  of  children, 
would  enjoy  no  more  advantages  in  the  possession  of  their 
heavenly  parent's  favour,  than  the  Jews  of  old,  who  were 
mere  slaves,  suing  for  pity  of  their  Lord.' " 

"  Father  ! "  I  here  exclaimed,  "  my  patience  is  ex- 
hausted ;  I  can  listen  no  longer  to  your  detestable  state- 
ments." "  They  are  not  my  own,"  he  replied.  "  I  know 
they  are  not,"  I  said;  "  but  you  repudiate  them  not — 
you  hold  not  their  authors  in  abhorrence,  but  regard  them 

MITIGATIONS   IN   PENANCE.  175 

with  complacency  !  Have  you  no  fear,  lest  acquiescence 
in  such  views  may  render  you  a  partaker  of  their  guilt  ? 
Know  you  not  that  St.  Paul  holds  to  be  worthy  of  death, 
not  only  the  authors  of  evil,  but  those  who  consent  to  it 
also  ?  Is  it  not  enough,  that,  by  your  fatal  palliatives, 
you  allow  so  much  that  is  forbidden,  but  you  must  also 
allure  and  prompt  to  the  commission  of  crimes  (crimes, 
which  even  yourselves  dare  not  excuse)  by  the  facility  of 
your  absolutions — annihilating,  for  this  purpose,  all  free- 
dom of  will  in  the  priest,  and  compelling  him,  as  a  slave 
rather  than  a  judge,  to  give  remission  to  the  most  in- 
veterate offenders  !  And  all  this,  without  alteration  of 
conduct — without  any  other  sign  of  compunction,  than 
promises  a  hundred  times  broken — without  penance,  '  if 
they  be  not  disposed  to  undergo  it' — without  abandoning 
their  vices,  '  if  it  cause  them  inconvenience  to  do  so ! ' 

"  But  I  pass  on.  The  freedoms  taken  by  your  Society 
with  the  most  sacred  rules  of  Christian  duty,  lead  to  the 
overthrow  of  the  entire  Law  of  God.  They  violate  the 
great  commandment,  on  which  hang  all  the  law  and  the 
prophets.  They  pervert  the  very  principle  of  piety  in 
the  heart ;  they  take  from  it  all  spirit  and  vitality ;  they 
proclaim,  that  love  to  God  is  not  needful  for  salvation ; 
and  dare  to  assert,  that  the  remission  of  this  sacred  prin- 
ciple is  a  benefit  which  the  religion  of  Jesus  has  conferred 
upon  the  world.  Impiety  can  go  no  further  !  The  blood 
of  Christ  has  flowed  forth  to  purchase  a  dispensation  from 
the  obligation  to  love  him  !  Before  the  mystery  of 
incarnation  was  revealed,  love  to  God  was  imperative ; 
now,  when  '  God  has  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  has 
given  his  only-begotten  Son  for  it/  the  world — purchased 

^^"  LETTER   X. 

by  that  love— is  discharged  from  the  sacred  duty  !  Oh, 
marvellous  theology  of  modern  days  !  To  presume  to 
reverse  the  anathema  pronounced  by  St.  Paul  against 
those  who  '  love  mi  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ! '  To  con- 
tradict the  assertion  of  St.  John,  '  that  whoso  loveth  not, 
is  dead  j'  and  the  declaration  of  Christ  himself,  that  "he 
who  loveth  not,  keepeth  not  his  commandments ! '  You 
would  confer  a  title  to  the  enjoyment  of  God,  throughout 
eternity,  upon  those  who  never  owned  an  emotion  of  love 
to  Him  in  life!  The  mystery  of  iniquity  is  accom- 
plished. Open,  open  your  eyes,  my  Father;  and,  if  you 
have  really  remained  unmoved  by  all  the  preceding 
sophistries  of  your  casuists,  let  these  closing  enormities 
awaken  you  !  I  fervently  desire  it,  on  behalf  both  of 
yourself  and  your  brethren ;  and  I  pray  to  God  to  reveal 
to  you  the  horrors  of  the  precipice  to  which  a  delusive 
light  has  led  you ;  and  to  fill  with  his  love  the  hearts  of 
those,  who  have  dared  to  excuse  and  absolve  the  absence 
of  it  in  their  fellow-men  !  " 

After  some  further  remarks  of  the  same  nature,  I  parted 
from  the  Father ;  and  we  shall  probably  never  meet  again. 
But  this  need  be  no  cause  of  concern ;  for  if  it  should  be 
necessary  for  me  further  to  communicate  with  you  upon 
their  system,  I  have  made  myself  so  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  their  writings,  thai  I  shall  be  able  to  furnish  you 
with  as  much  of  their  moral  principles,  and  perhaps  some- 
what more  of  their  polity,  than  they  themselves  would  be 
desirous  should  be  made  public. — I  am,  &c.  Sec. 

LETTER  XL 

TO  THE  REVEREND  THE  FATHERS  OF  THE 
SOCIETY  OF  JESUS. 

ERRORS  OF  A  RIDICULOUS  NATURE  MAY  BE  REFUTED 
BY  RAILLERY.  RESERVATIONS  TO  BE  OBSERVED  IN 
ITS  USE,  WHICH  HAVE  BEEN  OBSERVED  BY  MON- 
TALTE,*  BUT  HAVE  BEEN  DISREGARDED  BY  THE 
JESUIT  WRITERS.  IMPIOUS  BUFFOONERIES  OF  PERES 
LE   MOINE   AND   GARASSE. 

Reverend  Fathers,  August  18,  1656. 

I  HAVE  seen  the  letters  put  forth  by  you,  in  answer  to 
those  of  mine  addressed  to  a  friend,  on  the  principles  of 
your  moral  system ;  and  I  observe  that  a  main  point  in- 
sisted upon  by  you  in  your  defence  is,  that  I  have  not  ex- 
pressed myself  with  sufficient  gravity  in  animadverting 
upon  your  tenets.  This  is  reiterated  by  you  in  all  your 
publications ;  and  you  even  go  so  far  as  to  assert,  that  I 
have  been  guilty  of  turning  sacred  things  into  ridicule. 

This  reproach,  reverend  Fathers,  is  as  surprising  as  it 
is  unjust.  In  what  part  of  my  communications,  I  demand, 
is  this  ridicule  of  sacred  things  to  be  found  ?     You  par- 

*  The  feigned  name  (Louis  de  Montalte)  under  which  the  Letters  were 
originally  published. 

I  S 

178 

LETTER   XI. 

ticularize  especially  the  Mohatra  Contract,  and  the  history 
of  John  D'Alba.  But  are  these,  I  pray  you,  what  you 
call  "  sacred  things  ?  "  Is  the  Mohatra  a  matter  of  so 
holy  a  nature,  that  it  is  blasphemous  to  refer  to  it  without 
due  reverence  ?  And  the  instructions  of  Pere  Bauny  on 
the  subject  of  larceny,  which  induced  John  D'Alba  to  put 
them  in  practice,  to  the  prejudice  of  your  learned  body — 
are  they  of  so  sacred  a  character,  as  to  brand  with  impiety 
those  who  venture  to  allude  to  them  with  raillery  ? 

What  Sirs  !  the  fictions  of  your  brethren  are  to  pass 
for  the  solemnities  of  faith ;  and  we  are  not  to  be  suffered 
to  jest  at  the  absurdities  of  Escobar,  and  the  fantastic  and 
antichristian  decisions  of  your  authorities,  without  in- 
curring the  reproach  of  bringing  religion  into  ridicule  ! 
Is  it  possible  that  you  should  have  brought  yourselves  to 
repeat  so  often  a  charge  thus  utterly  unreasonable  ?  Do 
you  not  fear,  that  while  you  are  blaming  me  for  indulging 
a  smile  at  your  extravagance,  you  may  furnish  me  therein 
with  a  fresh  subject  of  ridicule;  and  make  the  charge 
recoil  upon  yourselves,  by  showing,  that  it  is  from  the 
absurdities  of  your  own  books  alone,  that  I  have  drawn 
the  materials  of  satire  ?  And  may  it  not  then  become 
apparent,  that,  in  exposing  the  sophistries  of  your  moral 
code,  I  have  been  as  far  from  ridiculing  religion,  as  the 
doctrines  of  your  Casuists  differ  from  the  holy  precepts  of 
the  gospel  ? 

Be  assured,  my  Fathers,  that  it  is  a  very  different  thing 
to  jest  at  religion,  and  to  ridicule  those  who  profane  it  by 
their  perversions.  It  were  indeed  impiety  to  fail  in  re- 
verence for  the  sacred  revelations  of  God's  Spirit ;  but  it 
would  be  impiety  of  another  kind,  not  to  expose  to  merited 

ERRORS   REPUTED   BY   RAILLERY.  179 

contempt  the  impostures  which  the  pernicious  ingenuity 
of  man  opposes  to  them  ! 

For  since,  reverend  Fathers,  you  compel  me  to  enter 
upon  this  controversy,  I  entreat  you  to  consider,  that  in 
proportion  as  the  truths  of  Christianity  are  entitled  to  our 
love  and  respect,  in  the  same  proportion  are  their  coun- 
terfeits deserving  of  contempt  and  aversion.  There  are 
two  especial  qualities  in  Christian  verity — a  sacred  majesty 
which  challenges  reverence,  and  a  divine  beauty  which 
inspires  love.  And  there  is  also  in  error,  an  impiety 
which  excites  distrust,  and  an  impertinence  that  exposes 
to  ridicule.  For  this  reason,  as  all  holy  men  desire  to 
cherish  sentiments  of  the  deepest  love  and  reverence  for 
truth,  and  feel  their  real  wisdom  to  consist  in  the  fear, 
which  is  its  great  principle,  and  the  love,  which  is  its  ob- 
ject ;  so  do  they  not  scruple  to  entertain  both  hatred  and 
contempt  for  error ;  and  their  zeal  prompts  them  equally 
to  oppose  the  powers  of  reason  to  the  malignity  of  the 
impious,  and  to  scatter  with  the  shafts  of  ridicule  their  ex- 
travagance and  folly. 

Flatter  not  yourselves  then.  Fathers,  that  you  can  in- 
duce the  world  to  deem  it  unbecoming  in  a  Christian  to 
resort  to  raillery  in  his  assaults  upon  error  !  Nothing  is 
more  easy  than  to  prove  that  the  practice  is  both  just  in 
itself,  and  usual  with  the  fathers  of  the  Church ;  that  it 
is  sanctioned  by  Scripture  and  by  the  example  of  the 
most  eminent  saints ;  and  that  it  claims  the  august  autho- 
rity even  of  the  Deity  himself. 

Do  you  not  know  that  the  Lord  both  abhors  and  de- 
spises sinners ;  insomuch  that  even  in  the  hour  of  death, 
that  period  the  most   affecting   and   mournful  in  their 

180 

LETTER   XI. 

whole  career — Divine  Wisdom  has  declared  that  it  will 
add  mockery  and  scorn  to  the  wrath  which  consigns  them 
to  eternal  perdition ;  "  In  interitu  vestro  ridebo  et  sub- 
sannabo"?  And  the  righteous^  in  the  same  spiritj  will 
indulge  the  like  emotions ;  for  (as  David  says)  when  they 
see  the  punishment  of  the  wicked^  "  they  will  both  fear 
and  mock — Videbunt  justi  et  timebunt;  et  super  eum 
ridebunt."  And  Job  says  the  same  thing ;  "  Innocens 
subsannabit  eos." 

But  further,  it  is  most  remarkable,  that  in  the  very 
first  words  addressed  by  God  to  man,  after  his  fall,  we 
find  a  species  of  raillery — and,  according  to  the  authority 
of  the  Fathers,  "  a  pointed  irony."  For  after  Adam  had 
disobeyed,  in  the  vain  hope  which  the  devil  had  inspired, 
that  he  would  become  like  the  gods,  it  appears  from  Scrip- 
ture, that  God  rendered  him  subject  to  the  punishment  of 
death ;  and  that,  having  reduced  him  to  this  unhappy 
condition — the  result  of  his  sin— he  mocked  him  with 
these  sarcastic  words,  "  Behold  !  man  is  become  as  one  of 
us! — Ecce  Adam  quasi  unus  ex  nobis!"  "A  cutting 
and  palpable  irony  on  the  part  of  the  Deity,  to  aggravate 
his  fall,"  according  to  Chrysostom  and  other  interpreters. 
"  Adam,"  Rupert  says,  "  had  justly  exposed  himself  to 
this  mockery,  and  would  feel  it  more  acutely  than  more 
serious  language."  And  Hugues  de  St.  Victor,  after 
similar  sentiments,  adds;  "  This  ironical  language  was 
fully  incurred  by  his  credulity  and  sin." 

You  see,  then,  my  Father,  that  raillery  is  sometimes 
proper,  to  awaken  men  to  a  sense  of  their  extravagances, 
and  is  then,  in  fact,  only  justice :  for  says  Jeremiah, 
"  Vana  sunt  et  risu  dignk."     And  so  far  is  this  kind  of 

ERRORS   REFUTED   BY   RAILLERY.  181 

ridicule  from  impiety,  that  according  to  the  words  of  St. 
AugustinCj  "  The  wise  mock  at  the  wicked  because  they 
are  wise ;  not  in  a  wisdom  of  their  own,  but  in  that 
which  is  divine,  and  which  exults  at  the  ruin  of  the 
wicked.'' 

In  like  manner,  the  prophets,  filled  with  the  Spirit  of 
God,  availed  themselves  of  the  weapons  of  ridicule ;  as  in 
the  examples  of  Daniel  and  Elijah.  Finally,  we  have 
instances  of  the  same  thing  in  the  discourses  of  Christ 
himself;  and  St.  Augustine  remarks,  that,  intending  to 
humble  Nicodemus,  who  deemed  himself  a  master  in  the 
law;  and  seeing  him  inflated  with  pride  in  his  attain- 
ments, as  a  doctor  in  Israel,  he  first  surprises  him  by  the 
depth  of  his  questions  ;  and  then,  having  reduced  him  to 
an  incapability  of  reply,  he  says  :  "  Art  thou  a  master  in 
Israel,  and  knowest  not  these  things?"  As  if  he  had 
said,  "  Proud  man,  know  you  not  that  you  know  no- 
thing ? "  And  both  St.  Chrysostom  and  St.  Cyril  re- 
mark hereupon,  that  this  species  of  raillery  is  justifiable. 

You  must  perceive,  then,  from  these  instances,  that  if 
it  should  happen  in  our  days,  that  those  professing  to  be 
masters  among  Christians  (like  Nicodemus  and  the  Pha- 
risees among  the  Jews),  should  show  themselves  to  be 
ignorant  of  the  first  principles  of  their  religion;  and 
maintain  (for  instance)  "  that  we  may  be  saved  without 
ever  having  experienced  love  to  God  in  the  whole  course 
of  our  lives  ; "  we  should,  in  that  case,  be  only  following 
the  example  of  our  Saviour,  in  exposing  to  the  severest 
ridicule  their  vanity  and  their  ignorance.  It  is,  I  repeat, 
in  no  wise  inconsistent  with  sanctity,  to  ridicule,  on  fit 
occasions,  the  errors  and  fallacies  of  men :  were  it  other- 

183  LETTER   XI. 

wise  we  should  censure  some  of  the  greatest  names  in 
our  Church,  who  have  sanctioned  the  practice — such  as 
St.  Jerome,  in  his  Letters  and  Treatises  against  Jovinian ; 
Vigilantius,  and  the  Pelagians  ;  Tertullian,  in  his  "  Apo- 
logy," written  against  the  follies  of  idolatry ;  St.  Augus- 
tine, against  the  Monks  of  Africa,  whom  he  calls  "  long- 
haired "  (chevelus) ;  St.  Irenoeus,  against  the  Gnostics ; 
St.  Bernard,  and  the  Fathers  of  the  Church ;  who,  having 
themselves  been  imitators  of  the  Apostles,  ought  to  be 
examples  to  the  faithful,  and  the  true  models  of  Christians 
in  all  ages,  and  to  the  present  day, 

I  have  therefore  entertained  the  belief  that  I  could  not 
err  in  following  such  examples ;  and  having,  as  I  trust, 
succeeded  in  establishing  the  position  I  proposed,  I  shall 
only  subjoin  the  admirable  words  of  Tertullian,  which 
seem  to  me  fully  to  confirm  the  course  I  have  taken : 
"  What  I  have  now  been  doing  is  but  a  pastime  prepar- 
atory to  the  real  confl^ict.  I  have  rather  shown  a  sem- 
blance of  wounds  that  might  have  been  given,  than 
inflicted  them.  If  some  passages  have  tended  to  excite 
merriment,  it  has  been  rather  in  the  subjects  than  in  the 
mode  of  treating  them.  There  are  many  things  that 
require  to  be  touched  with  lenity  and  banter,  lest  we 
should  give  them  too  much  importance  by  serious  discus- 
sion. Nothing  is  more  appropriate  to  folly  than  ridicule ; 
and  it  is,  properly,  truth  alone  that  ought  to  indulge  in 
smiles,  because  she  is  happy  in  herself,  and  may  venture  to 
amuse  herself  at  her  enemies'  expense,  inasmuch  as  she  is 
assured  of  victory.  She  ought  undoubtedly  to  be  careful, 
that  her  raillery  be  not'  gross  in  its  expressions,  and  un- 
worthy of  her  cause.     But  (with  this  limitation),  when  it 

ERRORS   REFUTED    BY    RAILLERY.  183 

can  be  advantageously  employedj  it  is  "  a  duty  that  it 
should  be  so."  Is  not  this  language,  my  Fathers,  appro- 
priate to  our  purpose  ?  Are  not  my  late  letters  "  a  pas- 
time preparatory  to  the  real  conflict  ? "  I  have  but 
amused  myself  "  by  showing  the  wounds  that  might  have 
been  given,  rather  than  inflicted  them."  I  have  simply 
held  up  to  view  the  passages  in  question,  without  com- 
menting upon  them.  "  If  some  of  them  have  caused 
mirth,  it  is  the  subjects  themselves  that  have  caused  it." 
What,  I  pray,  is  so  suited  to  excite  ridicule,  as  to  see  the 
weighty  subjects  of  Christian  morals  mixed  up  with  fan- 
tastic'imaginations  like  yours?  Such  is  their  way  of 
treating  this  sublime  system,  that  they  tell  us  "  Jesus 
Christ  has  himself  revealed  to  your  Fathers,  '  that  a  priest 
who  has  received  money  for  saying  a  mass,  may,  in  addi- 
tion, take  payment  from  others,  in  consideration  of  his 
making  over  to  them  all  his  own  share  of  the  sacrifice  : ' 
'  that  a  Monastic  is  not  liable  to  excommunication  for 
leaving  off  his  habit,  even  if  it  be  for  the  purpose  of 
joining  in  dances,  for  pilfering,  or  going  incognito  to  places 
of  licentiousness : '  and  '  that  we  fulfil  the  duty  of  at- 
tending mass,  by  listening  to  four  fourth-parts  of  the 
office  at  once,  from  different  priests V"  I  say  then,  after 
hearing  these  and  similar  decisions,  it  is  impossible  to 
avoid  ridicule,  or  to  deal  in  any  other  way  than  that  of 
sarcasm  with  such  absurdities ;  since,  according  to  Ter- 
tuUian,  "  it  would  be  to  give  them  weight  and  authority 
to  discuss  them  seriously." 

What !  are  we  to  bring  to  bear  the  force  of  Scripture 
and  tradition,  in  order  to  demonstrate  that  it  is  treacher- 
ous to  kill  an  enemy  by  sword-wounds  from  behind,  or  in 

184 

LETTER   XI. 

ambuscade ;  and  that  it  is  purchasing  a  benefice  to  give 
money  as  a  motive  to  the  party  to  resign  ?  These  are 
assuredly  among  the  things  that  excite  only  contempt ; 
and  that  "  deserve  to  be  encountered  with  mockery  and 
ridicule."  Again,  as  says  this  ancient  writer,  "  Nothing 
is  more  appropriate  to  folly  than  raillery ; "  and  the  re- 
mainder of  his  sentiments  apply  so  well  to  the  point  in 
question,  as  to  leave  no  doubt  that  it  is  perfectly  allow- 
able to  laugh  at  error,  without  violation  of  good  manners 
and  decorum. 

I  must  also  contend,  my  Fathers,  that  ridicule  may  be 
employed  without  any  infringement  of  charity;  although  my 
use  of  this  weapon  is  one  of  the  charges  you  have  brought 
against  me  in  your  late  publication.  "  For  charity  in- 
duces us  sometimes  to  indulge  in  ridicule  at  men's  errors, 
for  the  very  purpose  of  causing  them  to  see  their  absur- 
dity, and  thus  to  forsake  them ;  "  according  to  St.  Augus- 
tine: "  HiEC  tu  misericorditer  irride,  ut  eis  ridenda  ac 
fugienda  commendes."  And  equally  are  we  sometimes 
compelled,  in  the  same  spirit,  to  denounce  them  with 
warmth ;  as  St.  Gregory  Nazianzen  teaches,  in  these 
words  :  "  The  spirit  of  charity  and  kindness  has  both  its 
tenderness  and  its  severity."  "  In  truth,"  as  says  St. 
Augustine  again,  "  who  shall  dare  to  affirm,  that  truth  is 
to  remain  passive  under  the  aggressions  of  error ;  and 
that  the  enemies  of  the  faith  shall  be  allowed  to  disturb 
the  pious  by  their  audacities,  or  amuse  them  by  sallies 
of  wit  and  humour ;  while  the  orthodox  are  to  be  re- 
stricted to  a  frigidness  of  language  that  shall  send  the 
reader  to  sleep  ?  " 

See  you  not,  then,  I  pray,  that  in  this  way,  we  should 

ERRORS  REFUTED  BY  RAILLERY.        185 

allow  to  be  brought  into  the  Church  the  most  extravagant 
and  pernicious  errors,  without  daring,  on  the  one  hand, 
to  expose  them  to  deserved  contempt  by  raillery,  lest  we 
should  be  charged  with  want  of  good  manners  ;  or,  on  the 
other,  to  attack  them  with  more  vigorous  weapons,  lest  a 
breach  of  charity  should  be  imputed  to  us  ? 

What,  reverend  sirs  !  you  are  to  tell  us,  "  that  life  may 
be  taten  for  a  blow,  or  an  injury ;"  and  we  may  not  be 
allowed,  in  the  most  public  manner,  to  denounce  an  error 
of  such  grave  importance  to  the  public  !  You  are  to  be 
at  liberty  to  say  "  that  a  judge  may  with  safe  conscience 
retain  the  wicked  gains  that  he  has  made  by  corruption  ;" 
and  we  are  to  have  no  leave  to  contradict  the  position  ! 
You  publish  to  the  world,  with  the  consent  of  your  whole 
body,  "  that  a  man  can  be  saved  without  love  of  God  ;  " 
and  you  would  shut  the  mouth  of  those  who  desire  to  de- 
fend the  truth  and  the  faith ;  warning  them  that  they  will 
violate  brotherly  charity  by  controverting,  and  offend 
against  Christian  modesty  by  ridiculing  your  maxims  !  I 
doubt,  my  Fathers,  whether  there  are  any  whom  you  have 
succeeded  in  bringing  over  to  your  views.  But  should 
there  be  persons  so  credulous  as  to  be  persuaded  that  I 
have  violated  the  dues  bf  charity  towards  yourselves  by 
denouncing  your  moral  precepts,  I  request  them  now  to 
examine  carefully  the  grounds  of  this  opinion.  For, 
although  they  may  imagine  that  it  originates  in  zeal  to 
prevent  imputations  against  their  neighbours ;  let  them 
consider,  that  it  may  not  impossibly  own  another  source ; 
and  may  but  too  probably  arise  from  that  secret  opposition 
(often  undetected  even  by  ourselves)  which  our  evil  nature 
is  ever  apt  to  raise,  against  those  who  set  themselves  to 

186  LETTER   XI. 

stem  the  tide  of  moral  corruption.  And,  to  furnisli  them 
with  a  rule  to  discover  the  true  principle  of  their  conduct, 
I  would  ask  them,  whether,  while  they  complain  of  the 
manner  in  which  religionists  have  been  treated,  they  still 
more  warmly  resent  the  treatment  which  Divine  Truth 
has  received  at  those  religionists'  hands  ?  If  their  dis- 
pleasure have  been  excited,  not  only  against  these  letters, 
but  yet  more  against  the  principle  which  it  is  their  object 
to  expose,  then  I  shall  be  willing  to  acknowledge,  that 
their  resentment  has  its  source  in  a  zeal,  sincere,  though 
unenlightened;  and,  in  such  case,  the  authorities  I  am 
now  adducing  will  suffice  to  set  them  right.  But  if,  on 
the  other  hand,  such  persons  can  feel  wrath  only  against 
my  animadversions,  and  none  against  the  matters  which 
I  have  censured,  truly,  my  Fathers,  I  do  not  scruple  to 
tell  them  they  are  grossly  abused,  and  their  zeal  is  as 
blind  as  it  is  misdirected  ! 

Singular  indeed  is  that  zeal  which  rouses  against  such 
as  dare  to  denounce  error,  but  is  passive  towards  those 
with  whom  that  error  .originates  !  Novel  the  charity 
which  resents  the  overthrow  of  flagrant  impostures,  but  is 
silent  under  the  moral  contamination  which  they  produce ! 
Were  such  persons  in  danger  of  assassination,  would  they 
be  offended  with  the  friend  who  warned  them  of  the  am- 
bush prepared  for  them  ?  Instead  of  turning  out  of  its 
way,  would  they  trifle  in  complaints  of  the  nneharitable- 
ness  of  him  who  so  seasonably  informed  them  of  the 
murderous  plot  ?  Are  they  displeased  at  a  warning  to 
abstain  from  food  that  contains  poison ;  or  not  to  visit  a 
neighbourhood  which  is  the  seat  of  pestilence  ? 

How  is  it  then,  that  we  are  stigmatized  with  unchari- 

ERRORS   REFUTED   BY   RAILLERY.  187 

tableness  for  exposing  principles  fatal  to  religion  ;  and 
yet  should  be  thought,  wanting  in  charity,  in  not  giving 
warning  against  that  which  would  be  hurtful  to  health  or 
life  ?  Is  it  not,  that  the  love  of  life  causes  us  to  entertain 
with  favor  every  thing  that  tends  to  its  preservation ; 
while  an  indiflference  to  truth  leads  us  not  only  to  take  no 
part  in  its  defence,  but  to  view  with  hostility  the  efforts  of 
others  to  overthrow  falsehood  ? 

I  entreat  such  persons  to  consider — and  that,  as  in  the 
sight  of  God — the  scandal  and  injury  which  the  moral 
system  of  your  Casuists,  so  widely  diffused,  is  producing 
throughout  the  Church ;  the  unbounded  licence  of  man- 
ners to  which  it  is  giving  rise ;  the  fierce  and  stub- 
born audacity  with  which  it  is  propagated  ?  And  if  they 
cannot  perceive  that  the  time  is  come  for  making  a  stand 
against  such  corruptions,  their  blindness  is  not  less  la- 
mentable than  your  own,  0  Fathers  !  and  both  you  and 
they  will  fall  under  the  apostrophe  of  St.  Augustine,  upon 
the  words  of  our  Saviour  in  the  Gospel :  "  Woe  to  the 
blind  who  lead  !  Woe  to  the  blind  who  are  led  ! — Vse 
ccecis  ducentibus  !     Vse  ccecis  sequentibus  !  " 

But  that  you  may  no  longer  have  any  justification  for 
entertaining  these  impressions  yourselves,  or  conveying 
them  to  others,  I  will  tell  you,  my  Fathers — and  I  blush 
to  be  compelled  to  instruct,  when  I  ought  rather  to  be  sit- 
ting submissively  at  the  feet  of  age,  of  authority,  and 
learning — I  will  tell  you  what  are  the  marks  that  have 
been  assigned  by  the  leaders  of  our  Church  to  indicate 
whether  censures,  such  as  these,  proceed  from  a  spirit  of 
piety  and  charity,  or  of  impiety  and  malice. 

The  iirst  of  these  marks  then,  is,  that  piety  always 

188  LETTER   XI. 

uses  the  language  of  sincerity  and  truth ;  while  envy  and 
hatred  use  that  of  falsehood  and  calumny — "  Splendentia 
et  vehementiaj  sed  rebus  veris,"  says  St.  Augustine,  de 
Doct.  Chr.  B.  4,  C.  28.  "  Whosoever  resorts  to  false- 
hood is  under  the  influence  of  Satan.  No  regulation  of 
the  motive  can  justify  calumny  ;  and  if  the  conversion  of 
the  world  were  at  stake,  it  would  not  be  lawful  to  malign 
the  innocent ;  because  we  ought  not  to  do  the  smallest 
evil  to  bring  about  even  the  greatest  good;  and  the 
truth  of  God  hath  no  need  of  our  falsehood,"  according 
to  the  Scripture  (Job  xiii.  7,)  "  Will  ye  speak  wickedly 
for  God  ?  "  "  It  is  the  duty  of  those  who  defend  the 
truth  to  speak  nothing  but  truth,"  says  St.  Hilary,  Con. 
Const.  Therefore,  reverend  Fathers,  I  can  declare,  as 
before  God,  that  there  is  nothing  I  detest  more  than  the 
slightest  violation  of  truth  ;  and  that  I  have  been  always 
most  especially  careful,  not  only  not  to  falsify  (for  that 
would  be  detestable)  but  not  to  alter  or  pervert  in  the 
smallest  degree  the  sense  of  any  passage  I  have  quoted. 
So  that,  availing  myself  in  this  argument,  of  the  words  of 
St.  Hilary  again,  I  would  say  with  him,  "  if  we  assert 
what  is  false,  let  us  be  accounted  infamous ;  but  if  we 
can  demonstrate  that  our  statements  are  palpable  and 
notorious,  it  is  not  to  go  beyond  the  bounds  of  modesty 
and  apostolical  liberty,  to  direct  these  reproaches  against 
them." 

But  it  is  not  sufficient  that  we  state  only  what  is  the 
truth ;  we  are  bound  also  not,  at  all  times,  to  say  all 
that  is  true ;  because  we  ought  only  to  give  publicity  to 
things  that  may  serve  a  useful  purpose,  and  not  to  such 
as  may  cause  pain  to  individuals,  without  conducing  to 

ERRORS  REFUTED  BY  RAILLERY.        189 

general  utility.  And  thus^  as  the  first  rule  is  truth,  so 
is  the  second  discretion.  "  The  wicked,"  says  St.  Augus- 
tine, ep.  8,  "  persecute  the  good,  in  following  blindly  the 
guidance  of  their  passions ;  the  good,  on  the  other  hand, 
oppose  the  wicked,  in  the  exercise  of  a  sound  discretion  ; 
as  the  surgeon  carefully  considers  the  wound  he  is  about 
to  inflict ;  while  a  murderer  deals  his  destructive  blows  at 
random."  You  well  know,  my  Fathers,  that  I  have  not 
reported  many  of  these  maxims  of  your  authorities,  re- 
specting which  you  woidd  have  felt  the  most  sensitively  ; 
although  I  might  have  done  so — and  that  without  offend- 
ing against  discretion — as  many  wise  and  most  catholic 
men  before  me  had  done :  and  every  one  who  has  read 
your  authors,  knows,  as  well  as  yourselves,  how  greatly  I 
have  spared  you.  I  have,  further,  not  said  a  word  on  any 
occasion  to  the  prejudice  of  any  members  of  your  body 
individually ;  and  should  have  revolted  from  any  allusion 
to  secret  and  personal  delinquencies,  whatever  might  have 
been  the  proofs  I  possessed  of  them.  For  I  well  know 
that  this  is  the  characteristic  of  hatred  and  malevolence, 
and  is  a  practice  never  to  be  justified,  but  when  required 
by  the  most  pressing  necessity,  for  the  welfare  of  the 
Church.  It  is  evident  then,  that  I  have  in  no  degree  been 
wanting  in  prudence  in  the  allegations  I  have  thought  it 
my  duty  to  make  against  your  system  of  morality ;  and 
that  you  have  more  need  to  commend  me  for  my  absti- 
nence, than  to  complain  of  my  indiscretion. 

The  third  rule  is,  that  when  necessity  compels  to  resort 
to  raillerj',  we  should  confine  the  use  of  such  a  weapon 
to  the  errors  only  upon  which  we  may  be  animad- 
verting, and  not  employ  it  against  really  sacred  things ; 

190  LETTER   XI. 

while  a  spirit  of  buffoonery,  impiety,  and  heresy,  aims  to 
bring  ridicule  upon  the  most  solemn  realities.  I  have 
already  defended  myself  against  this  imputation  ;  and  in 
truth  there  is  not  much  danger  of  infringing  this  precept 
in  commenting  upon  opinions  such  as  those  I  have  ad- 
duced from  your  authorities  ! 

Finally,  my  Fathers — to  condense  these  rules  in  one, 
the  principal  and  the  very  substance  of  all — Divine  love 
should  influence  the  heart,  supremely  to  seek  the  spiritual 
good  of  those,  against  whom  we  direct  our  censures  ;  and 
to  address  our  petitions  to  God,  simultaneously  with  our 
reproaches  against  man.  "  We  ought,"  says  St.  Augus- 
tine, "  to  cherish  charity  in  the  heart,  even  when  we  are 
compelled  externally  to  do  what  is  offensive  to  men  ;  and 
to  inflict  upon  them  severe  but  salutary  chastisement : 
their  welfare  should  be  preferred  to  their  comfort."  It  is 
my  conviction.  Reverend  Fathers,  that  there  is  nothing  in 
my  letters  inconsistent  with  such  a  desire  on  my  part  for 
you;  and  charity  therefore  must  compel  you  to  believe 
such  to  have  been  in  reality  my  motive. 

But  if  you  are  desiroiis  indeed  that  I  should  briefly 
exhibit  to  you  a  conduct  at  variance  with  these  rules,  and 
bearing  the  true  character  of  buffoonery,  malice,  and 
hatred,  I  will  produce  some  specimens;  and  in,  order 
that  they  may  be  the  more  known  and  familiar  to  you, 
they  shall  be  drawn  from  the  pages  of  your  own  writers. 

To  begin,  then,  with  the  contemptuous  manner  in  which 
the  authors  of  your  school  deal  with  sacred  things,  whe- 
ther in  their  jocularities,  their  gallantries,  or  their  serious 
discussions,  would  you  consider  the>arious  absurd  stories 
introduced  by  your  Pere  Benit,  into  his  "  Consolations 

ERRORS   REPUTED   BY   RAILLERY.  191 

for  the  Sick/'  as  very  appropriate  to  his  ostensible  design 
of  furnishing  Christian  consolation  to  those  who  are  suf- 
fering under  the  afflictions  of  God  ?  Would  you  maintain 
that  the  profane  and  wanton  manner  in  which  the  Pere 
Le  Moine  talks  of  piety,  in  his  "  Devotion  made  Easy," 
is  calculated  to  inspire  respect  for  the  picture  he  draws  of 
Christian  virtue  ?  Does  his  entire  work  of  "  Moral  Por- 
traits"— whether  the  prose  or  the  verse — breathe  of  aught 
but  the  vanity  and  follies  of  the  world  ?  Is  the  poem  in 
the  seventh  book  entitled  "  Praises  of  Modesty,"  worthy 
of  an  ecclesiastic,  purporting  to  show  that  every  thing 
fair  blushes,  or  is  subject  to  blushing  ?  It  professes  to  be 
intended  to  console  a  lady,  who  is  called  Delphine,  and 
who  had  a  habit  of  frequent  blushing.  The  burthen  of 
each  stanza  is,  that  every  thing  most  admired  is  of  a 
blushing  hue,  such  as  roses,  pomegranates,  the  lips,  the 
tongue ;  and  it  is  amongst  these  gallantries,  disgraceful  to 
a  Pietist,  that  he  dares  indecently  to  mix  up  allusions  to 
those  blessed  spirits  who  stand  before  the  Lord,  and  whom 
the  Christian  should  never  name  but  with  reverence.* 

*  The  following  are  the  lines  alluded  to,  which  almost  defy  a  translation 
that  would  do  them,  justice : 

'  Les  chdrubins,  ces  glorieux 
Composes  de  tete  et  de  plume, 
Que  Dieu  de  son  esprit  allume, 
Et  qu'il  ^olaire  de  ses  yeux ; 
Ces  illustres  faces  volantes 
Sont  toujours  rouges  et  brulantes 
Soit  du  feu  de  Dieu,  soit  du  leur, 
Et  dans  leur  flammes  mutuelles 
Font  du  mouvement  de  leur  ailes 
Un  eventail  a  leur  chaleur. 
Mais  la  rongeur  delate  en  toi. 
Delphine,  avec  plus  d'avantage, 
Quand  I'honneur  est  sur  ton  visage 
Vetu  de  pourpre  comme  un  roi,^&c. 

192  LETTER   Xr. 

What  will  you  say.  Fathers,  to  the  preference  assigned 
to  the  blushes  of  Delphine  over  the  glowing  ardours  of 
those  spiritual  beings,  inspired  by  Divine  love  alone  ? 
And  the  comparison  of  a  fan  to  the  mysterious  ilutterings 
of  their  wings — is  that  consistent  with  Christian  decorum, 
in  one  who  performs  the  function  of  consecrating  the  holy 
body  of  the  Saviour  ?  I  know  the  scope  of  the  composi- 
tion is  only  gallantry  and  banter :  but  what  is  all  that, 
but  turning  sacred  things  into  jest  ?  And  is  it  any  valid 
plea  to  urge,  as  is  done  in  the  first  book,  in  language 
equally  unbecoming — "  The  Sorbonne  extends  not  its  juris- 
diction over  Parnassus,  and  the  errors  of  that  fair  region 
are  not  obnoxious  to  its  censures  or  inquisitions  : "  as  if 
blasphemy  and  impiety  were  only  blameable  in  prose  ! 
But,  at  all  events,  such  a  plea  would  not  avail  for  the  fol- 
lowing passage,  taken  from  the  preface  to  the  same  work : 
"  The  river,  on  the  border  of  which  the  author  has  com- 
posed these  verses,  is  so  calculated  for  the  formation  of 
poets,  that  if  baptismal  water  were  to  be  taken  from  it,  it 
would  not  have  the  efiect  of  driving  away  the  spirit  of 
poetry  ?  "  Nor  that  again  of  your  Pere  Garasse  in  his 
Summary  of  the  Chief  Truths  of  Religion,  p.  640,  in 
which  he  adds  blasphemy  to  heresy,  in  the  following  lan- 
guage on  the  sacred  mystery  of  the  Incarnation :  "  The 
human  personality  has  been,  as  it  were,  grafted,  or 
mounted  *  on  the  back  of  the  personality  of  the  Word." 
And  that  other  passage  of  the  same  author,  p.  510 — be- 
sides other  similar — in  which  he  utters  a  stupid  jest  upon 
the  name  of  Jesus,  designated  usually  thus,  J.  H.  S. 

In  thus  manner  it  is  that  you  degrade  the  great  verities 

*  '  MonW  a  cheyal.'  (Fr.) 

ERRORS   REFUTED   BY   RAILLERY.  193 

of  religion,  in  contravention  of  the  inviolable  rule,  which 
enjoins  to  treat  them  with  reverence.     And  you  do  no  less 
wrong  to  those  who  impose  upon  themselves,  as  a  duty,  the 
strict  observance  of  truth  and  discretion.     What  is  it  that 
abounds  more  in  your  writings  than  calumny?     Are  the 
allegations    of    P^re  Brisacicr  consistent    with    truth  at 
pp.  24,  35,  4th  Part,  that  the  nuns  of  Port  Royal  make 
no  invocations  to  the  saints,  and  have  no  images  in  their 
churches  ?     Are  these  not  audacious  falsehoods,  since  the 
very  contrary  is  known  to  be  the  case  throughout  the 
whole  of  Paris  ?     Is  it  a  decent  discretion  to  impeach  the 
character  of  these  pure-minded  and  exemplary  females — 
to  call  them  impenitent,  neglectful  of  the  sacraments,  un- 
devout,  foolish,  fantastical,  abandoned,   and  whatever  else 
is  opprobrious — and  to  heap   such  calumnies  upon  them 
as  even  to  draw  down  upon  the  slanderer  the  censure  of 
the  late  Archbishop   of  Paris  ?     Then,  again,  to  traduce 
the  priests,  whose  morals  are  so   irreproachable,  saying, 
1st  Part,  p.  23,  "  that  they  introduce  novelties  into  the 
confessional,  for  the  purpose  of  entrapping  the  fair  and  the 
innocent ;  and  that  the  author  would  be  shocked  to  record 
the  abominations  they  are  guilty  of  ?  "     Is  it  not  an  in- 
tolerable audacity  to  advance  such  flagrant  inventions,  not 
only  without  proof,  but  without  the  slightest  shadow,  or 
pretence  of  reality  !     I  shall  say  no  more  on  this  subject 
at  present,  but  postpone  further  remark  to  another  occa- 
sion.    What  I  have  now  advanced  may  be  sufficient  to 
show  the  degree  in  which  you  have  violated  equally  the 
laws  of  truth  and  discretion. 

But  it  may,  perhaps,  be  said,  that,  at  least,  the  last  of 
the  rules  which  have  been  cited  is  not  infringed  by  you. 

194  LETTER   XI. 

viz.  that  which  enjoins  us  to  seek  the  spiritual  welfare  of 
those  whom  we  censure ;  and  that  this  charge  cannot  be 
brought  against  you  without  violating  secrets  which  are 
known  to  God  alone.  Wonderful  is  itj  my  Fathers,  that 
the  means  should  be  in  our  power  to  convict  you  of  this 
charge  also  ;  that  carrying  your  hatred  against  your  op- 
ponents to  such  a  length  as  to  aim  at  their  eternal  de- 
structionj  your  infatuation  should  have  been  such  as  to 
betray  to  the  world  an  aim  so  abominable,  that,  far  from 
cherishing  secret  aspirations  for  their  eternal  welfare,  you 
have  indulged  in  public  vows  for  their  damnation ;  and 
that,  after  having  given  utterance  to  these  execrable  de- 
sires, to  the  scandal  of  the  whole  Church,  in  the  town  of 
Caen,  you  should  also  have  dared  to  reiterate  in  Paris,  in 
your  authorized  works,  a  sentiment  so  diabolical !  You 
here  reach  the  climax  of  violation  of  true  piety ;  ribald 
raillery  on  the  most  sacred  subjects,  false  and  scan- 
dalous calumny  of  holy  women  and  ecclesiastics,  and, 
lastly,  open  desires  and  vows  for  their  eternal  perdition  ! 
I  know  not,  0  Fathers,  where  is  your  sense  of  shame, 
when  you  can  venture  to  charge  a  want  of  charity  upon 
us,  who  have  been  so  scrupulously  observant  of  truth  and 
moderation — while  you,  yourselves,  have  been  guilty  of 
such  lamentable  transports  of  malevolence  ! 

I  will,  for  the  present,  conclude,  by  noticing  only  one 
other  charge  which  you  have  brought  against  me,  namely, 
that  amongst  the  numerous  axioms  of  your  authorities 
upon  which  I  have  remarked,  some  had  been  pretiioiisly 
subjected  to  censure.  To  this  I  answer,  that  it  is  for  this 
very  reason — because  you  have  so  little  profited  by  pre- 
vious comments,  that  I  now  repeat  them.     What  has  been 

ERRORS   REFUTED    BY   RAILLERY.  195 

the  fruitj  I  ask,  of  the  reiterated  animadversions  of  so 
many  learned  men — nay  of  the  entire  University — in  their 
numerous  writings  ?  What  has  been  the  conduct  of  your 
Annats,  your  Caussins,  Pintereaus  and  Le  Moines  in 
their  replies,  but  to  overwhelm  with  obloquy  those  who 
ventured  to  give  them  these  salutary  councils?  Have 
you  suppressed  the  works  in  which  such  offensive  prin- 
ciples are  inculcated  ?  Have  their  authors  been  repre- 
hended ?  Has  the  criticism  produced  more  circumspection  ? 
And  is  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  subsequent  to  all  this,  that 
Escobar  has  been  so  frequently  reprinted  both  in  France 
and  in  the  Low  Countries ;  and  that  your  Peres  Cellot, 
Bagot,  Bauny,  Laury,  Le  Moine  and  others,  have  been 
incessantly  putting  forth  similar  publications,  with  other 
novelties,  as  licentious  as  any  of  the  former  ?  Complain 
not  then.  Sirs,  that  I  have  made  the  subject  of  my 
renewed  censure,  principles  and  doctrines  which  (if  before 
attacked)  you  have  never  abandoned — that  I  have  exposed 
others  and  yet  more  unsound  dogmas,  to  the  public  gaze 
— that  I  have  made  all,  alike,  the  vehicles  of  ridicule  and 
sarcasm.  Look  at  them  once  again  calmly,  and  you  will 
see  in  them  your  own  confusion,  and  my  defence.  Who 
can  hear  without  scorn  the  decision  of  Pere  Bauny  in  the 
case  of  Incendiarism ;  that  of  Pere  Cellot  on  the  question 
of  Kestitution ;  the  rules  of  Sanchez  in  favour  of  Necro- 
mancers ,•  the  way  in  which  Hurtado  gets  rid  of  the  sin  of 
duelling,  by  allowing  the  party  to  walk  in  a  field  and  fall 
in  (of  course  by  accident)  with  his  antagonist ;  the 
refinements  of  Bauny  for  evading  the  crime  of  usury; 
the  method  of  keeping  clear  of  Simony  by  a  theory  of 
intention ;  and  that  of  avoiding  falsehood  by  sometimes 

K  2 

196  LETTER   XI. 

speaking  loud  and  sometimes  low ;  with  various  other 
similar  sophistries,  of  your  gravest  doctors  ?  Is  any  thing 
more  required  for  my  justification  ?  *  Is  aught/  as  says 
Tertullian,  '  due  to  such  opinions — so  compounded  of 
weakness  and  inanity—  but  ridicule  ? '  Yes,  Reverend 
Fathers,  I  must  tell  you  that  the  corruption  of  morals  to 
which  your  doctrines  lead,  requires  also  another  mode  of 
animadversion ;  and  we  may  justly  ask  with  the  same 
holy  writer  again,  '  Shall  we  laugh  at  their  folly,  or 
lament  their  blindness : '  '  Rideam  vanitatem,  an  expro- 
brem  ccecitatem  ? '  My  conviction  is,  my  Fathers,  that 
we  may  at  our  pleasure  both  laugh  and  weep  by  turns  ! 
'  Haec  tolerabilius  vel  ridentur,  vel  flentur,'  says  St. 
Augustine,  cont.  Faust.  B.  30,  C.  6.  Remember  that 
Holy  Writ  declares  the  same  truth.  And  it  is  my  desire 
that  I  may  not  see  realized  in  you  those  words  in  the 
Proverbs,  "  There  are  some  so  unreasonable  as  never  to 
be  satisfied,  however  they  are  treated,  whether  it  be  by 
ridicule,  or  by  anger. "  * 

P.  S. — Since  closing  my  letter,  I  have  seen  a  pubhcation 
emanating  from  your  Society,  in  which  I  am  accused  of 
misrepresentation  in  regard  to  six  of  your  maxims, 
reported  by  me,  and  of  making  common  cause  vpith 
heretics.  I  trust  you  will  receive  an  exact  and  early 
reply  to  this  charge ;  and  I  suspect  that,  after  a  time, 
you  will  not  be  much  inclined  to  repeat  these  kind 
of  recriminations. 

*  If  by  the  '  Proverbs'  here  is  meant  the  part  of  Scripture  so  entitled, 
the  above  must,  I  apprehend,  be  only  a  paraphrase  of  some  passage,  as  I  am 
not  aware 'of  any  part  from  which  it  is  literally  taken.     (Transl.) 

LETTER  XII. 

refutation  op  the  sophistries  op  the  jesuits  on 
the  subjects  op  alms-giving  and  simony. 

Reverend  Fathers, 
I  had  prepared  to  address  you  respecting  the  asper- 
sions in  which  you  have  so  long  indulged  towards  me  in 
your  various  publications ;  styling  me  successively  '  im- 
pious and  ignorant/  '  buffoon  and  Merry-Andrew,  an 
impostor,  a  calumniator,  a  cheat,  a  heretic,  a  Calvinist  in 
disguise,  a  disciple  of  Mohna,  one  possessed  with  devils, 
&c.  &c.'  Not  choosing  entirely  to  acquiesce  in  such 
treatment,  I  was  about  to  appeal  to  the  world  as  to  its 
justice,  and  had  determined  publicly  to  expose  your 
calumnies  and  impositions,  when  your  later  replies  to  me 
appeared ;  and  therein  I  found  myself  made,  in  my  turn, 
the  subject  of  similar  charges  of  imposition  on  your  part. 
I  have  thus  been  obliged  to  alter  my  plan  of  proceeding  ; 
although  I  intend  still,  in  a  measure,  to  pursue  my  original 
purpose ;  and  trust  to  be  able,  in  defending  myself  from 
the  charge  of  impostures,  to  convict  you  of  some  more 
palpable  and  flagrant  than  any  which  you  have  imputed 
to  me. 

198  LETTER  XII. 

And  truly,  my  Fathers,  your  case  is  one  of  more  sus- 
picion than  my  own.  Little  probable  is  it  that,  standing 
as  I  do  alone — without  external  power  or  human  aid — 
and  confronting  a  body  so  powerful  as  yours, — sustained 
alone  by  the  weapons  of  integrity  and  truth,  I  should 
expose  myself  to  the  loss  of  every  thing  dear  to  me,  by 
risking  a  conviction  of  falsehood  and  imposture !  It  is 
but  too  easy  to  detect  untruth  in'  matters  of  fact  like 
these ;  and  well  do  I  know,  I  should  not  lack  accusers,  nor 
would  full  scope  and  opportunity  be  denied  to  them  to 
establish  their  charges.  As  for  you.  Reverend  Sirs,  your 
position  is  far  different ;  you  may  use  what  language  you 
please  against  me,  and  I  can  complain  to  none.  In  this 
unequal  contest,  I  should  feel  little  bound  to  use  reserve, 
did  not  other  considerations  restrain  me.  Nevertheless, 
as  you  choose  to  hold  me  up  as  an  impostor,  you  compel 
me  to  a  defence ;  while,  as  you  must  know  that  this  can- 
not be  made  without  fresh  disclosures  on  my  part,  and 
laying  bare  anew  the  whole  foundation  of  your  moral 
system,  I  must  be  allowed  to  entertain  doubts  of  the 
policy  of  your  conduct.  The  war  must  now  be  carried  on 
within  your  own  borders,  and  at  your  own  cost ;  and 
although  you  may  think,  that  by  mystifying  the  questions 
at  issue  with  scholastic  terms,  the  replies  will  be  so 
tedious,  so  obscure  and  abstruse,  as  to  repel  the  public 
mind  from  their  consideration,  you  may  possibly  find 
yourselves  herein  mistaken.  It  shall  be  my  endeavour  to 
occasion  as  little  weariness  as  may  be  possible  in  such  a 
controversy  as  this.  Your  maxims  have  at  least  this 
property,  that  they  afford  universal  amusement.  Remem- 
ber, however,  that  it  is  yourselves  who  challenge  me  anew 

SOPHISTRIES   OF    THE   JESUITS.  199 

to  this  discussion ;  and  let  us  now  see  which  of  us  shall 
come  the  best  out  of  it. 

The  foremost  of  your  charges  of  imposture  is  concealing 
the  '  opinion  of  Vasquez  upon  the  duty  of  alms-giving.' 
Allow  me  however,  first  of  all,  to  give  a  clear  explanation 
of  the  point  at  issue,  in  order  that  all  obscurity  be  removed 
in  our  discussion. 

It  is  well  known.  Sirs,  that  according  to  the  authority 
of  the  Church,  there  are  two  precepts  on  the  subject  of 
alms ;  the  one,  to  give  of  our  superfluity  for  relieving  the 
ordinary  necessities  of  the  poor,  the  other  to  give  of  what 
is  even  necessary  to  ourselves  (according  to  our  means,)  in 
cases  of  extreme  destitution.  This  is  what  is  laid  down 
by  Cajetan  following  St.  Thomas ;  so  that,  to  ascertain 
the  spirit  of  Vasquez'  regulations  of  alms-giving,  we  must 
examine  his  directions,  both  as  to  what  may  be  deemed 
superfluous,  and  what  necessary. 

As  to  superfluity,  which  is  the  most  usual  resource  for 
the  relief  of  the  poor,  this  is  entirely  got  rid  of  by  the 
tenet  I  recited  in  my  letter,  De  Fl.  c.  4,  N.  14,  viz. 
'  That  which  persons,  moving  in  the  world,  retain  for 
supporting  their  station  in  society,  and  that  of  their  rela- 
tives, is  not  to  be  deemed  superfluous.  Therefore  it  can 
rarely  happen  that  such  persons,  even  of  the  most  exalted 
rank — not  excepting  Sovereigns — can  be  said  to  possess  a 
superfluity.'  You  see  therefore,  my  Fathers,  that  accord- 
ing to  this  definition,  no  persons  of  an  aspiring  disposition 
are  likely  to  suffer  under  a  superfluity  of  possessions  :  and 
by  this  means,  alms-giving,  in  regard  to  the  greater  part 
of  the  world,  is  virtually  abolished. 

But  even  if  this  were  not  the  case,  men  would  be  dis- 

200  LETTER   XII. 

pensed  from  this  duty,  in  eases  of  ordinary  necessity, 
according  to  Vasquez ;  who  impugns  entirely  aiiy  obliga- 
tion of  the  kind  on  the  part  of  the  rich.  These  are  his 
words,  ch.  1,  d.  4,  N.  33.  •  Corduba,'  he  says,  '  teaches 
that  those  who  enjoy  a  superfluity  of  means  are  bound  to 
distribute,  at  least  some  portion  to  all  who  are  in  circum- 
stances of  ordinary  necessity,  in  order,  in  some  measure, 
to  conform  to  the  precepts  of  the  church  on  this  head  ; 
but  this  I  do  not  agree  with  :  '  sed  hoe  non  placet ; '  for 
we  have  demonstrated  the  contrary,  in  opposition  to 
Cajetan  and  Navarre.'  Thus,  my  Fathers,  the  obligation 
to  alms-giving,  under  this  head,  is  according  to  this 
decision  entirely  abolished. 

As  regards  the  duty,  in  case  of  extreme  and  pressing 
necessity,  you  see  that  by  the  various  conditions  which 
must  unite  to  impose  the  obligation,  the  very  wealthiest 
people  in  Paris  may  pass  their  whole  lives  without  having 
once  incurred  it.  I  will  only  adduce  two  of  these ;  the 
one  is,  that  '  they  must  be  certain  that  the  poor  applicant 
will  not  be  able  to  receive  relief  from  any  other  quarter ; ' 
'  hsec  intelligo  et  csetera  omnia,  quando  scio  nullum 
alium  opem  laturum,  ch.  1,  N.  28."  What  shall  be  said 
to  this.  Reverend  Sirs  ?  Is  it  likely  often  to  happen,  I 
would  ask,  that  in  Paris,  where  beneficence  so  abounds,  it 
shall  be  demonstrable  that  none  would  be  found  except 
ourselves  to  relieve  a  distressed  applicant  ?  And  yet, 
according  to  this  authority,  unless  ascertained  of  this  fact, 
the  cry  of  poverty  may  always,  with  a  safe  conscience,  be 
left  unheeded !  The  other  preliminary  is,  '  that  the  ne- 
cessity of  the  pauper  shall  be  such  that  he  be  in  imminent 
danger  to  life  or  good  fame;'  N.  24  and  26.     This  is  a 

SOPHISTRIES   OP   THE   JESUITS.  201 

case  certainly  not  of  very  common  occurrence ;  and  what 
proves  the  infrequency  of  it  is,  that  the  author  says  (N.  45) 
that  the  poor  man,  being  thus  in  the  circumstances  which 
are  to  impose  the  necessity  of  alms-giving  for  his  relief, 
'  is  justified  in  robbing  the  rich  for  the  relief  of  his 
necessity.'  So  that,  after  absolving  the  rich  from  the 
duty  of  giving  alms  of  his  superfluity  (which  is  the  grand 
source  of  charity,)  he  only  obliges  him  to  afford  relief  to 
the  poor,  in  circumstances  of  such  exigency,  as  that, 
according  to  his  doctrine,  the  pauper  object  is  permitted 
to  help  himself  to  the  goods  of  the  rich.  This  is  Vas- 
quez's  theory,  to  which  you  refer  your  readers  for  their 
edification. 

I  come  now  to  other  charges  of  misrepresentation.  You 
insist  much  upon  the  way  in  which  Vasquez  enforces  the 
duty  of  alms-giving  upon  ecclesiastics ;  but  this  is  not  the 
question  between  us  at  present.  Be  assured  I  shall  be 
ready  to  discuss  it  whenever  you  please.  As  to  the  laity 
(whose  case  alone  it  is  we  are  considering),  you  seem  to' 
wish  it  to  be  understood  that  Vasquez  is  speaking,  in  the 
passages  I  have  quoted,  only  the  sentiments  of  Cajetan, 
and  not  his  own.  As  nothing,  however,  can  be  more  un- 
founded than  this,  and  as  you  have  not  ventured  so  far 
even  as  to  state  the  fact  unreservedly,  I  am  willing^  for 
your  own  sake,  to  believe  that  it  was  not  your  intention  to 
convey  such  a  meaning. 

You  afterwards  complain  vehemently,  that,  after  quoting 
the  maxim  of  Vasquez,  '  that  scarcely  any  persons  living 
in  the  world — not  even  excepting  sovereigns — will  be 
found  to  possess  "  superfluity,"  '  I  should  have  deduced 
the  conclusion  that  the  rich  are  under  very  little  obliga- 

K  s 

202 

LETTER   XII. 

tion  to  give  of  their  superfluity.  But  what  else  does  this 
mean,  I  pray  ?  If  it  be  true,  that  the  rich  may  contend 
that  they  rarely  possess  superfluous  wealth,  is  it  not 
equally  certain  that  they  cannot  be  bound  to  give  alms 
out  of  their  superfluity  ?  I  might  pursue  the  argument 
at  more  length,  had  not  Diana  (who  is  so  great  an  ad- 
mirer of  Vasquez,  that  he  calls  him  "the  Phoenix  of 
minds"),  drawn  the  same  inference  from  his  principles; 
for,  after  quoting  the  maxims  referred  to  of  Vasquez,  he 
thus  concludes  :  "  As  to  the  question,  Whether  the  rich 
are  bound  to  give  alms  of  their  superfluity,  although  the 
opinion  may  be  well  founded,  it  will  seldom  or  never 
happen  that  they  will  be  under  any  obligation  to  act  upon 
it."  Now,  I  have  done  no  more  than  follow,  word  for 
word,  these  authorities.  Diana,  however,  may  repeat  with 
eulogies  these  sentiments  of  Vasquez,  may  hold  them 
forth  as  most  reasonable,  and  "  very  convenient  for  the 
rich  "  (as  he  says  in  the  same  place) ;  and  you  hold  him  to 
be  no  calumniator,  no  forger,  no  impostor.  But  if  I,  on  the 
contrary,  venture  to  adduce  these  same  opinions  (but  by 
no  means  holding  their  author  to  be  a  phoenix) — I  am  an 
impostor,  a  forger,  a  calumniator  of  his  principles  !  Be 
assured,  reverend  Fathers,  you  have  good  reason  to  fear, 
that  this  difierence  in  your  conduct  towards  those  whose 
statements  are  identical,  and  who  disagree  only  in  their 
opinions  of  your  doctors,  will  betray  your  secret  motive ; 
and  make  it  apparent  that  your  only  aim  is  to  uphold,  by 
whatever  means,  the  reputation  of  your  Society.  So  long 
as  your  accommodating  theology  passes  for  a  prudent  con- 
descension to  the  infirmities  of  your  followers ;  you  are 
not  forward  to  disavow  the  statements  of  those  who  pub^ 

SOPHISTRIES   OP   THE   JESUITS.  203 

lish  itj  butj  on  the  contrary,  eulogize  them,  as  contri- 
buting to  the  support  of  a  common  object.  But  when  it 
is  denounced  as  a  pernicious  laxity,  then  the  same  instinct 
of  self-defence  leads  you  to  disavow  principles  which  are 
bringing  discredit  upon  you.  Thus  you  own  or  repudiate, 
not  by  the  rules  of  truth,  which  are  immutable,  but  by 
the  mere  accident  of  shifting  circumstances ;  according  to 
the  ancient  saying,  "  Omnia  pro  tempore,  nihil  pro  veri- 
tate."  Take  heed,  then,  0  Fathers !  and  that  you  may 
not  again  charge  me  with  having  drawn  from  the  prin- 
ciples laid  down  by  Vasquez,  conclusions  which  he  would 
have  disavowed,  know  that  he  has  drawn  those  very  con- 
clusions himself  (C.  1.  N.  27) :  "  Persons  are  scarcely 
bound,"  he  says,  "  to  alms-giving,  when  only  out  of  their 
superfluity,  according  to  the  opinion  of  Cajetan,  and  ae- 
cording  to  mine  also — et  secundum  nostram.'''  You  must 
confess  then,  Sirs,  on  the  testimony  of  Vasquez  himself, 
that  I  have  exactly  stated  his  sentiments ;  and  you  will 
then  see  with  what  justice  you  have  dared  to  say,  "  If  the 
matter  be  investigated  to  its  source,  it  will  be  seen  that 
he  (Vasquez)  has  inculcated  the  very  opposite  doctrine." 

By  what  I  have  now  adduced,  then,  you  show  the  value 
of  your  assertion,  that  if  Vasquez  does  not  compel  the 
rich  to  give  alms  of  their  superfluity,  he  enjoins,  as  a  set- 
off, that  they  should  give  of  that  which  is  necessary  to 
themselves.  But  you  have  omitted  to  add  the  combina- 
tion of  circumstances  which  he  declares  to  be  necessary  to 
constitute  the  obligation,  and  which  restrict  it  almost  to  the 
point  of  annihilation ;  while,  instead  of  stating  explicitly 
his  doctrines,  you  say,  generally,  that  he  compels  the  rich 
to  give,  even  of  that  which  is  necessary  to  their  station, 

204 

LETTER  XII. 

This  would  be  proving  too  much,  my  good  Fathers.  The 
gospel-rule  goes  not  this  length ;  and  Vasquez  would  be 
far  from  faUing  into  such  an  error.  To  conceal  his  lax- 
nessj  you  impute  to  him  a  severity  which  would  be  actually 
blapeable ;  and,  by  that  means,  you  shake  all  belief  in 
the  fidelity  of  your  representations.  But  he  is  by  no 
means  deserving  of  this  reproach,  after  having  maintained, 
as  I  have  shown,  that  the  rich  are  not  bound  by  the  laws 
of  justice  or  charity,  to  give  of  their  superfluity,  and  still 
less  of  their  necessaries,  in  any  ordinary  cases  of  poverty ; 
and  that  the  obligation  in  extraordinary  cases  is  so  rare,  as 
scarcely  ever  to  occur. 

I  have  now  disposed  of  all  your  cavils  j  and  it  only 
remains  for  me  to  show,  how  unfounded  your  assertion  is 
that  Vasquez  is  more  rigid  even  than  Cajetan.  This  will 
be  extremely  easy ;  for  the  Cardinal  teaches,  "  We  are 
bound  in  justice  to  give  alms  of  our  superfluity,  even  in 
relief  of  the  ordinary  necessities  of  the  poor  :  since,  ac- 
cording to  the  holy  Fathers,  the  rich  are  only  stewards  of 
their  possessions  for  the  purpose  of  dispensing  to  the 
wants  of  the  needy."  And  thus,  instead  of  being,  as 
Diana  says  of  the  maxims  of  Vasquez,  "  highly  conve- 
nient and  agreeable  to  the  rich  and  their  confessors,"  the 
doctrine  of  the  Cardinal  affords  them  no  such  consolation. 
He  declares  ("De  Eleem."  c.  6),  that  he  has  no  words 
for  the  rich  but  those  of  Jesus  Christ,  "  That  it  is  easier 
for  a  camel  to  pass  through  a  needle's  eye,  than  for  a  rich 
man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  "  and  to  their 
confessors,  "  If  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  both  shall  fall 
into  the  ditch."  Such  sacredness  did  he  attach  to  the 
duty  in  question ! 

SOPHISTRIES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  205 

And  have  not  all  the  Fathers  and  holy  men  of  old  main- 
tained the  same  obligation  ?  "  There  are  two  cases/'  says 
St.  Thomas,  2.  2.  q.  118,  Art.  4,  ad.  2,  "in  which  we  are 
bound  by  the  rules  of  justice  to  give  alms — ex  debito 
legali — the  one,  when  the  poor  are  in  circumstances  of 
dangerous  destitution  ;  the  other,  when  we  ourselves  enjoy 
a  superfluity  of  means."  And  q.  87,  a.  1,  ad.  4  :  "  The 
tithes  which  the  Jews  were  directed  to  distribute  to  the 
poor,  have  been  augmented  under  the  new  law ;  for  Christ 
commands  us  to  give  not  only  a  tenth,  but  the  whole  of 
our  superfluity."  And  yet  Vasquez  would  exempt  his 
followers  from  the  distribution  even  of  a  pitiful  fraction  ; 
such  is  his  indulgence  towards  the  rich— his  insensibility 
to  the  poor — his  contrariety  to  the  pious  and  beneflcent 
sentiments  expressed  by  the  holy  Gregory,  in  those  words 
so  unpalatable  to  the  rich  and  worldly :  "  When  we 
minister  to  the  necessity  of  the  poor,  we  give  them  not  so 
much  of  our  own,  as  of  theirs ;  and  it  is  a  debt  of  justice, 
rather  than  an  impulse  of  compassion." 

It  is  on  this  ground  that  the  saints  enjoin  on  the  rich 
to  share  with  the  poor  the  bounties  of  earth,  that  they 
may  enjoy  together  with  them  the  blessings  of  heaven. 
And,  instead  of  inculcating  upon  them,  like  your  Brethren, 
that  worldly  ambition  which  would  leave  them  no  super- 
fluous wealth,  and  those  avaricious  propensities  which 
would  forbid  its  distribution  ;  these  holy  men  laboured  to 
induce  men  to  give  bounteously  of  their  superfluity  ;  and 
to  show  them  Tiow  large  would  be  its  amount,  if  measured, 
not  by  our  natural  cupidity  (which  nothing  can  satisfy), 
but  by  the  rule  of  piety,  which  seeks,  with  ingenious 
pains,  to  retrench  all  superfluous  indulgence,  in  order  that 

206  .  LETTER   XII. 

we  may  have  the  more  to  dispense  in  the  exercises  of 
charity.  "  We  shall  have  large  superfluity,"  says  St. 
AngustinCj  "  if  we  confine  ourselves  within  the  limits  of 
necessity ;  but  if  we  give  the  reins  to  vain  indulgence, 
nothing  will  satisfy  us.  Ascertain,  my  brethren,  what 
suflSces  for  the  service  of  God,  and  the  wants  of  nature  ; 
and  not  what  is  demanded  by  your  cupidity,  which  is  the 
mere  temptation  of  Satan ;  and  remember,  that  the  super- 
fluity of  wealth  is  the  necessity  of  the  poor."  In  Ps.  147. 

I  earnestly  desire,  Reverend  Fathers,  that  what  I  have 
now  advanced,  may  not  only  serve  for  my  justification, 
which  is,  in  itself,  of  little  importance  ;  but  may  cause 
yon,  to  perceive  and  to  abhor  the  evil  tendency  of  those 
corrupt  maxims  of  your  Casuists ;  that  thus  we  may  be 
united  together  in  the  observance  of  the  sacred  rules  j)f 
the  gospel,  by  which  we  must  all  hereafter  be  judged  ! 

As  to  the  second  matter  in  question.  Simony — before 
replying  to  the  reproaches  you  have  cast  upon  me — I 
commence  by  an  explanation  of  your  doctrines  on  the 
subject.  Finding  yourselves  embarrassed  between  those 
canons  of  the  Church,  which  impose  fearful  penalties  upon 
simoniacal  practices,  and  the  avaricious  propensities  of  so 
many  who  are  addicted  to  them,  you  have  adopted  your 
usual  method,  of  conceding  to  men  all  that  they  desire ; 
and  to  God — nothing  but  words  and  empty  pretences ! 
What  does  the  simonist  want,  I  pray,  but  money,  for  the 
bestowal  of  his  benefices  ?  And  this  is  what  you  exempt 
from  the  charge  of  simony  !  But  since  it  is  necessary 
that  the  name  should  still  exist — a  certain  something  to 
which  it  may  be  attached — you  have  created  for  this  pur- 
pose a  mere  fiction,  which  would  never  have  occurred  to; 

SOPHISTRIES   OF   THE   JESUITS,  207 

the  thought  of  a  simonistj  and  would  indeed  be  useless  to 
him, — that  is,  to  weigh  the  money,  considered  in  itself, 
against  the  spiritual  good  in  question,  considered  in  itself. 
Now,  who  would  have  ventured  to  compare  things  so  dis- 
proportioned,  and  of  such  opposite  natures  ?  And  yet, 
provided,  as  say  your  authorities,  this  metaphysical  com- 
parison be  not  made,  it  is  allowable  to  transfer  a  benefice 
to  another,  and  receive  money  as  a  consideration,  without 
the  crime  of  simony ! 

Thus  it  is  that  you  make  puppets  of  religion,  in  com- 
plaisance to  men's  corrupt  passions.  Yet,  see  with  what 
gravity  your  Father  Valentia  delivers  his  vagaries,  in  the 
passage  cited  in  my  letter,  t.  3,  disp.  6,  q.  19,  part  3,  p. 
2044 ;  "  A  temporal  consideration,"  he  says,  "  may  be 
given  for  a  spirituality  in  two  ways  j  the  one  in  fixing  a 
higher  price  on  the  temporal  than  the  spiritual,*  which 
would  be  simony ;  the  other  in  regarding  the  tem- 
poral consideration  as  the  motive  and  inducement  for  the 
transfer  of  the  spirituality,  without,  however,  estimating 
the  temporality  higher  than  the  spirituahtyj  and  this  is 
no  simony.  The  reason  of  which  is,  that  simony  con- 
sists in  receiving  a  temporal  consideration  as  the  actual 
price  of  a  spirituality.  Now,  if  the  temporality  be  required 
— si  petatur  temporale — not  as  the  price,  but  as  the  mo- 
tive which  induces  the  bestowal,  this  is  no  kind  of  simony, 
even  if  the  principal  end  and  aim  be  the  acquisition  of  the 
temporality — minime  erit  simonia,  etiamsi  temporale  prin- 
cipaliter  intendatur  et  expectetur." 

And   your  illustrious  Sanchez  has  laid  down  similar 

*  '  Prisant  davantage  le  temporel  qae  le  spirituel.'  (Fr.) 

208  LETTER   XII. 

dogmas,  according  to  Escobar,  tr.  6,  ex.  3,  N.  40.    These 
are  his  words :  "  If  a  temporal  consideration  be  given  for 
a  benefice,  not  as  a  price,  but  as  a  motive  inducing  the 
patron  to  the  bestowal,  or  a  compensation,  if  already  be- 
stowed, it  is  not  simony.     Sanchez  declares  this,   Opusc. 
t.  2, 1.  2,  c.  3,  d.  23,  N.  7,  Theses  of  Caen,   1644 :  "  It 
is  a  probable  opinion,  inculcated  by  many  Catholics,  that 
it  is  not  simony  to  bestow  a  spirituality  for  a  temporal 
consideration,  when  the  latter  is  not  given  as  a  price  for 
the  same."     And  as  to  Tannerus,  this  is  his  doctrine  (and 
Valentia's  is  similar),  which,  I  think,  will  show  with  what 
justice  you  complain  of  me,  for  alleging  its  discrepancy 
with  that  of  St.  Thomas.     Here  is  his  own  avowal,  in  the 
passage  cited  in  my  letter,  t.  3,  disp.  5,  p.  1519;  "  Pro- 
perly speaking,"  he  says,  "  there  is  no  real  and  actual 
simony,  excepting  the  receiving  a  temporal  consideration 
as  a  price  for  a  spiritual  cure ;  but  if  it  be  taken  as  the 
motive  for  the  bestowal  of  the  benefice,  or  as  a  testimony 
of  gratitude  to  the  giver,  then  it  is  not  simony,  at  least 
by   the  rules  of   conscience."      And  afterwards :  "  The 
same  may  be  said,  even  if  the  temporality  be  the  principal 
consideration,   and  made  more  the  object  than  the  spi- 
rituality ;  although  St.  Thomas,  and  some  others,  seem  to 
hold  the  contrary ;  in  that  they  affirm  it  absolutely  to  be 
simony  to  bestow  a  benefice  for  a  temporal  consideration, 
when  the  latter  is  the  object  of  the  transaction." 

Here  then.  Reverend  Fathers,  is  your  doctrine  on  the 
subject  of  simony,  as  laid  down  by  your  most  eminent 
authors,  following  each  other's  views  with  a  wonderful 
exactness  !  It  remains  only  for  me  to  reply  to  your 
charges  of  misrepresentation  upon  this  head. 

SOPHISTRIES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  209 

You  say  nothing  respecting  the  opinions  of  Valentia ; 
and  his  doctrineSj  therefore^  remain  untouched  by  your 
statements.  But  it  is  upon  Tannerus  that  you  pause ; 
and  you  allege  that  he  has  only  decided  the  matter  in 
question  not  to  be  simony  "  by  the  divine  law ; "  leaving 
it  to  be  supposed  that  I  have  suppressed,  in  my  quotation, 
the  words  "  by  divine  law.'^  Now  this,  I  maintain  to  be 
untenable ;  for  the  terms,  "  by  divine  law,"  are  not  at 
all  in  the  passage.  You  go  on  to  say  that  Tannerus  de- 
clares it  to  be  a  simony  "  by  actual  law."  *  Again,  you 
are  wrong,  Reverend  Sirs  :  he  does  not  say  this  in  general 
terms ;  but  only  as  to  particular  cases — "  in  casibus  a 
jure  expressis " — as  he  says  in  the  same  place.  And 
herein  he  makes  an  exception  from  the  general  position 
laid  down  in  the  same  passage,  "  that  it  is  not  sinning  by 
the  rule  of  conscience  (simonie  en  conscience) ;  which 
implies  that  it  is  not  such  by  actual  laws ;  unless  you 
would  convict  Tannerus  of  the  impiety  of  maintaining 
simony  by  actual  law,  not  to  be  such  by  the  rules  of  con- 
science. But  you  are  fond  of  putting  forward  designedly 
such  terms  as,  "  right  divine,  positive  right,  natural  right, 
interior  and  exterior  tribunal,  cases  expressed  by  law, 
external  presumption,^^  and  others  equally  obscure,  in 
order  to  conceal  your  meaning  under  their  abstruseness, 
and  blind  people's  eyes  to  your  extravagances.  You  shall, 
however,  I  assure  you,  not  escape  by  these  subtilties :  I 
proceed  to  put  to  you  some  questions  of  so  simple  a  nature, 
that  they  shall  not  be  subject  to  a  "  distinguo." 

I  ask  you  then,  my  Reverend  Fathers — without  making 

*  '  De  droit  positif.'  (Fr.) 

210  LETTER  XII. 

it  any  question  of  "  positive  rights  "  or  "  external  pre- 
sumption "  or  "  an  exterior  tribunal " — whether  an  in- 
cumbent, according  to  your  authority,  is  a  Simonist  who 
transfers  a  benefice  of  four  thousand  livres  annual  value,* 
and  receives  ten  thousand  francs  money  down,t  not  as 
the  price  of  the  living,  but  as  a  motive  which  induces  him 
to  give  it  ?  Answer  me  plainly.  Sirs  ;  what  would  be  the 
decision  of  your  authors  upon  such  a  case  as  this  ?  Would 
not  Tannerus  say,  with  his  usual  formalities,  "  It  is  not 
Simony  by  the  rules  of  conscience,  because  the  temporal 
consideration  is  not  the  price  of  the  benefice,  but  only  the 
motive  which  causes  him  to  bestow  it  1"  Would  not 
Valentia,  Sanchez,  and  Escobar  also,  (as  do  your  Caen 
Theses)  decide  it  "  not  to  be  Simony  "  for  the  same  rea- 
son ?  Is  any  thing  further  necessary  to  shelter  this  in- 
cumbent from  the  charge  of  Simony  ?  And  would  you 
venture  to  treat  him  as  guilty  of  the  ofience,  in  your  con- 
fessionals, (whatever  might  be  your  private  opinion  of  his 
case,)  when  he  would  have  it  in  his  power  to  silence  you 
by  alleging  that  he  had  acted  on  the  opinions  of  such 
learned  authorities  as  these  ?  Acknowledge  then,  that 
the  party,  whose  case  we  are  supposing,  must  be  acquitted 
of  Simony,  according  to  your  doctrine ;  and  then  defend 
the  doctrines  themselves  in  the  best  way  you  can. 

This  is  the  proper  way,  my  Fathers,  to  treat  questions 
of  this  kind  ;  to  dissect  and  disentangle  them,  instead  of 
wrapping  them  up  in  scholastic  terms ;  or  changing  the 
state  of  the  question,  as  you  do  (in  your  last  piece  of 

*  '  De  quatre  mille  livres  de  rente,'  (Fr.) 
t  '  Dix  mille  francs  argent  comptant.'  (Fr.) 

SOPHISTRIKS   OP   THE   JESUITS.  211 

vituperation)  after  this  fashion :  "  Tannerus/'  you  say, 
"  declares  at  least,  that  such  a  barter  is  a  great  offence." 
And  then  you  reproach  me  with  having  maKciously  sup- 
pressed this  expression,  which,  as  you  allege,  entirely 
justifies  him.  Here  again  you  are  mistaken,  and  in 
various  ways.  For,  even,  were  what  you  state  true,  it 
would  not  be  a  question,  (in  regard  to  the  passages  I 
referred  to)  whether  sin  had  been  committed,  but  simply, 
is  it  Simony  ?  Now  these  are  two  very  opposite  questions. 
"  Sin,"  according  to  your  principles,  "  only  requires  con- 
fession ;  Simony  demands  restitution  : "  and  there  are 
those  who  consider  these  things  to  be  very  different.  For 
you  have  invented  methods  to  render  confession  most  in- 
dulgent ;  but  none  have  been  found  to  make  restitution 
agreeable.  I  must  further  tell  you  that  the  case  which 
Tannerus  holds  to  be  one  of  sin,  is  not  simply,  that  in 
which  a  spiritual  property  is  given  for  a  temporal,  which 
is  the  principal  motive;  but  he  superadds, " that  the  tem- 
poral shall  be  valued  higher  than  the  spiritual."  And  it 
is  not  amiss  in  him  to  adduce  such  a  case  as  this  as  a 
sin  ;  for  a  man  must  be  either  very  knavish,  or  very  stu- 
pid, who  could  not  avoid  falling  into  sin,  by  a  device  so 
easy  as  that  of,  merely,  not  drawing  into  a  comparison  the 
value  of  these  two  matters,  when  he  is  at  liberty  to  give 
the  one  in  exchange  for  the  other.  Besides  this,  Valen- 
tia,  in  his  enquiry,  (in  the  part  already  referred  to)  whe- 
ther it  be  sinful  to  exchange  spiritualities  for  a  temporal 
consideration  (the  latter  being  the  motive  for  the  barter) 
reports  the  reasons  of  those  who  decide  in  the  affirmative, 
adding :  "  sed  hoc  non  videtur  mihi  satis  cerium  " — this 
does  not  appear  to  me  sufficiently  clear. 

213  LETTER  XII. 

But,  since  that  period,  it  has  been  decided  by  your 
Pere  Erade  Bille,  Professor  of  cases  of  conscience  at  Caen, 
that  the  cases  in  question  have  not  the  nature  of  sin  j 
inasmuch  as  the  probable  opinions  in  their  favor  are  pro- 
gressively acquiring  strength.  He  states  this  in  his 
writings  in  1644 ;  in  answer  to  which  M.  Dupre,  Doctor 
and  Professor  of  Caen,  published  his  beautiful  and  well- 
known  Dissertation.  For,  although  Pere  Erade  Bille 
acknowledges  that  the  doctrine  of  Valentia  (followed  by 
Pere  Malhard,  and  condemned  by  the  Sorbonne)  "  is  op- 
posed to  the  general  feeling,  is  open  in  various  ways  to 
suspicion  of  Simony,  and  obnoxious  to  legal  punishment, 
if  detected,"  he  nevertheless  does  not  scruple  to  add, 
that  it  is  an  opinion,  probable,  and  consequently  safe,  as 
regards  the  conscience,  that  there  is  no  Simony  in  itj 
and  therefore  no  sin.  It  is,"  he  says,  "  a  probable  opi- 
nion, and  one  inculcated  by  many  learned  Catholics,  that 
it  is  not  Simony,  and  no  sin,  to  give  money,  or  any  other 
temporal  consideration  for  a  benefice;  either  on  the  ground 
of  acknowledgment,  or,  as  a  motive  without  which  it 
would  not  be  given  ;  provided  it  be  not  an  exact  equiva- 
lent for  the  spirituality  required." 

Here  then  is  all  the  proof  that  can  be  desired  !  And 
thus,  my  Fathers,  you  see  by  this  concurrence  of  authori- 
ties, that  Simony  will  be  reduced  within  such  narrow 
limits,  that  even  Simon  Magus  himself — the  Prototype  of 
all  Simoniacal  purchasers — who  desired  to  give  money  for 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; — and  Gehazi  also — the  Proto- 
type of  Simonical  venders,  who  received  money  for  the 
performance  of  a  miracle — that  even  these  would  be  ex- 

SOPHISTRIES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  213 

empted  from  the  charge  !  For  it  is  not  to  be  doubtedj 
that  when  Simon  (in  the  Acts)  oflPered  the  apostles  money 
for  their  miraculous  endowments,  he  used  none  of  the 
terms  of  buying,  and  selling,  and  price  ;  and  did  nothing 
more  than  offer  his  money  as  the  motive  for  which  the 
spiritual  gifts  were  to  be  be  imparted  to  him.  Which 
being  (according  to  your  writers)  no  Simony,  he  ought  to 
have  been  exempted  from  the  denunciation  of  St.  Peter, 
had  the  apostle  been  duly  instructed  in  your  doctrine. 
This  ignorance  also  must  be  regarded  as  a  source  of  great 
wrong  to  Gehazi,  when  struck  by  Elisha  with  leprosy; 
for  (receiving  the  largess  of  the  Prince,  after  his  miracu- 
lous cure,  merely  as  a  mark  of  his  gratitude,  and  not  an 
equivalent  for  the  supernatural  power  which  had  eflfected 
the  miracle)  he  might  have  compelled  the  prophet  to  re- 
store him  from  the  plague,  under  pain  of  a  mortal  sin  ; 
seeing  he  had  acted  only  on  the  principles  of  so  many 
profound  theologians — principles  on  which  your  confessors 
are  bound  to  absolve  their  penitents,  and  to  wash  them 
from  that  spiritual  leprosy,  of  which  the  corporeal  is  a 
type! 

Alas  !  my  Reverend  Fathers,  it  is  but  too  easy  to  turn 
all  this  into  matter  of  ridicule.  Why  you  should  thus 
expose  yourselves  to  it,  I  know  not ;  I  might  easily,  with 
the  same  view,  adduce  other  decisions ;  such  as  that  of 
Escobar,  in  his  '  Practice  of  Simony,'  according  to  the 
Society  of  Jesus,  tr.  6,  ex.  1,  N.  44.  '  Is  it  Simoniacal,' 
he  says,  '  for  two  ecclesiastics  to  make  an  agreement  of 
this  kind  :  give  me  your  vote  for  my  election  to  the  office 
of  Provincial,  and  I  will  give  you  mine  for  getting  that  of 
Prior  ?     No.'     And  this  again,  tr.  6,  N.  14 ;  '  It  is  not 

214  .  LETTER  XII. 

Simony  to  procure  a  benefice  under  a  promise  of  money, 
if  we  have,  in  reality,  no  intention  of  paying  it  j  for  this 
is  only  a  feigned  Simony,  and  not  more  real  than  counter- 
feit gold  is  pure  gold.'  Here  is  indeed  a  subtilty  of 
conscience  !  A  man  is  supposed  (adding  theft  to  simony) 
to  procure  the  benefice  without  payment — and  yet  without 
Simony !  But  I  have  not  space  to  pursue  this  subject 
further,  and  must  hasten  to  refute  your  third  calumnious 
charge  on  the  subject  of  Bankruptcies. 

Nothing,  my  Fathers,  can  be  more  gross  than  this. 
You  accuse  me  of  imposition,  on  the  ground  of  a  certain 
sentiment  of  Lessius,  not  cited  by  myself,  but  brought 
forward  by  Escobar,  in  a  passage  quoted  by  me  from  him  ; 
and  thus,  even  if  it  should  be  proved  that  Lessius  did  not 
hold  the  opinion  attributed  to  him  by  Escobar,  what  can 
be  more  unjust  than  to  visit  this  error  upon  me  ?  If  I 
quote  Lessius  and  your  other  authors,  as  of  myself,  I  am 
answerable  for  them.  But  Escobar,  having  collected  the 
views  of  four  and  twenty  of  your  Fathers,  I  ask  you 
whether  I  ought  to  be  held  responsible  for  any  thing  but 
what  I  myself  have  quoted  from  him,  and  should  be  made 
to  guarantee  further  all  his  questions  from  others  ?  How 
unreasonable  is  this  !  And  yet  this  is  the  point  in  ques- 
tion. I  cited  in  my  letter  the  following  passage,  very 
faithfully  translated  from  Escobar,  tr.  3,  ex.  ^,  N.  163 
(upon  which  you  make  no  remark.)  "  May  a  bankrupt 
retain  with  a  safe  conscience  a  sufficiency  of  property  to  en- 
able him  to  live  respectably  :  '  ne  indecore  vivat  ? '  I  reply 
with  Lessius,  Yes."  '  Cum  Lessio  assero  posse,  &c.'  Here- 
upon you  affirm,  that  Lessius  does  not  hold  this  opinion. 
Now,  consider  for  a  moment  what  it  is  to  which  you  are 

SOPHISTRIES   OF    THE   JESUITS.  215 

committing  yourselves.  If  the  fact  be  not  as  you  state, 
you  are  guilty  of  imposition  in  asserting  tlie  contrary ;  if 
it  bej  then  Escobar  is  the  impostor.  So  that,  in  some  way 
or  the  other,  some  Member  of  the  Society  is  convicted  of 
imposition.  See  the  scandal  you  are  causing !  You 
know  not  how  to  trace  things  to  their  necessary  conse- 
quences. You  think  you  have  only  to  fling  about  your 
malevolences,  without  considering  upon  whom  they  may 
be  retaliated.  Could  you  not  have  foreseen  your  difficulty 
in  regard  to  Escobar,  before  you  committed  yourselves  to 
such  a  statement  ?  He  would  have  set  you  right.  It  is 
not  difficult  to  communicate  with  Valladolid  where  he  is 
living,  in  excellent  health,*  occupied  in  completing  his 
great  work  on  Moral  Philosophy,  in  six  volumes  (of  the 
first  of  which  I  shall  some  of  these  days  perhaps  take  an 
opportunity  of  giving  you  some  account.)  My  first  ten 
letters  have  been  transmitted  to  him  :  you  might  also 
have  communicated  to  him  a  statement  of  your  difficulty, 
and  I  will  answer  for  it  he  would  have  replied  to  it ;  for 
it  cannot  be  doubted  that  he  has  himself  seen  the  passage 
in  question  of  Lessius,  from  whence  he  got  the  '  ne  in- 
decore  vivat.^  Read  it  carefully  yourselves,  my  Fathers, 
and  you  will  find  it  as  I  have  done.  Book  3,  ch.  16,  N.  45 ; 
'  Idem  coUigitur  aperte  ex  juribus  citatis,  maxime  quoad 
ea  bona  quse  post  cessionem  acquirit,  de  quibus  is  qui 

''  Escobar.  From  all  that  is  related  by  Alegambe  of  the  Pere  Escobar, 
he  seems  to  have  been  (in  his  way)  a  well-meaning,  laborious,  and  devoted 
man.  It  is  said  that  when  he  learnt  how  he  was  brought  forward  in  the 
Provincial  Letters  he  was  delighted,  and  thought  much  more  of  himself  than 
before.  His  portrait  is  in  existence :  it  is  striking,  and  shows  him  to  have 
been  a  resolute  and  decided  man,  of  thorough  self-confidence.  He  died  at 
Valladolid  in  July,  1663,  at  the  age  of  81.    (Editor.) 

216 

LETTER  XII. 

debitor  est  etiam  ex  delicto,  potest  retinere  quantum 
necessarium  est,  ut  pro  su^  conditione  non  indecore  vivat. 
Petes  an  leges  id  permittant  de  bonis  quse  tempore 
instantis  cessionis  habebat  ?  Ita  videtur  colligi  ex  CD," 
I  will  not  pause  here  to  show  that  Lessius,  in  this 
dogma,  abuses  the  sanction  of  the  law,  hy  which  a  bank- 
rupt is  allowed  a  mere  subsistence,  and  not  the  means  of 
an  honourable  maintenance.*  It  is  sufficient  to  have 
justified  Escobar  from  the  charge  against  him,  and  more 
than  was  necessary.  But  you,  reverend  Fathers,  have 
not  done  your  duty  ;  for  the  matter  in  question  is  to  reply 
to  that  passage  in  Escobar,  whose  decisions  are  very  in- 
convenient, inasmuch  as,  being  independent  of  all  that 
precedes  and  follows,  and  dealing  in  abstract  dogmas,  they 
are  not  subject  to  your  distinctions,  I  have  already 
quoted  one  entire  passage,  which  permits  "  those  who 
make  compromises,  to  retain  a  portion  of  theb*  property 
(even  though  unjustly  acquired),  for  the  respectable  main- 
tenance of  their  families,"  Upon  which  I  felt  myself 
compelled  to  make  this  comment  in  my  letter ;  "  By  what 
strange  species  of  charity  do  you  maintain,  that  property 
shall  belong  rather  to  those  who  have  acquired  it  by  injus- 
tice, than  to  the  lawful  creditors  ?  "  This  it  is  which 
calls  for  a  reply ;  but  then  comes  your  difficulty ;  which 
you  will  seek  in  vain  to  elude  by  citing  other  passages 
from  Lessius,  quite  beside  the  point,  I  ask  you,  can  this 
decision  of  Lessius  be  conscientiously  acted  upon  by  one 
who  has  committed  bankruptcy  ?  And  beware  how  you 
answer !     If  in  the  negative,  I  ask  what  becomes  of  your 

*  '  Vivre  avec  honneur.)  Fr.) 

SOPHISTRIES   OP    THE   JESUITS.  317 

Doctor,  and  your  doctrine  of  probability  ?  If  in  tbe  af- 
firmative, then  I  send  you  to  the  courts  of  justice  ! 

I  take  leave  of  you,  my  reverend  Fathers,  in  this  di- 
lemma ;  for  I  have  left  myself  no  space  now  to  expose 
your  next  imposture,  respecting  the  passage  from  Lessius 
upon  homicide.  Let  this  suffice  for  the  present :  more 
shall  follow. 

I  shall  also,  on  this  occasion,  make  no  reply  to  the 
false  and  scandalous  reflections  upon  myself,  with  which 
you  wind  up  each  successive  misrepresentation.  They 
shall  all  be  encountered  in  a  succeeding  letter ;  in  which 
also,  I  hope  effectually  to  open  up  the  hidden  sources  from 
which  your  various  calumnies  are  drawn. 

Yet,  Sirs,  for  your  own  sakes,  I  cannot  but  lament  to 
see  you  resorting  to  such  weapons.  The  wrongs  that 
you  inflict  upon  me,  will  not  set  at  rest  our  controversies ; 
and  your  menaces — of  whatever  description — shall  never 
deter  me  from  self-defence.  You  think  yourselves  shel- 
tered by  the  impunity  of  power  ;  but  I  stand  on  the  van- 
tage-ground of  innocence  and  truth  !  Long  and  perse- 
vering may  be  the  assaults  of  violence  against  those  sacred 
bulwarks.  No  efforts  of  rude  power  can  overthrow  truth  ; 
they  serve  only  to  enhance  her  lustre ;  while  truth's  most 
transcendent  radiance  avails  not  to  arrest  the  course  of 
violence,  and  serves  but  to  irritate  it  the  more.  When  force 
opposes  force,  the  stronger  overpowers  the  weak ;  when 
controversies  are  arrayed  against  each  other,  those  founded 
on  justice  and  reason  may  silence  the  clamours  of  vanity 
and  falsehood:  but  violence  and  truth  will  ever  wage 
against  each  other  a  fruitless  and  interminable  warfare. 
Yet,  let  it  not  then  be  concluded  that  their  forces  are 

218  LETTER  XII. 

balanced,  and  their  weapons  tempered  alike.  There  is 
between  them  this  immeasurable  difference,  that  violence 
traces  a  course  limited  and  circumscribed  by  the  resistless 
decree  of  God,  which  causes  all  its  efforts  to  subserve  the 
advancement  of  the  sacred  cause  assailed.  But  truth 
shall  remain  ever  unimpaired,  and  be  victorious  over  all 
her  enemies  ;  for  she  is  immortal  and  omnipotent,  like  the 
Eternal  himself ! 

Refutation  of  the  Reply  of  the  Society  to  the  preceding 
{I2th)  Letter. 

Sir, 
Whoever  may  be  the  party  I  am  now  addressing,  and 
who  has  undertaken  the  cause  of  the  Jesuits  against  a 
publication  which  exposes  so  fully  the  delinquencies  of 
their  moral  system,  you  seem,  by  the  eagerness  with  which 
you  hasten  to  their  succour,  to  be  sensible  of  their  weak- 
ness ;  and  herein  your  judgment  is  not  to  be  impeached. 
But,  if  you  entertain  the  belief  that  you  have  really  suc- 
ceeded in  establishing  their  defence,  your  discretion,  I 
must  take  leave  to  tell  you,  will  not  appear  to  be  equally 
sound.  I  entertain,  however,  a  better  opinion  of  you; 
and  am  satisfied  that  your  aim  is  only  to  divert  the  author 
of  the  Letters  from  his  object  by  a  feigned  attack.  In 
this  you  have  not  been  successful ;  and,  to  my  great  satis- 
faction, the  Thirteenth  Letter  is  on  the  eve  of  appearing. 

SOPHISTRIES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  219 

although  he  has  made  no  reply  to  your  strictures  upon 
the  11th  and  13th  j  and,  in  fact,  has  scarcely  bestowed  a 
thought  upon  the  writer.  This  leads  me  to  hope  that 
other  and  similar  animadversions  will  remain  disregarded 
by  him.  Doubt  not,  Sir,  that  he  would  have  found  you 
an  easy  antagonist.  You  have  seen  how  he  has  dealt  with 
the  Society  in  general;  what  difficulty  could  he  have  found 
in  encountering  yourself  individually  ?  You  may  judge 
of  this  by  what  I  am  about  to  remark,  in  answer  to  your 
strictures  upon  his  Twelfth  Letter. 

I  shall  here  leave  unnoticed  all  the  reproaches  you  have 
directed  against  the  author  of  the  Letters.  He  has  him- 
self promised  to  reply  to  them  ;  and  I  suspect  he  will  do 
it  after  such  a  fashion,  as  will  leave  to  you  little  more 
than  the  trophies  of  shame  and  remorse.  It  will  not  be 
difficult  for  him  to  overwhelm  with  confusion  mere  indi- 
viduals such  as  yourself  and  your  brother  Jesuits,  who 
indecently  presume  to  usurp  the  authority  of  the  Church ; 
to  treat  as  heretics  whomsoever  you  please;  while  you 
are  impotent  to  defend  yourselves  against  the  just  re- 
proaches which  their  flagitious  maxims  have  drawn  upon 
you.  For  myself,  I  shall  restrict  myself  to  the  refuta- 
tion of  those  new  impostures  to  which  you  have  resorted, 
for  the  justification  of  your  casuists.  We  will  begin  with 
Vasquez. 

You  make  no  reply  to  all  that  the  author  of  the  Letters 
has  cited  in  proof  of  his  pernicious  doctrines  of  alms- 
giving, and  you  weakly  accuse  him  (the  author)  of  four 
falsehoods,  the  first  of  which  is,  that  he  has  suppressed 
from  the  passage  cited  out  of  Vasquez,  in  the  6th  Letter, 
these  words,  "  Statum  quem  licite  possunt  acquirere;'^ 

L  2 

230'  LETTER   XII. 

and  has  been  guilty  of  dissimulation  respecting  the  re- 
proaches brought  against  him  thereupon. 

I  see  plainly,  Sir,  that  you  have  been  led  to  believe,  on 
the  faith  of  your  worthy  friends  the  Jesuits,  that  these 
words  are  to  be  found  in  the  passage  quoted  by  the 
author  of  the  Letters  ;  for  had  you  known  that  they  are 
actually  not  there,  you  would  rather  have  blamed  these 
Fathers  for  bringing  the  charge  against  him,  than  felt 
surprise  that  he  had  not  condescended  to  reply  to  so 
frivolous  an  objection.  But  do  not  put  so  much  confidence 
in  them.  Be  assured  you  will  be  taken  in.  Look,  for 
yourself,  into  the  passage  quoted  by  the  author.  You  will 
find  it,  De  Elem.  ch.  4,  N.  14;  but  you  will  not  find  in 
it  any  of  the  words  alleged  to  be  suppressed ;  nay,  you 
will  be  astonished  to  find  them  occurring  just  fourteen 
pages  previously  !  After  this,  you  will  no  doubt  feel  you 
have  cause  to  complain  of  these  good  Fathers ;  and  will 
see,  that  to  justify  a  charge  against  this  writer  of  sup- 
pressing the  words  in  question,  he  ought  to  be  bound  to 
introduce  passages  extending  through  fourteen  pages  in 
folio,  into  a  letter  consisting  of  eight  pages  in  quarto,  a 
space  also  in  which  he  has  been  accustomed  to  give 
about  thirty  or  forty  quotations.  This  is  not  quite  rea- 
sonable. 

This  then  may  suffice  to  prove  that  it  is  you  who  are 
the  real  authors  of  the  misrepresentation;  and  equally 
easy  is  the  conviction  of  Vasquez.  This  Jesuit  has  been 
charged  with  overthrowing  the  precept  of  Christ,  which 
enjoins  the  rich  to  give  alms  of  their  superfluity;  by 
maintaining,  "  that  what  the  rich  retain  for  the  mainten- 
ance of  their  station  in  life,  or  that  of  their  relatives,  is 

SOPHISTRIES  OP   THE  JESUITS.  221 

no  superfluity  ;  and  therefore,  that  people  of  the  world, 
and  even  Sovereigns  themselves,  scarcely  ever  have  any 
superfluous  means."  This  position  it  is — "  that  people 
of  the  world  scarcely  ever  have  a  superfluity" — which 
absolves  them  from  the  duty  of  alms-giving ;  since  it  is  a 
necessary  consequence,  that  having  nothing  superfluous, 
they  are  bound  to  give  nothing  away.  If  the  author  of 
the  Letters  had  drawn  this  inference,  you  would  have  had 
some  ground  for  pretending  that  it  was  not  deducible 
from  the  principle,  "  that  what  the  rich  retain  for  main- 
taining their  station,  or  that  of  their  relations,  is  not  to 
be  called  superfluity."  But  he  has  found  it  in  full  detail 
in  Vasquez.  He  has  read  these  words,  so  opposed  to  the 
spirit  of  the  gospel  and  to  Christian  moderation :  "  Scarcely 
is  superfluity  of  means  to  be  found  among  people  of  the 
world,  or  even  among  Sovereigns."  He  has  also  read  the 
following  sentiment,  quoted  in  the  12th  Letter :  "  We 
are  scarcely  bound  to  give  alms  at  aU,  if  we  are  bound  to 
give  it  only  of  our  superfluity."  And  what  is  curious,  is, 
that  this  expression  is  found  in  the  very  same  place  that 
contains  the  words,  "  Statum  quern  licite  possunt  acqui- 
rere;"  by  means  of  which  you  pretend  to  make  your 
escape.  You  throw  away  your  manoeuvres  upon  the 
principle  in  question,  since  you  are  obliged  to  be  silent 
respecting  the  consequences  formally  deduced  by  Vas- 
quez j  and  which  are  sufficient  to  annul  the  precept  of 
Christ,  as  he  is  in  fact  charged  with  doing.  If  Vasquez 
had  drawn  such  conclusions  erroneously,  he  would  have 
added  unsoundness  of  judgment  to  error  in  morals ;  and 
he  would  not  have  been  less  blameable,  nor  the  precept  of 
Christ  less  impugned.     But  it  will  appear,  by  the  refuta- 

332  LETTER   XII. 

tion  of  your  next  charge  against  the  author  of  the  I^etters, 
that  these  evil  consequences  are  properly  deduced  from 
the  bad  principle  laid  down  by  Vasquez  in  the  same  place ; 
and  that  the  Jesuit  in  question  has  not  offended  against 
the  laws  of  sound  reason,  but  only  against  those  of  the 
gospel ! 

Your  second  slanderous  charge,  ''  of  having  dissembled 
after  he  had  been  convinced  of  error/'  alleges  that  he  has 
omitted  the  words  in  question  designedly,  for  the  purpose 
of  misrepresenting  the  Father's  sentiments,  and  drawing 
from  them  this  scandalous  conclusion,  "that,"  according 
to  Vasquez,  "  those  who  have  much  .ambition  can  possess 
no  superfluity."     Here  I  must, tell  you.  Sir,  in  one  word, 
that  nothing  can  be  more  unfounded  than  this  accusation. 
The  Jesuits  themselves  have  never  complained  of  this  in- 
ference; and  yet  you  reproach  the  a,uthor  of  the  Letters 
with  not  having  answered  an  objection  that  was  never 
before  brought  against  him.     But  if  you  think  yourself 
more  clear-sighted  than  the  whole  of  their  body,  it  will 
be  easy  to  cure  you  of  a  self-complacency,  which  is  really 
injurious  to  this  great  fraternity.     Tor  how  can  you  deny 
that,  from,  the  principle  of  Vasquez,  viz.  "that  what  is 
reserved  for  the  maintenance  of  our  condition  in  society, 
or  that  of  our  relations,  is  not  to  be  called  superfluity," 
the  conclusion  is  unavoidable,  that  an  ambitious  person 
cannot  have  superfluous  means.     I  willingly  allow  you  to 
add  the  restriction  expressed  in  another  passage,  which  is, 
that  we  must  never  seek  to  improve  our  condition,  except 
by  lawful  means ;  "  Statum  quem  liciie  possunt  acquirere." 
This  by  no  means  impeaches  the  correctness  of  the  infer- 
ence, which  you  object  to  as  unfounded. 

SOPHISTRIES  OP  THE  JESUITS.  223 

It  is  quite  true,  that  there  are  rich  persons  who  may  be 
allowed  to  improve  their  condition  by  lawful  methods. 
An  expectation,  on  the  part  of  the  individual,  of  promoting 
the  public  good,  may  sometimes  justify  the  wish,  provided 
the  object  be  not  so  much  to  promote  his  own  interest  as 
the  honour  of  God,  and  the  general  welfare.  But  how 
rarely  does  the  spirit  of  the  Gospel — without  which  no 
pure  desires  can  exist — suggest  such  motives  as  these  to 
the  rich  and  worldly?  That  gracious  influence  more 
usually  prompts  to  diminish  the  encumbrances  which 
check  our  aspirations  after  heavenly  good ;  and  sounds  in 
our  ears  the  Gospel-warning,  "  He  that  exalteth  himself 
shall  be  abased."  Thus,  the  desires  so  prevalent  in  most 
men  of  the  present  day,  continually  to  raise  themselves 
and  their  connexions  in  station  (even  though  by  lawful 
means,)  are  ordinarily  nothing  more  than  the  instigations 
of  earthly  cupidity  and  ambition ;  for  it  is  a  gross  error 
to  suppose  that  ambition  to  rise  in  condition  is  only 
evinced  by  the  employment  of  unlawful  means.  And  it 
is  this  error  which  St.  Augustine  condemns  in  his  work 
'  On  Patience,'  ch.  3,  wherein  he  says,  "  The  love  of 
wealth  and  reputation  is  a  vanity  sanctioned  by  the 
world ;  and  it  is  supposed  that  avarice,  ambition,  luxury, 
dissipation,  are  innocent,  because  they  do  not  involve 
crimes  and  irregularity  forbidden  by  the  laws."  Ambition 
consists  in  desiring  elevation  and  honour  for  their  own 
sake,  as  avarice  is  a  love  of  money  for  itself.  If  pursued 
by  unjust  means,  these  objects  become  more  criminal ;' 
but  you  do  not,  by  merely  substituting  lawful  means, 
render  such  propensities  innocent.  Now  Vasquez  does 
not  refer,  on  this  occasion,  to  instances  in  which  certain 

234  ,  LETTER    XII. 

persons  of  substance  desire  to  improve  their  condition, 
and  "  are  in  tlie  probable  way  to  do  so/'  as  Cardinal 
Cajetan  says.  If  he  had  done  so,  it  would  have  been 
absurd  to  conclude  (as  he  does)  that  people  of  the  world 
rarely  have  a  superfluity ;  for  those  very  rare  occasions, 
which  can  seldom  occur  (perhaps  only  once  or  twice  in  a 
life,)  and  that,  only  in  the  instances  of  a  very  small 
number  of  wealthy  persons,  to  whom  God  has  revealed 
that  they  shall  not  injure  themselves  by  advancing  in 
station  for  the  good  of  others — these  instances,  I  say, 
cannot  invalidate  the  position  that  the  larger  number  of 
rich  persons  enjoy  much  of  superfluity.  But  he  speaks 
of  a  vague  and  indefinite  love  of  aggrandizement,  and  a 
desire  of  elevation  that  knows  no  bounds ;  for  had  it  been 
duly  limited,  the  rich  would  have  been  conscious  of 
possessing  superfluity,  before  such  a  point  had  been 
attained. 

And  thus,  at  last,  he  brings  himself  to  believe  that  the 
desire  in  question  is  so  universal  and  so  allowable,  that 
very  few  wealthy  persons  can  in  reality  possess  any 
superfluity. 

You  ought  then,  Sir,  to  understand  once  for  all,  that  it 
is  this  love  of  aggrandizement — this  effort  perpetually  to 
rise  above  our  fellows  and  associates,  even  by  lawful 
means — '  ad  statu'n  quem  licite  possunt  acquirere ' — that 
the  author  of  the  Letters  has  designated  as  ambition  ;  for 
it  is  the  name  which  the  Fathers  give  to  it,  and  which  the 
world  itself  does  not  disown.  He  has  not  thought  him- 
self bound  to  adopt  the  common  trick  of  such  casuists — 
that  of  banishing  vices  by  their  real  names,  but  retaining 
them  under  others.     If  then  the  words  '  Statum  quem 

SOPHISTRIES  OF   THE  JESUITS.  225 

licite  possunt  acquirere'  had  been  in  the  passage  he 
addacedj  he  would  not  have  been  obliged  to  suppress  them 
in  order  to  prove  it  to  be  criminal.  It  is  in  combining 
them  that  he  justly  condemns  Vasquez  for  the  position  he 
lays  dowHj  that  the  ambitious  can  have  no  superfluity ; 
and  he  is  not  the  first  who  has  drawn  such  a  conclusion 
from  this  doctrine.  M.  Du  Val  had  done  it  before  him 
(though  in  less  formal  terms),  while  combatting  this 
maxim— Vol.  2.  q.  8.  Sp.  576;  "  It  would  follow,"  he 
■says,  "  that  they  who  aspired  to  the  highest  station,  that 
is,  who  had  the  largest  share  of  ambition,  would  possess 
no  superfluity,  although  enjoying  much  more  than  they 
needed  for  their  present  rank — '  Sequeretur  eum  qui  banc 
dignitatem  cuperet,  sen  qui  majori  ambiiione  duceretur, 
habendo  plurima  supr&,  decentiam  sui  status,  non  habitu- 
rum  superflua.'" 

Thus,  Sir,  you  have  been  utterly  unsuccessful  in  the 
two  first  charges  of  misrepresentation  brought  against  the 
author  of  the  Letters ;  let  us  now  see  whether  the  rest 
are  better  founded.  Of  these,  the  one  is,  that  he  has 
stated  Vasquez  to  maintain  that  the  rich  are  not  bound 
to  give  of  what  is  required  for  maintaining  their  condition 
in  society.  The  refutation  of  this  charge  is  easy ;  it  is 
simply  that  it  is  false,  and  that  what  he  has  stated  is  the 
direct  reverse.  No  other  proof  is  required  of  this  than 
the  passage  which  you  yourselves  produce,  only  three  lines 
lower  down,  in  which  he  cites  Vasquez  as  saying,  "  that 
the  rich  are  bound  to  give  of  what  is  necessary  for  them, 
on  certain  occasions." 

Your  last  complaint  is  not  less  unfounded.  Let  us  look 
at  the  substance  of  it.     The  author  of  the  Letters  had 

L  5 

'226  LETTER  XII. 

referred  to  two  decisions  of  doctrine  in  Vasquez ;  the  one 
"  that  the  rich  are  not  bound  either  by  duty,  or  charity, 
to  give  of  their  superfluity  (and  still  less  of  what  they 
need  themselves)  in  any  cases  of  ordinary  necessity  of  the 
poor."  The  other,  "  that  the  occasions  on  which  they  are 
bound  to  give  out  of  that  which  they  need  themselves,  are 
so  rare,  as  that  they  scarcely  ever  occur."  To  the  first 
and  most  flagrant  of  these  decisions  you  have  no  reply  to 
offer :  what  then  do  you  make  of  the  second  ?  You  join 
them  together ;  and,  contriving  some  paltry  evasion  as  to 
the  latter,  you  endeavour  to  make  it  appear  that  you  have 
produced  an  answer  to  the  two.  Now  it  shall  be  my 
endeavour  to  unravel  what  you  purposely  perplex ;  and  I 
ask  you,  is  it  not  true  that  Vasquez  teaches,  that  the  rich 
are  never  bound  to  give  of  their  superfluity,  either  by 
necessity,  justice,  or  charity,  in  the  ordinary  exigencies  of 
the  poor  ?  Has  not  the  author  demonstrated  it  by  the 
express  words  of  Vasquez ;  "  Corduba  teaches  (he  says) 
that  those  who  have  abundance  are  bound  to  give  in 
ordinary  cases  of  necessity,  in  order  in  some  measure  to 
conform  to  the  precept."  (Observe  that  the  question  here 
is  not  whether  the  duty  be  one  of  justice  or  charity,  but 
of  absolute  obligation.)  See  then  the  decision  of  Vasquez 
hereon ;  "  But  this  does  not  please  me — '  sed  hoc  non 
placet ' — for  we  have  proved  the  contrary,  in  opposition 
to  Cajetan  and  Navarre."  To  this  then  you  have  given 
no  reply,  and  have  left  your  Jesuit  friends  convicted  of  a 
dogma  diametrically  opposed  to  the  Gospel ! 

And  as  to  his  second  decision,  "  that  the  rich  are  to 
give  on  such  infrequent  occasions,  as  almost  never  can 
occur,  of  that  which  is  acquired  for. their  own  wants,''  the 

SOPHISTRIES   OP   THE   JESUITS.  227 

author  of  the  Letters  has  not  less  clearly  proved  it  by 
the  numerous  conditions  which  the  Jesuit  collects  together 
to  constitute  the  obligation ;  viz.  that  the  casCj  being  one 
of  urgent  necessity,  can  receive  relief  from  no  other 
quarter,  and  that  the  necessity  must  be  attended  with 
mortal  danger  to  the  person  or  the  reputation.  The 
question  is  then  asked,  whether  these  various  contingencies 
are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  a  place  like  Paris ;  and 
next  he  presses  the  Jesuits  with  this  argument,  "  That 
Vasquez,  permitting  the  poor  to  rob  the  rich,  under  the 
same  circumstances  in  which  he  requires  the  rich  to 
relieve  the  poor,  must  have  supposed,  either  that  those 
circumstances  were  of  very  rare  occurrence,  or  that  the 
latter  would  be  commonly  allowed  to  resort  to  robbery." 
What  answer  have  you  given,  I  ask,  to  this  ?  You  have 
concealed  all  these  conditions,  and  have  simply  reported 
three  passages  from  Vasquez ;  in  the  two  first  of  which  he 
says,  that  the  rich  are  bound  to  help  the  poor  in  urgent 
need ;  a  position  which  the  author  of  the  Letters  expressly 
acknowledges ;  but  you  have  taken  care  not  to  add,  that 
he  mixes  up  with  the  precept  such  conditions,  as  that  the 
necessity  for  alms-giving  will  scarcely  ever  arise ;  which 
is  the  matter  actually  in  question. 

The  third  passage  upon  which  you  comment  states 
solely,  that  the  rich  are  not  bound  to  give  alms  even  in 
cases  of  extreme  necessity,  that  is,  if  a  human  being  be  at 
the  point  of  death,  because  they  are  very  rare:  whence 
you  maintain  it  to  be  false  that  the  cases  in  which  Vasquez 
enjoins  alms-giving  are  very  rare.  But  you  deceive  your- 
self. Sir:  you  can  conclude  no  otherwise;  since,  if  Vas^ 
quez  does  not  apply  the  term  '  rare '  to  the  occasions  6i 

238 

LETTER  XII. 

giving  alms,  he  renders  them  such  in  reality  by  the 
restrictions  he  imposes  upon  them.  In  this,  however,  he 
does  but  follow  the  system  of  the  entire  company.  The 
member  in  question  had  to  soothe  the  rich,  who  choose  to  be 
under  very  slender  obligation  to  give  alms  ;  and  to  satisfy 
the  Church,  which  makes  large  demands  upon  them  for 
such  objects.  According  to  the  method  of  the  Society, 
therefore,  he  wished  to  please  all  parties,  and  he  has 
succeeded.  On  the  one  side,  he  insists  upon  conditions 
of  such  rare  occurrence,  that  the  most  sordid  mind  must 
be  contented ;  on  the  other,  he  conceals  from  view  the 
infrequency,  in  order  to  give  satisfaction  to  the  Church. 
It  is  immaterial  therefore  whether  Vasquez  have  used  the 
term  '  rare '  or  not.  The  charge  is  not  as  to  a  name. 
He  was  too  subtle  a  Jesuit  to  call  bad  things  by  a  bad 
name.  But  the  question  is,  whether  he  makes  them 
'  rare '  in  reality  by  his  restrictions ;  and  this  it  is  which 
the  Author  of  the  Letters  has  so  clearly  established,  that 
no  resource  is  left  to  you,  but  that  which  never  fails — 
dissimulation  and  silence. 

All  that  you  subsequently  add,  as  to  the  subtlety 
of  Vasquez's  mind,  in  the  different  senses  in  which  he 
uses  the  terms  "  necessary  "  and  "  superfluous,"  is  pure 
deception.  He  has  never  (any  more  than  other  theolo- 
gians) treated  of  them  but  in  two  senses.  There  is,  ac- 
cording to  him,  what  is  "  necessary  for  nature,  and  neces- 
sary for  station  ;  superfluous  for  nature,  and  superfluous 
for  station."  But  to  constitute  superfluity  for  station,  he 
maintains  that  it  must  be  such,  not  only  for  the  present, 
but  also  for  such  future  condition  as  wealth  may  enable 
men  to  attain  to  for  themselves  or  their  families,  by  law- 

SOPHISTRIES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  229 

ful  means  !  ThuSj  according  to  Vasquez,  all  that  is  re- 
tained for  improving  our  condition  is  simply  necessary  for 
station,  and  only  superfluous  for  nature ;  whence  it  fol- 
lows (as  the  author  has  demonstrated)  that  the  occasions 
in  which  the  duty  of  alms-giving  will  be  incumbent,  can 
scarcely  ever  arise. 

It  is  needless  here  to  add  any  thing  to  the  remarks  of 
the  author  of  the  letters  upon  the  comparison  between 
Vasquez  and  Cajetan.  I  will  only,  in  passing,  give  you 
warning  that  you  misrepresent  both  the  Cardinal  and 
Vasquez  in  saying  that  "  contrary  to  what  he  had  stated 
in  the  Tract  upon  Alms-giving,  he  teaches  in  that  upon 
indulgences,  that  the  omission  of  the  duty  to  give  of  our 
abundance  does  not  exceed  "  venial  sin."  Read  it.  Sir, 
for  yourself,  and  trust  not  so  implicitly  to  Jesuits,  either 
dead  or  living  !  You  vnll  then  find  that  Cajetan  formally 
inculcates  the  direct  reverse ;  and  after  saying,  that  there 
are  only  extreme  necessities  (among  which  he  compre- 
hends also  the  greater  part  of  what  Vasquez  calls  "  ur- 
gent,") which  involve  mortal  sin,  he  makes  this  exception  : 
"  unless  it  be  to  possess  superfluous  propeity ; — seclusa 
superfluitate  bonorum." 

I  now  proceed,  with  you,  to  the  doctrine  on  Simony. 
The  author  of  the  Letters  has  had  but  one  object  in  view, 
viz.,  to  prove  that  the  society  holds  this  principle;  that, 
by  the  laws  of  conscience,  it  is  not  Simony  to  give  a 
spirituality  for  a  temporal  consideration,  provided  the 
temporality  be  not  the  principal  motive  in  the  transaction, 
and  be  not  received  as  its  price.  And  to  prove  this,  he 
has  in  his  Twelfth  Letter,  produced  entire,  a  passage  from 
Valentia,  which  establishes  the  doctrine  so  clearly,  that 

330  LETTER  XII. 

you  Have  nothing  to  advance  in  reply  to  it ;  any  more 
than  to  his  further  proofs  from  Escobar,  Erade  Belle, 
and  others ;  who  all  declare  the  same  thing.  This  una- 
nimity of  opinion  is  sufficient  (according  to  the  doctrine 
of  "  Probability,"  which  your  whole  body  maintain) 
to  bring  home  these  views  to  the  Society,  inculcated  as 
they  are  by  so  many  learned  provincials.  You  must  con- 
fess then,  that  in  leaving  undisturbed,  as  you  have  done, 
the  sentiments  of  all  the  other  Jesuits,  and  demurring 
only  to  that  of  Tannerus,  you  have  wholly  failed  in  im- 
peaching the  correctness  of  the  author  of  the  Letters 
whom  you  select  as  the  object  of  your  attack,  and  in  justi- 
fying the  Society,  which  you  have  undertaken  to  defend. 

But — to  leave  nothing  in  doubt  upon  this  head — I 
maintain  that  you  are  in  error  as  to  Tannerus,  as  well  as 
all  the  others.  First,"  you  cannot  deny  that  he  says, 
generally,  "  it  is  not  Simony,  in  conscience — '  in  foro 
conscientise ' — to  bestow  a  spirituality  for  a  temporal  con- 
sideration, when  the  temporality  is  not  the  principal  mo- 
tive, nor  even  the  price."  And  when  he  says  it  is  not 
Simony,  "  in  conscience,"  he  means  that  it  is  not  such, 
either  by  Divine  rules,  or  by  positive  law.  This  is  the 
general  rule  of  Tannerus,  to  which  he  makes  one  excep- 
tion, viz.,  "  in  cases  designated  by  law,  it  is  a  Simony  by 
actual  law,  or  a  Simony  by  presumption."  Now,  as  an 
exception  cannot  be  co-extensive  with  the  rule,  it  follows, 
necessarily,  that  the  general  maxim,  as  above-cited,  ap- 
plies in  some  cases  of  spiritual-transfers ;  and  thus,  that 
there  are  spiritualities  which  may  be  bestowed  without 
Simony,  by  actual  law  for  temporal  considerations,  by  ex- 
changing the  term  "  price,"  for  that  of  "  motive." 

SOPHISTRIES   OF   THE   JESUITS.  231 

The  author  of  the  Letters  has  thought  fit  to  apply  the 
doctrine  of  Valentia  and  Tannerus  to  the  case  of  beni- 
fices.  But  it  is  quite  unimportant  to  his  argument  that 
you  make  a  change ;  and  allow,  instead  of  benefices,  the 
sacraments,  or  ecclesiastical  offices  to  be  bartered  for 
money.  He  considers  both  to  be  alike  immoral,  and 
gives  you  the  choice  of  either.  It  would  seem.  Sir,  that 
you  are  disposed  to  make  the  election,  and  would  have  it 
understood  that  it  is  not  simoniacal,  to  repeat  masses 
(for  instance)  when  the  chief  motive  is  the  money  to  be 
received  for  the  performance  :  and  this  impression  is  un- 
avoidable, from  your  own  statements,  as  to  the  practice 
of  the  Church  in  Paris.  Now  if  you  had  meant  to  say 
simply,  that  the  faithful  are  at  liberty  to  offer  of  their 
temporal  goods  to  those  who  minister  to  them  in  spiritual, 
and  that  those  who  "  serve  the  altar  may  live  of  the  altar," 
none  would  contradict  you ;  but  this  is  quite  beside  the 
question.  The  real  point,  is  this  :  is  a  priest,  whose  only 
motive  in  offering  the  sacrifice  is  the  money  he  receives 
for  the  office,  guilty,  in  the  sight  of  God,  of  Simony  ? 
You,  (following  the  doctrine  of  Tannerus)  would  acquit 
him  ;  but  can  you  do  so,  on  the  principles  of  Christian 
faith  ?  "  If  Simony,"  says  Peter  Le  Chautre,  one  of  the 
brightest  ornaments  of  the  Church  of  Paris,  "  be  so  fla- 
grant and  damnable  in  matters  connected  with  the  sacra- 
ments, how  much  more  so  must  it  be  in  regard  to  the  very 
sacraments  themselves ;  and  chiefly  that  of  the  Eucharist, 
where  Jesus  himself,  the  source  and  spring  of  all  grace,  is 
received  ?  Simon  Magus,^'  continues  this  holy  man, 
"  having  been  repulsed  by  Simon  Peter,  might  have  said, 
'  You  repel  me  now,  but  the  time  will  come  when  I  shall 

233  LETTER  XII. 

triumpli  over  youj  and  the  whole  body  of  the  Church. 
I  shall  establish  my  empire  upon  the  altar  itself;  and 
when  the  angels  shall  assemble  on  the  one  side,   adoring 
the  body  of  the  Redeemer,  I  shall  stand  over  against  them, 
instructing  the  minister  of  the  altar  to  form  the  elements, 
that  complete  that  body,  for  money  ! '  "     Yet  the  crime 
which  this  pious  theologian  so  sternly  condemns,  consists 
only  in   the  cupidity  which  renders   the  temporal  consi- 
deration, for  which  holy  offices  are  performed,  the  chief 
object  in  such  perfprmance.     And  this  leads  him  gene- 
rally to  remark,  "  that  holy  offices  (which  he  calls  '  ou^ 
vrages  de  la  droite,')  being  performed  through  the  love  of 
money    constitutes    Simony — '  Opus    dexterse   operatum 
causd  pecunicB  acquirendce,  parit  Simoniam.'  "      What 
then  would  he  have  said,  had  he  heard  that  atrocious 
maxim  of  the  casuists,  which  you  defend,  "  It  -is  lawful 
for  a  priest  to  renounce,  for  a  small  sum  of  money,  all  the 
spiritual   benefits   that   he   might   expect   from  the    sa- 
crifice "  ? 

You  see  then,  that  if  this  be  the  whole  of  your  defence 
of  Tannerus,  you  prove  only  that  the  falsehood  of  his 
doctrine  is  aggravated  by  its  impiety ;  and  what  then  be- 
comes of  the  exception  to  be  made  in  his  favor  ? 

It  was  to  get  rid  of  all  these  refinements  that  the  au- 
thor of  the  Letters  eHquired  of  the  Jesuits,  "  Would  it  be 
Simony  by  the  ru\es  of  conscience,  according  to  your 
authors,  to  bestow  a  benefice  of  4000  livres  annual  value, 
in  consideration  of  a  payment  of  10,000  francs,  if  it  be  in 
the  way  of  motive  and  not  of  price  ?  "  To  this  he  has 
demanded  an  answer,  without  any  phraseology  of  "posi- 
tive rights,"  or  resorting  to  scholastic  terms  and  gram- 

SOPHISTRIES   OP   THE   JESUITS.  233 

matical  subtleties,  which  nobody  understands  or  cares  for. 
This  you  profess  now  to  do,  and  have  given  this  reply : 
"  That  apart  from  the  rules  of  law,  it  would  not  be  Simony, 
in  the  same  manner  as  there  would  be  no  sin  in  not  at- 
tending mass  on  festivals,  if  the  Church  had  not  ordained 
it."  That  is  to  say,  it  is  only  Simony  because  the  Church 
makes  it  so ;  and,  but  for  the  actual  law,  it  would  be  an 
innocent  act.     To  this  I  reply. 

First,  you  do  not  properly  answer  the  question  that  is 
put  to  you.  The  author  asked,  "  Is  it  Simony,  according 
to  the  Jesuit  authorities,  quoted  by  him  ?  "  The  question 
is  not  at  all  as  to  your  opinion :  what  weight  does  that 
carry  ?  Are  you  a  learned  doctor  ?  I  much  question  it  ? 
The  point  is,  as  to  the  opinions  of  Valentia,  Tannerus, 
Sanchez,  Escobar,  Erade  Bille,  all  men  of  unquestionable 
learning.  It  is  for  them  that  you  are  called  upon  to 
answer.  The  author  of  the  Letters  affirms  that  you  can- 
not maintain  the  case  in  question  to  be  Simony  (according 
to  the  laws  of  conscience)  by  the  rules  of  these  Jesuits. 
Now  as  to  Valentia,  Sanchez,  Escobar,  and  the  others, 
you  leave  them  to  answer  for  themselves.  You  make  a 
show  of  fighting  in  favor  of  Tannerus,  but  you  see  that  it 
is  unavailing;  and,  after  all,  it  remains  clear  that  the 
Society  teaches,  that  a  spiritual  charge  may,  without  con- 
scientious Simony,  be  given,  for  a  temporal  consideration, 
provided  the  temporality  be  only  the  inclining  motive, 
but  not  a  price.     This  is  all  that  was  contended  for. 

Secondly,  I  maintain  that  your  reply  involves  a  flagrant 
impiety.  What !  Will  you  dare.  Sir,  to  say,  that,  apart 
from  the  ecclesiastical  law  there  would  be  no  Simony  in 
giving  money,  though  in  this  circuitous  way,  for  admis- 

234 

LETTER  XII. 

sion  into  the  offices  of  the  Church ;  that  before  the  canons 
had  pronounced  it  crime,  money  was  a  lawful  way  of  en- 
trance, provided  it  were  not  given  as  a  price ;  and  that 
thus,  St.  Peter's  condemnation  of  Simon  Magus  was  harsh, 
and  rash,  seeing  it  was  not  clear  whether  the  mOney  he 
offered,  was  in  the  way  of  price  or  only  of  motive  ? 

To  what  school,  I  ask,  would  you  send  us,  to  learn 
this  doctrine  ?  Not  that  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  ever  taught 
his  disciples,  "  freely  to  give  as  they  had  freely  received  j" 
and  who  in  those  words,  as  Peter  Le  Chantre  remarks,  in 
verb.  Abb.  C.  36,  "  forbids  every  species  of  present  or 
compensation,  by  agreement,  or  without  agreement ;  for 
God  sees  the  heart."  It  is  not  to  the  school  of  the  Church, 
for  she  treats  not  only  as  criminals,  but  as  heretics,  all 
who  employ  money  for  the  obtaining  ecclesiastical  prefer- 
ments, and  designates  such  traffic — by  whatever  artifice 
palliated — not  as  a  violation  of  one  of  its  positive  laws, 
but,  as  heresy — "  Simoniacam  Hseresim ! " 

The  school,  then,  in  which  these  principles  are  taught 
— be  it,  that  it  is  not  Simony  by  positive  law ;  or  that  it 
is  such  only  by  presumption,  or  that  it  is  not  sinful  to 
give  money  as  a  motive,  but  only  as  a  price — such  a 
school  is  no  other  than  that  of  Gehazi  and  of  Simon  Ma- 
gus !  It  is  that  school,  in  which  those  two  first  traffic- 
ers  in  holy  things — doomed  to  execration  in  all  ages — 
may  alone  be  acquitted  of  guUtj  a  school  in  which, 
flinging  to  cupidity  the  reins  of  its  basest  desires  and 
unholiest  acts,  its  pupils  are  taught  to  evade  the  laws  of 
the  Omniscient  by  changes  of  words,  while  action  remains 
unaltered  !  But  let  the  disciples  of  that  school  learn  in 
what  way  the  great  Pope,  Innocent  III.,  in  his  Missive  to 

SOPHISTRIES   OP   THE  JESUITS.  235 

the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  in  the  year  1199,  has 
launched  his  indignant  anathemas  against  the  damnable 
subtleties  of  those,  "  who,  blinded  by  the  lust  of  gain, 
pretend  to  palliate  the  crime  of  Simony  under  reputable 
names ;— '  Simoniam  sub  honesto  nomine  palliant  j' — as  if 
the  change  of  a  name  could  alter  the  nature  of  the  crime, 
or  the  punishments  due  to  it.  But  God  is  not  mocked," 
(adds  the  Pope)  "  and  if  these  followers  of  Simon  could 
escape  in  this  life  the  retribution  they  deserve,  they  shall 
not  escape  in  another  the  everlasting  punishment  reserved 
for  such  guilt !  No  well-sounding  names  can  extenuate 
crime,  nor  shall  the  disguise  of  a  word  conceal  its  real 
nature :  '  Cum  nee  honestas  nominis  criminis  malitiam 
paUiabit,  nee  vox  poterit  abolere  reatum.' " 

The  last  question  between  us  is,  that  relating  to  bank- 
rupts. Here  I  cannot  but  admire  your  hardihood.  The 
Jesuits,  whom  you  defend,  had  very  imprudently  objected 
to  the  discussion  of  the  authority  of  Lessius,  as  adduced 
by  Escobar ;  for  the  author  of  the  Letters  cited  Lessius 
only  on  Escobar's  authority,  and  attributed  to  the  latter 
alone  the  decision  complained  of;  viz.  "  that  bankrupts 
may  retain  a  sufficiency  of  their  property  for  competent 
maintenance,  although  that  property  may  have  been  ob- 
tained by  notorious  peculation  and  crime."  It  is,  there- 
fore, as  to  Escobar  alone,  that  he  has  pressed  them,  either 
openly  to  disavow  this  maxim,  or  to  acknowledge  that 
they  hold  it ;  and — in  the  latter  alternative — "  I  send 
them,"  he  says,  "  to  the  laws."  It  is  to  them  that  they 
must  make  answer ;  and  not  shelter  themselves  under  the 
plea  that  Lessius  (with  whom  we  have  nothing  to  do)  is 
of  a  different  opinion  from  Escobar,  who  alone  is  the  party 

236 

LETTER  xn, 

in  question.  Do  you  suppose  that  to  evade  an  inquiry  is 
'to  answer  it  ?  Do  not  thus  deceive  yourself.  You  shall 
answer  for  Escobar,  before  we  proceed  to  Lessius.  It  is 
not,  however,  that  I  shrink  from  encountering  him  also ; 
and  I  promise  you,  hereafter,  a  very  full  exposition  of  the 
doctrine  of  Lessius  upon  bankruptcy,  and  thorough  proof 
that  it  is  as  much  opposed  to  the  Law,  as  to  the  Sor- 
bonne. 

Our  controversy,  with  the  help  of  God,  shall  not  stop 
here  j  but  it  shall  be  now  suspended,  on  my  part,  till  you 
have  replied  to  the  points  in  question  respecting  Escobar. 
You  shall  give  satisfaction  upon  this,  before  we  enter  upon 
other  matters.  Escobar  is  the  first  in  order  j  he  shall  be 
disposed  of,  in  spite  of  all  your  evasions.  Be  assured  that 
Lessius'  turn  shall  soon  follow  !  * 

*  Frencli  Editor's  note.  Although  by  a  different  hand,  and  very  inferior 
in  merit  to  the  Provincial  Letters,  this  article  seemed  to  me  too  interesting 
to  be  omitted  in  the  present  edition. 

\*  If,  as  above  stated,  this  letter  be  by  a  different  hand,  and  not,  as  is 
possible,  under  the  assumed  character  of  a  colleague,  in  order  to  give  variety 
to  the  correspondence,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  should  be  regarded  as 
very  inferior.  It  is  full  of  point  and  energy,  and  may  remind  us  of  the  fire 
of  Demosthenes,  interposing  between  the  more  flowing  and  graceful  rhetoric 
of  Cicero ;  or— in  modem  days — the  sparkle  and  impetuosity  of  Fox  or 
Sheridan  breaking  in  upon  the  measured  dignity  of  Pitt.    (Transl.) 

LETTER  XIII. 

THAT  THE  DOCTRINE  OP  LESSIUS  UPON  HOMICIDE  IS 
THE  SAME  AS  THAT  OF  VICTORIA.  HOW  EASY  IS 
THE  TRANSITION  FROM  SPECULATION  TO  PRACTICE. 
THE  REASON  OF  THE  JESUITS  AVAILING  THEMSELVES 
OF  THIS  FUTILE  DISTINCTION,  AND  THEIR  CULPABI- 
LITY  IN   SO   DOING. 

My  Revered  Fathers.  Sept.  30,  1656. 

I  HAVE  just  seen  your  last  paper,  in  which  you  pursue 
your  charges  of  imposture ;  but  state  that  you  have  now 
done  with  that  kind  of  accusation,  and  intend  to  adopt  a 
different  method  of  defending  yourselves,  viz.  by  showing 
that  there  are  many  casuists,  besides  those  of  your  fra- 
ternity, whose  views  are  equally  lax  with  your  own.  I 
have  now  before  me  the  whole  of  the  misrepresentations 
which  I  have  to  reply  to ;  and  as  the  fourth,  where  we 
left  off,  is  on  the  subject  of  homicide,  it  will  tend  to  con- 
venience, while  answering  you  on  that  point,  to  dispose,  at 
the  same  time,  of  No.  11,  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  and  18, 
which  are  all  upon  the  same  subject. 

I  have  then,  in  the  present  letter,  to  maintain  the 
fidelity  of  my  quotations,  in  contradiction  to  the  falsehood 
with  which  you  charge  me.     But  as  you  have  dared .  to 

238  LETTER   XIII. 

maintain  in  your  writings,  "  that  the  sentiments  of  your 
authors  on  the  subject  of  murder  are  conformable  to  the 
decisions  of  the  Popes  and  of  ecclesiastical  law/'  you 
compel  me  to  enter  upon  a  refutation  of  a  proposition,  so 
audacious  in  itself,  and  so  injurious  to  the  Church.  It  is 
incumbent  upon  me  to  demonstrate  that  her  holy  institu- 
tions are  untainted  by  your  corruptions,  in  order  that 
heretics  may  not  avail  themselves  of  your  errors,  to  draw 
inferences  dishonourable  to  her  purity.  And  thus,  by 
placing  in  contrast,  on  the  one  hand,  your  pernicious 
maxims,  and,  on  the  other,  the  canons  of  the  Church,  by 
which  they  are  condemned,  it  will  be  seen  at  once,  both 
what  should  be  avoided,  and  what  obeyed. 

Your  fourth  misrepresentation  is  on  the  subject  of  a 
decision  upon  the  question  of  murder,  which  you  charge 
me  with  falsely  attributing  to  LessiUs.  It  is  this:  "A 
man  who  has  received  a  blow,  may  pursue  his  enemy  at 
the  instant,  even  sword  in  hand ;  not  to  revenge  himself, 
but  for  the  purpose  of  repairing  his  honour."  Upon 
which  you  reply :  "  The  opinion  in  question  is  one  of  the 
Casuist  Victoria."  Now  this  again  is  not  the  matter  of 
dispute,  for  it  is  no  contradiction  to  say  that  it  is  jointly 
that  of  Victoria  and  Lessius;  because  Lessius  himself 
says  that  it  is  also  that  of  Navarre,  and  your  Pere  Hen- 
riquez ;  who  teach,  "  that  a  person  receiving  a  blow  may 
instantly  pursue  his  antagonist,  and  give  him  as  many 
blows  as  he  may  think  necessary  for  the  reparation  of  his 
honour."  The  question,  then,  is  only,  whether  Lessius  is 
agreed  in  opinion  with  these  authors,  as  well  as  his  cotem- 
poraries  ?  And,  therefore,  you  add,  "  Lessius  only  refers 
to  this  opinion  for  the  purpose  of  confuting  it;"  and 

LESSIUS   ON   HOMICIDE.  339 

thus  I  attribute  a  sentiment  to  him  which  he  brings  for- 
ward only  to  oppose — an  act,  of  all  others  the  most  mean 
and  disgraceful  in  a  writer.  But  I  maintain  that  he 
quotes  it,  for  the  purpose  of  expressing  his  agreement  with 
it.  It  is  a  question  of  fact,  which  may  easily  be  deter- 
mined. We  will  therefore  see  how  you  establish  your 
position,  and  you  shall  then  see  how  I  persist  in  maintain- 
ing mine. 

To  prove  that  Lessius  does  not  hold  the  opinion  in 
question,  you  say  he  condemns  it  in  practice ;  and  for 
proof  of  that,  you  produce  an  extract  from  his  works. 
Book  2,  c.  9,  n.  83,  as  follows  :  '  I  condemn  this  practice.' 
I  acknowledge  that  if  you  look  through  Lessius  (N.  83) 
as  referred  to  by  you,  you  will  find  these  words.  But 
what  will  you  say,  my  Fathers,  when  I  tell  you  that  in 
this  place  he  is  treating  of  a  question  wholly  different 
from  the  one  in  dispute;  and  that  the  opinion,  which 
he  here  says  he  in  practice  condemns,  is  entirely  un- 
connected with  that  we  are  discussing.  You  have  but  to 
open  the  book,  to  ascertain  the  fact :  his  argument  is  to 
the  following  eflfect. 

He  is  treating  of  the  question  '  whether  it  is  lawful  to 
take  life  for  a  blow  ? '  (No.  79,)  and  he  concludes  the 
subject  at  No.  80,  without  a  single  word  in  condemnation. 
This  question  being  finished,  he  begins  a  new  one  at 
Art.  81,  viz.  '  Whether  life  may  be  taken  for  slanderous 
language.'  It  is  respecting  this  question  that  he  uses  at 
(No.  83)  the  words  we  have  quoted  from  him,  '  I  condemn 
the  practice.' 

Now,  my  Reverend  Fathers,  is  it  not  disgraceful  to  find 
you  producing  these  expressions,  in  order  to  cause  it  to 

240  LETTER   XIII. 

be  believed  that  Lessius  condemns  the  opinion,  that  homi- 
cide may  be  perpetrated  in  revenge  for  a  blow  ;  and  that, 
resting  upon  this  solitary  proof,  you  should  triumphantly 
exclaim,  as  you  have  done,  '  Several  distinguished  persons 
in  Paris  have  already  ascertained,  by  a  perusal  of  Lessius, 
this  scandalous  falsehood;  and  have  thus  been  enabled 
to  judge  what  degree  of  belief  is  due  to  this  calumnious 
writer.' 

What,  Sirs  !  is  it  thus  you  abuse  the  confidence  reposed 
in  you  by  these  eminent  personages  ?  To  prove  to  them 
that  Lessius  does  not  hold  the  doctrine  in  question,  you 
open  his  book  at  a  part  where  he  condemns  another  ,•  and 
impose  on  the  credulity  of  persons  who  are  incapable  of 
suspecting  your  sincerity.  I  doubt  not,  my  good  Fathers, 
that,  for  the  success  of  this  flagrant  artifice,  you  have 
availed  yourselves  with  good  effect  of  your  own  doctrine 
of  '  Equivocation,'  and  while  reading  the  passage  '  aloud,' 
you  said  '  in  a  whisper '  that  it  had  reference  to  a  different 
matter.  But  I  may  be  allowed  to  doubt  whether  this 
procedure,  however  satisfactory  to  your  consciences,  will 
satisfy  the  just  reproaches  which  will  be  made  you  by 
these  honouralble  persons,  when  they  discover  the  impo- 
sition that  has  been  practised  upon  them. 

Take  care,  then,  I  pray  you,  to  prevent  their  seeing  my 
letters ;  for  this  is  the  only  way  in  which  you  can  much 
longer  preserve  your  credit;  /  do  not  take  this  pre- 
caution with  yours :  I  send  them  round  to  all  my  friends : 
I  wish  the  whole  world  to  see  them.  And  I  believe  we 
are  both  in  the  right.  For,  as  to  yourselves,  after 
trumpeting  so  publicly  the  refutation  of  my  fourth  mis- 
representation, what  will  be    your  situation,   when  it  is 

LESSIUS   ON   HOMICIDE.  241 

found  that,  to  make  good  your  case,  you  have  substituted 
one  passage  for  another  ?  Naturally  will  it  be  judged, 
that  if  you  had  been  able  to  find  what  you  wanted  in  the 
part  where  Lessius  treats  of  the  quotation  at  issue,  you 
would  not  have  sought  it  elsewhere ;  and  that  you  have 
had  recourse  to  this  method,  only  because  you  could  find 
nothing  else  favorable  to  your  object.  You  desired  to 
discover  in  Lessius  what  you  stated  in  your  "  Imposture," 
p.  10,  Lig.  13, — "  That  he  does  not  allow  this  opinion  to 
be  speculatively  probable."  Now  Lessius  says  expressly, 
in  the  cfose  of  his  Discussion,  N.  80 :  "  The  opinion — 
that  life  may  be  taken  for  a  blow — is  speculatively  pro- 
bable." Is  not  this,  word  for  word,  the  opposite  of  your 
assertion  ?  And  who  but  must  admire  the  audacity  with 
which  you  adduce  from  him  in  express  terms  a  sentiment 
the  very  reverse  of  the  real  one  ?  So  that — instead  of 
opposing — Lessius  is  proved  by  his  own  words,  distinctly 
tp  sanction  it. 

You  would  desire  to  represent  Lessius  as  "  condemning 
the  practice"  in  question;  and  (as  I  have  said  already) 
not  a  word  of  condemnation  is  to  be  found  in  his  Trea- 
tise ;  but  these  are  his  actual  expressions  :  "  It  seems 
that  this  practice  ought  not  lightly  to  be  allowed ; — '  in 
praxi  non  videtur  facile  permittenda."  Is  this,  Sirs,  the 
language  of  a  man  who  condemns  a  doctrine  ?  Is  not 
the  just  conclusion  rather — since  nothing  to  the  contrary 
is  stated — that,  although  the  practice  is  not  lightly  to  be 
sanctioned,  it  may  sometimes  (even,  if  rarely)  be  allowed  ? 
And,  as  if  he  would  teach  the  whole  world  when  it  may 
be  allowed,  and  relieve  persons  receiving  the  offence  in 
question  from  inconvenient  scruples,  as  not  knowing  ex- 

M 

243  LETTER   XIII. 

actly  the  occasions  on  which  they  may  practically  be  in- 
dulged in  committing  the  murders  in  question,  he  is 
careful  to  prescribe  what  should  be  avoided,  in  order  to 
carry  the  doctrine  into  practice  with  a  safe  conscience. 
"  It  seems,"  he  says,  "  that  it  ought  not  to  be  lightly 
allowed,  on  account  of  the  danger  of  its  being  practiced 
through  hatred,  or  for  revenge,  or  in  excess ;  or,  lest  it 
should  occasion  too  many  murders." 

From  all  this  then  it  is  clear  that  this  species  of  homi- 
cide is  in  practice  fully  allowed  by  Lessius,  provided  these 
inconvenient  consequences,  be  avoided ;  that  is,  provided 
it  be  done  without  malice,  not  in  revenge,  and  without 
occasioning  too  large,  a  number  of  homicides.  Do  you 
wish,  my  Fathers,  for  an  instance  ?  I  can  furnish  you  with 
one  sufficiently  recent.  It  is  that  of  the  blow  of  Com- 
piegne.*  And  you  will  allow  that  the  person  receiving  it, 
gave  proof  by  his  conduct,  that  he  was  sufficiently  master 
of  his  feelings  of  hatred  and  revenge.  It  was  only  neces- 
sary for  him  then  further  to  take  care  that  no  excessive 
amount  of  murders  should  ensue — and  you  well  know  it 
is  so  rare  an  occurrence  for  Jesuits  to  inflict  blows  upon 
officers  in  the  royal  household,  that  there  was  not  niuch 
reason  to  fear  that  a  single  homicide  on  this  occasion 
would  have  brought  others  in  its  train.  You  cannot 
therefore  deny  that  this  Jesuit  might  have  been  killed 
with  a  safe  conscience ;  and  the  offender  in  so  doing, 
would  in  no  way  have  acted  in  violation  of  the  doctrine  of 
Lessius.  And,  indeed,  my  good  Fathers,  he  in  all  pro-- 
bability  would  have  done  so,  had  he  been  versed  in  the 

*  This  seems  to  refer  to  some  occurrence  of  that  day,  of  whicli  no  parti- 
cular explanation  is  given  in  the  text.     (Transl.) 

LESSIUS   ON   HOMICIDE.  243 

lessons  of  your  school — had  he  learnt  of  Escobar,  "  that 
a  man  receiving  a  blow  is  regarded  as  dishonoured  till  he 
has  succeeded  in  taking  the  life  of  the  party  inflicting  it." 
But  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  instruction  of  a 
very  diff'erent  kind,  which  had  been  received  by  him  from 
an  ecclesiastic,  not  holding,  indeed,  a  high  station  in  your 
esteem,  contributed  in  no  small  degTee,  on  the  occasion 
referred  to,  to  save  the  life  of  a  member  of  your  own 
fraternity ! 

Let  us  hear  no  more,  then,  of  the  inconvenient  results 
which  are  to  be  avoided  in  encounters  of  this  kind;  and 
(avoiding  which)  the  homicide,  according  to  Lessius,  is  in 
practice  allowable.  These  have  been  thoroughly  treated 
by  your  several  authors,  quoted  by  Escobar  in  his  "  Prac- 
tice of  Homicide,  according  to  the  Jesuits'  Society,  tr.  1, 
ex.  7,  N.  48 :  "  Is  it  lawful,"  he  says,  "  to  kill  one  who 
has  inflicted  a  blow  upon  you  ?  "  Lessius  says,  it  is  law- 
ful speculatively,  but  practically  it  is  not  to  be  recom- 
mended— '  non  consulendum  in  praxi;'— on  account  of 
the  risk  of  its  giving  rise  to  animosities,  or  murders, 
dangerous  to  public  welfare.  But  others  are  of  opinion 
that  if  these  evil  consequences  be  avoided,  the  practice  is 
lawful  and  safe; — '  in  praxi  probabilem  et  tutam  judica- 
runt  Henriquez,  &c.'  This  is  the  way  in  which  your  opi- 
nions rise  step  by  step  towards  probability.  For,  at  last, 
the  permission  is  given  without  any  distinction  of  specu- 
lation and  practice,  as  follows  :  "  It  is  lawful  on  receiving 
a  blow  to  retaliate  on  the  instant  with  the  sword,  not  in  a 
spirit  of  revenge,  but  for  the  preservation  of  honour.'' 
This  is  prescribed  by  your  brethren  at  Caen,  in  1644,  in 
their  published  writings,  laid  by  the  University  before  the 

M  2 

344  LETTER  XIII. 

Parliament,  on  presenting  its  third  petition  against  your 
doctrine  of  Homicide,  as  appears  in  p.  389  of  the  book  at 
that  time  published  on  the  subject. 

Observe  then,  I  pray  you,  that  your  own  authors  over- 
throw, of  themselves,  the  frivolous  distinction  which  they 
had  attempted  to  draw  between  speculation  and  practice, 
so  justly  ridiculed  by  the  University ;  and  which  is  nothing 
more  than  one  of  those  ingenious  devices  of  your  policy 
that  ought  to  be  exposed.    For,  besides  that  this  furnishes 
a  clue  to  your  14th,  16th,  17th  and  18th  charges,  it  can 
never  be  otherwise  than  instructive  to  unravel,  one  after 
another,  the  intricate  principles  of  this  mysterious  system. 
Whenever  you  have  taken  upon  you  to  decide  cases  of 
conscience,  such  as  these,  in  a  lenient  and  accommodating 
manner,  the  first  point  has  been  to  ascertain  those  in 
which  religion  only   is   concerned, — such   as  contrition, 
penitence,  the  love  of  the  Deity,  and  all  such  things  as 
especially  affect  a  tender  conscience.     But  then,  you  were 
met  by  other  cases  in  which  the  public  welfare  had  a  joint 
interest  with  religion,  such  as  usury,  bankruptcy,  homi- 
cide and  the  like ;  and  it  has  been  matter  of  poignant 
concern  to  those  who  are  really  attached  to  the  Church, 
to  find  you,  on  numberless  occasions  in  which  the  interests 
of  religion   only  are   involved,   overthrowing   her   rules, 
without  reserve,  distinction,  or  fear ;  as  in  your  audacious 
decisions  upon  penitence  and  the  love  of  God ;  and  this, 
because  you  too  well  knew  that  the  world  is  not  the  scene 
where  the  Great  lluler  of  all  things  is  wont  openly  to 
vindicate  his  justice.     But  in  matters  in  which  the  State 
has  an  interest  equally  with  religion,  your  apprehensions 
of  human  jurisprudence   have  led  you   to  divide  (as  it. 

LESSIUS  ON  HOMICIDE.  245 

were)  your  decisions,  and  distribute  them  into  two  separate 
compartments,  the  one  you  call  "  speculative/'  in  which, 
viewing  crimes  in  themselves,  without  reference  to  public 
interests,  but  only  to  the  offended  laws  of  God,  you  sanc- 
tion them  without  scruple.  Thus  you  set  yourselves  in 
opposition  to  the  judgment  of  God.  The  other,  you  call 
"  practical ;"  wherein,  considering  the  injury  that  may 
accrue  to  society,  and  fearing  the  severity  of  magisterial 
rebuke,  you  affect  occasionally  to  discountenance  the 
commission  of  those  murders  and  other  crimes,  to  which 
you  have  given  your  speculative  sanction ;  in  this  way 
you  contrive  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  the  Judges. 
Thus,  for  instance,  on  the  question,  "  whether  it  is  lawful 
to  kill  another  for  slander,"  your  authors,  Filiutius  tr.  39, 
Cap.  3,  N.  53,  Reginaldus  ],  28,  Ch.  5,  N.  63,  and 
others,  reply :  "  Speculatively  it  is  lawful, — '  ex  proba- 
bili  opinione  licet ;'  but  I  do  not  approve  of  it  'practically , 
on  account  of  the  large  number  of  murders  which  would 
ensue,  to  the  detriment  of  public  interests,  if  all  slander- 
ers were  to  be  killed ;  so  that  taking  life  for  this  cause 
would  expose  persons  to  public  justice." 

We  have  here  a  specimen  of  your  opinions,  under  this 
kind  of  subtle  reservation ;  by  which  you  merely  over-, 
throw  the  sanction  of  religion,  while  you  avoid  doing 
serious  injury  to  the  State. 

In  this  yoli  think  yourselves  safe.  You  suppose  that 
the  repute  in  which  you  are  held  in  the  Church  will  screen 
from  punishment  your  offences  against  truth;  and  that 
your  precautions  to  prevent  your  sanctions  being  carried 
out  too  easily  in  practice,  will  keep  you  in  safety  from  the 
magistrate,  who,  not  concerning  himself  with  niceties  of 

246  LETTER   XIII. 

conscience,   takes  cognizance  only  of  external  conduct. 
Thus,  an  opinion  which  would  be  condemned  in  practice, 
is  enunciated  with  safety  as  speculative  only.    But,  the 
foundation  heing  laid  in  this  manner,  it  becomes  easy  to 
build  upon  it  your  whole  system.     Infinite  was  the  dis- 
tance between  the  Divine  interdict  against  murder,  and 
the  speculative  permission  to  the  act  conceded  by  your 
writers.     But,  practically,  the  interval  is  reduced  to  almost 
nothing.     It  was  required  only  to  demonstrate  that  what 
is  thus  allowed  in  theory,  should  become  also  lawful  in 
practice.     Keasons  for  this  will  be  found  in  abundance  : 
you  have  already  discovered  them  in  some  of  the  most 
difficult  of  your  cases.     Would  you  learn,  ray  Fathers,  by 
what  process  they  have  been  arrived  at  ?     You  have  but 
to  follow  the  reasoning  of  Escobar,  who  has  plainly  de- 
cided the  point  in  the  first  of  the  sis  volumes  of  his 
f  Grand  Moral  Theology,"  before  referred  to  ;  in  which 
he  seems  to  hold  views  entirely  different  from  those  in  his 
"  Selection  from   the  Twenty-four  Elders.''    Instead  of 
considering,  as  in  the  former  work,  that  opinions  might 
be  held  in  speculation  which  were  not  carried  into  prac- 
tice,  he  has  since  then  come  to  an  opposite  conclusion ; 
and  has  fully  developed  it  in  the  latter  work ;  so  much 
does  the  doctrine  of  probability,  as  well  as  every  indivi- 
dual opinion,  acquire  strength  by  time. 

Listen  to  his  words  in  Proelog.  C.  3,  N.  15  ;  "  I  can- 
not see,"  he  says,  "  how  a  thing  which  is  lawful  in  specu- 
lation should  not  be  so  in  practice,  since  what  may  be 
right  practically  depends  upon  what  is  believed  to  be  so 
in  theory ;  and  the  two  differ,  only  as  cause  differs  from 
effect.     Speculation  is  what  determines  action.     Whence 

LESSIUS   ON   HOMICIDE.  347 

it  follows,  tliat  we  may,  with  a  safe  conscience,  carry  into 
practice  whatever  opinions  are  determined  to  be  specula- 
tively probable  ;  and  that,  even  with  greater  security  than 
in  the  case  of  those  who  have  been  subjected  to  this  spe- 
culative examination." 

In  truth,  Reverend  Sirs,  the  reasoning  of  your  cham- 
pion Escobar  is  sometimes  not  wanting  in  force.  There 
is  indeied  so  intimate  a  connexion  between  speculation  and 
practice,  that  when  once  the  one  has  taken  root,  the  tran- 
sition is  easy  to  the  undisguised  reality.  This  is  exem- 
plified in  the  licence  to  kill  for  a  blow ;  which,  froin  simple 
theory,  has  been,  by  Lessius,  boldly  advanced  to  a  practice, 
which  may  not,  however,  With  too  great  facility  be  al- 
lowed ;  and,  thence,  by  Escobar,  to  an  allowable  practice.* 
Since  which  your  learned  Fathers  of  Caen,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  have  carried  it  out  to  a  plenary  permission, 
without  any  distinction  of  theory  and  practice. 

Thus  it  is  that  you  advance,  step  by  step,  your  opinions. 
If  they  were  to  appear  at  once  in  all  their  naked  de- 
formity, they  would  inspire  unmixed  horror ;  but  their 
slow  and  stealthy  progress  renders  them  familiar  to  the 
mind,  and  mitigates  their  atrocity.  In  this  way,  the 
sanction  of  murder — that  crime  so  abhorrent  both  to  the 
State  and  to  the  Church,  is  insinuated  first  into  the  Church, 
and  from  the  Church  finds  its  way  into  the  State. 

Similar  has  been  the  progress  of  t^e  opinion,  that  life 
may  be  taken  for  the  offence  of  slander.  At  the  present 
time  the  sanction  has  obtained  without  any  distinction. 
I  should  not  pause  to  cite  here  the  passages  bearing  upon 

*  '  Une  pratique  facile.'  (Fr.) 

348  LETTER  XIII. 

it  from  your  Fathers,  were  it  not  necessary  to  expose  to 
the  world  the  intrepidity  with  which  you  have  ventured 
to  assert  in  your  4th  "  Imposition,"  pages  36  and  30, 
"  that  there  is  no  Jesuit  who  has  sanctioned  the  taking 
hfe  on  account  of  slander."  Before  you  ventured  on  this 
statement,  my  Fathers,  you  should  have  satisfied  your- 
selves that  I  had  not  the  means  of  seeing  these  things 
with  my  own  eyes  ;  so  easy  is  it  to  me  thus  to  refute  you. 
For,  in  addition  to  the  fact  that  your  Fathers  lleginaldus, 
Filiutius,  &c.  have  respectively  sanctioned  this  practice 
speculatively  (as  I  said  before),  and  that  such  speculative 
sanction,  on  Escobar's  principle,  assuredly  leads  to  prac- 
tice ;  I  now  assert,  that  several  of  your  own  writers  have 
allowed  the  act  in  question  in  express  terms.  Among 
others  is  the  P^re  Hereau,  in  his  public  lectures ;  for 
which  the  King  caused  him  to  be  put  in  ward  in  your  own 
house :  the  doctrine  he  taught  (together  with  others 
equally  erroneous),  being,  that  "  when  a  person  traduces 
us  in  the  presence  of  respectable  persons,  and  continues 
to  do  so  after  being  warned  to  desist,  it  is  lawful  for  us  to 
iahe  his  life,  not  indeed  publicly,  for  fear  of  scandal,  but 
in  secret — "  sed  clam." 

I  have  spoken  before  of  Pere  Launy,  and  you  are  aware 
that  his  doctrine  on  this  subject  was,  in  1649,  censured  by 
the  University  of  Louvain.  And  yet  it  is  not  six  months 
since,  that  your  Father  Des  Bois  maintained  at  Kouen  the 
very  doctrine  of  Launy,  thus  stigmatized ;  and  inculcated 
the  lawfulness  of  an  ecclesiastic  defending  his  reputation, 
even  by  taking  the  life  of  him  who  attacked  it — "  etiam 
cum  morte  invasoris."  Which  circumstance  occasioned 
such  offence  in  that  place,  that  all  the  ministers  joined 

LESSIUS  ON  HOMICIDE.  249 

together  to  silence  him,  and  to  compel  him,  by  ecclesias- 
tical censures,  to  make  a  recantation  of  his  doctrine.  This 
circumstance  is  officially  recorded. 

What  is  your  answer,  I  ask,  to  this.  Reverend  Fathers  ? 
Will  you  now  maintain  that  "  no  Jesuit  has  advanced  the 
opinion  that  life  may  be  taken  for  a  slander  ? "  And  need 
any  thing  further  be  produced  for  your  refutation,  than 
the  expressions  of  your  own  authors,  seeing  they  forbid 
not  the  murder  in  question  abstractedly,  but  solely,  on  the 
ground  that  practically  it  might  cause  inconvenience  to 
the  public  welfare  ?  I  ask  you  here  then,  Sirs,  whether 
this  is  not  the  only  question  between  us,  viz.  that  your 
doctrine  is  subversive  of  the  law  of  God  against  murder? 
It  is  not  whether  the  State  may  sustain  injury,  but  is 
religion  violated  ?  What  avails  it  in  such  a  dispute  as 
this  to  plead  that  society  is  spared  a  wrong,  when  the 
deadliest  wound  is  inflicted  upon  piety  ?  I  want  nothing 
further  to  terminate  the  controversy  than  this  one  state- 
ment produced  by  yourselves  from  Reginaldus,  p.  28, 
t.  3.  "  The  opinion  of  Reginaldus  on  the  question  of 
killing  for  the  offence  of  slander  is,  that  an  individual  may 
resort  to  this  kind  of  defence,  considered  simply  in  itself."  * 
"  An  individual,'^  you  say,  "  may  resort  to  this  mode  of 
defence," — that  is,  slaying  another  man  for  a  slander — 
"considering  the  matter  in  itself; "  consequently,  the 
law  of  God,  which  forbids  murder,  is  overthrown  by  your 
decision ! 

It  is  futile  to  say,  as  you  afterwards  do,  "  This  is  un- 
lawful and  cruel,  even  according  to  God^s  law,  on  account 

*  '  La  considerant  simplement  en  elle  meme.'  (Fr.) 
M  5 

250  LETTER   XIII. 

of  the  numerous  murders  and  irregularities  which  ensue ; 
inasmuch  as  we  are  bound,  before  God,  to  have  regard  to 
the  welfare  of  the  State."  This  is  to  evade  the  question. 
Be  it  remembered,  man  is  under  obedience  to  two  great 
laws;  the  one  which  forbids  to  take  blood,  the  other 
which  forbids  to  injure  the  State.  Reginaldus  would 
keep  clear  of  detriment  to  society,  but  he  doubtless 
violates  the  Divine  law  against  murder.  This  is  the  only 
point  in  dispute.  But  your  other  Fathers,  who  have 
sanctioned  these  murders  in  actual  practice,  have  sub- 
verted both  these  rules. 

Let  us  now  proceed  a  step  further.  We  have  seen  that 
you,  in  some  cases,  forbid  injury  to  the  State,  and  allege 
that  your  design  in  so  doing  is  to  conform  to  the  Divine 
law,  which  enjoins  its  support.  This  may  be  true, 
although  it  is  by  no  means  certain ;  for  you  might  attain 
the  same  end,  by  the  fear  alone  of  the  civil  power.  Let 
us  then  examine,  upon  what  principle  it  is  that  you  herein 
proceed. 

If,  Reverend  Sirs,  you  were  really  influenced  by  the 
fear  of  God,  and  his  law  were  the  first  and  chief  object  of 
your  thought,  would  not  this  motive  uniformly  regulate 
your  decisions,  and  the  interests  of  religion  be  on  all 
occasions  your  aim  ?  But  if,  on  the  contrary,  we  find  you 
unscrupulously  violating  the  most  sacred  commands  im- 
posed by  the  Deity  upon  man,  when  unsupported  by  the 
arm  of  civil  authority, — thus  submitting  the  law  of  God, 
which  proclaims  these  acts  to  be  criminal  in  themselves, 
and  shrinking  only  from  carrying  them  into  practice  from 
the  fear  of  human  law — is  it  not  clear  that  you  have  no 
regard  to  the  Divine   will;  and  that,  if  you  externally 

LESSIUS   ON   HOjMICIDE.  251 

abstain  from  injuring  society,  it  is  from  no  motive  of 
piety,  but  only  to  subserve  your  own  aims  and  interests, 
which  have  been  always  the  governing  principle  of  bodies 
of  men  uninfluenced  by  conscientious  motives  ? 

What,  Sirs !  regardless  of  the  Divine  canon  against 
Homicide,  you  teach,  that  blood  may  be  spilt  for  a  slander- 
ous word !  And  then,  while  thus  setting  yourselves 
against  the  august  command  of  God,  you  suppose  you 
can  obviate  the  scandal,  and  retain  your  claims  to  Oui" 
respect,  by  alleging  that,  in  practice,  you  forbid  it,  from 
regard  to  the  State,  and  fear  of  the  law  !  Is  not  this  only 
an  aggravation  of  the  outrage?  Not,  indeed,  by  the 
regard  you  show  for  the  civil  power  —it  is  not  for  that 
I  censure  you ;  and  you  yourselves  have  made  this  point 
the  subject  of  your  absurd  banter  at  p.  29 — I  reproach 
you  not  for  your  fear  of  the  Judges,  but  for  your  fear  of 
the  Judges  only.  This  is  my  indictment,  that  you  make 
God  less  the  enemy  of  sin  than  man  !  Were  you  to  say 
that  a  slanderer  might  be  murdered  by  the  rules  of  men, 
but  not  by  those  of  God,  that  would  be  less  intolerable  ; 
but  to  maintain  that  such  an  act  is  too  criminal  for 
human  endurance,  but  lawful  in  the  sight  of  heaven — of 
Justice  itself — of  the  Supreme  and  Eternal  source  of 
Right — what  is  this  but  to  proclaim  to  the  whole  world, 
by  this  unholy  perversion,  that  you  can  show  yourselves 
fearless  towards  God,  while  you  are  timid  towards  men  ? 

Then  again,  wishing  to  insinuate  the  permission  in- 
sensibly, and  to  circumvent  by  stratagem  the  guardians  of 
the  public  safety,  how  politicly  have  you  acted,  in  sepa- 
rating your  precepts  from  each  other,  and  laying  down, 
on  the  one  hand,  "  the  lawfulness,  speculatively,  of  taking 

252  LETTER   XIII. 

life  for  slander"  (for  who  can  gainsay  mere  speculation  ?) 
and  on  the  other  hand,  "  that  what  is  lawful  in  speculation 
is  also  lawful  in  practice  :  "  for  what  interest  can  the  State 
feel  in  a  proposition  thus  abstract  and  metaphysical  ? 
ThuSj  these  two  unsuspected  propositions,  being  separately 
propounded,  the  vigilance  of  the  magistrate  is  lulled ;  and 
he  forgets  to  put  together  the  two  maxims,  and  draw  from 
them  your  own  conclusion,  that  murder  is  allowable,  in 
revenge  for  the  simple  offence  of  slander  ! 

We  have  now  arrived  at  one  of  the  most  subtle  artifices 
in  your  policy,  that  of  separating  in  your  writings  maxims 
which  in  your  system  are  really  united.  It  is  in  this  way 
that  you  have  established  your  doctrine  of  probability,  so 
often  referred  to.  The  general  principle  being  stated, 
you  proceed  separately  to  advance  things,  which — innocent 
perhaps  in  themselves — become  detestable,  when  united 
with  a  previously  enunciated  and  pernicious  principle.  I 
adduce,  for  example,  what  you  say  at  page  11  of  "  your 
Impositions,"  and  which  calls  upon  me  for  a  reply; 
"  Several  celebrated  theologians,"  it  is  there  stated,  "  are 
of  opinion  that  life  may  be  taken  for  the  offence  of  a 
blow."  Here  it  is  clear,  that,  if  a  person  not  holding  the 
doctrine  of  Probability  had  asserted  this,  there  would  have 
been  nothing  to  object  to,  for  it  is  a  simple  and  incon- 
sequential affirmation.  But  if  you,  Reverend  Sirs,  and 
all  who  maintain  the  dangerous  doctrine  "  that  whatever 
is  approved  by  all  authors  of  celebrity  is  probable,  and 
safe  as  regards  the  conscience,"  add  to  this  latter  pro- 
position, the  one  above  cited,  "  that  several  celebrated 
theologians  hold  '  life  for  a  blow;'"  what  is  this,  I  ask, 
but  to  place  the  poignard  in  every  Christian's  hand,  to 

LESSIUS  ON  HOMICIDE.  353 

revenge  liis  affronts  with  death,  by  announcing  that  his 
conscience  may  be  at  rest,  seeing  he  is  following  the 
opinion  of  grave  and  learned  authorities  ? 

Is  not  this,  I  ask,  horrible  ?  To  report  in  this  way  the 
damnable  opinions  of  your  authors,  and  virtually  your 
own  decision  in  their  favour,  and  thus  to  give  licence  to 
the  conscience  to  act  upon  those  opinions  !  But  this, 
Reverend  Fathers,  is  the  policy  of  your  school,  and  one 
can  only  be  astonished  at  your  hardihood  in  avowing  so 
undisguisedly  your  sentiments,  by  which  you  stand  con- 
victed, on  your  own  admission,  of  holding  that  a  man  may 
with  safe  conscience  "  murder  another  for  the  offence  of 
a  blow ; "  inasmuch  as  you  declare  the  maxim  to  be 
advanced  by  various  eminent  authorities." 

It  is  in  vain  for  you  to  deny  this,  or  to  put  forward 
passages  from  Vasquez  and  Suarez,  condemnatory  of  these 
murders  which  your  Brethren  sanction.  Testimony  of 
this  kind,  dissociated  from  other  parts,  may  confuse  those 
who  do  not  understand  your  system.  But  I  say,  let  your 
principles  and  maxims  he  put  properly  together.  You  may 
allege,  in  one  place,  that  Vasquez  disallows  such  homicide. 
But  what  is  your  language  elsewhere  ?  "  The  probability 
of  one  opinion  does  not  prevent  the  probability  of  an  op- 
posite one : "  and,  in  another  place :  "  It  is  lawful  to 
foUow  a  less  probable  and  safe  opinion,  in  preference  to 
one  more  probable  and  more  safe."  What  follows  from 
all  this,  I  demand,  but  that,  with  entire  liberty  of  con- 
science, a  man  may  choose  from  the  most  contradictory 
opinions  just  that  one  which  falls  in  the  most  entirely 
with  his  own  inclination  ?  What,  then,  my  Fathers,  is 
the  value  of  all  your  quotations  ?     I  condemn  you  by  the 

254  LETTER   XIII. 

very  means  you  employ  for  your  defence.  Why  produce 
passages  which  I  did  not  quote,  to  excuse  others  which  I 
did  quote,  and  which  have  nothing  in  common  with  each 
other  ?  Does  this  give  you  a  right  to  call  me  an  im- 
postor ?  Did  I  affirm  that  all  your  Fathers  taught  doc- 
trines equally  licentious  ?  Have  I  not  proved,  on  the 
contrary,  that  your  chief  strength  lay  in  having  at  your 
command  opinions  of  every  hue  for  your  various  occa- 
sions ?  To  the  advocates  of  murder  you  present  Lessius ; 
to  the  humane  and  scrupulous,  Vasquez ;  so  that  all  may 
be  satisfied,  and  none  be  without  a  grave  authority  to 
support  their  view.  Lessius,  speaking  like  a  Pagan  of 
homicide,  and,  perhaps,  like  a  Christian  of  alms-giving; 
Vasquez,  heathenishly  of  alms,  and  Christianly  of  homi- 
cide. Then,  by  means  of  the  doctrine  of  probability,  held 
by  both,  they  can  make  over  to  each  other  their  respec- 
tive sentiments  ;  and  will  feel  themselves  bound  to  absolve 
such  as  may  have  carried  out  into  action  the  opinions 
which  each  in  his  turn  has  condemned.  It  is  this  shifting 
and  versatility  which  enhance  your  delinquency  :  unifor- 
mity would  be  comparatively  innocent.  Nothing,  more- 
over, is  more  opposed  to  the  express  directions  of  St. 
Ignatius  and  your  earlier  rulers,  than  this  confusion  and 
intermixture  of  all  opinions.  I  may  have  something  to 
say  to  you  on  this  subject,  my  reverend  Fathers,  here- 
after ;  and  the  world  will  perhaps  be  surprised  to  learn 
how  you  have  degenerated  from  the  early  spirit  of  'your 
institution  ;  while  your  own  founders  foresaw  that  a  re- 
laxation of  your  moral  doctrines,  such  as  this,  would  be 
fatal,  not  to  your  Society  only,  but  also  to  the  universal 
Church ! 

LESSIUS   ON   HOMICIDE.  255 

I  must  tell  you,  however,  in  the  meau  time,  that  you 
vainly  seek  to  derive  advantage  from  the  opinion  of  Vas- 
quez.  It  would  be  strange,  indeed,  if,  among  the  writings 
of  so  many  of  your  brethren,  one  or  two  could  not  have 
been  found  holding  opinions  such  as  all  Christians  ac- 
knowledge. Little  cause  of  boasting  is  it  in  any  one,  to 
maintain  that,  according  to  Christ's  gospel,  murder  may 
not  be  committed  for  a  blow;  but  most  flagrant  is  the 
disgrace  of  those  who  deny  the  proposition.  Far  from 
afl^ording  you  any  justification,  this  fact  only  aggravates 
your  guilt;  for  it  proves  that,  possessing  among  your 
members  some  who  hold  the  truth,  you  adhere  not  to 
that  truth,  but  love  darkness  rather  than  light.  You 
have  been  told  by  an  eminent  authority  of  your  own,  "  that 
it  is  heathenish — not  christian — to  maintain  that  a  wound 
may  be  returned  for  a  mere  blow ;  that  such  a  doctrine  is 
opposed  both  to  the  Decalogue  and  the  Gospel ;  and 
would  be  supported  only  by  the  most  unprincipled  of 
human  society."  And  in  spite  of  this,  and  in  contradic- 
tion of  such  obvious  truths,  you  are  passive,  while  Lessius, 
Escobar,  and  others,  aver,  in  the  face  of  the  most  solemn 
denunciations  of  Jehovah  against  man-slaying, — that  life 
may  be  taken  in  revenge  for  a  blow  !  What  does  it  avail 
you  then  to  oppose  Vasquez  to  Lessius,  but  to  show  that, 
according  to  Vasquez,  Lessius  is  a  heathen  and  a  profli- 
gate, which  is  far  more  than  I  have  ventured  to  say  ? 
What  conclusion  are  we  to  draw,  but  that  Lessius  would 
overthrow  both  the  Decalogue  and  the  Gospel  ?  What, 
but  that,  at  the  last  great  day,  Vasquez  will  condemn 
Lessius  on  one  point,  as  Lessius  will  condemn  Vasquez  on 
another ;  and  that  the  whole  of  your  authorities  will  rise 

256  LETTER   XIII. 

in  jadgmentj  the  one  against  the  other,  for  their  awful 
violations  of  the"  law  of  Christ  ? 

To  conclude,  then.  Reverend  Fathers ;  since  your  doc- 
trine of  probability  renders  the  opinions  of  some  of  your 
Members  useless  to  the  Church,  and  advantageous  only 
for  the  advancement  of  your  own  polity,  these  very 
opinions  do  but  prove,  by  their  contrariety,  the  duplicity 
of  your  principles.  It  is  in  this  way  that  you  oppose  the 
solemn  dictates  of  Scripture,  corrupt  the  simplicity  of 
Divine  truth,  and  point  to  man  two  diverging  ways  of 
holiness  and  salvation  ! 

LETTER  XIV. 

REFUTATION  FROM  SCRIPTURE,  THE  HOLY  FATHERS, 
&C.,  OP  THE  JESUIT  MAXIMS  UPON  HOMICIDE.  PASS- 
ING REPLY  TO  VARIOUS  OTHER  SLANDERS,  AND  COM- 
PARISON OP  THEIR  DOCTRINE  WITH  THE  FORMALI- 
TIES  OBSERVED   IN   CRIMINAL   PROCESSES. 

Reverend  Fathers,  October  23,  1656. 

If  my  task  were  nothing  more  than  to  reply  to  your 
threefold  misrepresentations  respecting  homicide,  I  should 
not  need  to  employ  many  words,  and  my  refutation  would 
lie  in  the  narrowest  compass  ;  but,  considering  it  much 
more  important  to  impress  upon  the  world  a  due  horror  of 
your  opinions  on  this  subject,  than  to  justify  the  fidelity 
of  my  quotations,  I  deem  it  necessary  to  occupy  the  larger 
part  of  this  letter  in  a  general  refutation  of  your  tenets ; 
and  in  proving  how  opposed  they  are  at  once  to  the  sen- 
timents of  the  Church,  and  to  the  dictates  of  nature. 

The  sanction  to  take  life,  conceded  by  you  on  so  many 
occasions,  proves  how,  in  this  respect,  you  have  utterly 
disregarded  the  law  of  God,  and  sought  to  extinguish,  in 
man,  the  light  of  nature ;  so  that  it  is  become  necessary 
to  bring  you  back  to  the  very  elementary  principles  of 
religion  and  common  sense.     What  can  be  more  in  ac- 

258  LETTER  XIV. 

cordance  with  natural  feelings  than  the  sentiment,  "  That 
one  man  has  no  right  to  deprive  another  of  life."  "  Our 
own  consciences  may  tell  us/'  says  St.  Chrysostom,  "  that 
when  God  issued  the  command,  '  Thou  shalt  not  kill/  he 
deemed  it  not  necessary  to  assign  the  reason  why  homi- 
cide is  a  sin ;  because  the  law  supposes  such  a  principle 
of  nature  to  be  already  known  to  us." 

This  is  a  command,  then,  that  has  been  imposed  upon 
man  from  the  commencement  of  time,  and  in  every  age. 
The  Gospel  confirmed  the  sanction  of  the  law;  and  the 
decalogue  only  renewed  the  prohibition,  which  man  had 
received  from  the  mouth  of  Deity  (before  the  introduction 
of  the  law)  through  the  instrumentality  of  our  progenitor 
Noah.  At  that  second  birth  of  the  world,  God  said  to 
the  patriarch,  "  At  the  hand  of  every  man's  brother  will 
I  require  the  life  of  man  :  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood, 
by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed ;  for  in  the  image  of  God 
made  he  man." 

This  universal  interdict  takes  from  man  all  right  over 
the  life  of  his  fellow-man.  And  so  absolutely  has  God 
reserved  this  power  to  himself,  that,  by  the  principles  of 
Christianity — principles  at  variance,  herein,  with  the  false 
opinions  of  Paganism — man  has  not  even  a  right  to  dis- 
pose of  his  own  life.  But,  as  it  seemed  good  to  the 
Divine  Providence  to  give  to  man  the  institutions  of  So- 
ciety, and  to  appoint  punishments  for  those  who  trouble 
its  well-being,  he  has  himself  enacted  laws  for  taking 
away  the  life  of  offenders ;  and  thus,  homicides,  which, 
without  such  sanction  would  be  unjustifiable  infringe- 
ments upon  the  rights  of  our  fellows,  become,  under  that 
sanction,  lawful  and  necessary.     This  is   admirably  un- 

JESUIT   MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  259 

folded  by  St.  Augustine,  Book  I.  of  his  "  City  of  God," 
Ch.  31.  "  God/'  he  says,  "  has  himself  decreed  some 
exception  to  his  general  prohibition  to  kill,  whether  by 
the  institution  of  laws  for  the  punishment  of  criminals, 
or  by  special  commands,  occasionally  given,  for  the  death 
of  individuals.  When  life  is  taken  away  in  such  cases  as 
these,  it  is  not  man  that  kills,  but  God,  of  whom  man  is 
the  mere  instrument ;  as  is  a  sword  in  the  hand  of  him 
who  uses  it  in  warfare.  But,  with  these  exceptions,  who- 
sover  takes  away  the  life  of  man  is  a  murderer." 

It  is  then  not  to  be  doubted  that  God  alone  has  the 
right  to  take  away  man's  life.  Nevertheless,  having  in- 
stituted laws  for  the  capital  punishment  of  offences,  he 
has  constituted  earthly  sovereigns  or  governments,  the 
depositaries  of  this  power.  This  is  taught  us  by  St.  Paul, 
where,  speaking  of  the  right  possessed  by  kings  to  take 
life,  he  clothes  it  with  a  Divine  authority,  saying,  "  He 
beareth  not  the  sword  in  vain ;  for  he  is  the  minister  of 
God,  to  execute  wrath  upon  him  that  doeth  evil."  (Rom. 
xiii.  4.) 

But  this  authority  being  committed  to  man  by  God,  he 
requires  that  it  shall  be  exercised  by  man,  as  it  is  by 
Himself,  with  justice,  according  to  St.  Paul  again  in  the 
same  connexion.  "  Eulers  are  not  a  terror  to  good 
works,  but  to  the  evil.  Wilt  thou  then  not  be  afraid  of 
the  power  ?  Do  that  which  is  good.  He  is  the  minister 
of  God  to  thee  for  good."  And  this  restriction,  so  far 
from  weakening,  elevates  their  authority ;  for  it  assimi- 
lates it  to  that  of  the  Almighty  himself;  who  is  incapable 
of  evil,  but  omnipotent  for  good ;  in  contrast  with  that  of 
demons,   who  are  incapable  of  good,    and  have   power 

360  .  LETTER  XIV. 

only  for  evil.  There  is  this  difference,  alone,  between 
Jehovah  and  earthly  potentates,  that  He,  being  himself 
perfect  justice  and  wisdom,  may  at  any  instant  take  the 
life  of  his  creatures,  whensoever  and  in  what  manner  it 
shall  please  him ;  for,  besides  that  He  is  the  absolute  Dis- 
poser of  man's  life,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  He  never 
resumes  that  life  without  good  cause,  and  in  the  exercise 
of  perfect  discretion,  inasmuch  as  He  is  incapable  alike  of 
injustice  and  of  error.  But  princes  may  not  thus  act ; 
because,  although  ministers  of  God,  they  possess  a  human 
and  not  a  divine  nature.  They  are  obnoxious  to.  be  mis- 
led by  error,  excited  by  false  suspicion,  carried  away  by 
passion ;  and  this  has  led  them,  of  their  own  accord,  to 
resort  to  fitting  institutions,  and  to  delegate  the  power 
thus  committed  to  them  of  God,  into  the  hand  of  wise 
and  impartial  magistrates,  that  it  may  be  improved  to  the 
august  purposes  for  which  it  has  been  bestowed. 

Know  then.  Reverend  Father,  that  to  escape  the  guilt 
of  homicide  in  taking  man's  life,  the  authority  of  God 
should  be  wielded  in  conjunction  with  \h.e.  justice  of  God  ; 
and  that  if  these  two  conditions  be  not  fulfilled,  sin  is 
committed ;  be  it  under  Divine  authority,  but  without 
justice;  or,  with  justice,  but  without  Divine  authority. 
"  From  the  necessity  of  such  a  union,  it  follows,"  says 
St.  Augustine,  "  that  any  one  who,  without  authority, 
puts  a  criminal  to  death,  is  himself  guilty  of  crime ;  for 
this  reason,  chiefly,  that  he  usurps  an  authority  which 
God  has  not  conferred."  On  the  other  hand,  the  judge 
although  clothed  with  that  authority,  is  guilty  of  homi- 
cide, if  he  puts  an  innocent  person  to  death,  in  violation 
of  the  laws  which  it  is  his  duty  to  follow. 

JESUIT    MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  261 

These,  Sirs,  are  the  great  principles  upon  which  rest 
the  peace  and  security  of  society ;  principles  which  have 
prevailed  in  all  ages,  and  among  all  nations;  and  on 
which  legislators,  both  sacred  and  profane,  have  founded 
their  laws.  For  Pagans,  even,  have  not  violated  these 
rules,  excepting  on  occasions  when  the  loss  of  chastity  or 
life  could  not  be  averted  without  it ;  "  for  then,"  remarks 
Cicero,  "  the  laws  themselves  seem  to  furnish  arms  to 
those  exposed  to  such  an  exigency." 

But  that,  apart  from  such  occasions  as  these,  individuals 
should  ever  be  allowed  to  deprive  their  fellow-men  of  life,  in 
revenge  for  an  affront,  or  to  escape  an  injury  to  reputation 
or  property,  and  that,  where  life  is  exposed  to  no  danger ; 
this,  I  assert,  is  what  heathens  themselves  never  sanc- 
tioned. They  have,  on  the  contrary,  expressly  forbidden 
it ;  for  the  Roman  law  of  the  twelve  tables  enacted, "  That 
it  is  unlawful  to  slay  a  robber,  in  the  day-time,  who  is  not 
armed  for  his  own  defence."  This  too  was  forbidden  in 
Exodus  Ch.  xxii.  And  the  law,  "  Furem,  ad  legem  Cor- 
neliam,"  taken  from  Ulpian,  "  forbids  even  the  killing  of 
robbers  by  night,  if  they  do  not  put  our  own  life  in  peril." 
See  Cujas,  in  tit.  dig.  de  Just,  et  Jure,  ad  Leg.  3. 

I  ask  you  now,  Keverend  Fathers,  by  what  authority  it 
is,  that  your  Society  permits  that  which  laws,  both  human 
and  divine,  have  forbidden ;  and  how  Lessius  has  dared 
to  say,  B.  2,  C.  9,  N.  66  and  72  :  "  In  Exodus  it  is  for- 
bidden to  kill  those  committing  robbery  by  day,  not  de- 
fending themselves  by  arms ;  and  he  that  killed  another 
in  such  manner  was  to  be  punished.  Yet,  notwithstand- 
ing this,  in  doing  so  we  should  not,  in  conscience,  be  cul- 
pable, seeing  that  we  cannot  otherwise  have  any  certainty 

263  LETTER   XIT. 

of  recovering  the  property  thus  stolen  from  us ;  but  sucli 
recovery  must  be  doubtful ;  and  we  are  not  bound  to  ex- 
pose ourselves  to  the  loss  of  property,  to  save  the  life  of  a 
robber.     And  this  even  is  lawful  for  ecclesiastics  also." 

Inconceivable  audacity  !  The  law  of  Moses  punishes 
the  taking  the  life  of  a  robber,  if  our  own  life  be  not 
threatened ;  and  you  say,  the  law  of  the  Gospel  absolves 
it !  What,  Sirs,  did  Christ  come  to  destroy  the  law,  or 
to  fulfil  it  ?  "The  law  might  punish,"  says  Lessius,  "for 
such  an  offence ;  but  conscience  shall  acquit  us."  Is  the 
morality  of  the  Gospel  more  cruel — less  hostile  to  blood- 
shedding — than  that  of  heathenism,  from  whence  our  own 
legislators  have  derived  the  very  laws  which  condemn  it  ? 
Shall  Christians  set  more  value  upon  their  sordid  goods, 
and  less  upon  the  life  of  immortal  man,  than  idolators  and 
infidels  ?  "What  is  it,  Keverend  Fathers,  that  you  ground 
your  rules  upon  ?  Not  surely  upon  any  actual  law  of 
God,  or  of  man ;  but  upon  reasoning  such  as  this  :  "  The 
law  allows  us  to  defend  ourselves  against  robbery ;  and  to 
repel  force  by  force.  Now,  defence  being  allowed,  homi- 
cide must  also  be  allowable,  since  without  it,  such  defence 
would  often  be  impossible." 

Here,  Sirs,  I  am  at  issue  with  you.  Defence  being 
allowed,  it  follows  not  that  homicide  is  also  allowable.  It 
is  this  barbarity  in  the  manner  of  defence  that  is  the 
source  of  your  perversions,  and  is  denominated  by  the 
faculty  of  Louvain  "  a  murderous  defence  " — defensio  oc- 
cisiva — in  their  Censure  of  your  Pere  Launy's  doctrines 
upon  Homicide.  I  maintain,  then,  that  there  is  so  much 
difference  in  law,  between  the  taking  of  life  and  allowable 
self-defence,  that  on  those  very  occasions  in   which  the 

JESUIT    MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  263 

latter  is  permittedj  homicide  is  equally  forbidden,  where 
life  is  not  put  in  danger.  Hear  what  Cujas  says  on  this 
subject,  "  It  is  lawful  to  repel  one  who  endeavours  to 
deprive  us  of  our  property ;  but  it  is  not  lawful  to  deprive 
him  of  life.'^  And  again,  "  If  we  receive  a  blow,  but  not 
with  a  design  against  our  life,  it  is  lawful  to  defend  our- 
selves, but  not,  in  doing  so  to  take  life." 

Where  then  do  you  receive  authority  to  say,  as  do  Mo- 
lina, Reginaldus,  Filiutius,  Escobar,  Lessius,  and  others. 
"  It  is  lawful  to  take  life  in  revenge  for  a  blow  ?  "  And 
again,  "  It  is  allowed,  by  the  opinion  of  all  Casuists,  '  ex 
sententia  omnium,'  to  take  the  life  of  him  who  assails  our 
reputation,"  *  as  says  Lessius,  N.  74.  By  what  title  do 
you — mere  unauthorized  individuals  yourselves — give  this 
power  over  life  to  individual  persons,  and  even  to  the 
pious  ?  How  is  it  that  you  presume  to  usurp  this  right 
over  life  and  death — the  sole  prerogative  of  the  Most 
High,  and  the  brightest  jewel  in  the  crown  of  Infinitude? 
To  this  I  demand  a  reply ;  and  you  afiect  to  give  one  by 
saying  simply  in  your  "  thirteenth  Imposture,"  "  that  the 
consideration  in  value  for  which  Molina  allows  the  killing 
a  robber,  who  escapes  without  threatening  violence,  is  not 
so  small  as  I  state,  and  must  exceed  six  ducats."  Mise- 
rable sophistry  !  Where,  Sirs,  will  you  fix  this  amount  ? 
At  fifteen — at  sixteen  ducats  ?  Does  this  improve  your 
case  }  Why  you  do  not  then  get  beyond  the  price  of  a 
horse;  for  Lessius  plainly  declares,  B.  2,  C.  9,  N.  74, 
"  that  we  may  kiU  a  man  who  steals  our  horse."  But  I 
tell  you  again,  as  I  have  stated  already,  that,  according  to 

*  '  Tuer  celui  qui  Teut  nous  faire  un  affront.'  (Fr.) 

264  LETTER   XIV. 

Molinaj  tlie  amount  is  fixed  at  six  ducats ;  and  if  we  can- 
not here  agree,  let  us  call  in  an  arbitrator^  and  one  whom 
you  cannot  gainsay.  I  name  for  the  purpose  your  own 
Reginaldus,  who  commenting  on  this  passage  of  Molina^ 
B.  31j  N.  68,  says,  "  Molina  here  decides  that  the  amount 
for  which  it  is  not  permitted  to  take  life  is  three,  or  four, 
or  five  ducats."  Thus,  my  Fathers,  I  have  not  only 
Mohna,  but  Reginaldus  also  to  support  my  assertion. 

It  will  be  not  less  easy  for  me  to  refute  your  fourteenth 
"  Imposture,"  respecting  Molina's  alleged  permission  "  to 
kill  a  thief  for  the  robbery  of  a  dollar."  This  is  so  uni- 
form a  doctrine,  that  Escobar  wUl  furnish  you  with  it. 
In  tr.  1,  ex.  7,  N.  44,  he  says,  "  Molina  authoritatively 
fixes  the  amount  for  which  life  may  be  taken,  at  a  dollar." 
But  you  charge  me,  in  the  same  connexion,  with  suppress- 
ing the  subsequent  part  of  the  passage :  "  "We  ought 
herein,  however,  to  be  careful  to  observe  the  moderation 
of  a  just  defence."  *  Why  do  you  not  then  censure  Es- 
cobar, who  has  equally  omitted  these  words  ?  This  is 
somewhat  sharp  policy.  Do  you  think  others  do  not 
understand  as  well  as  you,  your  own  fashion  of  defence  ? 
Do  not  we  know  what  it  is  to  make  "  a  murderous  de- 
fence ?  "  (defense  meurtriere.)  You  would  have  it  under- 
stood that  Molina  meant  by  this,  that  when  life  is  ex- 
posed to  danger  in  the  preservation  of  our  dollar,  that  we 
may  kill  the  assailant,  as  it  is  then  an  act  of  self-preserva- 
tion. Were  that  true,  my  Fathers,  why  has  Molina  said 
in  the  same  passage,  that  "  in  this  he  dijQfers  from  Carrerus 
and  Bald,"  who  allow  of  homicide  for  preservation  of  life? 

*  '  L'on  doit  garder  en  cel.i  Is  modulation  d'une  juste  defense.'  (Fr.) 

JESUIT   MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  265 

I  maintain  that  what  he  means  is  simply,  that  if  we  can 
save  our  crown-piece  without  killing  the  robber,  we  ought 
not  to  kill  him ;  but  if  we  cannot  save  it  without  killing, 
even  if  there  be  no  danger  of  our  own  life  (as  when  the 
robber  is  unarmed),  it  is  then  lawful  for  us  to  kill  the 
thief,  to  save  our  crown ;  and  that  in  doing  so,  according 
to  his  opinion,  we  are  not  exceeding  the  limits  of  lawful 
defence.  For  proof  of  this,  hear  his  own  explanation : 
t.  4,  tr.  3,  d.  11,  N.  5,  "  We  do  not  exceed  the  modera- 
tion of  a  just  defence,  when  we  use  arms  against  those 
who  have  none,  or  avail  ourselves  of  any  other  advantage 
over  them.  I  know  there  are  those  who  hold  a  diflferent 
opinion,  but  I  do  not  agree  with  them." 

Thus,  Reverend  Fathers,  it  is  placed  beyond  contro- 
versy, that  your  authorities  allow  life  to  be  taken  for  the 
defence  of  property,  and  reputation,  even  when  the  party 
assailed  is  in  no  danger  of  his  own  life.  And  it  is  on  the 
same  principle  that  sanction  is  given  to  the  practice  of 
duelling,  as  I  have  proved  by  numerous  passages  from 
their  writings,  to  which  you  have  ventured  no  reply. 
You  comment  only  on  one  quotation  made  by  me  from 
your  Pere  Layman,  in  which  he  permits  such  an  act,  say- 
ing, "  when,  otherwise,  we  should  be  in  danger  of  loss  of 
fortune,  or  honour ;"  and  you  charge  me  with  suppressing 
his  concluding  words  "  this,  however,  may  rarely  happen." 
Now  this  is  really  to  be  admired,  my  good  Fathers  !  This 
is  your  happy  way  of  charging  me  with  misrepresenta- 
tion !  We  are  enquiring  whether  duelling  be  lawful  or 
not.  There  are  here  two  distinct  questions  at  issue. 
Layman,  as  a  Casuist,  sets  himself  to  decide,  "  is  duelling 
lawful?"  and  decides  aflSrrnatively,  We  can  judge  for  our- 

266  LETTER   XIV. 

selves  whether  the  case  supposed  for  its  justification  be 
infrequent ;  and  we  contend  that  it  is  of  common  occur- 
rence. But  if  you  prefer  the  testimony  of  your  good  col- 
league, Diana,  he  will  inform  you  how  common  it  is,  in 
part  5,  tract  14,  Misc.  2,  Resol.  99.  Be  it  however  com- 
mon or  not,  and  be  it  that  Layman  herein  follows  Na- 
varre, as  you  so  strongly  insist, — is  it  the  less  atrocious 
that  he  should  adopt  such  an  opinion,  as  that  (from  a 
false  notion  of  honour)  it  should  be  lawful  to  engage  in  a 
duel,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  all  Christian  States,  and  to 
the  canons  of  the  Church ;  contrary  to  the  authority  of 
Scripture,  and  to  the  writings  of  the  Fathers,  and  to  the 
example  of  the  saints ;  and  in  accordance  only  with  such 
diabolical  and  impious  reasonings  as  these :  "  that  honour 
is  dearer  to  us  than  life ;  that  it  is  lawful  to  take  life  in 
defence  of  life ;  therefore  it  is  lawful  to  take  life  in  de- 
fence of  honour  "  ? 

What,  Sirs  !  Because  the  wickedness  of  men  leads 
them  to  cherish  this  vanity  of  reputation  more  than  the 
existence  which  their  Creator  has  given  them,  that  it  may 
be  devoted  to  His  service,  therefore  the  lives  of  their  fel- 
lows are  to  be  sacrificed  to  its  preservation  !  It  is  not 
enough  that,  by  a  fatal  perversion,  this  bubble  of  fame  is 
thus  to  be  valued  more  than  life ;  but  the  vicious  attach- 
ment— capable,  when  pursued  as  an  end,  of  sullying  the 
holiest  actions — is  to  be  allowed  to  justify  the  very  worst, 
when  resolved,  as  its  motive,  into  mere  jealousy  of 
honour ! 

And  where  is  this  fearful  infatuation  to  end  ?  To  what 
excesses  must  it  not  lead !  Is  it  not  obvious  that  lifewill 
come  to  be  set  in  the  balance  with  the  veriest  trifles,  if  it 

JESUIT   MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  267 

be  regarded  as  a  point  of  honour  to  preserve  them ;  yes, 
the  life  of  man  may  be  taken  for  an  apple  !  Here  you 
would  again  charge  me,  my  Reverend  Fathers,  with  draw- 
ing slanderous  inferences  from  your  doctrines,  were  I  not, 
in  saying  this,  supported  by  the  authority  of  the  grave 
Lessius  himself,  who  has  these  words,  N.  68  :  "  It  is  not 
allowable  to  take  the  life  of  another  for  the  preservation 
of  a  thing  of  small  value,  such  as  a  dollar,  or  an  apple — 
'  aut  pro  porno ' — unless  the  loss  of  it  should  be  attended 
with  disgrace  to  ourselves.  For  then  we  are  bound  to 
recover  it,  and  even  to  take  life,  if  necessary,  for  the  pur- 
pose— '  et  si  opus  est  occidere ' — because  this  is  not  so 
much  for  the  preservation  of  our  property  as  of  our 
honour."  Is  not  this  plain  speaking  ?  And,  to  conclude 
with  a  proposition  which  includes  all  the  others,  hear  the 
following  passage  from  Pere  Hereau,  and  which  he  has 
adopted  from  Lessius.  "  The  right  of  defending  ourselves 
extends  to  the  use  of  every  kind  of  means  for  preserving 
ourselves  from  every  kind  of  injury." 

Look  at  the  consequences  involved  in  this  inhuman 
maxim  !  Surely  every  one  should  oppose  it,  and  espe- 
cially all  persons  occupying  public  stations.  And  not 
only  should  they  do  this  on  public  grounds,  but  for  their 
individual  safety  ;  for  your  Casuists,  whom  I  have  quoted 
in  former  letters,  extend  their  sanction  to  the  invasion  of 
their  lives  also.  Thus,  turbulent  spirits,  who  are  justly 
exposed  to  punishment  for  their  offences,  easily  persuading 
themselves  that  they  are  objects  of  oppression,  will  soon 
act  upon  the  conviction  "  that  the  right  to  defend  them- 
selves extends  to  every  kind  of  means,  against  every  kind 
of  injury."     They  will  no   longer  feel  it   necessary   to 

N  2 

268  LETTER   XIV. 

resist  those  conscientious  scruplesj  which  stifle  the  greater 
number  of  crimes  in  their  birth  ;  and  their  only  care  will 
be  to  overcome  the  external  obstacles  to  their  revengeful 
purposes. 

I  will  however  say  no  more.  Reverend  Fathers,  on  this 
hateful  subject,  nor  on  other  descriptions  of  murder  yet 
more  atrocious — more  imminent  to  public  safety — to 
which  your  sanctions  have  been  given,  although  they  are 
openly  treated  of  by  Lessius  in  his  "  Doubts  4  and  6," 
as  well  as  by  others  among  your  writers.  Would  that 
these  infamous  maxims  had  never  been  dragged  from  the 
dark  abyss  in  which  they  were  engendered ;  and  that  the 
Devil,  their  author,  had  not  succeeded  in  finding  agents 
so  devoted  to  his  interests,  as  to  set  them  forth  in  all  their 
deformity  among  Christian  nations  ! 

It  must  be  manifest  from  all  that  has  been  advanced, 
how  opposed  is  the  laxity  of  your  opinions  to  the  strict, 
ness  of  the  civil  law,  even  amongst  heathen  states.  What 
must  it  be  then,  when  compared  with  the  ecclesiastical 
code,  which  is  so  much  the  more  elevated  over  every 
other,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  Church  alone  that  has  dis- 
covered and  possesses  true  holiness  !  Therefore  it  is  that 
this  chaste  Bride  of  Christ,  who,  in  imitation  of  her  Divine 
Spouse,  is  willing  to  shed  her  blood  for  the  good  of  others, 
but  never  sheds  that  of  others  for  her  own  pleasure, 
entertains  an  especial  horror  of  the  crime  of  murder— a 
horror  proportioned  to  the  clearness  of  that  light  which 
has  been  imparted  to  her  by  God  himself.  She  regards 
man  as  the  image  of  Him  whom  she  adores.  She  enters 
tains  for  every  individual  of  our  race  a  holy  reverence,  as 
for  one  bought  with  fin  infinite  pripe,  and  designed  to 

JESUIT   MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  269 

become  a  temple  of  the  living  God.  Thus  she  judges 
the  death  of  man — unauthorized  by  a  law  from  heaven — 
to  be  not  homicide  alone,  but  an  act  of  sacrilege,  by  which 
she  is  deprived  of  one  of  her  members ;  since,  whether 
one  of  the  faithful  or  not,  she  regards  him  either  as 
actually  one  of  her  children,  or  as  one  capable  of  becoming 
such. 

These,  my  Fathers,  are  the  hallowed  reasons  which, 
seeing  that  the  Deity  has  condescended  to  become  Man 
for  the  salvation  of  men,  have  so  enhanced  the  value  of 
man's  life  in  the  eyes  of  the  Church,  that  she  resents  the 
shedding  of  his  blood  as  the  highest  crime  that  can  be 
committed  against  God.  I  will  adduce  some  instances  of 
this ;  not  with  the  view  that  such  severities  should  on  all 
occasions  be  imitated  (for  I  know  that  the  Church  may 
vary  the  degrees  of  her  external  discipline,)  but  to  show 
what  has  been  ever  the  immutable  spirit  of  her  laws  on 
this  subject.  The  penalties  she  inflicts  for  this  crime 
of  homicide  may  vary  in  different  periods ;  but  the 
horror  she  evinces  for  the  offence  will  be  unalterably  the 
same. 

The  Church,  during  a  long  period  of  time,  never  dis- 
pensed with  the  death  of  those  who  were  guilty  of  deli- 
berate homicide,  of  the  same  nature  as  those  which  your 
Society  sanctions.  The  celebrated  council  of  Ancyra 
ordained  penance  for  the  crime  during  the  whole  period 
of  life :  and  the  Church,  since  then,  has  deemed  it  a 
sufficient  relaxation  to  reduce  the  term  of  penance  to  a 
large  number  of  years.  But  to  deter  men  more  effectually 
from  the  commission  of  wilful  homicide,  she  has  even 
imposed  severe  punishments  upon  thqse  which  occurred 

370  LETTER   XIV. 

through  inadvertencies  ;  *  as  may  be  seen  in  St.  Basil,  St. 
Gregory  Nazianzen,  and  in  the  decrees  of  Popes  Zacchary 
and  Alexander  II.  The  canons  quoted  by  Isaac,  Bishop 
of  liangres,  t.  2,  ch.  13,  "  direct  seven  years  of  penance 
for  killing  another  in  self-defence."  And  we  find  St. 
Hildebert,  Bishop  of  Mans,  replying  to  Yves  de  Chartres, 
"  That  he  deemed  it  right  to  supersede  a  priest  from  his 
office  during  his  whole  life,  for  having  killed  a  .thief  with 
a  blow  of  a  stone  in  an  act  of  defence.''' 

Presume  then  no  longer  to  assert  that  your  decisions 
are  conformable  in  spirit  to  the  canons  of  the  Church.  I 
defy  you  to  produce  one  which  authorizes  the  taking  life 
for  the  preservation  of  property  only,  (for  I  refer  not  to 
occasions  in  which  it  may  be  necessary  to  defend  life  also,) 
*  se  suaque  liberando.'  Your  own  Fathers  acknowledge 
there  are  none ;  among  others  Launy,  tr.  5,  disp.  36, 
Num.  136 :  "  There  is,"  he  says,  "  no  law,  divine  or 
human,  that  expressly  allows  to  kill  a  thief,  who  uses  no 
violence."  Nevertheless,  this  is  what  you  solemnly  au- 
thorize. I  defy  you  to  show  one  ecclesiastical  law,  which 
allows  to  take  life  for  defending  reputation,  for  a  blow,  an 
injury,  or  a  slander.  I  defy  you  to  show  one  which 
allows  the  killing  a  witness,  a  magistrate,  a  judge,  what- 
ever alleged  injury  may  be  sustained  from  them.  The 
spirit  of  the  Church  is  entirely  opposed  to  these  pernicious 
maximsj  which  open  a  door  to  the  most  flagrant  irregulari- 
ties. Her  lessons  have  ever  been,  "  not  to  render  evil 
for  evil ; "  "  to  give  place  to  wrath ; "  "  to  submit  to 
violence;"  "to  render  to  all  their  dues — honour,  sub- 

*  '  Par  imprudence,'  (Fr.) 

JESUIT   MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  271 

mission^  tribute  ;  "  "  to  pay  obedience  to  magistrates  and 
superiors/'  even  the  unjust,  because  we  are  to  recognize  in 
them  the  authority  of  God  by  whom  they  are  appointed. 
The  Church  forbids  us  (even  yet  more  strictly  than  the 
civil  law)  to  avenge  ourselves ;  and  it  is  by  the  spirit 
imbibed  from  her,  that  Christian  sovereigns,  not  yielding 
to  vindictive  emotions,  even  in  cases  of  the  highest  state- 
treasons,  hand  over  the  criminal  to  the  civil  judge  to  be 
dealt  with  according  to  the  national  laws.  Ought  not  the 
blush  of  shame  to  overspread  your  cheeks,  0  Fathers,  at 
the  contrast  between  this  mode  of  procedure  and  your 
principles  ? 

Follow  now,  I  pray,  the  comparison  between  the  mode 
of  dealing  with  an  enemy,  which  is  authorized  by  your 
Society,  and  the  solemn  process  with  which  the  punish- 
ment of  death  is  inflicted  upon  criminals  by  our  national 
judicatures. 

Every  one  knows  that  individuals  are  never  allowed  to 
demand  the  death  of  others  ;  and,  if  we  have  been  ruined 
in  our  circumstances,  maimed  in  our  limbs,  our  house  burnt 
down,  our  nearest  relative  even  destroyed — if  threatened 
with  assassination,  or  slandered  and  traduced — we  are  not 
left  to  deal  with  the  offenders  ourselves :  public  pro- 
secutors are  appointed,  for  the  purpose  of  redress  on  the 
part  of  the  sovereign,  or  rather  on  the  part  of  God.  Do 
you  think.  Reverend  Sirs,  that  Christian  judges  have 
made  such  regulations  as  these  a  mere  feint  and  pre- 
tence ?  Is  it  not  done,  rather,  in  order  that  human  laws 
may  be  assimilated  to  the  Gospel  rules,  and  to  prevent  the 
external  practice  of  our  jurisprudence  being  placed  in 
opposition  to  the  convictions  and  practices  of  Christianity  ? 

272  LETTER   XIV. 

We  may  see  from  this  how  you  stand  confuted  on  the 
very  first  principles  of  justice.  You  shall  be  yet  more 
confounded  by  what  follows. 

Let  us  now  suppose  that  the  public  functionary  referred 
to  has  demanded  the  capital  punishment  of  the  criminal ; 
what  follows  thereupon  ?  Is  death  hastily  awarded  ? 
Noj  my  Fathers ;  man's  life  is  of  too  much  importance 
for  this  J  his  Maker's  gift  is  treated  with  more  reverence. 
The  law  places  it  not  at  the  disposal  of  our  fellow-men 
indiscriminately ;  it  is  committed  into  the  hand  of  magis- 
trates, of  learning,  intelligence  and  probity.  Nor  is  the 
judgment  of  one  alone  deemed  sufficient  for  his  condem- 
nation. Seven  *  must  solemnly  concur  in  the  act.  Of 
those  seven,  care  is  taken  that  no  one  shall  have  expe- 
rienced wrong  or  injury  from  the  criminal,  lest  any 
personal  prejudice  should  produce  a  bias  or  feeling  of 
resentment  against  him.  And  you  are  aware  also,  that  in 
order  to  secure  the  clearest  exercise  of  the  mind  on  the 
part  of  these  Judges,  the  earlier  hours  of  the  day  only 
are  appropriated  to  this  important  duty;  such  is  the 
solicitude  to  obtain  due  preparation  for  so  solemn  an  act, 
wherein  they  are  constituted  the  representatives  and 
ministers  of  God ;  and  to  ensure  that  they  shall  punish 
none  but  those  whom  the  Deity  himself  condemns. 

And  therefore  it  is,  in  order  that  they  may  be  faithful 
dispensers  of  this  divinely-entrusted  authority  over  man's 
life,  that  they  are  allowed  only  to  proceed  upon  authentic 
testimony,  and  according  to  all  other  established  for- 
malities ;  and,  finally,  can  condemn  and  sentence  capitally 

*  It  is  otvious  that  it  is  the  French  criminal  system  that  is  here  referred 
to.     (Transl.) 

JESUIT  MAXIMS  UPON  HOMICIDE.  373 

only  in  strict  conformity  with  legal  rules.  Andj  after  all 
this,  if  the  authority  thus  divinely  derived,  compels  the 
abandonment  to  punishment  of  the  body  of  the  unhappy 
criminal,  the  same  command  of  God  enjoins  a  solicitude 
for  their  wretched  souls.  The  very  criminality  of  the 
offenders  enhances  the  obligation  to  this  duty ;  lest  they 
should  be  dismissed  from  life  without  an  effort  for  their 
spiritual  preparation.  Can  any  thing  be  more  pure  and 
blameless  than  this  ?  Yet  so  greatly  does  the  Church 
abhor  the  shedding  of  blood — such  is  her  serious  view  also 
respecting  homicide — that  she  holds  to  be  incapacitated 
from  ministering  at  her  altars,  any  who  have  taken  part 
in  a  capital  proceeding,  although  it  has  been  accompanied 
and  sanctioned  by  all  these  scrupulous  observances  ! 

See  then,  I  pray  you,  in  what  manner,  by  the  rules  of 
jurisprudence,  man's  life  is  dealt  with  :  see,  on  the  other 
hand,  how  your  Order  deals  with  it.  By  your  novel  code 
there  is  but  one  Judge,  and  that  Judge  is  the  party 
against  whom  the  offence  has  been  committed.  Behold 
him,  at  once.  Plaintiff,  Judge,  and  Executioner !  At 
once,  he  impeaches  his  enemy,  passes  his  condemnation, 
and  executes  the  sentence ;  and,  regardless  of  the  welfare 
either  of  body  or  soul  of  his  fellow-man,  he  hurls  from 
life,  and  dooms  perhaps  to  eternal  perdition,  one,  for  whom 
Christ  died  !  And  all  this  to  revenge  a  blow,  a  slander, 
an  irritating  word,  or  some  similar  offence ;  for  which  a 
magistrate,  clothed  with  lawful  authority,  might  have 
been  himself  deemed  criminal  in  capitally  committing  the 
offender,  seeing  the  law  had  awarded  no  such  punishment 
for  the  trespass  !  And  then,  to  crown  and  consummate 
the  outrage,   no  blame,   no  irregularity,   even  is  to  be 

N  6 

374  LETTER   XIV. 

imputed,  for  such  an  unauthorized — such  illegal  taking  of 
man's  life — even  if  the  party  be  an  ecclesiastic  or  a  priest ! 

What,  Sirs,  are  we  come  to  !  Are  they  ecclesiastics, 
are  they  priests,  who  hold  this  language  ?  Are  they 
Christians  ?  Are  they  Infidels  ?  Are  they  Men  ?  Are 
they  Demons  ?  Ar^  these  the  "  Mysteries  revealed  by 
the  Lamb  to  his  followers,"  or  are  they  abominations 
whispered  by  Satan  in  the  ear  of  those  who  are  led  in 
chains  by  his  delusions  ? 

For,  after  all.  Reverend  Fathers,  in  what  light  would 
you  have  the  world  regard  you  ?  Are  you  to  be  deemed 
followers  of  the  gospel,  or  its  opponents  ?  We  must  be 
of  one  side  or  another :  there  is  no  middle  place.  "  He 
that  is  not  with  the  Saviour  is  against  him."  These  two 
classifications  divide  the  whole  race  of  man.  There  are, 
according  to  St.  Augustine,  "  two  classes,  and  two  dif- 
ferent worlds,  diffused  over  the  earth's  surface ;  the  world 
of  God's  children,  which  forms  that  body  of  which  Christ 
is  the  Head  and  Sovereign  ;  and  the  world  of  God's  ene- 
mies, whose  head  and  ruler  is  the  Devil."  It  is  on  this 
account  that  Jesus  is  called  the  King  and  God  of  the 
world;  because  he  has  everywhere  subjects  and  worship- 
pers ;  and  the  Devil  is  also  called  in  Scripture,  the  Prince 
and  God  of  the  world;  seeing  he  has  everywhere  his 
devotees  and  slaves.  Christ  has  given  to  the  Church— 
his  seat  of  empire — such  laws  as  seemed  good  to  Ms  in- 
finite wisdom ;  and  Satan  has  also  exacted,  in  his  king- 
dom, laws  according  to  his  pleasure.  Jesus  has  conferred 
honour  upon  the  sufferer  :  the  Devil  upon  him  who  suffers 
not.  Jesus  has  enjoined  upon  him  who  is  smitten  on  the 
one  cheek,   to  turn  the  other  also :  Satan  tells  the  man 

JESUIT   MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  275 

who  receives  a  blow,  to  retaliate  even  to  death  upon  him 
that  inflicts  it.  Jesus  declares  those  happy  who  share 
with  him  shame  and  reproach :  Satan  proclaims  the  re- 
proached and  slandered  to  be  unhappy.  Christ  says, 
"  Woe  unto  you  when  all  men  speak  well  of  you !  "  The 
Devil  says,  "Woe  unto  those  whom  the  world  esteems  and 
caresses  not ! 

Loot  well,  then,  to  it,  my  Fathers,  to  which  of  these 
kingdoms  you  belong.  You  know  the  language  of  the 
City  of  Peace — the  mystical  Jerusalem ;  and  you  know 
also  the  language  of  the  City  of  Sorrow,  which  the  Scrip- 
ture calls  "  the  spiritual  Sodom."  Which  of  these  lan- 
guages are  you  versed  in  ?  Which  of  these  do  you  speak  ? 
Those  who  belong  to  Christ  (according  to  St.  Paul)  hold 
the  doctrines  of  Christ ;  and  those  who  (in  the  language 
of  Christ)  are  children  of  Satan — "  ex  Patre  Diabolo," 
who  was  a  murderer  from  the  beginning — follow  the 
maxims  of  the  DevU.  See  what  is  the  language  of  your 
school,  and  ask  your  writers  the  question,  "  If  I  receive  a 
blow,  shall  I  patiently  endure  it,  rather  than  aim  at  the 
life  of  him  who  gives  it  ?  Or,  am  I  allowed  to  kill  such 
an  one  in  revenge  of  the  affront  ?  "  "  You  are  allowed," 
say  Lessius,  Molina,  Escobar,  Reginaldus,  Filiutius,  Bal- 
dellus,  and  other  Jesuits;  "you  are  allowed  to  kill  a  man 
from  whom  you  receive  a  blow."  Answer  me,  now,  is 
this  the  language  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  Again :  "  Would  a 
person  be  dishonoured  by  receiving  a  blow,  without  taking 
the  life  of  the  person  inflicting  it  ? "  "  Is  it  to  be 
doubted,"  says  Escobar,  "  that  if  a  person  allows  another 
to  live,  who  has  given  him  a  blow,  he  himself  will  live 
without  honour  ?  " 

^76  LETTER   XIV. 

Yes,  Sirs,  but  it  is  that  honour  whicli  the  Devil,  the 
fountain  of  pride,  has  transmitted  to  all  the  children  of 
pride  !  This  is  the  honour  which  has  ever  been  the  idol 
of  the  men  of  the  world.  To  maintain  this  honour — the 
choicest  gift  of  Satan — we  see  them  sacrifice  life,  in  the 
fury  of  the  duel;  true  reputation,  by  the  disgraces  they 
entail  upon  themselves  ;  and  their  eternal  welfare,  by  the 
damnation  into  which  they  plunge — recklessly  foregoing 
even  the  rites  of  Christian  sepulture,  which  ecclesiastical 
law  denies  them  !  But  we  have  cause  to  bless  God  for 
having  enlightened  the  mind  of  our  sovereign  *  with  purer 
views  than  those  inspired  by  your  theology.  His  severe 
ordonnances  on  the  subject  have  not  indeed  had  the  effect 
of  constituting  duelling  a  crime,  but  they  have  inflicted  a 
punishment  upon  the  crime  inseparable  from  duelling. 
He  has  deterred,  by  the  fear  of  legal  rigours,  those,  who 
could  not  be  restrained  from  the  practice  by  the  fear  of 
God ;  and  his  sense  of  piety  has  taught  him  that  a  Chris- 
tian's honour  consists  in  observance  of  the  laws  of  God 
and  of  religion ;  and  not  that  vain  and  empty  phantom  of 
honour,  which  you  pretend  to  be  a  legitimate  excuse  for 
the  murder  of  a  fellow-creature  !  Thus  it  is  that  your 
blood-thirsty  decisions  have  become  the  abhorrence  of  the 
whole  world;  and  you  would  do  well  to  change  your 
system  from  a  motive  of  policy,  even  if  not  of  religious 
duty.  Let  me  advise  you,  my  Fathers,  by  a  voluntary 
condemnation  of  these  inhuman  opinions,  to  obviate  the 
fatal  consequences  which  must  ensue  from  them ;  and  for 
which  you  alone  are  responsible.     And,  to  inspire  a  more 

*  Louis  XIV. 

JESUIT    MAXIMS   UPON   HOMICIDE.  277 

just  horror  of  the  crime  of  homicide,  bear  ever  in  mind,  I 
pray  you,  that  the  first  crime  of  fallen  man  was  a  homi- 
cide, committed  upon  the  innocent ;  that  the  greatest  of 
crimes  was  a  homicide  committed  upon  the  Head  and  Re- 
presentative of  all  the  Just  j  and  that  homicide  is  that 
crime,  of  all  others,  which  outrages  at  once  the  State,  the 
Church,  human  nature,  and  religion  ! 

P.  S. — I  have  just  seen  the  reply  of  your  apologist  to 
my  13th  Letter :  but  if  he  makes  no  better  than  that  to 
the  present  letter,  which  solves  the  greater  part  of  his 
difficulties,  he  will  deserve  no  further  rejoinder.  It  is 
pitiful  to  see  him  wandering  continually  out  of  his  proper 
topics,  to  scatter  his  reproaches  and  slanders  against  both 
the  living  and  the  dead.  Really  it  is  quite  needless  for 
you,  in  order  to  give  greater  credibility  to  the  statements 
with  which  you  furnish  him,  to  disavow  before  the  public 
so  notorious  a  fact  as  Compiegne's  blow.  It  is  established 
by  the  acknowledgment  of  the  party  insulted  himself,  that 
he  received  a  blow  on  the  cheek  from  the  hand  of  a 
Jesuit ;  and  the  only  doubt  that  your  friends  have  been 
able  to  raise  upon  the  question  is,  whether  he  received  it 
from  the  back  or  the  palm  of  the  hand ;  and  therefore, 
whether  a  blow  from  the  back  of  the  hand  ought  to  be 
called  a  blow  or  not  ?  I  really  do  not  know  who  is  to 
decide  this  point ;  but  I  certainly  am  of  opinion  that  it 
must  be  called,  at  least,  a  "probable"  blow.  This  is 
enough  to  satisfy  my  conscience. 

LETTER  XV. 

SUBJECT;     THE    JESUITS    HAVE    WITHDRAWN    CALUMNY 
FROM    THE    CATALOGUE    OF    CRIMES,    AND   MAKE   NO 

scruple  op  availing  themselves  of  its  aid  to 
confute  their  opponents. 

Reverend  Fathers,  Nov.  25,  1656. 

As  your  misrepresentations  seem  to  multiply  from  day  to 
day,  and  you  avail  yourselves  of  them  to  outrage  so  re- 
morselessly all  those  pious  persons  who  endeavour  to  op- 
pose your  errors,  I  feel  myself  compelled,  both  from  a 
regard  for  their  welfare,  and  for  the  interests  of  the 
Church,  as  well  as  in  fulfilment  of  a  promise  which  I  long 
since  made,  to  lay  open  to  the  public  a  certain  secret 
method  in  your  proceedings  ;  by  which  may  be  judged — ■ 
and  that  by  a  rule  drawn  from  your  own  principles — 
what  faith  ought  to  be  given  to  your  accusations  and  your 
slanders. 

I  am  aware  there  are  some  who,  not  being  sufficiently 
acquainted  with  your  principles,  find  themselves  under 
difficulty  upon  this  matter  ;  since  they  are  reduced  to  the 
alternative  either  to  give  credit  to  the  monstrous  crimes 
which  you  impute  to  your  opponents,  or  (which  seems  to 
them  an  impossibility)  to  hold  you  to  be  arrant  impostors. 

CALUMNY.  279 

"  What ! "  they  say,  "  were  these  things  not  really  as 
represented,  would  religious  persons  dare  to  publish  them 
to  the  world  ?  Would  they  so  violate  all  the  laws  of  con- 
science, and  seal  their  own  condemnation,  by  such  ca- 
lumnies ?  "  This  is  the  way  they  reason ;  and  thus,  the 
palpable  proofs  by  which  your  calumnies  are  overthrown 
being  encountered  by  their  own  strong  prepossession  of 
your  sincerity,  their  minds  remain  suspended  between  the 
proofs  of  the  actual  truth,  which  they  are  unable  to  gain- 
say, and  the  tendencies  of  charity  which  they  are  appre- 
hensive of  wounding.  If,  then,  seeing  the  only  thing  that 
stands  in  the  way  of  their  rejection  of  your  slanders,  is 
theii"  favoiirable  opinion  of  yourselves,  it  can  be  demon- 
strated to  such  persons  that  the  ideas  you  entertain  of 
the  offence  of  slander  are  different  from  those  which  they 
suppose  you  to  hold ;  and  that  you  consider  you  are  legi- 
timately promoting  your  own  advantage  in  traducing  your 
enemies ;  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  that  the  force  of  truth 
would  at  once  lead  them  to  discredit  your  impostures. 
This  is  the  subject,  then,  reverend  Fathers,  which  I  pro- 
pose to  myself  in  the  present  Letter. 

I  do  not  mean  to  confine  my  remarks  to  proofs  that 
your  writings  are  filled  with  calumnies  :  I  have  a  higher 
aim  than  this.  It  is  very  possible  to  say  that  which  is 
false,  while  we  believe  it  to  be  true  :  but  the  essence  of 
falsehood  includes  the  intention  to  lie.  It  shall  be  my 
endeavour,  then,  Reverend  Sirs,  to  show  that  your  inten- 
tion is  falsehood  and  calumny;  and  that  it  is  with  fore- 
thought and  purpose,  that  you  impute  to  your  adversaries 
crimes,  of  which  you  know  they  are  innocent ;  inasmuch  as 
you  have  brought  yourselves  to  believe  it  possible  to  do 

280  LETTER   XV. 

this  without  incurring  the  danger  of  falling  from  a  state 
of  grace.  And  although  you  are  as  well  acquainted  as 
myself  mth  this  doctrine  of  your  school,  I  do  not  the 
more  omit,  in  the  most  unequivocal  terms,  to  hold  it  up 
to  your  view ;  my  object  being  to  sustain  the  assertion  to 
your  own  face,  and  to  deprive  you  of  all  possibility  of 
denial.  So  common,  in  fact,  is  this  tenet  amongst  your 
Society,  that  it  is  circulated  not  only  in  your  writings, 
but  also  in  your  public  theses ;  as  (among  others)  those 
of  Louvain,  in  the  year  1645,  in  the  following  terms  :  "  Is 
it  anything  more  than  venial  sin  to  calumniate,  and  im- 
pute false  crimes ;  in  order  to  impeach  the  credibility  of 
those  who  speak  ill  of  ourselves  ? — Quidni  non  nisi  veniale 
sit,  detrahentis  auctoritatem  magnam;  tibi  noxiam,  falso 
crimiue  elidere  ? "  And  this  doctrine  is  so  universal 
among  you,  that  any  one  daring  to  oppose  it  is  regarded 
by  you  as  presumptuous  and  ignorant. 

This  was  not  long  since,  the  treatment  experienced  by 
P^re  Quiroga,  a  German  Capuchin,  on  his  venturing  to 
controvert  these  views.  Your  own  Pere  Dicastillus  at 
once  entered  the  field  against  him,  and  expressed  himself 
on  the  question  in  these  terms;  de  Inst.  B.  3,  tr.  3,  disp. 
13,  N.  404 :  "  A  certain  grave  Friar,  bare-footed  and 
hooded — (cucullatus,  gymnopoda) — whom  I  do  not  name, 
has  had  the  audacity  to  denounce  this  opinion  amongst 
females  and  ignorant  persons;  and  to  assert  that  it  is 
injurious  and  scandalous,  contrary  to  sound  morality, 
opposed  to  the  welfare  of  the  state  and  of  society  ;  and, 
finally,  at  variance,  not  only  with  the  opinion  of  the 
highest  Catholic  authorities,  but  also  with  those  of  all 
who  hold  Catholic  sentiments.     But  I  have  contended. 

CALUMNY.  281 

and  do  still  contend,  that  calumny,  where  employed 
against  a  calumniator  (even  though  it  amount  to  false- 
hood) is  no  mortal  sin,  nor  is  an  offence  against  justice  or 
charity.  And  to  prove  this,  I  have  furnished  him  with  a 
multitude  of  authorities  from  our  Fathers,  and  their  entire 
Colleges,  whom  I  have  consulted;  among  others,  the 
Reverend  Father  Jean  Gans,  confessor  to  the  Emperor, 
the  Reverend  Father  D.  Bastele,  confessor  to  the  Arch- 
duke Leopold,  Father  Henri,  late  preceptor  to  the  two 
Princes ;  all  the  Professors,  public  and  ordinary,  of  the 
university  of  Vienna  (entirely  consisting  of  Jesuits) ;  all 
the  Professors  of  the  university  of  Gratz  (likewise  Je- 
suits) J  all  the  Professors  of  the  university  of  Prague  (the 
Masters  being  Jesuits) ;  from  all  of  whom  I  hold  confii'- 
matiou  of  my  opinion,  under  their  own  bond  and  seal. 
Besides  which,  I  have  on  my  side,  Pere  Pennalosa,  a 
Jesuit,  Preacher  to  the  Emperor  and  King  of  Spain  ; 
Pere  Pilliceroli,  a  Jesuit,  and  many  others,  who  held  this 
to  be  a  '  probable '  opinion  previous  to  our  dispute." 

You  see  from  this,  my  Fathers,  that  there  are  few 
opinions  which  your  Society  have  taken  such  pains  to 
establish  as  this ;  for  indeed  there  are  few  of  which  you 
stand  so  much  in  need.  And  it  is  because  you  have  given 
so  fully  your  authorization  to  it,  that  the  Casuists  avail 
themselves  of  it  as  an  indubitable  principle.  "  It  is 
clearly,"  says  Caramuel,  N.  1151,  p.  550,  "  a  '  probable' 
opinion  that  it  is  not  a  mortal  offence  to  disseminate 
falsehoods  against  character,*  in  defence  of  our  own  re- 
putation.     This  has  been  maintained  by  above  twenty 

*  '  A  calomnia  faussement,'  (Fr.) 

283  LETTER   XV. 

learned  doctors,  by  Gaspard  Hurtado  and  Dicastillus, 
Jesuits,  &c. ;  so  that  if  this  doctrine  is  not  to  be  regarded 
as  a  probable  one,  scarcely  any  can  be  regarded  as  such 
throughout  the  whole  system  of  theology." 

Oh  most  flagrant  and  corrupted  theology !  according 
to  whose  tenets,  if  it  could  not  be  established  to  be  allow- 
able, with  safety  of  conscience,  to  deal  out  mendacious 
calumnies  in  defence  of  our  reputation,  scarcely  any  of  its 
decisions  could  be  established  !  Can  it  be  doubted,  Sirs, 
that  those  who  hold  abstractedly  such  a  principle,  will 
find  no  difficulty  in  carrying  it  into  practice  ?  Our  cor- 
rupt propensities  so  naturally  incline  us  to  this  offence, 
that  when  once  the  restraint  of  conscience  is  removed,  it 
will  break  out  with  irresistible  force.  Do  you  ask  for  an 
example  ?  Caramuel  will  furnish  you  with  one  :  "  This 
maxim,"  said  he,  "  of  the  Jesuit  Dicastillus  respecting 
slander,  having  been  taught  by  a  German  countess  to  the 
Empress's  daughters,  the  belief  that  they  would  commit 
no  more  than  a  venial  offence  in  uttering  slanders,  in- 
duced them,  in  a  few  days,  to  set  afloat  so  many  false 
and  calumnious  reports,  that  the  whole  court  was  thrown 
into  commotion.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  use  to  which 
they  turned  this  license ;  so  that  to  allay  the  tumult  it 
was  found  necessary  to  call  in  a  worthy  Capuchin,  of 
exemplary  life,  named  Pere  Quiroga  (and  this  it  was  which 
caused  P6re  Dicastillus  so  much  chagrin)  ;  who  forth- 
with expressed  his  opinion  that  the  maxim  in  question 
was  highly  pernicious,  especially  among  females,  and  he 
was  most  urgent  that  the  Empress  should  immediately 
interdict  the  practice." 

No  one  can  be  surprised  at  the  ill  effects  which  ensued 

CALUMNY.  283 

from  this  doctrine ;  on  the  contrary,  the  wonder  would 
have  been  had  it  been  otherwise.  Our  self-love  easily 
persuades  us  that  we  are  unjustly  accused  j  and  most 
especially  is  this  the  case  with  you,  my  Fathers,  whose 
vanity  so  greatly  blinds  you,  that  you  give  out  in  all  your 
writings  that  the  Church  is  wounded  when  a  member  of 
your  Society  is  attacked.  It  would  have  been  strange, 
therefore,  had  you  not  put  such  a  maxim  as  this  into 
practice.  No  longer  can  it  be  said  of  you,  as  it  might 
have  been  by  those  who  do  not  know  you,  "  How  is  it 
possible  that  these  worthy  Fathers  should  calumniate 
their  enemies,  when  in  so  doing  they  would  endanger  their 
salvation  ?  "  On  the  contrary,  it  may  be  said,  "  How  is 
it  likely  that  these  good  Fathers  should  forego  the  ad- 
vantage of  falsehood  and  slander,  since  they  find  they  can 
use  them  without  danger  to  their  souls  ? "  Let  us  no 
longer  be  surprised  to  find  the  Jesuits  turn  calumniators. 
Their  consciences  are  safe  ;  what  is  there  to  prevent  them  ? 
By  their  credit  with  the  world  they  can  disseminate  their 
slanders  without  fear  of  man's  resentment ;  and  by  the 
latitude  they  have  given  to  the  conscience,  they  have 
brought  themselves  to  believe  that  they  have  nothing  to 
fear  from  the  justice  of  God  ! 

Here  then,  Reverend  Father,  is  the  fruitful  source  of 
your  numerous  and  malignant  impostures.  This  it  was 
that  prompted  such  libels  on  the  part  of  your  own  Pere 
Brisacier,  as  to  bring  down  upon  him  the  censure  of  the 
late  pious  Archbishop  of  Paris.  This  it  was  that  led  the 
Pere  D'Anjou  to  denounce  publicly  from  the  pulpit  in 
the  church  of  St.  Benedict,  Paris,  on  the  8th  March  1655, 
those  persons  of  rank  who  received  the  contributions  for 

284  LETTER   XV. 

the  poor  in  Picardy  and  Champagne,  to  which  they  had 
given  so  liberally  themselves ;  and  to  affirm,  with  such 
malignity  of  falsehood — as  if  for  the  very  purpose  of 
quenching  the  charity  of  any  who  had  yielded  credit  to 
the  slander — "  that  he  knew,  for  a  certainty,  that  those 
persons  had  misappropriated  the  money,  to  employ  it  in 
purposes  hostile  to  the  Church  and  the  State.''  What 
was  the  consequence  ?  The  curate  of  the  parish,  a  doctor 
of  the  Sorbonne,  was  obliged  the  next  day,  to  ascend  the 
pulpit,  and  publicly  contradict  the  calumny. 

It  was  on  the  same  principle  that  your  Pere  Crasset, 
in  his  preaching  at  Orleans,  uttered  such  gross  calumnies 
that  the  Bishop  of  Orleans  was  obliged,  in  his  Charge  of 
9th  last  September,  to  denounce  him  as  a  public  impostoi', 
declaring  "  that  he  forbids  Brother  John  Crasset,  Priest 
of  the  Society  of  Jesus,  to  preach  in  his  diocese,  and  to  all 
his  people  to  attend  him,  under  pain  of  an  act  of  mortal 
disobedience ;  inasmuch  as  he  had  learnt  that  the  said 
Crasset  had  delivered  from  the  pulpit  a  discourse  filled 
with  falsehood  and  calumnies,  against  the  ecclesiastics  of 
this  city;  charging  them  falsely  with  maintaining  the 
proposition,  "  That  the  keeping  the  commandments  of 
God  .is  impossible  j*  that  internal  grace  is  irresistible ; 
and  that  Christ  did  not  die  for  all  men  •"  with  other  simi- 
lar sentiments,  condemned  by  Innocent  X.  For  here, 
Keverend  Sirs,  is  your  ordinary  method  of  misrepresenta- 
tion, and  the  first  species  of  reproach  that  you  are  wont 
to  cast  against  those  whom  you  seek  to  denounce.  And 
although  you  may  know  it  to  be  impossible  to  prove  the 

*  '  Que  les  commandements  de  Dieu  sont  impossibles.'  (Fr.j 

.  CALUMNY.  285 

charge,  as  in  the  case  of  your  Pere  Crasset  and  the  Orleans' 
ecclesiastics,  your  conscience  is  at  ease ;  for  you  believe 
that  this  method  of  calumniating  your  opponents  is  so 
clearly  allowable,  that  you  hesitate  not  to  circulate  your 
slanders  in  the  most  public  and  extensive  manner. 

Another  striking  instance  of  this  was  exhibited  in  your 
controversy  with  M.  Puys,  curate  of  St.  Nisier,  at  Lyons ; 
and  as  this  incident  is  very  characteristic  of  the  spirit  of 
your  Society,  I  shall  relate  the  leading  circumstances  of 
it.  You  are  aware.  Reverend  Sirs,  that  in  the  year  1649 
M.  Puys  translated  into  French  an  excellent  work  of  a 
certain  other  Capuchin  Father,  "  respecting  the  duties 
which  Christians  owe  to  their  respective  parishes,  &c.," 
treating  the  subject  wholly  without  invective,  and  not 
designating  any  religious  bodies  or  orders  in  particular. 
Your  Society,  however,  chose  to  apply  the  matter  to  them- 
selves ;  and  throwing  aside  all  feeling  of  respect  for  an 
aged  pastor,  a  Judge  Ecclesiastical  in  the  principal  See  of 
France,  and  a  man  revered  by  the  whole  city,  the  Pere 
Alby  issued  a  furious  publication  against  him,  and  your 
Society  offered  it  for  sale  themselves,  in  your  own  church, 
on  the  day  of  the  Assumption.  In  this  work  he  brought 
various  charges  against  M.  Puys,  and  among  others,  "  that 
he  had  been  guilty  of  scandalous  intrigues ;  that  he  lay 
under  suspicion  of  impiety  and  heresy  ;  and  that  he  de- 
served to  be  excommunicated  and  brought  to  the  flames." 
To  this  M.  Puys  published  a  reply;  and  the  Pere  Alby 
then  maintained  in  a  second  Work,  the  truth  of  his  ori- 
ginal charges. 

Now,  Reverend  Sirs,  in  this  case  it  is  clear,  either  that 
your  brethren  were  guilty  of  calumny ;  or  that  they  be- 

286  LETTER   XV. 

lieved  all  that  they  asserted  against  this  worthy  Father  ; 
and  in  the  latter  alternative,  they  ought  to  have  been 
satisfied  that  he  had  renounced  his  errors  before  they 
deemed  him  worthy  of  their  countenance.  Mark  now, 
however,  what  occurred  on  occasion  of  the  reconciliation, 
which  took  place,  in  presence  of  a  large  number  of  the 
principal  persons  of  the  city,  whose  names,  as  enumerated 
in  the  authorized  report,  dated  25th  Sep.  1650,  are  here 
subjoined.*  It  was  before  this  large  assembly  that  M. 
Puys  simply  declared,  "  that  what  he  had  written  was  not 
directed  against  the  Jesuit  Fathers ;  but  that  he  had  re- 
ferred generally  to  those  who  seduce  the  faithful  from 
their  own  parishes ;  and  without  intending  any  applica- 
tion to  the  Society ;  which,  on  the  contrary,  he  regarded 
with  esteem  and  affection."  On  the  strength  of  these  few 
words,  his  apostacy,  his  scandals,  his  excommunication, 
were  all  at  an  end  !  No  retractation  is  asked  for,  no  ab- 
solution ;  and  the  Pere  Alby  addressed  him  in  these  very 
words  :  "  Sir ;  a  belief  that  you  intended  to  attack  the 
Society,  to  which  I  have  the  honour  to  belong,  induced 
me  to  take  up  my  pen  in  reply ;  and  I  considered  that 
the  method  I  pursued  in  so  doing,  was  allowable.  But, 
as  I  now  understand  your  intention  to  have  been  other- 
wise, I  hasten  to  declare  that  there  is  nothing  to  prevent 
my  regarding  you  as  a  man  of  an  enlightened,  learned, 
and  orthodox  mind ;  of  irreproachable  morals ;  and,  in  a 
word,  a  moral  and  exemplary  pastor  of  your  Church.     I 

*  M.  de  Ville,  Vicar-General  of  the  Cardinal  of  Lyons ;  M.  Scarron,  Canon 
and  Curate  of  St.  Paul,  &c.  &c. ;  M.  Gu€,  President  of  the  Treasuries  of 
France ;  M.  Groslier,  Prevot  des  Marchandes  ;  and  numerous  other  official 
personages. 

CALUMNY.  287 

make  this  avowal  with  pleasure,  and  I  desire  that  all  the 
gentlemen  here  present  will  bear  witness  of  and  remem- 
ber it." 

They  have  indeed  remembered  it.  Sirs ;  and  the  recon- 
ciliation caused  more  scandal  than  the  dispute.  Who 
but  must  admire  the  Pere  Alby^s  discourse?  He  had 
nothing  to  retract,  not  he,  as  having  heard  of  a  change  of 
morals  and  doctrine  on  the  part  of  the  good  Cure  ;  but, 
simply,  "  he  now  knows  that  he  did  not  intend  an  attack 
upon  the  Society,  and  therefore  finds  no  obstacle  to  the 
regarding  him  as  a  sound  Catholic  !  "  Did  he  in  fact 
believe  him  at  all  to  be  a  heretic  ?  No  such  thing.  And 
after  bringing  the  charge  against  him,  though  knowing  it 
to  be  false,  he  makes  no  acknowledgment  of  error ;  but 
dares,  on  the  contrary,  to  say,  "  he  considers  the  use  he 
made  of  the  accusation  was  allowable." 

Do  you  mean  then,  my  Fathers,  really  to  tell  the 
world,  that  your  only  standard  of  men's  faith  and  piety  is 
to  be  the  opinion  they  hold  of  your  Society  ?  Have  you 
no  fear  of  being  regarded— and  that  by  your  own  confes- 
sion— as  impostors  and  calumniators  ?  Is  then  the  same 
individual — wholly  unchanged  in  himself,  but  just  in 
so  far  as  you  consider  him  hostile  or  friendly  to  your 
body — to  be  alternately  pious  or  profligate — blameless,  or 
deserving  of  excommunication — an  exemplary  pastor  of 
his  flock,  as  fit  only  for  the  flames — in  a  word,  a  faithful 
Catholic  or  a  damnable  Heretic  ?  With  you,  then,  dis- 
favour to  your  Society  and  heresy  are  synonimous ;  and 
when  we  find  in  your  publications  many  good  Catholics 
branded  as  heretics,  we  should  only  understand  you  to 
mean  that  they  have  ventured  to  censure  your  brethren  ! 

288  LETTER   XV. 

It  is  well,  my  good  Fathers,  that  this  point  should  be 
understood ;  for  in  your  sense,  no  doubt,  /  am  regarded 
as  an  incurable  heretic ;  and  you  have  often  bestowed  the 
epithet  upon  me.  It  is  because  you  consider  that  my  letters 
have  injured  you,  that  you  would  seek  to  cut  me  off  from 
the  Church.  Therefore,  to  remain  in  her  bosom,  I  have 
no  alternative,  but,  either  to  countenance  your  moral  de- 
linquencies— which,  without  doing  violence  to  every  sen- 
ment  of  piety,  I  cannot  do — or  to  convince  you  that,  in 
my  animadversions,  I  am  aiming  only  at  your  real  welfare. 
And  this  latter  result  could  alone  be  hoped  for  on  the 
supposition  that  you  were  brought  to  see  and  renounce 
your  obliquities.  One  way  or  the  other  therefore,  I  fear  I 
am  hopelessly  involved  in  heresy  of  this  description  ;  for, 
my  own  purer  system  of  faith  (permit  me  to  say  it)  not 
being  likely  to  convict  me  of  such  errors,  I  can  relinquish 
them  only  by  the  violation  of  my  own  conscience,  or  by 
the  reformation  of  yours.  Till  then  I  shall  be  compelled 
to  remain  a  reprobate  and  an  impostor ;  and,  after  the 
fidelity  with  which  I  have  represented  your  sentiments 
and  quoted  your  writings,  you  will  go  about,  proclaiming, 
everywhere,  "  He  must  be  an  absolute  agent  of  Satan  to 
impute  such  things  to  our  Society,  when  he  cannot  find 
an  atom — a  vestige  of  them  in  our  writings  !  "  Truly,  in 
all  this  you  will  be  only  acting  in  pursuance  of  your  own 
maxims,  and  your  usual  custom ;  such  is  the  latitude  of 
falsehood  to  which  you  consider  yourselves  entitled. 

Allow  me  here  to  furnish  you  with  one  more  instance 
in  proof  of  what  I  am  stating  j  which  I  select,  with  the 
further  object  of  replying  to  another  of  your  misrepre^ 

, CALUMNY.  289 

sentation.     They  are  not  indeed  of  sufficient  importance 
to  require  more  than  such  an  incidental  refutation. 

It  is  about  twelve  years  since  the  following  maxim  of 
the  Pere  Bauny  was  made  a  matter  of  charge  against 
your  Society  :  viz.  "  It  is  lawful  to  expose  ourselves  to 
circumstances  which  may  prove  to  us  the  occasion  of  sin, 
when  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  the  spiritual  or 
temporal  welfare  of  ourselves  or  of  our  neighbours ;  "  * 
part  1,  tr.  4,  q.  14,  p.  94.  And  this  example  is  given ; 
"  It  is  lawful  for  any  one  to  repair  to  places  of  public 
resort,  for  the  purpose  of  converting  abandoned  females 
from  their  sins,  although  he  may  consider  it  probable  he 
may  fall  into  sin,  from  having  often  before  been  led  into 
temptation  on  such  occasions."  What  was  the  reply  of 
your  Pere  Caussin  to  this  in  1644,  in  his  Apology  for  the 
Society  of  Jesus,  p.  128  ?  "  Let  any  one  read  the  very 
passage  referred  to  in  Vkre  Bauny,  the  identical  page,  the 
marginal  notes,  the  context,  the  whole  book  through, 
and  not  a  vestige  shall  be  found  of  such  a  sentiment ;  a 
sentiment,  which  could  only  occur  to  the  mind  of  a  man 
utterly  seared  in  conscience,  and  the  very  emissary  of  the 
Devil  ?  "  And  your  Pere  Pintereau,  in  the  like  strain,  in 
his  first  part,  p.  94,  says,  "  A  man  must  be  lost  to  all 
sense  of  shame  to  teach  such  a  doctrine ;  but  he  must  be 
worse  than  a  demon  to  attribute  it  to  Pere  Bauny. 
Reader,  be  assured  there  is  not  a  trace  or  syllable  re- 
sembling it  throughout  his  book."  Who  could  have 
doubted,  that  those  who  held  such  language  as  this,  had 

*  '  II  est  pennis  de  rechercher  directement— jonmo  et  per  se — une  occasion 
prochaine  de  prober,  pour  le  1)1611  spirituel  ou  temporal  de  nous  ou  de  notre 
prochain.'  (Fr.) 

(» 

290  LETTER   XV. 

just  cause  of  complaint^  and  that  Pere  Bauny  was  an 
injured  man?  Have  you  ever  used  even  against  me 
stronger  terms  ?  And  how  could  it  be  credited  that  the 
passage  in  question  was  to  be  found,  in  the  very  words  and 
place  described,  after  their  declaration  that  "  there  was 
not  a  trace  or  tittle  of  it  in  the  book  ?  " 

In  reality,  Reverend  Sirs,  this  is  the  method  by  which 
you  impose  upon  the  public  a  belief  of  your  statements, 
until  they  encounter  a  reply ;  but  in  this  way  also  you 
will  come  to  forfeit  all  credibility,  after  such  reply  shall 
have  been  made.  For  so  certainly  is  it  proved  that  what 
you  then  said  was  untrue,  that  you  now  make  no  diiBculty 
in  acknowledging  this  to  be  a  maxim  of  P^re  Bauny,  and 
that  it  is  to  be  found  at  the  very  place  alleged.  But  what 
is  more  admirable  still,  instead  of  being  (as  twelve  years 
before  it  was)  a  detestable  sentiment,  it  is  now  so  innocent 
a  one,  that  in  your  "  Ninth  Imposture,"  p.  10,  you 
charge  me  "  with  ignorance  and  malice  for  quarrelling 
with  PSre  Bauny  about  an  opinion  which  is  not  at  all 
discountenanced  by  the  Schools  !  "  See  the  advantage  of 
having  to  do  with  those  who  can  play  fast  and  loose — who 
have  an  affirmative  and  a  negative  for  every  thing !  I 
have  only  to  bring  forward  yourselves,  to  refute  your- 
selves. I  need  only  establish  two  things ;  the  one,  that 
the  maxim  is  bad ;  the  other,  that  it  is  Pere  Bauny's ; 
and  both  are  proved  by  your  own  confession.  In  1644, 
you  acknowledged  that  it  was  "  detestable ; "  and  in 
1656,  you  avow  that  it  is  Bauny's.  This  twofold  ad- 
mission is  sufficient  for  my  justification;  but,  more  than 
this,  it  reveals  effectually  to  all  who  are  capable  of  judging, 
the  whole  scope  and  spirit  of  your  policy. 

CALUMNY.  291 

Tell  me,  I  pray  you,  what  is  the  end  that  your  writings 
propose  ?  Is  it  truth  ?  No,  Sirs ;  you  are  the  destroyers 
of  truth !  Is  it  the  purity  of  a  holy  Faith  ?  Just  as 
little ;  for  you  sanction  a  doctrine  which  you  once  branded 
as  "  detestable."  Can  you  forget  that  when  you  called 
that  maxim  "  detestable,"  you  denied  that  it  was  pro- 
mulgated by  your  own  author ;  and  on  the  strength  of  that 
denial  you  rested  his  innocence  ?  And  now  that  you  avow 
it  to  be  his,  you  alike  maintain  the  innocence  of  the  maxim 
and  the  orthodoxy  of  its  propounder  !  It  then  clearly 
appears,  that  the  exculpation  of  the  Father  being  the  only 
thing  common  to  your  two  replies,  that  was  the  only 
point  you  sought  to  establish  ;  and  thus  your  only  object 
is  to  defend  your  own  members,  alike  when  you  assert  that 
a  sentiment  is  in  their  writings,  and  that  it  is  not ;  that 
it  is  good  and  that  it  is  bad ;  looking  only  to  your  own 
sordid  and  fluctuating  interests,  but  regardless  of  the 
sacredness  of  truth,  which  is  unchangeable  ! 

Need  I  add  more  in  proof  of  my  statements  ?  I  could 
bring  forward  innumerable  examples,  but  will  content 
myself  with  one  other  only ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that 
you  also  will  find  this  sufficient. 

Your  Fraternity  has  been  from  time  to  time  reproached 
with  another  proposition  of  your  Pere  Bauny,  tr.  4, 
quest.  33,  p.  100;  "  We  ought  not  to  deny  or  postpone 
Absolution  to  those  who  are  living  in  the  commission  of 
crimes,  even  against  the  law  of  God,  of  nature,  and  of  the 
Church ;  and  that,  though  we  may  entertain  no  hope  of 
their  amendment ; "  '  etsi  emendationis  futurce  spes  nulla 
appareat.'  I  beg,  reverend  Fathers,  you  will  now  inform 
me  which  of  your  two  brethren  has,  in  your  opinion, 

o  2 

293  LETTER   XV. 

made  the  best  reply  upon  this  point,  Pere  Pintereau  or 
Pere  Brisacier ;  for  they  have  both  taken  up  the  defence 
of  their  brother,  but  in  different  ways.  The  one  con- 
demns the  proposition,  but  denies  that  it  is  Bauny's ;  the 
other  avows  it  to  be  Bauny's,  but  justifies  the  doctrine  it 
contains. 

Hear  what  they  respectively  say.  First,  for  Pere  Pin- 
tereau, p.  18 ;  "  Can  any  thing  equal  the  shamelessness 
and  impudence  of  imputing  in  this  positive  manner  to 
Pere  Bauny  so  damnable  a  doctrine  ?  Judge,  reader,  of 
the  shamelessness  of  this  calumny  ;  see  how  the  Jesuits 
are  traduced,  and  say  whether  so  black  an  imputation  is 
not  an  invention  of  the  very  Father  of  Lies  !  "  Now 
mark  what  your  P^re  Brisacier  says,  4  Part,  p.  21.  "  It 
is  admitted  that  Pere  Bauny  says  what  is  reported  of 
him;  (this  is  pretty  completely  disposing  of  his  Brother 
Pintereau.)  But,"  he  adds,  "  in  justification  of  the 
learned  Father,  observe,  you  who  reprove  him  for  this 
sentiment ;  when  a  Penitent  is  at  your  feet,  his  guardian 
Angel  hypothecates  (as  bail  for  him)  all  his  own  preten- 
sions to  heaven.  If  you  wait  till  God  the  Father  shall 
swear  that  David,  in  the  Spirit,  said  falsely  that  '  all 
men  are  liars,  deceivers,  frail ; '  and  till  the  penitent  in 
question  shall  be  no  longer  deceitful,  frail,  fickle,  or  a 
sinner  like  other  men,  you  will  assuredly  apply  the  blood 
of  Christ  to  no  one." 

What,  Sirs,  is  to  be  thought  of  this  extravagant  and 
impious  language ;  that,  if  we  are  to  wait  till  we  have 
some  hope  of  a  sinner's  amendment,  before  giving  him 
absolution,  we  must  wait  till  God  shall  swear  that  he  will 
never  fall  again  ?     "What !  is  there  no  difierence  between 

CALUMNY.  293 

a  hope  and  a  certainty  ?  How  do  we  outrage  the  grace 
of  Christ  by  declaring  that  "  man^s  abandonment  of  his 
crimes  against  God,  against  nature,  and  against  the  Church, 
is  hopeless,  unless  the  Word  of  Inspiration  have  uttered 
falsehood  !  "  So  that,  according  to  this  doctrine,  if  abso- 
lution be  withheld  from  those  of  whose  amendment  we  have 
no  hope,  Christ's  blood  is  valueless,  and  can  never  be 
applied !  To  what  lengths,  my  Fathers,  does  your  in- 
ordinate desire  to  justify  your  brotherhood  carry  you, 
when  you  can  find  but  two  methods  of  doing  so — 
imposture,  or  impiety ;  and  thus  the  least  culpable  of  the 
alternatives  is,  boldly  to  disavow  things  that  are  palpable 
to  the  whole  world  ! 

This  is  the  reason  why  you  avail  yourselves  so  largely 
of  this  resource ;  but  you  do  not  stop  here.  You  scruple 
not  to  commit  forgeries,  in  order  to  excite  odium  against 
your  opponents ;  witness  "  The  Letter  of  a  Minister  to 
M.  Arnauld,"  which  you  circulated  throughout  Paris,  to 
cause  it  to  be  believed  that  the  work  "  On  frequent  Com- 
munion," approved  by  so  many  Bishops  and  learned 
Divines,  but  which  bore  somewhat  hard  upon  your 
opinions,  was  the  result  of  a  secret  understanding  with 
the  Ministers  of  Charenton.  On  another  occasion,  you 
attribute  to  your  adversaries  writings  filled  with  impiety, 
such  as  the  "  Circular  Letter  of  the  Jansenists ; "  the 
trashy  style  of  which  at  once  betrays  the  grossness  of  the 
deception,  and  plainly  reveals  the  impertinence  and 
malice  of  your  own  P^re  Meynier,  who  dared  to  avail 
himself  of  this  artifice  to  circulate  the  most  flagrant 
impostures.  Sometimes  you  quote  books  that  never  had 
existence,  such  as  "  the  Constitutions  of  the  Holy  Sacra- 

294  LETTER   XV. 

raentj"  from  which  you  quote  fabricated  passages,  at 
your  own  pleasure,  which  shock  simple-minded  people, 
who  are  not  aware  of  the  hardihood  with  which  you  are 
in  the  habit  of  inventing  and  giving  currency  to  false- 
hood. There  is  no  species  of  deception  to  which  you  do 
not  resort.  Never  could  the  maxim  by  which  your 
Society  sanctions  this  weapon  be  in  better  hands  than 
yours  ! 

But  these  methods  are  too  palpable,  and  easily  seen 
through  :  you  have  others  yet  more  subtle  in  reserve.  In 
these  your  custom  is  to  particularize  nothing,  in  order  to 
deprive  your  antagonist  of  all  means  of  reprisal  and 
answer.  As,  for  instance,  when  the  Pere  Brisacier  says, 
"  his  enemies  are  in  the  habit  of  committing  abominable 
crimes ;  but  he  will  not  further  describe  them  :  "  do  you 
not  see  that  there  can  be  no  convicting  of  falsehood  a 
charge  so  indefinite  as  this  ?  An  ingenious  individual, 
however,  has  succeeded  in  discovering  the  secret ;  and  he 
again,  my  good  Father,  is  a  Capuchin.  You  really  are 
now-a-days  somewhat  unlucky  with  Capuchins;  and  I 
am  fearful  the  time  may  come  when  you  will  be  equally 
so  with  Benedictines.  The  Capuchin  in  question  is  one 
Pere  Valerian,  of  the  House  of  the  Counts  de  Magnis. 
You  will  learn  from  this  little  narrative  in  what  way  he 
encountered  your  calumnies. 

This  person  had  just  succeeded  in  effecting  the  con- 
version of  Prince  Ernest,  Landgrave  of  Hesse  Rheinsfeld  : 
on  this  your  Fathers,  as  if  chagrined  at  witnessing  the 
conversion  of  a  Sovereign  Prince  without  their  interven- 
tion, immediately  issued  a  book  against  him  (for  every- 
where the  best  persons  are  subject  to  your  persecutions,) 

CALUMNY.  295 

in  which,  by  falsifying  certain  passages  from  his  writings, 
they  imputed  to  him  a  heretical  doctrine.  They  also 
circulated  a  letter,  in  which  they  said,  "  Yes,  we  could 
reveal  things — we  say  not  what  they  are — which  might 
disturb  you  not  a  little  !  And  if  you  do  not  give  proper 
explanations,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  report  you  to  the 
Pope  and  the  Cardinals."  Now  this  is  a  proceeding 
sufficiently  subtle ;  and  I  doubt  not,  my  good  Fathers, 
that  you  would  be  disposed  to  say  the  same  sort  of  thing 
of  me.  But  mark  the  way  in  which  the  worthy  Capuchin 
replies  to  them,  in  his  work  printed  at  Prague  last  year, 
at  pages  113  and  following;  "  How  am  I,"  he  asks,  "to 
meet  charges  thus  vague  and  indefinite  ?  How  refute 
calumnies  unsubstantial  as  the  air?  Thus  it  is  that  I 
treat  them;  I  publicly  and  solemnly  tell  my  accusers 
that,  unless  they  state  the  fullest  particulars  of  the  offences 
they  impute  to  me  before  the  whole  world,  they  shall  be 
held  up  as  flagrant  impostors,  as  subtle  and  impudent 
liars  !  Come  forward,  then,  slanderers  !  Publish  these 
things  upon  the  house-tops  instead  of  whispering  them  in 
the  ear,  where  you  thought  you  could  insinuate  your 
falsehoods  with  impunity  !  There  are,  indeed,  those  who 
resent  the  scandal  that  these  contentions  produce ;  but 
let  it  be  remembered  that  the  scandal  lies  at  the  door  of 
those  who  thus  impute  to  me  such  a  crime  as  heresy,  and 
excite  against  me  suspicion  of  other  offences.  My  only 
resource  therefore  is  thus  openly  to  maintain  my  inno- 
cence ! " 

Truly,  Reverend  Sirs,  you  come  off  the  worst  in  the 
controversy ;  and  no  one  could  have  defended  himself 
better  than  this  worthy  Capuchin.     It  is  clear  that  there 

296  LETTER  XV. 

existed  not  the  very  slightest  ground  for  your  insinuation 
against  the  good  Father ;  for  to  this  hour  you  have  made 
no    reply  to  his   challenge.      You  certainly  contrive  to 
hring  yourselves  every  now  and  then  into  ugly  dilemmas ; 
but  these  difficulties  fail  in  teaching  you  wisdom.     A  little 
time   after,   you   attacked   your  respondent   again   in   a 
similar  way,  on  another  subject ;  and  he  again  defended 
himself  in  the  following  terms,  page  151 ;  "  This  body  of 
persons,  who  are  making  themselves  the  aversion  of  all 
Christendom,  aspire,  under  pretence  of  superior  virtue,  to 
power  and  domination,  by  turning  to  their  own  purposes 
every  description  of  laws,   divine,  human,  positive,  and 
natural.     By  means  of  their   doctrines,  by  fears,  or  by 
hopes,  they  enlist  on  their  side  the  highest  human  autho- 
rities ;  and  then  abuse  the  ascendancy  thus  acquired,  for 
the  promotion  of  the  most  detestable  intrigues.     Their 
criminal  schemes  elude  unhappily  both  punishment  and 
check  ;  and  through  the  encouragement  they  receive,  they 
seem  emboldened  to  perseverance,  even  as  if  they  were  in 
them  rendering  service  to  God  himself.     The  whole  world 
sees  and  execrates  their  baseness ;  but  few  are  capable  of 
making  a  stand  against  a  tyranny  so  formidable.     This, 
however,  is  what  I  am  resolved  to  do  !     I  have  already 
put  them  to  confusion;  and  I  will  do  so  yet  more.     I 
declare,  then,  that  they  have  been  guilty  of  most  impu- 
dent   falsehood  —  '  mentiris    impudentissime.'      If   the 
charges  they  have  brought  against  me  be  true,  let  them 
bring  forward  their  proofs,  or  stand  convicted  of  the  most 
flagrant  slander  !     It  will  now  be  seen  which  of  us  has 
right  on  his  side.     I  take  the  world  to  witness,  that  these 
men,  so  sensitive  to  injuries  which  they  have  the  power  to 

.CALUMNY.  297 

repel,  are  making  a  mere  show  of  enduring  patiently 
charges  which  they  are  unable  to  refute ;  and  mask  their 
real  impotence  under  a  pretence  of  virtue.  Therefore  it 
is  that  I  have  determined  in  this  way  to  expose  their 
shame ;  that  the  dullest  may  comprehend  their  silence  to 
be,  not  the  effect  of  Christian  forbearance,  but  the  confu- 
sion of  a  wounded  conscience  !  " 

These,  Sirs,  are  his  words ;  and  he  thus  concludes  r 
"  These  persons,  whose  history  is  known  to  all  the  world, 
have  become  so  scandalous  in  their  entire  conduct,  and  so 
audacious  from  the  impunity  they  have  too  long  enjoyed, 
that  I  should  be  a  traitor  to  Christ  and  his  Church,  did 
I  not  thus  openly  declare  my  detestation  of  their  pro- 
ecedings;  and  this,  not  less  to  justify  myself,  than  to 
warn  the  simple-minded  against  their  seductions  !  " 

My  revered  Fathers,  there  is  no  way  left  to  evade  this. 
You  stand  here  in  the  position  of  convicted  calumniators ;, 
and  you  have  only  to  have  recourse  to  your  own  maxim, 
that  this  kind  of  calumny  is  no  crime.  This  worthy 
ecclesiastic  has  found  a  method  to  stop  your  mouths ;  and 
the  same  method  must  be  adopted  at  all  times,  when  you 
bring  charges  against  persons  without  proof.  We  shall 
only  have  to  reply  to  every  one  of  you,  like  the  Capuchin 
Father,  "  meniiris  impudentissime  !  "  For  who,  in  fact, 
could  make  any  other  reply  ?  When,  for  instance,  your 
Pere  Brisacier  writes  in  a  strain  like  this,  of  his  oppo- 
nents, "  that  they  are  the  gates  of  hell ;  high-priests  of 
Satan ;  persons  fallen  from  faith,  hope,  and  charity ; 
builders  up  of  the  treasury  of  Antichrist ;  and  all  this  I 
say  not  in  mere  invective,  but  from  the  conviction  of 
truth ;  "  would  any  one  descend  to  the  puerility  of  dis- 

o  5 

298  LETTER  XV. 

proving  that  he  is  "  a  gate  of  hell,  or  a  builder  of  the 
treasury  of  Antichrist  ?  " 

In  the  same  way,  what  answer  is  to  be  given  to  all 
those  vague  animadversions  in  your  books,  and  your  futile 
replies  to  my  letters  ?  such,  for  example,  as  "  that  resti- 
tution has  been  carried  so  far,  as  to  reduce  creditors  to 
poverty ;  that  full  purses  have  been  offered  to  learned 
ecclesiastics,  and  refused  by  them ;  that  benefices  have 
been  bestowed  for  the  sole  purpose  of  spreading  heretical 
tenets;  that  we  have  pensionaries  among  the  most  dis- 
tinguished ecclesiastics  in  the  sovereign  courts;  and  that 
I  am  also  a  pensionary  of  Port  Royal,  and  was  a  writer  of 
romances,  before  the  publication  of  my  Letters  " — I,  who 
have  never  in  my  life  read  any,  and  do  not  even  know  the 
names  of  those  of  your  apologist  ?  What  answer  is  to 
be  given,  my  good  Fathers,  to  all  those  things,  but  "  men- 
tiris  impudentissime"  when  you  particularize  neither 
persons,  words,  time,  or  place  ?  Either  you  must  be 
silent,  or  substantiate  all  the  circumstances,  as  I  did  when 
I  gave  the  histories  of  Pere  Alby  and  Jean  d'Alba ;  other- 
wise assuredly  you  will  injure  no  one  but  yourselves. 
The  fables  you  deal  in  might  have  availed  you,  before 
your  principles  were  known;  but  now  that  all  is  laid 
open,  when  you  venture  again  to  whisper  furtively  to  any 
one,  "  some  trust-worthy  person  (whom  you  are  not  at 
liberty  to  name),  has  told  you  very  flagrant  things  of 
such  and  such  an  one ;  "  we  shall  immediately  recollect 
the  " mentiris  impudentissime"  of  the  good  Capuchin. 

Too  long  have  you  deceived  the  world,  and  abused  the 
belief  it  has  yielded  to  your  impostures  !  It  is  time 
now  to  vindicate  the  numberless  reputations  that  you  have 

CALUMNY.  299 

destroyed.  Yet  where  can  be  found  innocence  so  perfect 
as  to  suffer  no  taint  from  the  audacious  calumnies  of  a 
Society  ramified  over  the  whole  earth,  and  whose  sancti- 
fied garb  covers  a  heart  of  such  malignity,  as  to  commit 
the  basest  of  crimes,  not  in  violation  of,  but  in  strict  con- 
formity with  its  own  maxims  ?  Let  none  therefore  cen- 
sure me  for  having  destroyed  the  confidence  once  reposed 
in  you.  Far  more  just  is  it  to  preserve  to  the  multitudes 
whom  you  have  traduced,  that  reputation  for  sanctity, 
which  they  ought  never  to  have  forfeited,  than  to  leave 
you  the  credit  of  a  sincerity  which  you  never  deserved. 
And,  as  the  one  could  not  be  accomplished  without  the 
other,  how  important  was  it  that  you  should  be  held  up, 
as  it  has  been  my  endeavour  to  do,  in  your  true  colours 
to  the  world  ! 

This  is  the  undertaking  which  I  have  here  commenced ; 
but  much  time  will  be  required  for  its  completion.  It 
shall,  however.  Reverend  Sirs,  be  completed,  nor  shall 
all  the  resources  of  your  policy  avail  to  prevent  it ;  for  the 
efforts  you  make  to  oppose  my  design  will  serve  only  to 
discover  to  the  least  clear-sighted  the  greatness  of  your 
fears;  and  prove  that,  while  your  conscience  shrinks 
from  my  revelations,  you  have  done  all  that  was  in  your 
power,  though  ineffectually,  to  prevent  and  stifle  them. 

LETTER  XVI. 

THE    JESUITS'     SHAMEFUL     CALUMNIES     AGAINST     PIOUS 
ECCLESIASTICS,   AND   HOLY   WOMEN. 

Reverend  Fathers,  JDec.  A,  1656. 

I  PROCEED  now  with  your  further  aspersions ;  and  shall 
first  dispose  of  the  remaining  portion  of  your  "  Advertise- 
ments." But  as  all  your  other  publications  are  filled  with 
statements  of  the  same  description,  they  will  also  afford 
me  conjointly  matter  for  animadversion. 

In  one  word,  then,  I  take  upon  myself  to  tell  you,  that 
in  that  fiction  respecting  M.  D'Ypres,  with  which  you 
have  filled  several  of  your  writings,  you  have  maliciously 
tortured  certain  ambiguous  expressions  in  one  of  his 
Letters,*  which,  being  susceptible  of  an  unobjectionable 
sense,  ought,  according  to  the  rules  of  the  Chui;ch,  to  be 
construed  favourably ;  and  could  not  have  been  otherwise 
interpreted,  but  in  that  spirit  which  uniformly  actuates 
your  Society.  Por  why  should  you  infer,  when  he 
says  to  his  friend,  "  Do  not  concern  yourself  about 
your  nephew ;  I  will  furnish  him  with  what  he  requires, 

*  The  letters  of  Jansenius,  Bishop  of  Ypres,  were  first  printed  by  the 
Jesuits,  and  afterwards  the  Pere  Gerberon  republished  them  in  the  Low 
Countries  with  some  very  curious  notes.    (French  Ed.) 

CALUMNIES.  301 

out  of  the  money  in  my  hands," — that  he  impHed  by 
those  expressions,  that  he  should  take  the  money  without 
returning  it ;  and  not  rather  that  he  should  advance  it 
temporarily,  to  be  afterwards  repaid  ?  But  see  now  your 
imprudence ;  for  you  have  yourselves  furnished  the  refu- 
tation of  your  calumny,  in  those  other  Letters  of  M. 
D'Ypres,  published  by  yourselves ;  which  plainly  show 
that  the  transaction  in  question  was  nothing  more  than 
an  advance  of  money,  to  be  repaid  again.  This  appears, 
in  the  Letter  of  30th  July,  1619,  quoted  by  yourselves,  to 
your  entire  confusion :  "  Do  not  give  yourself  any  con- 
cern about  the  advances ;  he  shall  want  for  nothing  while 
he  remains  here."  And  in  that  of  the  6th  January,  1620, 
in  which  he  says,  "  You  are  too  hasty ;  whenever  it  shall 
become  necessary  to  settle  accounts,  the  measure  of  credit 
I  enjoy  here  will  enable  me  to  raise  as  much  money  as  will 
be  necessary." 

It  is  you,  then,  my  Fathers,  who  are  the  deceivers ;  and 
not  in  this  subject  only,  but  also  in  your  ridiculous  story 
of  the  Poor-Box  of  St.  Merri.*  For  of  what  advantage  to 
you  could  be  the  charge,  which  one  of  your  friends  raised 
against  this  ecclesiastic,  whom  you  had  determined  to  run 
down  ?  Is  a  man  to  be  held  guilty,  because  he  is  ac- 
cused ?  No,  Sirs ;  holy  men,  such  as  he,  will  ever  be 
subject  to  calumny,  while  there  are  slanderers  in  the 
world  like  yourselves !  It  is  not  upon  the  charge,  but 
the  verdict,  that  we  are  to  form  our  judgment.  Now 
the  sentence  that  was  given,  in  this  case,  on  the  23rd 
February,  1656,  establishes  in  favour  of  the  party  referred 

*  Here,  as  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  are  references  to  contemporary  oc- 
currences, of  which  no  explanation  is  given  by  the  French  Editors,  (Transl.) 

302  LETTER   XVI. 

to,  a  full  justification ;  in  addition  to  which,  the  man  who 
so  rashly  initiated  this  unjust  procedure,  was  disavowed 
by  his  colleagues,  and  compelled  to  retract  the  charges. 
And  as  to  what  you  say  in  the  same  place,  "  of  the  cele- 
brated Director,  who  suddenly  acquired  a  property  of  nine 
hundred  thousand  livres,"  it  is  sufficient  to  refer  you  to 
the  respected  Curates  of  St.  Roche  and  St.  Paul,  who  will 
bear  testimony  before  the  whole  of  Paris  to  his  perfect 
disinterestedness  in  the  afiiair,  as  well  as  to  the  inexpres- 
sible maliciousness  of  your  accusations. 

Enough,  however,  of  these  trumpery  falsehoods.  They 
are  the  mere  rudimental  essays  of  novices,  not  the  ma- 
ture achievements  of  your  more  eminent  professors.  To 
these  latter  I  am  now,  my  Fathers,  advancing ;  and  I 
begin  with  that  instance  of  calumny,  the  very  blackest 
that  the  evil  spirit  of  your  Society  ever  concocted — I  mean 
the  intolerable  audacity  with  which  you  have  dared  to 
impute  to  certain  holy  women  an(|  their  instructors, 
"  that  they  disbelieve  the  mystery  of  transubstantiation, 
and  the  real  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Eucharist."*  Here, 
Sirs,  is  an  imposture  worthy  of  yourselves !  This  is  a 
crime  which  Heaven  alone  can  fitly  punish,  as  it  is  one 
which  none  but  yourselves  are  capable  of  committing.  It 
demands  also  the  deep  humility  with  which  these  lowly 
sufferers  are  endued  to  bear  such  an  accusation  with  pa- 
tience ;  while  the  heart  must  be  as  malignant  as  that  of 
the  infamous  slanderers  themselves  that  can  yield  cre- 
dence to  the  calumny !  I  care  not  to  undertake  .their 
defence; — the  breath  of  suspicion  has  never  rested  upon 

*  See  note  in  a  following  page. 

CALUMNIES.  303 

them.  Did  they  need  defenders,  they  would  find  others, 
and  better  qualified  for  the  ofiice  than  myself.  What  I 
am  now  about  to  adduce  is,  not  to  demonstrate  their  in- 
nocence, but  your  malice.  All  I  aim  at  is,  to  prove  to 
the  whole  world  that  there  is  no  baseness  so  flagrant  as 
that  you  should  be  incapable  of  its  perpetration  ! 

I  know,  however,  you  will  not  fail  to  meet  this  with  the 
sneer,  "  He  belongs  to  the  Port  Royal " — for  this  is  your 
constant  allegation  against  any  who  oppose  themselves  to 
your  enormities.  As  if  it  was  within  the  walls  of  the  Port 
Royal  only  that  zeal  could  be  found  sufficient  for  de- 
fending against  your  perversions,  the  purity  of  Christian 
Faith  !  I  well  know.  Reverend  Sirs,  the  excellence  of 
the  devout  Solitaries  who  there  hold  their  secluded  seats  ; 
and  I  have  not  to  be  informed,  how  greatly  the  world  is 
indebted  for  their  profound  and  instructive  writings.  I 
am  well  acquainted  with  their  unfeigned  piety,  and  their 
mature  learning ;  and,  although  I  have  never  belonged  to 
their  Society,  as  you  (in  your  ignorance  who  I  really  am) 
would  desire  should  be  believed ;  yet  am  I  not  without 
the  advantage  of  a  personal  acquaintance  with  several  of 
their  members,  while  I  revere  the  virtues  of  all.  But  the 
God  of  Truth  has  not  confined  to  their  body  alone  the 
power  and  the  will  to  oppose  your  corruptions,  as,  with 
His  help,  I  hope  to  make  you  perceive.  And  if  His 
grace  (from  whom  I  derive  all  the  ability  I  possess)  shall 
be  given,  to  sustain  me  throughout  this  undertaking,  I 
hope  to  be  able  yet  further,  so  to  follow  up  our  contro- 
versy, that  you  may  even  regret  you  have  not  a  member  of 
the  Port  Royal  to  cope  with  ! 

In  fulfilment,  then,  Sirs,  of  this  my  endeavour,  and  not 

304  LETTER   XVI. 

willing  to  leave  those  whom  you  have  outraged  by  this 
flagrant  slander,  no  other  resource  than  to  pour  out  in 
silence,  to  Heaven,  their  meek  supplications  for  your  par- 
don, I  have  undertaken — 7,  who  am  personally  unconcerned 
in  this  injury — to  make  you  blush  for  your  wrong-doing, 
in  the  face  of  the  whole  Church,  and  thus  experience  that 
salutary  confusion  described  in  Holy  Writ,  as  almost  the 
only  remedy  for  enormities  such  as  yours ;  "  Imple  facies 
eorum  ignominia,  et  quserent  nomen  tuum,  Domine  !  "  *  • 
It  is  time  that  a  check  should  be  imposed  upon  inso- 
lence such  as  this,  which  spares  not  the  purest  indivi- 
duals, or  the  holiest  places !  Who  can  be  safe,  I  de- 
mand, after  calumnies  like  this  ?  What  Sirs  !  are  we  to 
see  you,  with  impunity,  publishing,  yourselves,  and  cir- 
culating throughout  the  whole  of  Paris,  a  work,  under 
the  name  of  your  own  member  Meynier,  and  bearing  this 
scandalous  title,  "  Port  Royal  and  Geneva  agreed  in 
opposing  the  Holy  Sacrament  of  the  Altar ; "  a  work  in 
which  you  charge  with  this  apostacy  not  only  M.  L'Abbe 
de  St.  Cyran  and  M.  Arnauld,  but  also  the  Mere  Agnes, 
his  sister,  and  all  the  nuns  of  her  convent;  respecting 
whom  you  assert,  p.  96,  "  that  their  opinions  concerning 
the  Eucharist  are  suspected,  equally  with  M.  Arnauld's ; " 
while  of  the  latter  you  affirm,  at  p.  4,  "that  he  is  virtually 
Calvinistic  ! " 

*  It  will  be  obvious  to  the  Protestant  reader  to  remark,  and  to  regret,  that 
this  fine  passage,  into  which  the  Author  has  poured  the  whole  vehemence  of 
his  impassioned  spirit,  should  be  expended  (although  consistently  with  his 
own  faith)  in  defending  these  injured  females  from  an  imputation,  which, 
malignant  as  was  its  origin,  would  have,  if  well  founded,  commended  them 
more  to  our  sympathies  than  the  most  triumphant  establishment  of  their  in- 
nocence,   (Transl.) 

CALUMNIES.  305 

I  ask  noWj  in  the  face  of  the  whole  world,  if,  through- 
out the  universal  Church  can  be  found  persons,  upon 
whom  such  a  reproach  could  be  cast  with  less,  even  of  the 
show  of  probability,  than  upon  these  ?  Tell  me.  Sirs  — 
were  these  nuns,  and  their  instructors,  "  agreed  with 
Geneva  in  opposing  the  Holy  Sacrament  of  the  Altar  "  (the 
very  thought  of  which  is  abhorrent  to  their  mind)  why 
should  they  have  adopted  as  the  very  principal  object  of 
their  devotions  that  sacrament,  thus  held  in  abomination  ? 
Why  incorporate  prominently  in  their  rules  that  sacred 
institution  ?  Why  adopt  the  habit  of  the  holy  sacrament ; 
— call  themselves  "  Daughters  of  the  holy  sacrament  j" — 
give  their  church  the  very  name  of  the  holy  sacrament  ? 
Why  should  they  have  asked  and  obtained  from  Rome  a 
confirmation  of  this  institution,  and  the  liberty  to  cele- 
brate weekly  its  offices  (offices  in  which  the  faith  of  the 
Church  is  so  perfectly  expressed,)  if  they  were  conspiring 
with  Geneva  against  this  primary  article  of  the  Church's 
faith  ?  Why  should  they  have  bound  themselves  by  a 
special  act  of  devotion  (also  sanctioned  by  the  Pope)  to 
appoint  night  and  day  a  constant  succession  of  their  holy 
sisterhood  before  the  sacred  host,  in  order  to  counteract, 
by  their  unceasing  adoration  of  that  perpetual  sacrifice, 
the  impiety  of  a  heresy  which  aims  at  its  abolition  ?  * 
Tell  me,  if  you  can,  why,  among  all  the  mysteries  of  our 
religion,  they  should  have  neglected  those  which  they  be- 

*  It  will  here  again  be  noticed,  that  these  and  many  other  passages 
throughout  the  work  are  valuable,  as  showing  the  warmth  and  sincerity  of 
Pascal's  devotedness  at  that  time  to  the  doctrinal  views  of  the  Church, 
against  whose  moral  an^  social  corruptions  (as  embodied  and  exaggerated  in 
the  Jesuit  system)  he  was  dealing  the  most  deadly  wounds.     (Trans!. ) 

306  LETTER   XVI. 

lieve,  to  cherish  one  which  they  discredit;  and  devoted 
themselves  in  a  manner  so  hearty  and  entire  to  this  dogma 
of  our  faith,  if,  like  the  heretic,  they  regarded  it  as  the 
"  Mystery  of  Iniquity  "  ?  What  have  you  to  say,  Reve- 
rend Sirs,  to  testimony  so  copious,  not  of  words  only  but 
of  actions,  and  not  of  particular  acts  alone,  but  of  a  whole 
course  of  life  devoted  to  the  adoration  of  their  Redeemer 
upon  his  own  altar  ?  What,  to  the  works  which  you 
describe  as  issuing  from  Port  Royal,  filled  with  the  most 
explicit  details  respecting  the  essentials  of  this  great  mys- 
tery ;  works  of  which  even  the  Fathers  and  Councils  have 
availed  themselves  ?  Is  it  not  absolutely  ludicrous, 
although  most  indecent,  to  hear  the  terms  in  which  you 
thus  libel  M.  Arnauld  :  "  M.  A."  you  say,  "  speaks  in- 
deed of  Transubstantiation ;  but  it  is  possible  he  means  a 
'  transubstantiation  significative'  "  He  declares  his  belief 
in  the  '  real  Presence ; '  but  who  is  to  satisfy  us  that  he  does 
not  intend  by  it  a  true  and  '  real  figure  ?'  *  Is  it  come  to 
this,  my  Fathers  ?  Who  may  not  be  proved  to  be  Cal- 
vinists  at  your  pleasure,  if  you  are  to  convey  a  licence  to 
corrupt  expressions  the  most  canonical  and  pure  by  the 
maHcious  subtleties  of  your  newly-invented  equivocations  ? 
Who  has  ever  used  any  other  terms  than  these,  especially 
in  pious,  simple,  and  uncontroversial  discourses  ?  Yet,  so 
imbued  are  all  their  writings,  with  love  and  reverence  of 
this  august  mystery,  that  I  defy  you,  Sirs,  with  all  your 
artifices,  to  detect  in  them  the  slightest  appearance  of 
ambiguity,  or  the  most  remote  sympathy  with  the  senti- 
ments of  Geneva. 

*  '  Une  figure  vraie  et  r&Ue.'  (Fr.) 

CALUMNIES.  307 

Every  one  knows  that  the  heresy  of  Geneva  consists 
essentiallyj  as  you  state  yourselves,  in  believing  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  not  corporeally  present  in  his  sacrament ;  that 
it  is  impossible  for  him  to  be  in  various  places  at  one  time  ; 
that  he  is,  in  reality,  in  heaven  alone ;  and  there — and 
not  at  the  altar — he  should  be  adored  ;  that  the  substance 
of  the  bread  remains  unchanged  ;  that  the  body  of  Christ 
is  not  taken  into  the  mouth,  or  received  as  our  food ;  that 
it  is  eaten  only  by  faith,  and  consequently,  the  wicked  do 
not  eat  it  at  all ;  and  that  the  mass  is  not  a  sacrifice,  but 
an  abomination.  Hear  then,  my  Fathers,  in  what  way 
Port  Royal  is  in  accordance  with  Geneva,  in  their  writings. 
Read  there,  to  your  confusion,  "  That  the  flesh  and  blood 
are  contained  in  the  substances  of  bread  and  wine."  (2nd 
Letter  of  Arnauld,  p.  359.)  "  That  the  Holy  of  Holies 
is  present  in  the  sanctuary,  and  should  there  be  adored.^' 
(Ibid.  p.  343.)  "  That  Christ  dwells  in  sinners,  commu- 
nicating, by  the  real  and  actual  presence  of  his  body  in 
their  body,  though  not  by  the  presence  of  his  Spirit  in 
their  heart."  (Freq.  Com.  3d  Part,  Ch.  16.)  "  That  the 
mortal  remains  of  the  bodies  of  saints  derive  their  chief 
dignity  from  the  seed  of  life  which  remains  to  them,  from 
the  contact  which  had  been  experienced  with  the  immortal 
and  life-giving  flesh  of  Christ."  (1st  Part,  Ch.  40.)  "That 
it  is  not  by  any  natural  power,  but  by  the  omnipotence 
of  God  (to  whom  nothing  is  impossible)  that  the  body  of 
Christ  dwells  in  the  host,  and  in  the  smallest  part  of  each 
individual  host."  (Theol.  fam,  Lee.  15.)  "  That  the  Di- 
vine efficacy  is  present  to  produce  the  efi^ect  which  the 
words  of  consecration  signify."  (Ibid.)  "  That  Jesus  who 
is  brought  down  and  laid  upon  the  altar,  is  at  the  same 

308  LETTER  XVI. 

time  elevated  in  his  glory ;  that  he  is,  by  himself,  and  by 
his  ordinary  powers,  in  various  places  at  the  same  time — in 
the  midst  of  the  Church  triumphant,  and  in  the  Church 
militant  and  fugitive."  (De  la  Suspension,  rais.  21.) 
"  That  the  sacramental  elements  remain  suspended,  and 
subsist  in  an  extraordinary  way  without  dependence  upon 
any  thing ;  and  the  body  of  Christ  is  also  suspended  in 
the  elements  :  that  it  depends  not  upon  tbem,  in  the 
manner  that  the  substances  depend  upon  adventitious 
circumstances."  *  (Ibid.  23.)  "  That  the  substance  of 
the  bread  changes,  leaving  the  casualties  unchangeable." 
(Heures  dans  la  prose  du  saint  Sacrement.)  "  That 
Christ  dwells  in  the  Eucharist  with  the  same  glory  that 
he  possesses  in  the  heavens."  (Lettres  de  M.  St.  Cyrar, 
tom.  1,  let.  93.)  "  That  his  glorious  humanity  resides  in 
the  tabernacles  of  the  Church  under  the  substance  of 
bread,  which  visibly  encloses  him;  and,  knowing  our  earth- 
liness,  he  thus  leads  us  to  the  adoration  of  his  Divinity, 
present  in  all  places,  by  that  of  his  humanity,  present  in  each 
several  place."  (Ibid.)  "  That  we  receive  the  body  of  Jesus 
upon  our  tongue,  and  he  sanctifies  it  by  his  Divine  touch." 
(Lett.  32.)  "  He  enters  the  mouth  of  the  priest."  (Lett. 
72.)  "  That  although  Jesus  Christ  makes  himself  acces- 
sible to  us,  through  his  love  and  clemency  in  the  holy  sa- 
crament, he  does  not  the  less  preserve  his  inaccessibility  as 
an  inseparable  condition  of  his  Divine  nature ;  because, 
although  the  body  and  blood  alone  be  there,  by  virtue  of 
the  words — '  vi  verborum^ — as  the  school-men  say — that 
does  not  prevent  his  entire  Divinity,  with  his  humanity, 

*  '  Dependent  des  accidents.'  (Fr.) 

CALUMNIES.  309 

being  there  also  by  a  necessary  conjunction/*  (Defense 
du  Chapelet,  fee,  p.  317.)  And,  finally,  "  The  Eucharist 
is  both  a  sacrament  and  a  sacrifice."  (Theol.  fam.  Lee.  15.) 
And,  "  Although  the  sacrifice  is  a  commemoration  of  that 
of  the  cross,  there  is  this  difiierence,  that  that  of  the  mass 
is  offered  alone  for  the  Church  and  for  the  faithful  who 
are  partaking  the  communion,  while  that  of  the  cross  was 
offered  for  the  whole  world  according  to  holy  Scripture." 
(Ibid.  p.  153.) 

I  think,  my  Fathers,  this  quotation  may  suffice  to  prove 
that  misrepresentation  never  was  more  gross  than  this  of 
yours.  But  I  intend  further  to  bring  you  forward  as 
witnesses  against  yourselves.  For  what  is  it  that  you 
make  a  condition  to  obviate  all  suspicion  of  agreement 
with  Geneva  ?  "  If  M.  Arnauld,"  writes  your  own  Pere 
Meynier,  p.  83,  "  had  said  that  in  this  ineffable  mystery 
there  had  remained  in  the  elements  no  substance  of  bread, 
but  only  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  should 
have  admitted  that  he  was  decidedly  opposed  to  the  views 
of  Geneva."  Admit  it  then  now,  ye  impostors,  and  make 
him  a  reparation  as  public  as  your  calumny  !  How  often 
have  you  yourselves  read  the  fact  in  the  passages  I  have 
cited?  But,  besides  this,  the  "  Theologie  Familiere"  of 
M.  St.  Cyran,  being  sanctioned  by  M.  Arnauld,  it  is  to 
be  held  as  containing  the  views  of  both.  Read  then  the 
whole  of  Lecon  15,  and  especially  the  second  article,  and 
you  will  find  the  very  expression  you  require,  and  con- 
veyed even  with  more  precision  than  by  yourselves.  "  Is 
there  now  bread  in  the  wafer,  and  wine  in  the  cup  ?  No  : 
all  the  substance  of  the  bread  and  the  wine  is  displaced 
by  that  of  the  body  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which 

310  LETTER   XVI. 

latter  it  thenceforth  remains,  clothed  with  the  qualities 
and  elements  of  bread  and  wine." 

Now,  Reverend  Sir,  will  you  again  state  that  the  Port 
Royal  teaches  nothing  but  what  Geneva  receives;  and 
that  M.  Arnauld,  has,  in  his  Second  Letter,  said  nothing 
that  had  not  been  better  expressed  by  a  minister  of  Cha- 
renton  ?  Let  us  summon  Mestrezat,  and  have  him  de- 
clare, in  the  same  manner  like  M.  Arnauld,  Letter,  p.  387 
and  following,  "  It  is  an  infamous  falsehood  to  charge 
him  with  denying  transubstantiation  ;  he  maintains  as  a 
fundamental  doctrine  in  all  his  writings  the  real  presence 
of  the  Son  of  God,  in  opposition  to  the  Calvinistic  heresy  : 
he  is-  never  so  happy  as  when  in  a  place  where  adoration 
is  constantly  paid  to  the  Holy  of  Holies,  as  present  in  the 
sanctuary."  All  which  is  much  more  opposed  to  the  be- 
lief of  the  Calvinists  than  even  the  real  presence,  since, 
according  to  Cardinal  Richelieu,  in  his  "  Controversies," 
p.  536,  "  The  new  ministers  of  France  having  united  with 
the  Lutherans,  who  believe  in  the  real  presence  of  Christ 
in  the  Eucharist,  they  have  declared  that  they  only  sepa- 
rate from  the  Church,  in  respect  of  this  mystery,  on  ac- 
count of  the  adoration  paid  by  Catholics  to  the  Eucha- 
rist," Cause  to  be  subscribed  at  Geneva  all  the  passages 
I  have  cited  to  you  from  the  works  of  Port  Royal,  and  not 
only  passages,  but  entire  treatises  upon  this  mystery,  such 
as  the  Book  on  '  frequent  Communion,'  '  Explanation  of  the 
Mass'  and  many  others  ;  and  procure  the  establishment  at 
Charenton  of  this  holy  institution,  the  ceaseless  adoration 
of  the  Redeemer  in  the  Eucharist,  as  at  Port  Royal,  and 
you  will  then  render  the  most  signal  service  to  the 
Church ;  for  in  that  case,   Port  Royal  would  not  be  in 

CALUMNIES.  311 

accordance  with  Geneva,  but  Geneva  in  accordance  with 
Port  Royal,  and  with  the  universal  Church. 

Truly,  my  Fathers,  you  could  have  committed  no 
greater  mistake  than  that  of  accusing  the  Port  Royal  of 
heterodoxy  respecting  the  Eucharist ;  but  I  shall  now 
proceed  to  show  the  motives  that  induced  you  to  take 
that  step.  You  perceive  already  that  I  understand  some- 
thing of  your  policy.  You  are  consistent  in  it  at  all 
times  and  on  all  occasions. 

If  the  Abbe  of  St.  Cyran  and  M.  Arnauld  had  only 
stated  what  ought  to  be  the  belief  respecting  this  mystery, 
and  not  what  ought  to  be  done  in  duly  preparing  for  its 
participation,  they  would  have  been  the  best  Catholics  in 
the  world,  and  no  equivocation  would  have  been  dis- 
covered in  their  definition  of  "  real  presence^'  and 
transubstantiation.  But  as  it  is  your  method  to  brand 
all  who  set  themselves  to  oppose  your  laxities  of  practice 
with  heresy,  and  that  too  just  in  the  very  points  on  which 
they  oppose  you,  how  could  it  be  otherwise  than  that 
M.  Arnauld  should  incur  your  stigma,  after  publishing  a 
book  expressly  against  the  profanations  of  this  mystery 
by  your  Society  ?  No,  Reverend  Sirs !  trust  me,  he 
coiild  not  with  impunity  say  "  Let  not  the  Body  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  be  given  to  those  who  are  relapsing  continually 
into  former  offences,  and  of  whom  no  hope  of  amendment 
can  be  entertained;  .but  let  persons  be  warned  from  the 
altar,  that  they  may  purify  themselves  by  a  sincere 
repentance,  and  afterwards  partake  of  it  with  due  effi- 
cacy ! "  Suffer  not  such  language  as  this,  my  good 
Fathers,  or  you  will  soon  find  your  Confessionals  thinned. 
Does  not  your  own  Pere  Brisacier  say,  "  If  you  follow 

312  LETTER  XVI. 

such  a  method  as  this,  you  will  apply  the  blood  of 
Christ  to  none  ? "  Far  better  is  it  for  you  to  follow  the 
practice  of  your  Society,  as  given  by  your  Pere  Mas- 
carenhas,  in  a  work  that  has  received  the  sanction  of  your 
Authorities,  and  even  of  your  Reverend  Father  General, 
viz.  "  that  all  persons,  and  even  priests,  may  receive  the 
Body  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  very  day  in  which  they  may 
have  fallen  into  grievous  offences ;  and  so  far  from  this 
being  an  abuse  of  the  office,  it  is  commendable  to  avail 
themselves  of  it  in  this  way :  Confessors  are  not  bound 
to  reject  such  persons,  but  ought,  on  the  contrary,  to  urge 
such  as  have  committed  these  crimes  to  communicate  at 
the  very  moment ;  because,  notwithstanding  the  Church 
may  have  forbidden  this,  the  prohibition  is  abolished  by 
universal  consent  throughout  the  world." 

See  now,  my  Fathers,  the  beneficial  fruit  of  having 
Jesuits  over  all  the  earth  !  Here  we  have  a  specimen  of 
the  universal  practice  which  you  have  introduced,  and 
still  maintain.  No  matter  that  the  Table  of  Christ  be 
filled  with  abominations,  provided  your  churches  be  not 
empty  !  Establish,  by  whatever  means — at  whatever  cost 
— the  heresy  of  those  who  oppose  them !  But  how  is 
this  to  be  done,  after  the  irrefragable  proofs  they  have 
given  of  their  orthodoxy  ?  Have  you  no  fear  that  I  shall 
bring  forward  the  four  grand  proofs  you  have  alleged  of 
their  heresy  ?  You  may  well  shrink  from  my  examina- 
tion of  them,  and  I  shall  not  spare  exposing  your  shame. 
Let  us  proceed  now  to  the  first. 

"  M.  de  St.  Cyran,"  says  the  Pere  Meynier,  "  when 
consoling  one  of  his  friends  on  the  death  of  his  mother, 
t.  1,  Lett.  14,  says,  '  the  most  acceptable  sacrifice  that 

CALUMNIES.  313 

can  be  offered,  when  under  Divine  chastisements,  is 
patience ; '  therefore  he  is  a  Calvinist."  Now  this,  my 
Fathers,  is  ingenious,  and  I  doubt  if  any  one  but  the 
writer  would  perceive  this  meaning.  Let  us  then  gather 
it  from  himself.  "  Because,"  proceeds  this  great  contro- 
versialist, "  he  does  not  believe  in  the  sacrifice  of  the 
Mass.  For  that  is,  of  all  others,  the  most  acceptable  to 
God."  Who  will  now  say  the  Jesuits  caanot  reason  ? 
So  well  can  they  argue,  that  they  can  prove  any  persons 
they  wish  to  be  heretics — and  even  the  Holy  Scripture 
itself.*  For  would  it  not  be  heresy  to  say  as  in  Eccles. 
"  there  is  nothing  worse  than  the  love  of  money ;  '  nihil 
est  iniquius  qukm  amare  pecuniam  j '  as  if  adultery, 
homicide,  idolatry,  were  not  greater  crimes  ?  And  who 
does  not  use  the  same  kind  of  expressions  as  this  con- 
tinually ;  for  instance,  again,  "  the  sacrifice  of  a  contrite 
and  humble  spirit  is  the  most  acceptable  in  the  sight  of 
God ; "  for  in  these  sayings  we  are  only  comparing 
certain  internal  graces,   one  with  another,   and  not  with 

*  Pascal  had  doubtless  here  in  view  the  Pere  Theophile  Raynauld,  Savoyard 
Jesuit,  who  proposed  to  pass  a  censure  upon  the  Apostles'  Creed,  hy  which  he 
undertook  to  prove  that  this  earliest  Confession  of  Christianity  is  heretical  in 
all  its  chief  articles.  It  appeared  first  in  the  Latin  work  of  that  Jesuit,  en- 
titled '  Erotemata  de  bonis  ac  malis  libris,'  in  4to.  Lugduni,  1653 ;  and  re- 
printed since  then,  as  a  blasphemous  production,  in  several  works.  I  am  well 
aware  that  it  is  a  sarcasm  of  Pere  Theo.  Raynauld,  directed  against  the 
censures  of  the  Sorbonne.  But  how  could  he  indulge  himself  in  raillery  upon 
one  of  the  important  acts  of  Christianity  ?  This  is  the  first  article  of  the 
singular  effusion :  Erotemata,  p.  294,  in  4to ;  "  Credo  in  Deum,  patrem  omni- 
potentem,  Creatorem  coeli  et  terrae.  Primus  iste  articulus,  si  intelligaturi 
quasi  solus  pater  sit  Dens,  et  omnipotens  et  Creator  ;  Filius  autera,  et  Spiritus 
Sanctus  solum  creaturae  sint,  Ideoque  neo  Filius  vere  ac  substantialiter  dici 
possit  Deus,  et  omnipotens  et  Creator,  similiterque  Spiritus  Sanctus  :  proposi- 
tio  et  blasphema ;  individuse  Trinitatis  destructiva,  et  pridem  in  sacro  et 
cecumenico  Nicseno  concilio  trecentorum  decern  et  octo  episcoporum,&c.  &c." 
Le  restede  la  piece  est  sur  meme  ton.    (Note  of  Edit,  in  1812.) 

P 

314  LETTER   XVI. 

the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass,  which  is  of  a  wholly  different 
naturCj  and  higher  order  ?  Do  you  not  then  see  the 
absurdity  of  this,  my  good  Fathers  ?  And  is  it  necessary, 
in  order  to  complete  your  confusion,  to  bring  forward  the 
words  of  M.  de  St.  Cyran,  in  the  same  letter,  in  which  he 
speaks  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Mass  as  the  most  excellent 
of  all,  saying,  "  Ofi"er  then  to  God,  daily,  and  in  all 
places,  the  sacrifice  of  the  Body  of  his  Son,  who  could 
devise  no  more  excellent  way  than  this  of  honouring  his 
Father."  And  again  ;  "  Christ  at  his  death  commanded 
us  to  partake  of  his  sacrificed  Body,  in  order  to  render 
more  acceptable  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  our  own,  and  to 
unite  himself  to  us  in  death;  and  in  order,  further,  by 
his  presence  to  strengthen  us  in  our  final  offering  to  our 
Maker,  of  our  body  and  our  life."  Keep  all  this  in  the 
back-ground,  Reverend  Sirs ;  and  fail  not  to  say,  as  you 
have  indeed  done  at  p.  33,  "  that  the  writer  opposed  the 
act  of  Communion  at  death,  and  disbelieved  the  sacrifice 
of  the  Mass."  Nothing,  believe  me,  is  too  daring  for 
slanderers  by  profession. 

To  this  remark  your  second  proof  bears  striking  witness. 
In  order  to  convict  of  Calvinism  the  late  M.  St.  Cyran,  to 
whom  you  attribute  the  work  of  "  Petrus  Aurelius,"  you 
produce  a  passage  in  which  the  latter,  at  p.  89,  explains 
the  manner  in  which  the  Church  proceeds  in  the  deposi- 
tion and  degradation  of  priests,  and  also  of  bishops. 
"  The  Church,"  he  says,  "  being  unable  to  take  from 
them  the  character  of  their  order,  because  it  is  in  itself 
ineffaceable,  does  all  that  she  can ;  she  blots  out  from  her 
own  memory  the  character,  which  cannot  be  extinguished 
in  the  minds  of  those  who  have  once  received  it.     She 

CALUMNIES.  315 

regards  them  as  ceasing  to  be  priests  or  bishops ;  so  that, 
according  to  the  ordinary  language  of  the  Church,  they 
may  be  said  no  longer  to  be  such,  although  the  character 
itself  must  always  remain :  '  oh  indelebilitatem  charac- 
teris.' "  You  here  see,  my  Fathers,  that  this  writer, 
receiving  the  approval  of  three  General  Assemblies  of  the 
French  clergy,  declares  explicitly  that  the  character  of  the 
priesthood  is  ineffaceable ;  while  you,  nevertheless,  make 
him,  in  the  very  same  passage,  assert  the  direct  reverse, 
viz.  "  that  the  character  of  the  priesthood  is  not  inef- 
faceable." Here  I  convict  you,  then,  of  flagrant  calumny 
— or,  according  to  your  doctrines,  of  a  "  petty  and  venial 
offence  !  •"  The  book,  in  fact,  has  done  your  Society  an 
injury,  by  its  refutation  of  the  heresies  of  your  brethren 
in  England,  respecting  the  episcopal  authority.  But  see 
the  palpable  folly  you  have  fallen  into.  Having  ignorantly 
supposed  M.  St.  Cyran  to  hold  the  effaceability  of  the 
priestly  character,  you  thence  conclude  that  he  disbelieves 
the  real  presence  of  Christ  in  the  Eucharist ! 

Now,  you  must  not  expect  me,  my  Fathers,  to  reply 
to  this  point.  If  your  common  sense  fails  you,  I  cannot 
furnish  you  with  a  supply.  All  who  possess  any,  must 
laugh  at  such  a  conclusion,  as  also  at  your  third  proof, 
which  you  found  on  the  following  expressions  from  the 
'Freq.  Comm.  3rd  part,  ch.  11;'  "  God  gives  us  in  the 
Eucharist  the  same  food  as  the  saints  in  heaven,  without 
any  difference ;  excepting  that  here  he  withholds  from  us 
the  sensible  sight  and  taste,  reserving  both  the  one  and 
other  for  the  heavenly  blessedness."  Truly,  my  Fathers, 
these  words  express  so  plainly  the  intention  of  the  Church, 
that  I  am  at  a  loss  to  think  what  there  is  in  them  to 

p  2 

316  LETTER  XVI. 

censure.  I  see  in  them  nothing  but  what  the  Council  of 
Trent  inculcates,  Less.  13,  c.  8,  that  there  is  no  other 
difference  between  Christ  in  the  Eucharist  and  Christ  in 
the  heavens,  than  that  here  he  is  under  a  veil,  and  there 
unveiled.  M.  Arnauld  does  not  say  that  there  is  no  other 
difference  in  the  way  of  receiving  Jesus  Christ ;  but  only, 
there  is  no  other  in  Christ,  whom  we  receive.  Not- 
withstanding which,  you  would  represent  him  as  saying 
in  this  passage,  contrary  to  all  sound  reason,  that  (in  the 
elements)  we,  on  earth,  no  more  receive  the  body  of  Christ 
in  the  mouth,  than  we  shall  do  in  heaven :  and  thence  you 
charge  him  with  heresy. 

You  really.  Reverend  Sirs,  excite  my  pity.  Is  it  pos- 
sible that  further  explanation  is  necessary  ?  Can  you  be 
so  obtuse  as  to  confound  the  sacred  nourishment  in  ques- 
tion, with  the  mode  in  which  it  is  received  ?  There  is 
only  this  one  point  of  difference  between  this  nourishment, 
as  partaken  of  on  earth  and  in  heaven  ;  and  that  is,  that 
here  it  is  under  a  veil  which  conceals  it  from  the  sensible 
sight  and  taste.  But  there  are  various  differences  in  the 
manner  of  receiving  it  here  and  there;  the  principal  of 
which  is,  as  M.  Arnauld  says,  3rd  part,  ch.  16.  "  Here  it 
is  corporeally  received  both  by  the  just  and  by  the  wicked ; 
but  in  heaven  it  shall  not  be  so." 

If  you  are  not  aware  then  of  the  reason  of  this  distinc- 
tion, I  must  inform  you.  The  diversity  in  the  manner  of 
receiving  this  sacred  nourishment,  arises  from  the  difference 
in  the  state  of  Christians  in  this  life,  and  of  the  blessed  in 
heaven.  Christians,  as  says  Cardinal  Perron,  following 
the  views  of  the  Fathers,  hold  a  middle  position  between 
that  of  the  blessed  and  that  of  the  Jews...  The  blessed 

CALUMNIES.  317 

possess  Jesus  positively,  withoiit  a  figure,  and  without  a 
veil.  The  Jews  possessed  only  the  emblems  and  the 
shadows  of  Christ,  such  as  the  manna  and  the  paschal 
lamb.  And  Christians  have  him  in  the  Eucharist,  in 
reality  and  truth,  but  yet  covered  as  with  a  veil.  "  God," 
says  St.  Eucher,  "  has  formed  for  himself  three  taber- 
nacles ;  the  Synagogue,  which  has  only  his  shadow,  with- 
out reality;  the  Church,  which  has  reality,  and  also 
shadows ;  and  Heaven,  where  there  are  no  shadows,  but 
reality  alone."  "We  should  depart  from  our  present 
state,  that  of  faith  (which  St.  Paul  opposes  both  to  the 
law  and  to  the  perfect  vision),  if  we  possessed  only  the 
figures,  without  Christ  himself;  because  it  is  the  property 
of  the  law  to  have  only  the  shadows  and  not  the  substance 
of  things.  And  we  should  depart  from  it  also,  if  we 
possessed  him  visibly  ;  because  faith,  as  the  same  apostle 
says,  is  not  founded  on  things  that  are  seen.  Thus  the 
Eucharist  is  strictly  adapted  to  our  condition  of  faith, 
because  it  contains  the  reality  of  Christ,  but  veiled.  So 
that  this  condition  would  be  destroyed  if  Christ  were  not 
really  in  the  substances  of  bread  and  wine,  as  the  heretics 
maintain ;  and  it  would  also  be  destroyed  if  we  received 
him  unveiled,  as  in  the  heavens ;  for  this  would  be  to 
confound  our  proper  condition,  on  the  one  side  with  that 
of  Judaism,  and,  on  the  other,  with  that  of  glory.* 

Behold  then,  Reverend  Fathers,  the  sources,  mysterious 
and  divine,  in  which  this  ineffable  mystery  originates ! 

*  The  reasoning  throughout  these  elahorate  passages  is  specious  and  beau- 
tiful, but  how  easily  overthrown  by  the  severer  deductions  of  an  enlightened 
Protestantism !  Happily  the  repositories  of  our  polemical  divinity  contain 
ample  stores  for  the  refutation  of  these  views.    (Transl.) 

318  LETTER   XVI. 

This  is  what  causes  us  to  shrink  from  the  Calvinistic  doc- 
trinej  as  reducing  us  to  the  condition  of  Judaism  j  and 
bids  us  aspire  to  the  glory  of  the  blessed,  which  will 
bestow  upon  us  the  full  and  eternal  enjoyment  of  Jesus, 
From  hence  you  will  see  that  there  are  various  diversities 
in  the  mode  of  participation  between  Christians  and  the 
Blessed — among  otherSj  that,  here,  the  Redeemer's  body 
is  taken  corporeally,  but  not  so  in  heaven ;  all  which, 
however,  resolves  itself  into  the  one  great  difference  be- 
tween the  state  of  faith,  in  which  we  are  placed  here,  and 
the  state  of  sight  and  fruition  to  be  enjoyed  hereafter. 
And  this  is  what  has  been  most  clearly  expressed  by  M. 
Arnauld,  as  follows,  "  There  must  be  no  other  difference 
in  the  purity  of  those  who  receive  Christ  in  the  Eucharist, 
and  that  of  the  glorified,  except  that  which  exists  between 
the  state  of  faith  and  the  clear  vision  of  God ;  whence 
alone  arises  the  difference  in  the  mode  of  participating  in 
him,  in  earth  and  in  heaven."  You  ought,  my  Fathers, 
to  have  revered  the  sanctity  and  truth  of  these  expressions, 
instead  of  perverting  them  to  a  charge  of  heresy ;  which 
dwelt  only  in  your  own  imagination,  but  never  had  the 
slightest  existence  in  the  mind  of  the  author. 

You  see  then.  Sirs,  that  these  your  boasted  proofs  are 
lamentable  failures.  Your  next  resource  is  a  novel  kind 
of  artifice,  namely,  a  falsification  of  the  Council  of  Trent, 
in  order  to  prove  a  deviation  from  its  views  on  the  part  of 
M.  Arnauld  j — so  various  are  your  methods  of  proving  all 
the  world  heretics  but  yourselves  !  This  is  achieved  by 
your  Pere  Meynier,  in  fifteen  passages  in  his  work,  and 
eight  or  ten  in  that  single  page  (54)  wherein  he  pretends 
to  say,  that,  for  the  catholic  sense,  it  is  not  sufficient  to 

CALUMNIES.  319 

declare,  "  I  believe  Jesus  Christ  to  be  really  present  in 
the  Eucharist ;  "  but  we  ought  to  say,  "  I  believe,  with 
the  Council,  that  he  is  there  present,  with  a  true  local 
presence,  or  locally."  And  then  he  quotes  the  Council, 
Sess.  13,  can.  3,  can.  4,  6.  Now,  who  would  not  believe, 
seeing  the  term  "  local  presence,"  cited  from  three  canons 
of  a  universal  Council,  but  that  it  must  actually  be  in 
those  canons?  This  might  have  served  your  purpose, 
previous  to  my  15th  letter ;  but  now  it  is  of  no  avail. 
We  refer  to  the  records  of  the  Council,  and  we  there  dis- 
cover your  imposition ;  for  these  terms,  "  local  presence, 
locally,  locality,"  are  nowhere  to  be  found;  and  fur- 
thermore, I  aiErm  they  exist  not  in  any  part  of  the  pro- 
ceedings of  the  Council,  nor  in  those  of  any  former 
one,  nor  in  the  writings  of  any  Father  of  the  Church 
whatever ! 

I  request .  you  to  tell  me  if  we  are  to  hold  all  under 
suspicion  of  Calvinism  who  have  not  made  use  of  these 
expressions  ?  If  so,  then  the  Council  of  Trent  lies  under 
that  suspicion,  together  with  all  the  holy  Fathers,  without 
exception  !  Can  you  find  no  other  means  to  charge  heresy 
upon  Arnauld,  than  by  injuring  so  many  who  have  done 
nothing  to  incur  your  censure  ?  Among  others,  is  St. 
Thomas  to  be  charged  with  error — the  most  signal  of 
the  champions  of  the  Eucharist ;  and  who,  so  far  from 
adopting  the  expression  in  question,  has,  on  the  contrary, 
studiously  rejected  it — 3rd  pt.  qusest  76,  a.  5 — saying, 
"  NuUo  modo  corpus  Christi  est  in  hoc  Sacramento  loca- 
liter?"  Where  is  your  authority.  Reverend  Sirs,  to 
impose,  at  your  mere  will,  novel  terms  for  the  explanation 
of  the  true  faith ;  as  if  the  confession  appointed  by  the 

330  LETTER   XTI. 

Pope  in  Council,  in  which  no  such  terms  are  found,  were 
actually  defective  and  ambiguous ;  and  you  alone  were; 
competent  to  supply  such  defect,  and  rectify  such  ambi- 
guity ?  I  know  not  which  most  to  admire,  the  audacity 
which  presumes  to  dictate  such  expressions  to  the  learned; 
the  falsehood  of  attributing  them  to  our  general  Councils; 
or  the  ignorance  which  keeps  you  unconscious  of  the  dif- 
ficulty they  present  to  the  minds  of  the  most  enlightened 
saints  !  You  should  "  blush,"  0  Fathers,  "  at  your 
ignorant  impostures,"  as  the  Scripture  addresses  persons 
such  as  yourselves  :  "  De  mendacio  ineruditionis  tuse  con- 
fundere." 

Aspire  not  then  any  longer  to  the  character  of  Masters 
of  Theology :  you  have  neither  reputation  nor  qualifica- 
tions for  the  office.  Would  you  however  put  forward 
your  dogmas  with  somewhat  more  modesty,  they  might 
meet  with  attention  ;  for,  although,  as  we  have  seen,  this 
term  "  local  presence  "  has  been  rejected  by  St.  Thomas, 
because  the  body  of  Christ  is  not  contained  in  the  Eucha- 
rist, to  the  ordinary  extent  of  bodily  substances,  yet  has 
the  expression  been  admitted  by  some  recent  controver- 
sialists ;  inasmuch  as  they  only  understand  by  it  that  the 
Saviour's  body  is  really  covered  by  the  substances ;  and, 
therefore,  these  substances  having  specific  locality,  the 
body  of  Jesus  is  there  also.  In  this  sense,  M.  Arnauld 
scruples  not  to  admit  it,  because  both  M.  St.  Cyran  and 
himself  have  ever  declared  that  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  Eu- 
charist, is  actually  in  a  specific  place,  as  also,  in  a  mira- 
culous manner,  in  several  places  at  the  same  time.  Thus 
do  all  your  subtleties  fall  to  the  ground ;  and  you  are 
seen  to  fail  in  giving  the  slightest  colour  to  accusations, 

CALUMNIES.  321 

which  ought  never  to  have  been  advanced  but  on  the  most 
irrefragable  proofs. 

But  whatj  after  all,  avails  it,  my  Fathers,  to  confront 
the  innocence  of  these  objects  of  your  persecution  with 
youi'  calumnies  ?  You  attribute  to  them  these  errors,  not 
in  the  belief  that  they  actually  entertain  them,  but  because 
their  opinions  are  prejudicial  to  yourselves.  This,  according 
to  your  system  of  theology,  allows  you  to  slander  them 
without  a  crime;  and  you  can,  without  confession  or 
penitence,  perform  the  sacred  office  of  the  mass  at  the 
very  time  you  are  imputing  to  ecclesiastics,  that,  while 
daily  performing  the  same  service,  they  believe  it  to  be  ai 
sheer  idolatry ; — a  sacrilege  this,  so  atrocious,  that  you 
yourselves  caused  to  be  hung  in  effigy  your  own  member, 
Pere  Jarrige,*  for  having  performed  mass  at  the  time  that 
he  was  in  correspondence  with  Geneva. 

What  surprises  me  then,  is,  not  that  you  should  thus 
unscrupulously  deal  out  these  charges,  so  scandalous  and 
yet  so  false,  but  that  you  should  imprudently  impute 
crimes  so  little  likely  to  have  been  committed.  You  know 
how  to  attach  the  stigma  of  offences  at  your  will ;  but  do 
you  suppose  you  can  as  easily  incline  men's  belief  to  your 
purposes  ? 

Truly,  my  Fathers,  if  the  suspicion  of  Calvinism  must 
necessarily  attach  either  to  them  or  to  you,  your  case 
would  be  a  very  bad  one.  Their  language  is  as  strictly 
catholic  as  yours ;  but  their  conduct  confirms  their  faith, 
and  yours  contradicts  it : — for  if  you  believe  as  they  do, 

*  A  celebrated  Jesuit  who  went  over  to  the  Huguenots,  and  on  his  apos- 
tacy  published  a  work  entitled  "  The  Jesuit  on  the  Scaffold,"  in  which  he 
reproached  the  Jesuits  with  the  most  odious  acts.     (French  Editor.) 

P  5 

333  LETTER   XVI. 

that  this  bread  is  really  clianged  into  the  body  of  the  Re- 
deemer, why  do  you  not  also,  with  them,  demand  that  the 
hard  and  icy  hearts  of  those  whom  you  invite  to  its  par- 
ticipation be  also  truly  changed  to  penitence  and  love  ? 
If  you  believe  that  Christ  is  there  exhibited  in  his  state  of 
mortality,  in  order  to  teach  those  who  approach  him  to 
die  to  the  world,  to  sin,  and  to  themselves,  how  can  you 
invite  to  his  altar  such  as  are  conscious  of  vice  and  cri- 
minal passions  in  all  their  vitality  and  strength  within 
their  bosoms  ?  How  dare  you  judge  those  worthy  to  par- 
take of  the  bread  of  heaven,  for  whom  even  that  of  earth 
is  too  good  ? 

Oh,  worthy  guardians  of  this  sacred  mystery  ! — whose 
zeal  is  expended  in  persecuting  those  that  do  it  real 
honour  by  so  many  holy  appliances  ;  and  flattering  such  as 
dishonour  it  by  the  most  sacrilegious  corruptions  !  Most 
fitting  is  it  in  these  champions  of  a  sacrifice  so  pure  and 
adorable,  to  crowd  the  Saviour's  table  with  hardened 
sinners,  reeking  from  their  infamies  ;  and  to  place  in  the 
midst  of  them  a  priest,  dismissed,  in  his  turn,  by  his 
confessor  to  the  altar  from  recent  impurities — there,  as 
the  representative  of  Christ,  to  ofi'er  that  immaculate  vic- 
tim to  the  God  of  Holiness,  and  bear  it  in  his  polluted 
hands  to  mouths  equally  polluted !  Well  does  it  become 
those  who,  according  to  the  sanctions  and  maxims  of  their 
own  Chief,  bear  these  practices  over  the  whole  world,  to 
impute  to  the  author  of  the  "  Frequent  Communion," 
and  to  the  "  Sisters  of  the  Holy  Sacrament,"  disbelief  in 
this  their  most  revered  and  cherished  institution  ! 

But  even  this  was  not  enough.  In  their  implacable 
malice,  they  must  proceed  further,  and  accuse  these  holy 

CALUMNIES.  323 

persons  of  a  renunciation  of  Christ,  and  of  their  baptism  ! 
Deem,  not,  Keverend  Sirs,  these  things  to  be  fictions, 
such  as  you  deal  in  j  they  are  mournful  instances  of  the 
outrages  to  which  your  calumnious  propensities  can  lead. 
So  flagrant  a  falsehood  would  not  have  found  a  supporter 
befitting  its  enormity  in  the  person  alone  of  your  worthy 
comrade  Filleau,  with  whom,  at  your  instigation,  it  ori- 
ginated :  your  Society  must  give  it  their  own  public  sanc- 
tion ;  and  your  Pere  Meynier  has  just  come  forward  with 
the  assertion  (as  an  undoubted  fact)  that  the  Port  Royal 
has,  during  the  last  thirty-five  years,  been  the  seat  of  a 
secret  cabal,  (of  which  M.  de  St.  Cyran  and  M.  D'Ypres 
were  the  heads)  "  to  overthrow  the  mystery  of  the  Incar- 
nation; to  pass  off  the  gospel  for  an  apocryphal  his- 
tory ;  to  exterminate  the  Christian  religion,  and  elevate  a 
system  of  Deism  upon  the  ruins  of  Christianity."  Is 
this,  my  Fathers,  sufficient  ?  Will  you  be  satisfied  with 
establishing  such  imputations  as  these  against  the  objects 
of  your  hate  ?  Will  your  animosity  be  now  assuaged, 
when  you  have  made  them  objects  of  aversion,  not  only 
to  the  whole  Church,  by  means  ^  the  alleged  "  accord- 
ance with  Geneva,"  but  also  with  all  who  believe  in  Jesus 
Christ,  by  their  horror  of  "  infidelity,''^  of  which  you  ac- 
cuse them  ? 

But  who,  let  me  ask,  are  they  whom  you  expect  to  con- 
vince, on  your  sole  assertion  (without  the  slightest  real 
proof,  and  in  the  face  of  all  imaginary  contradictions)  that 
these  ecclesiastics — who  preach  alone  the  grace  of  Christ, 
the  purity  of  the  Gospel,  and  the  obligations  of  the  bap- 
tismal vow — that  they  have  renounced  their  baptism,  the 
Gospel,  and  their  Redeemer  ?     Who,  I  say,  would  believe 

334  LETTER   XVI. 

it  ?  Unhappy  men  !  *  Do  you  believe  it  yourselves  ?  How 
low  are  you  sunk,  that  you  are  reduced  either  to  furnish 
proof  that  these  objects  of  your  malevolence  are  really 
unbelievers,  or,  failing  such  proof,  to  pass  for  the  most 
abandoned  of  calumniators !  Bring  forward,  Fathers, 
your  evidence.  Name  the  distinguished  ecclesiastic,  who 
you  say  was  present  at  that  assembly  of  "  the  Bourg  Fon- 
taine "  in  1621,  and  revealed  to  your  Pere  Filleau  the  de- 
sign then  concocted  to  "  destroy  the  Christian  religion  : " 
name  the  six  persons,  who  you  allege,  banded  themselves 
together  in  that  foul  conspiracy  :  name  the  person  desig- 
nated by  the  initials  A.  A.  (who  you  say,  at  p.  15,  "  is 
not  Antoine  Arnauld,"  because  he  has  proved  to  you  that 
at  that  time  he  was  not  nine  years  old)  "  but  another 
person  still  living,  and  too  much  a  friend  of  M.  Arnauld  to 
be  unknown  to  him."  You  then,  Sirs,  are  acquainted 
with  the  party]  and,  if  you  would  not  be  held  destitute 
of  all  piety  yourselves,  you  are  bound  to  denounce  him 
to  the  King  and  the  Parliament,  that  he  may  meet  the 
punishment  he  merits.  You  must  speak  out ;  you  must 
produce  names  ;  or  b^  hereafter  regarded  as  having  for- 
feited all  title  to  belief !  It  is  in  this  way  that  the  worthy 
Pere  Valerian  has  shown  us  how  to  torture  and  put  down 
impostors  of  this  description.  Your  silence  will  now  be 
regarded  as  a  full  and  entire  acknowledgment  of  this 
diabolical  slander.  The  most  deluded  of  your  supporters 
will  be  constrained  to  acknowledge,  "  that  this  is  not  a 
proof  of  your  virtue,  but  of  your  impotence." 

They  will  wonder  also  that  you  should  have  dared  to 
extend  your  unprincipled  attacks  against  the  Sisters  of 

*  '  Miserables  que  vous  etes.'  (Fr.) 

CALUMNIES.  335 

the  Port  Eoyal :  stating  as  you  do  at  p.  14<,  that  the 
"  Secret  Chapelet  of  the  Holy  Sacrament/'  (composed  by 
one  of  them)  was  the  first  fruit  of  that  conspiracy  against 
Christ;  and  at  p.  95,  "  thus  they  are  all  imbued  with  the 
detestable  maxims  of  that  effusion ;"  which,  according  to 
your  statement,  is  an  "  instruction  in  Deism."  Your  im- 
posture respecting  this  production  has  been  already  effec- 
tually exposed  in  the  answer  to  the  censure  of  the  late 
Archbishop  of  Paris  against  your  Pere  Brisacier.  You 
could  find  nothing  to  say  in  rejoinder  ;  and  yet  you  per- 
sist in  your  shameless  deception,  for  the  purpose  of  attri- 
buting to  a  body  of  females,  whose  piety  has  been  hitherto 
universally  acknowledged,  the  very  acme  of  impiety  ! 

Cruel  and  dastardly  persecutors  !  Could  the  hallowed 
privacy  of  the  cloister  furnish  no  shelter  from  your  ca- 
lumnies ?  While  these  holy  women  were,  in  punctual  obe- 
dience to  the  rules  of  their  institution,  adoring,  night  and 
day,  their  Redeemer  in  his  sacrament,  it  was  your  mag- 
nanimous office,  by  day  and  by  night,  to  proclaim  to  the 
world  that  they  believed  Him  not  to  be  present  in  his 
own  institution,  or  even  in  his  ascended  glory  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Father ;  and,  at  the  very  time  that  they 
were  pouring  out  their  secret  prayers  for  yourselves  and 
for  the  Universal  Church,  your  unremitting  aim  was  to 
thrust  them  out  from  her  maternal  bosom.  You  calum- 
niate those  who  have  no  ears  to  listen,  and  no  mouth  to 
reply.  But  Jesus,  their  Lord,  in  whose  heart  they  are 
now  hidden,  to  be  one  day  manifested  together  with  him 
— he  hears  your  insults,  and  will  undertake  their  defence. 
The  day  will  come  when  that  sacred  and  awful  voice  shall 
be  heard  on  their  behalf,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  world, 

326  LETTER   XVI. 

but  to  the  consolatidn  of  the  Church  !  And,  mucli  I 
fear,  my  Fathers,  that  those  who  now  harden  their  hearts, 
and  obstinately  turn  from  Him  when  he  speaks  as  their 
God,  will  hear  him  with  unspeakable  terror,  when  he  ad- 
dresses them  as  their  Judge  ! 

For,  in  fine.  Reverend  Sirs,  what  account,  I  ask,  will 
you  be  able  to  render  of  such  calumnies  as  these,  when 
examined,  not  according  to  the  fictions  of  your  Dicas- 
tillus,  your  Gans,  and  your  Pennalossa,  by  which  they 
may  indeed,  after  a  fashion,  be  justified ;  but  according  to 
the  rules  of  Eternal  Truth,  and  by  the  ordinances  of  the 
Church ;  which,  so  far  from  excusing,  holds  the  oflFence  in 
such  abhorrence  as  to  denounce  against  it  the  punishment 
of  a  wilful  homicide  ?  By  the  1st  and  2nd  Council  of 
Aries,  the  communion  is  withheld,  even  to  the  hour  of 
death,  from  calumniators,  equally  with  murderers.  The 
Council  of  Lateran  held  those  who  had  been  convicted  of 
the  offence,  to  be  unfit  for  ecclesiastical  office,  although 
they  had  recanted  their  error.  The  popes  have  ever 
threatened  such  as  should  slander  bishops,  priests,  or 
deacons,  with  refusing  the  communion  at  death.  And 
the  authors  of  a  defamatory  work,  who  are  found  unable 
to  prove  their  allegations,  are  sentenced  by  Pope  Adrian 
to  "  be  flogged,'' — yes,  my  Reverend  Fathers,  "  flagel- 
lentur :"  so  much  has  the  Church  ever  repudiated  the 
errors  of  your  corrupt  Society,  which  justify  in  others 
these  flagrant  crimes,  that  they  may  practise  them  them- 
selves with  impunity. 

And  truly,  my  Fathers,  the  consequences  of  such  con- 
duct would  have  been  most  fatal,  had  not  Providence  so 
ordered  it,  that  you  should  yourselves  furnish  the  means 

CALUMNIES.  337 

of  counteracting  the  evilj  and  rendering  your  impostures 
inefifectual ;  for  it  is  only  necessary  that  your  outrageous 
rule  should  be  known,  (by  which  this  practice  is  exempted 
from  criminality)  in  order  to  divest  it  of  all  authority. 
Calumny  is  ineffective  unless  it  proceeds  from  those  who 
have  some  reputation  for  truth.  The  slanderer  fails  of 
his  aim  if  he  be  not  believed  to  be  one  abhorring  and 
incapable  of  slander.  Thus,  Sirs,  your  own  principle 
betrays  you  !  You  have  ingeniously  invented  it  for  the 
ease  of  your  consciences ;  for  you  would  not  wish  to  incur 
damnation  by  your  defamation ;  but  aspire  to  be  of  the 
number  of  those  "  holy  and  pious  calumniators  "  spoken 
of  by  St.  Athanasius.  To  save  yourselves  from  hell,  you 
cling  to  this  maxim,  which,  on  the  faith  of  your  doctors, 
assures  you  of  safety.  But  this  very  maxim,  which  gua- 
rantees you,  on  their  authority,  from  the  terrors  in  a  life 
to  come,  deprives  you  in  the  present  of  all  the  advantage 
you  looked  for  from  your  practices.  Hoping  to  avoid  the 
criminality  of  slander,  you  lose  its  fruit :  the  crime  is  its 
own  counteractive ;  and  embarrasses  and  destroys  itself  by 
its  inherent  wickedness. 

You  would  therefore  practise  your  calumnies  with  more 
benefit  to  yourselves,  were  you  simply  to  allow,  with 
St.  Paul,  that  slanderers — "  maledici  " — shall  not  see 
God.  Then  would  your  malevolences  receive  more  credit, 
although  in  reality  you  would  but  condemn  yourselves. 
But  in  saying,  as  you  do,  that  calumny  against  your  ene- 
mies is  no  crime,  neither  will  your  slanders  be  believed, 
nor  will  you  escape  the  Divine  retribution  which  is  their 
due.  For,  be  assured,  my  Fathers,  your  profoundest 
authorities  will  contend  in  vain  against  the  immutable 

328  LETTER  XVI. 

justice  of  God ;  and  you  can  give  no  plainer  proof  that 
you  are  not  "  of  the  Truth,"  than  by  having  recourse  to 
such  inventions  as  these. 

Were  Truth  on  your  side,  she  would  combat  for  you — 
she  would  conquer  for  you  :  and — whatever  enemies  op- 
posed^-" Truth,"  according  to  the  promise,  "  would  de- 
liver you  from  them.  You  resort  to  falsehood,  to  sustain 
the  errors  with  which  you  lull  the  consciences  of  the 
worldly  and  reprobate ;  and  to  oppress  with  calumny 
those  pious  persons  who  denounce  them.  Truth  being 
opposed  to  both  these  ends,  you  are  seen  to  "  put  your 
confidence  in  lies,"  as  the  prophet  Isaiah  says  (ch.  xxviii.) 
You  have  said,  "  when  the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass 
through,  it  shall  not  come  unto  us ;  for  we  have  made  lies 
our  refuge,  and  under  falsehood  have  we  hid  ourselves." 
But  what  says  the  prophet  in  reply  at  ch.  xxx.  ?  "  Thus 
saith  the  Holy  one  of  Israel,  because  ye  despise  this  word, 
and  trust  in  oppression  and  perverseness,  and  stay  therein; 
therefore  this  iniquity  shall  be  to  you  as  a  breach  ready  to 
fall,  swelling  out  in  a  high  wall,  and  whose  breaking 
cometh  suddenly  at  an  instant.  And  he  shall  break  it  in 
pieces  as  the  breaking  of  a  potter's  vessel :  he  shall  not 
spare  :  so  that  there  shall  not  be  found  in  the  bursting  of 
it  a  sherd  to  take  fire  from  the  hearth."  "  Because,"  as 
says  another  prophet,  "  ye  have  made  the  heart  of  the 
righteous  sad,  whom  I  have  not  made  sad ;  and  strength- 
ened the  hands  of  the  wicked,  that  he  should  not  return 
from  his  wicked  way,  by  promising  him  life  :  I  will  de- 
liver my  people  out  of  your  hand ;  and  ye  shall  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord  !  " 

Yes,  Sirs,  it  must  be  our  hope  that,  if  a  change  do  not 

CALUMNIES.  829 

take  place  in  your  principles,  God  will  interpose  to  with- 
draw from  your  hands  those  whom  you  have  so  long  mis- 
led, whether  by  leaving  their  irregularities  unchecked  by 
your  own  example,  or  poisoning  their  minds  by  your  mis- 
representations. He  will  do  this,  by  showing  to  the  one 
that  the  fallacies  of  your  Casuists  will  afford  them  no  plea 
against  his  righteous  anger;  the  others  he  will  inspire 
with  a  just  fear  of  perdition,  from  listening  to  and  be- 
lieving your  impostures — a  perdition  to  be  shared  with 
those  who  invented  and  circulated  them  throughout  the 
world.  I  warn  you — be  not  deceived  !  God  will  not  be 
mocked  !  Nor  can  that  sacred  precept  of  his  Gospel  be 
broken  with  impunity,  that  we  condemn  not  our  neigh- 
bour without  cause.  Whatever  be  the  pious  professions 
of  those  who  thus  lend  themselves  to  your  falsehoods — 
whatever  their  pretences  of  devotional  exactness — let  them 
know  that  they  run  the  risk  of  exclusion  from  God's  king- 
dom, be  it  only  for  this  one  crime — that  they  have  dared  to 
impute  the  guilt  of  heresy  and  schism  to  orthodox  priests 
and  sainted  females,  upon  no  other  proofs  than  the  gross 
impostures  which  you  have  supplied.  "  Satan,"  says  M. 
de  Geneve,  "  is  on  the  tongue  of  him  who  slanders,  and 
in  the  ear  of  him  who  listens."  "  Slander,"  says  St.  Ber- 
nard, Serm.  24,  in  Cant.  "  is  a  poison  which  extinguishes 
charity,  in  both  the  utterer  and  the  receiver.  So  that  a 
single  calumny  may  be  destructive  to  an  infinite  number 
of  souls,  since  it  ruins  not  only  those  who  publish  it,  but 
those  also  who  do  not  reject  it." 

P.  S.    My  letters.   Reverend  Fathers,   have  not  been 
wont  heretofore  to  follow  so  quickly,  nor  extend  to  such 

330  LETTER   XVI. 

length.  My  limited  time  is  the  cause  both  of  the  one 
and  the  other.  I  have  been  obliged  to  make  the  present 
too  long,  for  the  very  reason  that  I  had  not  time  to  make 
it  shorter.  The  cause  of  my  being  compelled  to  hasten, 
as  I  have  done,  is  better  known  to  you  than  to  me.  Your 
replies  are  not  too  successful.  You  have  done  right  in 
changing  your  method  of  proceeding ;  but  I  do  not  know 
that  you  have  yet  made  a  happy  choice ;  and  whether 
the  world  will  not  say,  that  you  were  afraid  of  the  Bene- 
dictines. 

I  have  just  learnt  that  the  person  to  whom  every  one 
attributed  your  apologies  disavows  them^  and  resents  the 
imputation.  He  is  right ;  and  I  have  injured  him  by  my 
suspicion ;  for  however  strong  were  the  reports,  I  might 
have  thought  he  possessed  too  sound  a  judgment  to  be- 
lieve your  impostures,  and  too  much  honour  to  publish, 
without  believing  them.  There  are  few  people  in  the 
world  capable  of  those  excesses  which  are  your  peculiar 
characteristic,  and  which  are  too  distinctive  of  your  cha- 
racter to  allow  you  to  pass  undetected.  The  universality 
of  the  report  misled  me ;  but  this  excuse,  which  might 
serve  your  purpose,  is  insufficient  to  exonerate  me,  who 
take  credit  for  advancing  nothing  without  absolute  proof 
— and,  in  fact,  have  not  done  so  in  any  instance  but  this. 
I  hereby  express  my  regret  and  my  disavowal ;  and  I 
wish  you  may  follow  my  example  . 

LETTER  XVII. 

ADDRESSED   TO   R.   P.    ANNAT,    JESUIT.  * 

Reverend  Father,  January  23,  1657. 

I  HAD  been  led  to  suppose  that  it  was  your  wish  that  we 
should  mutually  repose  from  our  controversies ;  and  I, 
for  my  part,  was  equally  disposed  to  do  so.  But  you 
have  very  recently  issued  so  large  a  number  of  publica- 
tions, as  to  make  it  evident  that  no  peace  can  be  an 
assured  one,  which  is  dependent  upon  the  silence  of 
Jesuits.  I  doubt  whether  this  renewed  rupture  may 
prove  to  your  advantage ;  but,  for  myself,  I  cannot  regret 
the  opportunity  it  affords  me  of  effectually  demolishing 
this  hackneyed  reproach  of  heresy  with  which  you  are  in 
the  habit  of  filling  your  writings. 

It  is  time  then  that  I  should,  once  for  all,  silence 
these  baseless  charges,  which,  with  growing  audacity,  you 
urge  against  me.  You  have  repeated  them  in  your  latest 
publications,  and  that  in  such  a  form  as  is  not  to  be 
longer  endured  in  silence  :  not  to  make,  indeed,  this 
public  reply  would  expose  me  to  suspicion.     I  had  treated 

*  See  Appendix,  No.  V.  '  Annat.' 

333  LETTER   XVII. 

these  aspersions^  and  many  other  of  the  like  nature  in  the 
writings  of  your  confederates,  with  the  contempt  they 
deserve.  My  Fifteenth  Letter  furnished  to  them  a  suffi- 
cient reply  :  but  you  now  reproduce  them  in  a  different 
form.  You  put  them  forward  deliberately,  in  the  very 
front  of  your  defence ;  they  are  almost  the  only  means 
you  employ  for  the  purpose.  I  find  you  saying  "  that  it 
is  a  sufficient  reply  to  my  Fifteen  Letters,  to  repeat  for 
the  Fifteenth  time,  that  I  am  a  heretic  ;  and,  after  that, 
I  am  entitled  to  no  belief.".  In  fact,  no  further  doubt  is 
to  be  entertained  of  my  apostacy;  it  is  to  be  assumed  as 
incontrovertible :  and  your  further  conclusions  are  to  be 
founded  upon  it  as  a  fact.  Well  and  good,  my  Father ; 
you  are  to  treat  me  as  a  heretic,  and  it  must  be  my 
business  now  to  reply  to  the  charge. 

You  cannot  but  be  aware  that  this  imputation  is  so 
serious,  that  it  is  an  indecent  temerity  in  any  one  to 
advance  it,  without  the  means  of  proof.  I  ask  you,  then, 
what  proofs  do  you  possess  ?  When  was  I  ever  seen  at 
Charenton?  When  have  I  failed  in  my  attendance  at 
the  services  of  the  Church,  or  been  wanting  in  any  other 
duties  of  a  Christian,  to  the  Communion  to  which  he 
belongs  ?  When  did  I  ever  make  common  cause  with 
heretics,  or  join  any  schismatical  Body  ?  What  Council 
have  I  opposed  ?     What  ordonnance  of  the  Papacy  have 

I  violated  ?     I  demand.  Reverend  Father,  a  reply,  or : 

you  understand  what  follows.  And  what  is  the  kind  of 
reply  you  make  ?  I  ask  the  whole  world  to  witness  it. 
You  assume  first  of  all,  "  that  the  writer  of  the  Letters 
belongs  to  the  Port  Royal."  You  then  say,  "  The  Port 
Royal   has  been  declared  heretical : "  whence  you  draw 

TO   R.   P.    ANNAT.  333 

the  conclusion,  that  the  writer  of  the  Letters  is  declared 
heretical.  It  is  not  then  upon  me  that  the  force  of  your 
accusation  falls,  but  upon  the  Port  Royal ;  and  you  only 
make  me  a  party  to  it  because  you  suppose  I  belong  to 
her.  I  shall  then  have  little  trouble  in  establishing  my 
defence ;  for  I  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  declare  that  I 
do  not  belong  to  that  Society,  and  to  refer  you  to  my 
Letters,  in  which  I  have  stated  that  "  I  stand  alone ; " 
and  declared  in  express  terms,  "  I  do  not  belong  to  Port 
Royal."  All  which  you  find  in  my  Sixteenth  Letter — the 
one  immediately  preceding  your  publication. 

You  must  discover,  then,  some  other  way  to  prove  me 
a  heretic,  or  the  whole  world  will  see  the  impotency  of 
the  charge.  Show  from  my  writings  that  I  hold  not  the 
constitutions  of  the  Church.  They  are  not  so  numerous; 
there  are  but  Sixteen  Letters  to  examine ;  and  I  defy  you, 
or  any  human  being,  to  produce  from  them  the  slightest 
proof  of  the  charge.  But  the  very  reverse  is  really  the 
fact.  For  when  I  state  (for  instance,)  in  my  Fourteenth 
Letter,  "  In  taking  the  life  of  a  brother,  in  the  commis- 
sion of  mortal  sin,  we  destroy  a  soul  for  which  Christ 
died,"  do  I  not^plainly  acknowledge  that  Christ  died  for 
these  destroyed  souls;  and  that  it  is  therefore  false 
"  that  He  died  only  for  the  Elect,"  which  is  condemned 
in  the  5th  Proposition  ?  It  is  therefore  certain  that  I 
have  not  advanced  a  syllable  in  support  of  these  impious 
propositions,  which  I  detest  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart. 
And  if  even  the  Port  Royal  held  them,  I  assert  that  this 
would  establish  nothing  against  me ;  because  I  am,  God 
be  praised,  wholly  devoted  to  the  Catholic,  Apostolical  and 
Roman  Church,  in  which  alone  I  desire  to  live  and  to  die. 

334  LETTER   XVII. 

and  in  communion  with  her  supreme  and  Papal  Head — 
and  out  of  which  I  believe  there  is  no  salvation.* 

What  will  you  then  do  with  a  person  who  holds  such 
language  as  this  ?  How  attack  one,  whose  language  and 
writings  furnish  no  ground  of  accusation,  and  whose  very 
obscurity  throws  around  him  a  shield  impervious  to  your 
threats?  You  find  yourselves  struck  by  an  invisible 
hand,  which  exposes  your  delinquencies  to  the  whole 
world  j  and  you  endeavour  in  vain  to  wound  me,  in  the 
persons  of  those  to  whom  you  believe  I  belong.  I  fear 
you  not  for  myself,  or  for  others  :  I  am  attached  neither 
to  communities  nor  to  individuals.  All  your  power,  all 
your  influence  are  directed  against  me  in  vain.  From  the 
world  I  have  nothing  to  hope — nothing  to  fear  —nothing 
to  desire.  Endued  by  a  grace  which  is  from  above,  I 
have  need  of  nothing  that  the  wealth  or  authority  of 
man  can  supply.  It  is  in  this  way,  my  Father,  that  I  am 
invulnerable  to  all  your  devices.  Aim  from  what  side 
you  will,  and  it  will  be  to  no  purpose.  You  may  wound 
the  Port  Royal,  but  you  touch  not  me !  The  whole 
Sorbonne  might  be  discomfited,  but  /  should  be  un- 
moved. You  may  threaten  and  annoy  ecclesiastics  and 
doctors,  but  you  cannot  injure  me,  who  am  none  of  these. 
Never  could  you  have  encountered  one  so  screened  from 
your  assaults,  and  so  fitted  to  combat  your  errors — one 
independent — isolated  —  without   party  —  without    tie — 

*  It  may  perhaps  he  remembered,  that,  in  the  brief  Memoir  prefixed  to 
these  pages,  an  opinion  was  hazarded,  that  if  added  years  had  famished  the 
lamented  Pascal  with  the  opportunity  to  contrast  more  maturely  the  systems 
of  Popery  and  Protestantism,  the  above  declaration  of  his  sincere,  but  mis- 
guided belief,  would  haye  been  the  foremost  that  he  would  have  been  eager 
to  retract.    (Transl.) 

TO   E.   P.   ANNAT.  335 

without  professional  bias — without  encumbering  occupa- 
tion— one  also  well  versed  in  your  principles ;  and  deter- 
mined— as  God  shall  enable  him — to  expose  and  denounce 
them  without  suffering  any  earthly  consideration  to  avert 
or  mitigate  his  hostility  ! 

How  will  it  benefit  you  then^  Reverend  Sir,  since 
against  me  your  efforts  are  fruitless — to  persist,  as  your 
writers  do,  in  persecuting  with  their  defamations  persons 
wholly  unconnected  with  our  controversies  ?  These  sub- 
terfuges shall  avail  you  nothing ;  you  shall  feel  in  all  its 
rigour  the  force  of  the  truth  which  I  array  against  you. 
I  tell  you,  that  you  annihilate  all  Christian  morality,  in 
severing  it  from  the  love  of  God,  and  dispensing  man 
from  its  obligations ;  and  you  talk  to  me  of  "  the  death 
of  the  Pere  Mester,"  a  work  which  I  never  saw  in  the 
whole  course  of  my  life.  I  charge  upon  your  authors, 
that  they  allow  the  life  of  man  to  be  taken  for  an  apple, 
if  disgrace  attend  the  loss  of  it ;  and  you  reply,  "  a  poor- 
box  has  been  opened  at  Saint  Merri !  "  Why  am  I  per- 
petually to  be  taxed  on  the  subject  of  the  work  "  on  the 
Holy  Virginity,"  *  written  by  a  Father  of  the  "  Oratoire," 
when  I  never  saw  either  the  author  or  ^his  book  ?  It  is 
a  happy  idea  indeed  to  regard  all  who  are  opposed  to  you 
as  one.  Your  hatred  seems  to  view  them  as  a  single 
antagonist,  and  would  make  each  of  them  answer  for  the 
acts  of  the  whole. 

*  This  book  on  the  Holy  Virginity  is  a  translation  by  the  Pere  Seguenot, 
Priest  of  the  Oratoire,  of  a  work  of  St.  Augustine.  In  the  original  there  was 
nothing  to  censure  ;  but  the  Father  added  to  it  some  extravagant  remarks, 
which  incurred  deserved  animadversion :  and  as  this  work  proceeded  from  a 
Father  of  the  "  Oratoire,"  whose  members  had  been  always  attached  to  the 
doctrines  of  St.  Augustine,  it  was  sought  to  throw  the  blame  of  the  publica- 
tion upon  the  Jansenists.     (Note,  Edit.  1812.) 

336  LETTER   XVII. 

There  is,  however^  an  important  difference  between  the 
Jesuits  and  those  opposed  to  them.  YoUj  in  reality,  are 
one  united  Body,  under  one  Head ;  and  your  rules,  as  I 
have  proved,  forbid  you  to  publish  any  thing  without  the 
sanction  of  your  Superiors,  who  take  upon  themselves  the 
responsibility  of  the  errors  of  each  individual  member ; 
"  without  the  power  of  excusing  themselves  by  alleging 
that  they  had  not  noticed  any  specified  errors,"  seeing 
that  they  ought  to  have  noticed  them,  "  according  to 
your  own  ordinances,  and  the  mandates  of  your  chiefs, 
Aquaviva,  Wittelleschi,  &c."  It  is  with  justice  then  that 
the  errors  of  individual  members  are  charged  upon  your 
whole  Society,  since  your  writings  are  sanctioned  by  your 
Superiors,  and  your  incorporate  Theologians.  But  for 
myself,  my  Reverend  Father,  your  rule  of  judgment 
should  be  different.  I  have  given  no  sanction  to  the 
work  "  on  the  Holy  Virginity."  All  the  Poor-Boxes 
in  Paris  might  be  opened,  and  I  should  be  no  worse  a 
Catholic.  And,  in  fact,  I  tell  you  plainly  and  openly, 
that  no  one  is  answerable  for  my  Letters  but  myself,  and 
that  I  am  answerable  for  nothing  but  my  Letters. 

I  might  stop  here.  Sir,  and  abstain  from  saying  any 
thing  of  those  other  persons  whom  you  charge  with  heresy, 
for  the  purpose  of  including  me  in  the  accusation.  But 
as  it  is,  I,  who  have  been  the  occasion  of  it,  feel  bound 
in  some  measure  to  draw  from  the  present  opportunity 
this  three-fold  advantage.  It  is  one  important  point  to 
substantiate  the  innocence  of  so  many  persons  under 
accusation  :  it  is  another— and  one  especially  suited  to 
my  main  object — to  hold  up  on  all  occasions  the  artifices 
to  which   it  is   your  pohcy   to    resort    in  bringing  the 

TO   R.   P.   ANN  AT.  337 

charge.  But  that  which  I  value  most  of  all  isj  that  I 
shallj  by  this  means,  be  enabled  to  exhibit  to  the  whole 
world  the  falsity  of  that  scandalous  report  which  you  have 
spread  on  all  sides,  "  That  the  Church  is  rent  asunder 
by  a  new  Heresy."  And  as  you  have  succeeded  in  im- 
posing upon  multitudes  by  making  them  believe  that  the 
points  upon  which  you  endeavour  to  excite  such  clamour 
are  essential  articles  of  Eaith,  I  think  it  of  high  import- 
ance to  destroy  those  false  impressions,  and  to  explain  in 
this  place  clearly  in  what  these  things  consist,  while  I 
demonstrate  at  the  same  time  that  there  are  in  reality  no 
heretics  in  the  Church. 

For  is  it  not  a  fact  that  if  the  question  be  asked,  in 
what  consists  the  heresy  of  those  whom  you  call  Jansenists, 
the  reply  promptly  is,  they  hold,  "  that  the  command- 
ments of  God  are  of  impossible  observance;  grace  is 
irresistible  j  man  has  no  power  of  doing  good,  or  ill ; 
Christ  died  not  for  all,  but  only  for  the  Elect ;  and,  finally, 
they  receive  the  five  Propositions  condemned  by  Rome  ?  " 
Do  you  not  distinctly  avow  it  to  be  on  these  grounds  that 
you  follow  up  your  persecution  ?  Is  not  this  the  burthen 
of  your  writing,  your  conversation,  your  Catechisms  ?  Did 
you  not  do  this  at  Easter,  and  the  Fete  St.  Louis,  when 
you  asked  the  young  country-girls,  "Who  did  Christ  come 
down  for,  my  child  ?  "  '  For  all  men.  Father.'  "  What, 
my  child,  then  you  are  not  one  of  these  new  kind  of 
heretics  who  say  that  he  only  came  for  the  Elect  ?  " 

Of  course  the  children  believe  all  this,  and  a  great  deal 
more  ;  for  you  entertain  them  with  the  same  kind  of 
fictions  in  your  sermons :  like  your  Pdre  Crasset  of 
Orleans,  who  has  been  placed  under  interdict  for  it.     I 

338  LETTER  XVII. 

confess,  I  myself  believed  these  tilings  formerly.  You 
were  successful  in  impressing  me  with  the  like  ideas  of 
all  those  persons ;  so  that  when  you  pressed  them  upon 
these  Propositions,  I  was  very  observant  of  their  reply, 
and  could  not  feel  fully  satisfied  until  they  had  renounced 
them  as  utter  impieties.  But  this  I  found  they  did,  in 
the  most  distinct  manner.  For  M.  de  St.  Beuve,  the 
King's  Professor  in  Sorbonne,  publicly  denounced  in  his 
writings  these  five  Propositions,  long  before  the  Pope  had 
done  so ;  and  these  doctors  put  forth  several  publications 
about  the  same  time  (among  others,  that  "  on  victorious 
grace,'')  in  which  they  rejected  the  propositions  in  ques- 
tion, as  both  heretical  in  themselves  and  unknown  in 
theology.  "  For,"  as  they  say  in  the  Preface,  "  these  Pro- 
positions are  heretical  and  Lutheran,  fabricated,  and 
gratuitous  inventions,  and  found  neither  in  Jansenius  nor 
his  defenders  : " — these  are  their  own  expressions.  They 
complain  of  having  such  sentiments  attributed  to  them, 
and  apply  to  you  the  words  of  St.  Prosper,  the  first  dis- 
ciple of  St.  Augustine,  their  master,  to  whom  the  semi- 
Pelagians  of  France  imputed  views  of  the  same  kind,  in 
order  to  bring  odium  upon  him.  "  There  are  some 
persons,"  says  this  holy  man,  "  so  blinded  by  a  passion 
to  decry  us,  that  they  resort  to  means  destructive  of  their 
own  reputation :  for  they  have  designedly  fabricated 
certain  propositions  full  of  impiety  and  blasphemies, 
which  they  circulate  on  all  sides,  in  order  to  induce  the 
belief  that  we  maintain  these  principles.  But  we  shall 
prove,  in  this  our  reply,  both  our  own  innocence,  and  the 
malice  of  those  who  impute  these  impieties  to  us,  and  of 
which  they  are  themselves  the  sole  inventors." 

TO   R.   P.   ANNAT.  339 

Now,  my  good  Father,  ■when  I  heard  language  such  as 
this  from  them,  before  the  issuing  of  the  "  Constitution ;" 
when  I  saw  the  deep  respect  with  which  they  received 
that  decree;  when  I  found  that  they  offered  volun- 
tarily to  subscribe  to  it,  and  that  all  this  was  declared  by 
M.  Arnauld  in  his  second  Letter,  in  terms  much  more 
energetic  than  I  can  employ, — all  these  things  made  it 
impossible  for  me  any  longer  to  doubt  of  their  good  faith. 
And,  in  truth,  those  who  had  been  indisposed  to  absolve 
their  friends,  previous  to  the  Letter  of  M.  Arnauld,  have 
since  then  declared,  that  as  he  had  so  clearly  dis- 
avowed the  errors  imputed  to  him,  they  saw  no  longer 
any  reason  to  exclude  him,  or  his  friend,  from  the  pale  of 
the  Church.  But  your  treatment  of  them  was  of  a  very 
different  kind ;  and  from  that  time  it  was,  that  I  was  led 
to  suspect  passion  and  prejudice  to  be  your  guides. 

For,  after  having  used  threats  to  induce  them  to  sign 
the  "  Constitution"  in  question,  when  you  supposed 
them  to  be  averse  to  it ;  as  soon  as  you  found  them 
inclined,  of  themselves,  to  take  that  step,  nothing  more 
was  heard  from  you  on  the  subject.  And  although  it 
might  have  been  thence  inferred  that  you  were  satisfied 
with  their  conduct,  we  found  you  still  not  scrupling  to 
treat  these  persons  as  heretics ;  "  on  the  ground,"  as  you 
allege,  "  that  their  heart  contradicted  their  head ;  and 
while  they  were  externally  professing  themselves  to  be 
Catholic,  they  were  internally  heretics,"  according  to 
your  own  expression  in  your  "  Reply  to  certain  questions," 
p.  27  and  47. 

Now,  my  Father,  all  this  seemed  to  me  most  remark- 
able.    Who  is  there,  I  pray,  that  might  not  in  this  way 

Q  2 

340  .    LETTER    XVII. 

be  liable  to  the  satae  kind  of  cavils  ?  And  see  too  the 
vexatious  consequences  to  which  such  conduct  leads.  "  If 
we  refuse/'  says  St.  Jerome,  "  to  believe  those  who  make 
profession  of  faith  in  conformity  with  the  doctrines  of  the 
Church,  we  cast  suspicion  upon  the  belief  of  all  Catholic 
persons,"  Regist.  1.  v.  Ep.  15.  I  fear  then,  my  Father, 
''  that  your  object  was  to  attach  the  stigma  of  heretic  to 
those  who  are  in  reality  not  such ; "  as  the  same  Pope 
says  in  reference  to  a  similar  controversy  in  his  time ; 
"  for,"  says  he,  "  it  is  not  opposition  to,  but  a  creation 
of  heresy,  to  discredit  those  who  openly  profess  the  true 
faith :  '  hoc  non  est  hseresim  purgare,  sed/acere.'  Ep.  16." 
Now  it  was  a  clear  proof  to  me  that  there  was  no  heresy 
in  the  matter,  when  I  found  that  you  could  convict  these 
persons  of  no  error  in  faith,  but  were  obliged  to  attack 
them  upon  certain  matters  of  fact,  respecting  Janse- 
nius,  and  such  as  could  involve  no  question  of  heresy. 
Eor  your  real  aim  was,  as  you  yourselves  wrote,  to  compel 
them  to  acknowledge  that  "  these  Propositions  were  to 
be  found  ?  word  for  word,'  in  Jansenius ;  '  singulares, 
individuce,  totidem  verbis,  apud  Jansenium  contentse ' — 
Cavilli,  p.  39." 

From  that  moment,  your  dispute  lost  all  importance  in 
my  eyes.  As  long  as  I  had  supposed  that  you  were  dis- 
cussing the  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  Propositions  them- 
selves, I  looked  on  with  attention ;  for  that  was  a  matter 
in  which  belief  was  concerned.  But  when  I  found  that 
the  question  with  you  was,  merely,  whether  such  and  such 
words  were  to  be  found  in  Jansenius  or  not — religion  not 
being  involved — I  was  no  longer  interested.  Not  that  I 
did  not  still  suppose  there  was  some  probability  in, your 

TO  E.   P.   ANNAT.  341 

allegations ;  for  as  to  the  fact,  whether  certain  expressions 
are  to  be  found  word  for  word  in  an  author,  it  is  difficult 
to  conceive  of  a  mis-statement.  Therefore  I  was  not 
surprised  that  so  many  persons,  both  in  France  and 
Rome,  should,  on  the  strength  of  such  distinct  statements, 
have  believed  that  Jansenius  really  inculcated  these  sen- 
timents. Judge  then  my  astonishment,  on  learning  that 
this  very  fact,  put  forth  by  you  as  so  undoubted  and  so 
important,  proves  to  be  wholly  unfounded ;  and  that  you 
are  now  defied,  in  vain,  to  produce  the  passage  in  Janse- 
nius, in  which,  as  you  asserted,  these  expressions  were  ac- 
tually word  for  word,  to  be  found  ! 

All  this  I  state  thus  circumstantially,  because  it  seems 
to  me  conclusive  of  the  spirit  that  actuates  your  Society 
throughout  this  whole  affair;  and  that  the  world  may 
admire  (as  I  do)  that,  notwithstanding  all  that  has  been 
now  related,  you  should  still  persist  in  branding  your 
opponents  with  the  charge  of  heresy.  But  your  method 
is,  to  vary  their  heresy  with  times  and  circumstances.  As 
soon  as  they  clear  themselves  from  one  charge,  the  plan 
of  your  brethren  is,  to  bring  forward  another.  Thus,  in 
1653,  their  heresy  consisted  in  the  spirit  of  the  Propo- 
sitions. Afterwards  it  was  in  the  letter.  After  that, 
again,  you  found  it  in  their  own  heart.  But  now,  all  this 
is  gone  by ;  and  they  are  held  to  be  heretics  if  they  hesi- 
tate to  subscribe,  "  that  the  substance  of  Jansenius' 
doctrine  is  to  be  found  in  the  five  Propositions." 

This  then  is  the  subject  of  your  present  dispute.  It  is 
not  sufficient  that  they  should  condemn  the  five  Proposi- 
tions, and  everything  also  that  is  to  be  found  in  Jan- 
senius, conformable  to  them,  and  opposed  to  St.  Augus- 

342  LETTE]^   XVII. 

tin;  for  all  this  they  do.  Thus,  for  instance,  it  is  no 
longer  a  question  "whether  Christ  died  only  for  the 
elect " — they  condemn  that  as  much  as  ourselves ; — but, 
whether  Jansenius  is  of  that  opinion  or  not?  Therefore  it 
is,  that  I  declare  more  decidedly  than  ever,  that  your  con- 
troversy interests  me  little;  and  equally  little  does  it 
concern  the  Church.  For,  besides  that  I  am  no  Doctor, 
any  more  than  yourself,  I  see  plainly,  once  for  all,  that 
the  matter  Is  not  one  of  faith,  but  simply  what  is  the 
opinion  of  Jansenius  ?  If  they  believed  that  his  doctrine 
was  conformable  to  the  strict  and  literal  sense  of  these 
Propositions,  they  would  condemn  it ;  and  they  demur  to 
do  so,  only  because  they  are  convinced  that  it  is  wholly 
different.  Thus  if  they  had  even  put  a  misconstruction 
upon  it,  they  would  not  be  guilty  of  heresy,  because  they 
construe  it  in  a  catholic  sense. 

And,  to  explain  this,  I  will  take,  as  an  example,  the 
diversity  in  the  opinions  of  St.  Basil  and  St.  Athanasius, 
upon  the  writings  of  St.  Denis  of  Alexandria.  St.  Basil, 
believing  he  perceived  in  these  the  doctrine  of  Arius,  which 
impugn  the  equality  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  condemns 
them  as  heretical;  while  St.  Athanasius,  on  the  other 
hand,  considering  these  same  works  to  propound  the  true 
doctrine  of  the  Church,  maintains  their  catholicity.  Do 
you  think,  Reverend  Father,  that  St.  Basil,  though  holding 
these  writings  to  be  Arian,  would  have  been  justified  in 
charging  St.  Athanasius  with  heresy,  because  he  defended 
them  ?  On  what  ground  could  he  have  done  so,  since  it 
was  not  Arianism  that  Athanasius  therein  defended,  but 
the  truth,  which  he  believed  he  discovered  in  the  book  ? 
If  these  holy  men  had  been  agreed  as  to  the  true  meaning 

TO   R.   P.   ANNAT.  343 

of  the  writings,  and  both  of  them  had  seen  the  heresy 
they  contained  in  them,  then  no  doubt  Athanasius  could 
not  have  sanctioned  them  without  heresy ;  but,  differing 
as  to  the  interpretation,  Athanasius  was  orthodox  in  sup- 
porting them,  even  if  he  had  misapprehended  their  mean- 
ing (his  error  being  only  one  of  fact),  and  in  this  doctrine 
he  merely  defended  the  true  faith  which  he  believed  it  to 
contain. 

Now  this.  Sir,  is  what  I  maintain,  in  regard  to  your- 
selves. Were  you  agreed  as  to  the  meaning  of  Jansenism, 
and  could  all  come  to  the  same  conclusion — as,  for  in- 
stance, that  he  maintains  "  that  grace  cannot  be  resisted  " 
■ — those  who  refused  to  condemn  him  would  be  heretics  ? 
But  while  you  are  at  variance  as  to  his  meaning ;  and 
some  hold  that,  according  to  his  doctrine,  "  Grace  may 
be  resisted;"  you  have  no  ground  for  charging  such 
persons  with  heresy,  whatever  error  you  may  attribute  to 
him  yourselves ;  since  they  condemn  it  in  the  sense  which 
you  attach  to  it;  and  you,  on  the  other  hand,  would  not 
venture  to  blame  the  proposition,  according  to  the  inter- 
pretation they  put  upon  it.  Would  you  desire  to  convince 
these  persons,  then,  you  must  show  that  the  meaning 
they  attribute  to  Jansenius  is  heretical;  for  then  they 
become  partakers  of  the  error.  But  how  can  you  do  this, 
while  it  is  clear,  on  your  own  admission,  that  the  con- 
struction they  maintain  is  not  to  be  condemned  ? 

To  illustrate  this  yet  more  clearly,  I  will  assume,  as  a 
principle  recognized  by  yourselves,  that  "  the  doctrine  of 
effectual  grace  has  never  been  condemned,  but  has  been 
left  untouched  by  Papal  ordonnances."  And,  in  fact, 
when  these  five  Propositions  were  passed  in  review,  the 

34'!  LETTER   XVir. 

question  of  "  effectual  grace  "  was  exempted  from  all  cen- 
sure ;  and  this  appears  clearly  from  the  opinions  of  the 
Arbitrators,  to  whom  the  Propositions  were  submitted. 
I  have  their  decision  in  my  possession — in  common 
with  several  persons  in  Paris — among  others  M.  the 
Bishop  of  Montpelier,*  who  brought  them  from  Rome. 
From  this  document,  it  appears  that  the  Arbitrators  were 
divided  in  their  opinions  ;  and  that  the  principal  among 
them,  such  as  the  Master  of  the  Sacred  Palace,  the  Com- 
missary of  the  Holy  Office,  the  General  of  the  Augustinesy 
and  others,  considering  that  these  propositions  might  be 
understood  in  the  sense  of  effectual  grace,  held  that  they 
ought  not  to  be  censured ;  while  others — still  admitting 
that  if  that  were  their  true  meaning,  they  ought  not  to 
be  condemned — maintained  that  they  were  censurable, 
because  their  true  and  natural  construction  was  opposed 
to  this  interpretation.  It  was  on  this  account  that  the 
Pope  condemned  them  ;  and  every  one  has  concurred  in 
his  decision. 

It  follows  then,  certainly,  that  "  effectual  grace  "  is  not 
condemned.  So  strenuously,  -indeed,  is  this  doctrine 
maintained  by  St.  Augustine,  by  St.  Thomas,  and  his 
entire  school,  by  so  many  Popes  and  Councils,  and  by 
universal  tradition,  that  it  would  be  impious  to  charge  it 
with  heresy.  Now,  all  those  whom  you  stigmatize  as 
heretics,  declare  that  they  find  in  Jansenius  no  other 
thing  than  this  very  "  effectual  grace ; "  and  this  alone  is 

*  The  Bishop  of  Montpelier.  This  was  Francis  de  Bosquet,  at  first  Bishop 
of  Lodeve,  afterwards  (in  16S5)  Bishop  of  Montpelier,  who  died  in  1676. 
He  was  one  of  the  most  learned  bishops  of  his  time,  and  especially  versed  in 
all  ecclesiastical  matters.     (Edit.  1812.) 

TO   E.    P.    ANNAT.  345 

what  they  have  maintained  in  Rome.  You  yourself  even 
have  acknowledged  it — "  Cavill.  p.  35,"  wherein  you  de- 
clare, "  that,  in  the  presence  of  the  Pope,  they  said  not  a 
word  about  the  Propositions — ne  verbum  quidem — but 
employed  the  whole  of  their  time  in  speaking  of  "  eflfectual 
grace."  And  thus,  whether  they  deceive  themselves  in 
the  supposition  or  not,  it  is  at  least  placed  beyond  a  doubt, 
that  the  interpretation  they  attach  is  not  heretical ;  and, 
as  a  necessary  consequence,  they  are  not  at  all  heretical  in 
reality.  For,  in  one  word,  either  Jansenius  has  taught 
only  the  doctrine  of  "  effectual  grace,"  and,  in  that  case, 
is  not  in  error ;  or  he  has  taught  something  else — and 
then,  he  has  no  defenders.  The  whole  point  then  is,  to 
ascertain  whether  Jansenius  has  actually  inculcated  any 
other  principles  than  that  of  "  effectual  grace :  " — If  it  be 
so,  then  you  will  have  the  praise  of  having  better  under- 
stood him  than  they  ;  but  they  will  not  labour  under  the 
misfortune  of  having  erred  from  the  faith. 

We  have  cause,  then,  my  Father,  for  thankfulness  to 
God,  that  there  is  in  reality  no  heresy  in  the  Church  ; 
since  there  is  no  other  question  than  of  a  fact ;  and  that 
cannot  constitute  heresy.  The  Church  decides  upon 
matters  of  faith  with  a  divine  authority,  and  excludes 
from  her  pale  all  who  refuse  to  receive  them.  But  she 
does  not  act  thus  with  regard  to  matters  of  fact ;  and  the 
reason  is,  that  our  salvation  depends  upon  a  faith  in  things 
revealed,  preserved  in  the  Church  by  tradition ;  but  not 
upon  facts,  which  have  formed  no  part  of  the  Divine  re- 
velation. We  are  therefore  bound  to  believe  that  the 
commandments  of  God  are  not  incapable  of  fulfilment ; 
but  we  are  not  bound  to  be  acquainted  with  what  Jan- 

Q  5 

346  LETTER  XVII. 

senius  teaches  on  the  subject.  It  is  in  this  way  that  the 
Almighty  guides  the  Church  in  her  determination  of  points 
of  faith  by  the  assistance  of  his  Spirit;  which  cannot  err ; 
but  in  regard  to  factSj  we  are  left  to  our  senses  and  to 
reason,  which  are  their  natural  arbiters.  It  was  God  alone 
who  could  have  instructed  the  Church  in  her  faith.  But 
we  have  only  to  read  Jansenius,  in  order  to  ascertain 
whether  certain  Propositions  be  contained  in  his  Book. 
It  followsj  then,  that  it  is  a  heresy  to  oppose  the  decisions 
of  faith,  because,  in  so  doing,  we  are  opposing  our  own 
wisdom  to  that  which  is  Divine.  But  it  is  no  heresy 
(although  it  may  be  not  unattended  with  responsibility), 
to  doubt  of  certain  particular  facts ;  for  we  are  then  only 
setting  the  deductions  of  reason  (not,  perhaps,  wanting  in 
far-sightedness)  against  an  authority  which,  although  high, 
cannot  be  infallible. 

This  is  an  axiom  recognized  by  all  theologians ;  as  ap- 
pears by  the  following  opinion  of  Cardinal  Bellarmine,  a 
member  of  your  Society :  "  General  Councils,  lawfully 
constituted,  cannot  err  in  defining  dogmas  of  faith ; 
but  they  may  err  as  to  question  of  fact."  De  Sum. 
Potent.  Lib.  4,  c.  11.  And  elsewhere:  "  The  Pope,  as 
Pope,  and  even  as  the  head  of  the  universal  Council, 
may  err  in  controversies  as  to  particular  facts,  which  de- 
pend chiefly  upon  the  information  and  testimony  of  men." 
C.  2.  And  the  Cardinal  Baronius  to  the  same  effect  says, 
"  We  must  submit  entirely  to  the  decisions  of  Councils 
upon  points  of  faith ;  but  upon  matters  relating  to  indi- 
viduals, or  their  writings,  it  has  not  been  deemed  necessary 
to  be  so  guarded  in  our  animadversions ;  because  there 
are  no  persons  who  may  not  be  occasionally  mistaken." 

TQ  B.  P.   ANNAT.  347 

Ad  an.  681,  IvT.  39.  On  this  ground  also,  the  Archbishop 
of  Toulouse  *  has  cited  the  following  rule  from  the  writ- 
ings of  the  two  great  Popes,  St.  Leon  and  Pelagius  II. : 
"  The  proper  object  of  Councils  is  the  regulation  of  faith  j 
and  their  decisions  upon  all  other  subjects  may  be  open  to 
investigation  :  but  their  ordonnanx;es  on  matters  of  faith 
may  not  be  questioned,  because,  as  TertuUian  says,  the 
rules  of  faith  are  at  once  immutable  and  fixed." 

This  is  the  reason  that  the  general  Councils,  legally 
constituted,  have  never  been  found  at  variance  with  each 
other  on  points  of  faith ;  "  because,"  as  the  Archbishop  of 
Toulouse  says,  "  it  is  not  even  permitted  to  examine  anew 
what  has  been  already  decided  on  questions  of  faith."  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  very  same  Councils  have  been 
seen  opposed  to  each  other  on  facts  which  turn  upon  the 
statements  or  interpretation  of  an  author.  "  For,"  says 
again  our  Archbishop,  following  the  sentiments  of  the  Popes 
before  cited,  "  every  thing  settled  in  Councils,  with  the 
exception  of  points  of  faith,  may  be  subjected  anew  to 
examination  and  revision."  Thus  it  is  that  the  4th  and 
5th  Council  appear  to  be  opposed  to  each  other  in  their 
interpretation  of  the  same  authors ;  and  the  same  thing 
happened  in  the  instance  of  two  Popes,  upon  a  proposition 
of  certain  monks  of  Scythia :  for,  after  the  Pope  Hor- 
misdas  had  condemned  that  proposition,  on  an  interpreta- 
tion, on  his  part,  in  an  objectionable  sense,  the  Pope 
John  II.,  his  successor,  examining  it  afresh,  and  under- 
standing it  in  an  orthodox  sense,   sanctioned  it  with  his 

*  M.  de  Marca.  This  illastiious  prelate  was  Archbishop  of  Toulouse  before 
his  translation  to  the  See  of  Paris,  of  which  death  prevented  his  taking  actual 
possession.     (French  Ed.) 

348  LETTER  XVII. 

approbation;  and  declared  it  to  be  catholic.  Would  you 
thence  say  that  one  of  these  Popes  must  have  been  a 
heretic  ?  Or  will  it  not  be  acknowledged  that,  provided 
the  heretical  sense,  which  one  of  the  Popes  supposed  he 
had  found  in  the  passage,  be  condemned,  we  are  not 
blame-worthy  in  not  condemning  the  passage  itself,  pro- 
vided it  be  taken  in  a  sense  which  another  Pope  has  not 
condemned  ?  For,  otherwise,  the  one  of  these  Popes  must 
stand  convicted  of  error. 

I  have  been  desirous.  Reverend  Father,  to  familiarize 
your  mind  with  these  contrarieties,  common  among  the 
faithful  in  their  interpretations  of  an  author,  as  to  matters 
of  fact ;  and  for  this  purpose,  to  show  you  one  Father 
of  the  Church  controverting  another  Father — one  Pope 
another  Pope — one  Council  another  Council — in  order  to 
conduct  you  with  me  to  the  consideration  of  other  in- 
stances of  similar  but  more  striking  contrariety.  For  you 
will  then  see  Councils  and  Popes,  on  the  one  side,  and 
Jesuits  on  the  other,  diametrically  opposed  in  opinion 
upon  the  interpretation  of  an  author;  without  any  im- 
putation, on  your  part,  upon  such  author,  even  of  incon- 
si  deration — much  less  of  heresy. 

You  well  know,  my  Father,  that  the  writings  of  Origen 
were  condemned  by  various  Councils  and  Popes,  and  even 
by  the  Fifth  General  Council,  as  containing  heretical 
opinions;  and  among  others  that  of  "  the  reconciliation 
of  devils  at  the  day  of  judgment.''  Do  you  on  that 
account  believe  it  to  be  necessary,  in  order  to  give  proof 
of  your  catholicity,  to  allow  that  Origen  actually  main- 
tained these  views;  and  may  it  not  be  sufficient  to  con- 
demn the  errors  themselves,  without  attributing  them  to 

TO   R.   P.    ANNAT.  349 

him  ?  Were  it  indeed  so,  what  would  you  do  with  your 
own  Father  Halloix,  who  has  maintained  the  purity  of 
Origen's  faith ;  as  well  as  several  other  Catholics  who 
have  done  the  same  thing,  such  as  Pere  La  Mirande  arfd 
Genebrardj  doctors  of  Sorbonne  ?  And  is  it  not  also  a 
fact,  that  this  very  fifth  General  Council  condemned  the 
writings  of  Theodoret  against  St.  Cyril,  "  as  impious, 
opposed  to  the  faith,  and  containing  Nestorian.  heresy  ?  " 
And,  nevertheless,  the  Jesuit  Father  Sirmond  has  not 
shrunk  from  defending  him,  and  stating,  in  his  life  of 
that  Father,  "  that  the  writings  in  question  are  wholly 
untainted  with  the  Nestorian  heresy." 

You  see  then,  Sir,  that  when  the  Church  condemns  any 
works,  she  adjudges  them  to  contain  some  fundamental 
error;  and  condemns  them  accordingly.  It  is  on  the 
ground  of  doctrine,  then,  that  they  are  censured  ;  and  not 
on  the  question  of  fact,  whether  the  writings  actually  con- 
tain the  error  so  imputed.  I  assume  this,  however,  to  be 
now  sufficiently  established ;  and  I  shall  close  my  illus- 
trations by  the  well-known  instance  of  Pope  Honorius. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  seventh  century,  the 
Church  being  disturbed  by  the  heresy  of  the  Monothelites, 
the  Pope,  in  order  to  terminate  the  controversy,  issued  a 
decree  which  seemed  favourable  to  the  heretics ;  so  that 
many  persons  were  scandalized  at  it.  Little  attention, 
however,  was  excited  by  the  circumstance  during  his  pon- 
tificate; but  fifty  years  afterwards,  on  occasion  of  the 
Sixth  General  Council,  at  which  Pope  Agatho  (through 
his  legates)  presided,  this  decree  was  referred  to  the  As- 
sembly ;  and,  having  been  read  and  considered,  was  con- 
demned, as  containing  Monothelistical  heresies.     On  that 

350  LETTER  XVII, 

groundj  it  was  publicly  burnt,  together  with  other  writings 
of  this  sect.  This  decision  was  received  with  the  utmost 
respect  and  unanimity  throughout  the  Churchj  and  sub- 
sfequently  confirmed  by  two  other  General  Councils  ;  and 
even  by  the  Popes  Leo  II.  and  Adrian  II.,  about  two 
hundred  years  afterwards  ;  nor  did  any  one  in  fact  attempt 
to  disturb  this  general  uniformity  of  opinion  during  the 
lapse  of  above  seven  or  eight  centuries.  Notwithstanding 
all  this,  however,  several  writers  of  later  times,  and  among 
others  Cardinal  Bellarmine,  were  not  apprehensive  of  the 
suspicion  of  heresy,  in  maintaining,  in  the  face  of  so 
many  Popes  and  Councils,  that  the  writings  of  Pope  Ho- 
norius  are  utterly  free  from  the  heresy  with  which  they 
were  charged ;  "  For,"  says  he,  "  as  there  is  no  incapa- 
bility of  general  Councils  to  fall  into  error  upon  questions 
of  facts,  it  may  be » confidently  asserted  that  the  Sixth 
Council  was  mistaken  as  to  the  matter  in  dispute ;  and, 
not  having  rightly  apprehended  the  meaning  of  Pope  Ho- 
norius,  in  his  documents,  it  has  done  him  a  wrong  in 
classing  him  with  heretics." 

Mark  then,  my  Father,  that  it  is  no  heresy  to  say  that 
Pope  Honorius  was  not  heretical,  although  various  Popes 
and  Councils,  after  mature  deliberation,  had  passed  such 
condemnation  upon  him.  Then  I  come  to  the  question 
between  us  j  and  you  may  put  your  case  as  strongly  as 
you  please.  What  is  it  that  you  assert,  to  prove  heresy 
against  your  opponents  ?  "  The  Pope  Innocent  has  pro- 
nounced that  the  error  of  the  '  Five  Propositions '  is  con- 
tained in  the  writings  of  Jansenius."  Admit  this  :  what 
then  is  your  conclusion  ?  "  It  is  therefore  heretical 
not  to  admit  that  the  error  of  the  'Five  Propositions' 

TO   R.   P.    ANN  AT.  351 

is  in  Jansenius."  Now,  I  ask  you,  Sir,  is  not  this  a 
question  of  fact  precisely  similar  to  my  precedents  ?  The 
Pope  has  declared  a  certain  error  to  be  contained  in  Jan- 
senius,  just  as  his  predecessors  declared  that  the  errors  of 
the  Nestorians  and  Monothelites  were  contained  in  the 
writings  of  Theodoret  and  Honorius.  Upon  which,  your 
Fathers  published  to  the  world  that  they  were  unanimous 
with  the  Pope  in  condemning  the  heretics,  but  the  parties 
in  question  demurred  to  the  fact  of  their  being  contained 
in  those  writings.  Just  as  in  the  former  instance,  your  op- 
ponents condemn  these  five  Propositions,  but  they  do  not 
admit  that  Jansenius  has  inculcated  them.  Truly,  my 
good  Father,  the  two  cases  are  strictly  parallel ;  and  if 
there  be  any  difference,  it  is  obviously  in  favor  of  the  pre- 
sent and  later  one,  on  a  due  comparison  of  all  the  circum- 
stances, which  however  I  stop  not  now  to  detail.  I  only 
ask,  how  it  can  be  maintained  that  in  cases  strictly  alike, 
your  own  Fathers  are  to  be  deemed  catholic,  and  your 
present  adversaries  heretical ;  and  by  what  strange  con- 
clusions you  would  deprive  the  latter  of  a  privilege  which 
has  been  heretofore  conceded  to  all  the  faithful? 

To  this,  however,  you  reply  "  that  the  Pope  has  con- 
firmed his  ordonnance  by  a  Brief."  I  rejoin  again,  that 
two  General  Councils  and  two  Popes  confirmed  the  con- 
demnation of  Honorius'  Letters.  But  what  is  it  that  you 
build  upon  in  the  expressions  of  this  Brief,  in  which  the 
Pope  announces  that  "  he  has  condemned  the  doctrine  of 
Jansenius  in  these  five  Propositions  ? "  What  strength 
does  this  add  to  the  ordonnance  ?  What  does  it  prove, 
but  that,  as  the  sixth  Council  condemned  the  doctrine  of 
Honorius,  conceiving  it  was  identified  with  that  of  the 

353  LETTER  XVII. 

Monothelites ;  so  the  Pope  now  says,  he  condemns  the  doc- 
trine of  Jansenius  in  these  five  Propositions,  because  he 
conceives  it  to  be  identified  with  those  Propositions?  And 
how  could  he  do  otherwise  ?  Your  Society  was  constantly 
re-iterating  the  assertion ;  and  you  yourself,  Reverend 
Sir — who  had  declared  that  "  word  for  word  "  they  were 
the  same — you  were  at  Rome  (for  in  fact  you  are  every- 
where) at  the  very  time  the  Censure  was  published. 
Could  his  holiness  have  suspected  your  veracity,  or  the 
authority  of  so  many  grave  theologians  ?  And  how  could 
he  doubt  that  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius  was  identical  with 
that  of  the  Propositions,  after  the  assurance  you  had  given 
him  that  those  Propositions  were  "  word  for  word  "  in  his 
writings  ?  It  is  evident  then,  that  if  it  should  be  proved 
that  Jansenius  does  not  maintain  them,  it  must  not  be 
said,  according  to  the  example  set  by  your  Fathers,  that 
the  Pope  was  mistaken  as  to  the  fact — a  thing  always  to 
be  deprecated — but  that  you  have  deceived  the  Pope.  And 
so  well  are  you  in  fact  now  known,  that  this  cannot  occa- 
sion any  great  increase  of  scandal. 

Then,  after  all,  my  revered  Father,  we  find  little  enough 
of  heresy  in  this  matter.  But,  determined  at  all  hazards 
to  prove  it  to  be  such,  you  have  endeavoured  to  turn  the 
question  from  one  of  fact  into  one  of  faith ;  and  this  is 
the  way  in  which  you  proceed :  "  The  Pope,"  you  say, 
"  declares  that  he  condemns  the  doctrine  of  Jansenism  in 
the  five  Propositions ;  then  it  is  in  a  question  of  faith 
that  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius  respecting  these  Proposi- 
tions (be  it  what  it  may)  is  heretical."  Now  this  is  a 
strange  point  of  faith,  that  a  doctrine  is  heretical,  be  it 
what  it  may.     What !  if,  according  to  Jansenius,  "  we 

TO  R.   P.   ANNAT.  353 

may  resist  the  influence  of  internal  grace ; "  and  if  it  be 
false,  according  to  him,  "  that  Christ  died  only  for  the 
predestinated,"  is  this  also  to  be  condemned,  because  it  is 
his  doctrine  ?  Is  it  true,  according  to  the  Pope^s  Ordon- 
nance,  "  that  we  have  power  to  do  good  or  evil ;"  and  is 
the  same  proposition  false  in  Jansenius  ?  By  what  un- 
happy fatality  is  it  that  truth  becomes  heresy  if  found  in 
his  writings  ?  Surely  he  can  only  be  a  heretic  where  he 
propounds  heresy  !  As,  according  to  the  pope  and  the 
bishops,  "  the  propositions  are  condemned  in  their  proper 
and  natural  sense,"  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  be 
condemned  in  the  sense  of  Jansenius,  unless  such  sense 
be  proved  to  be  their  proper  and  natural  one,  which  be- 
comes a  question  of  fact. 

It  is  on  fact,  then,  and  nothing  else,  that  our  contro- 
versy turns.  It  can  never  be  made  a  question  of  heresy  ; 
but  it  might  be  made  a  pretext  for  persecution,  were  there 
not  ground  to  hope  that  none  could  be  found  sufficiently 
devoted  to  your  interests  to  adopt  so  unjust  a  procedure, 
and  to  pronounce  as  you  would  wish  them^  to  do,  that 
"  these  Propositions  ave  condemned  in  the  sense  of  Jan- 
senius," without  explaining  first,  what  is  that  sense.  Few 
persons  are  disposed  to  sign  a  confession  of  faith,  in 
blank;  and  this  would  be,  in  truth,  sig-ning  a  blank- 
which  you  might  fill  up  for  them,  at  your  own  pleasure  ; 
as  you  would  then  be  at  liberty  to  interpret  after  your 
own  fashion  the  unexplained  meaning  of  Jansenius.  Let 
this  explanation  be  first  given ;  otherwise  you  would  be 
indeed  exercising  over  us  a  "  proximate  "  power — "  ab- 
strahendo  ab  omni  sensu."  This,  you  well  know,  the 
world  will  not  allow.     Nothing  is  more  universally  odious 

354  LETTER  XVII. 

than  ambiguity,  especially  in  matters  of  faith.  In  them, 
common  justice  demands  that  we  hear  before  we  condemn. 
And  how  could  those  who  are  satisfied  that  Jansenius 
means  nothing  more  than  to  maintain  the  doctrine  of 
"  effectual  grace/'  be  prevailed  upon  to  pronounce  a  cen- 
sure upon  his  tenets,  without  a  due  explanation  of  them  ? 
Entertaining,  as  they  unalterably  will,  this  conviction  in 
regard  to  the  author,  such  a  censure  would  amount  to  a 
condemnation  on  their  part  of  the  doctrine  of  "  effectual 
grace  "  itself — which  would  be  in  itself  a  crime.  Would 
it  not  be  a  strange  tyranny  to  expose  them  to  this  un- 
happy dilemma — either  to  incur  guilt  towards  God,  by 
signing  this  condemnation,  against  their  conscience,  or  to 
be  treated  as  heretics  if  they  refuse  to  do  it  ? 

But  there  is,  in  reality,  much  of  mystery  in  all  this. 
Your  proceedings  are  full  of  the  deepest  policy.  You 
oblige  me  therefore  to  show  why  it  is  that  you  omit  to 
explain  the  meaning  of  Jansenius.  My  great  aim  is  to 
unravel  your  secret  designs,  and  in  so  doing,  to  frustrate 
them.  Let  all  then,  who  are  unacquainted  with  the  fact, 
know  that,  your  main  object  in  the  controversy  being  to 
protect  Molina's  doctrine  of  a  "  sufficient  grace,"  you  can 
only  accomplish  this  by  overthrowing  that  of  an  "  effec- 
tual grace,"  which  is  opposed  to  it.  But  as  you  find  this 
latter  doctrine  at  the  present  time  sanctioned  at  Rome, 
and  by  the  highest  authorities  in  the  Church ;  and  you 
are  thus  precluded  from  attacking  it,  on  its  own  merits  j 
you  proceed  covertly  to  assail  it  under  the  name  of  the 
Doctrine  of  Jansenius.  For  this  reason  you  have  sought 
to  procure  his  condemnation  without  explanation  of  his 
meaning ;  and  to  cause  it  to  be  believed  that  his  doctrine 

TO   R,   P.   jiNNAT.  355 

is  not  that  of  "  effectual  grace,"  in  order  that  the  censure 
of  himself  might  not  involve  that  of  the  doctrine.  Here 
is  the  secret  of  all  the  efforts  of  your  Society  to  prejudice 
those  who  are  unacquainted  with  his  writings.  And  this 
is  what  you  yourself  also,  Reverend  Father,  have  at- 
tempted in  your  "  Cavill,"  p.  23,  by  the  following  subtle 
reasoning :  "  The  Pope  has  condemned  the  doctrine  of  Jan- 
senius ;  now  the  Pope  has  not  condemned  the  doctrine  of 
effectual  grace ;  therefore  the  doctrine  of  effectual  grace 
is  not  that  of  Jansenius."  But,  here  I  repeat,  were  this 
kind  of  syllogism  conclusive  of  the  arguments,  it  could 
equally  be  maintained  that  Honorius  and  all  who  support 
him  are  heretical.  The  sixth  Council  condemned  the 
doctrine  of  Honorius ;  but  the  Council  did  not  condemn 
the  doctrine  of  the  Church  :  then  the  doctrine  of  Hono- 
rius is  not  that  of  the  Church ;  and  all  who  defend  it  are 
heretics.  It  is  evident  that  this  proves  nothing;  since 
the  Pope  has  condemned  nothing  but  the  doctrine  of  the 
five  Propositions,  which  he  had  been  induced  to  believe 
was  that  of  Jansenius. 

But  all  this  is  unimportant ;  for  you  will,  I  know,  not 
long  continue  to  avail  yourself  of  this  line  of  argument. 
Peeble  as  it  is,  however,  it  will  last  long  enough  to  answer 
your  purpose.  It  is  needed  by  you  only  so  far  as  to  in- 
duce those  who  would  not  deny  the  doctrine  of  effectual 
grace,  to  condemn  Jansenius,  without  a  scruple.  When 
that  is  achieved,  your  argument  will  be  soon  forgotten ; 
and  as  the  signatures  will  remain  a  perpetual  witness  of 
the  censure  of  Jansenius,  you  will  thence  take  occasion  in 
due  time  directly  to  attack  the  doctrine  in  question,  by 
this  more  specious  argument :  "  The  doctrine  of  Janse- 

356  LETTER  XVII. 

nius,"  you  will  say,  "  has  been  condemned  by  the  una- 
nimous consent  of  the  whole  Church :  now,  this  doctine 
is  clearly  that  of  "  effectual  grace,"  (this  you  will  find  no 
difficulty  in  proving)  "  then,  this  doctrine  of  "  effectual 
grace  "  is  condemned  even  by  the  voice  of  its  defenders." 

This  is  why  you  urge  the  condemnation  of  the  doctrine 
without  an  explanation.  And  herein  consists  the  advan- 
tage you  hope  for  from  the  signatures  you  are  soliciting. 
If  your  opponents  demur  to  take  that  step,  you  have 
another  resource.  Skilfully  uniting  the  question  of  fact 
with  that  of  faith,  without  allowing  a  separation  of  the 
two,  or  the  signature  of  the  one  without  that  of  the  other 
— as  they  cannot  subscribe  both,  you  proclaim  to  the 
world  that  they  refuse  both.  And  thus,  although  in 
reality  they  only  refuse  to  admit  that  Jansenius  held  these 
propositions,  which  they  condemn — which  certainly  is  no 
heresy — you  audaciously  say,  they  have  refused  their  con- 
demnation of  the  propositions  themselves, — which,  were  it 
true,  would  really  be  heretical. 

In  this  way  it  is,  that  you  derive  as  much  advantage 
from  their  refusal  as  you  would  from  their  compliance. 
Whether  they  sign  or  not,  you  make  your  account  of 
them ;  and  whatever  be  their  own  inclination,  your  policy 
turns  it  to  the  promotion  of  your  object. 

Yes,  my  good  Father,  be  assured,  I  know  you  all  too 
well !  It  is  my  grief  to  see  heaven  abandoning  you  in 
permitting  the  success  of  such  nefarious  conduct !  Your 
good  fortune  excites  only  my  pity  ;  and  can  be  an  object 
of  envy  to  none  but  those  who  are  ignorant  wherein  true 
prosperity  consists.  It  is  charity  to  yourselves  to  frus- 
trate your  pernicious  aims  !     You  build  alone  upon  lies; 

TO   E.    P.    ANNAT.  357 

and  seek  to  propagate  but  an  alternative  of  falsehood. 
You  will  not  rest  till  you  prove  that  the  Church  has  con- 
demned the  doctrine  of  effectual  grace,  or  that  those  who 
defend  it^  maintain  the  censured  Propositions  ! 

The  world  then  must  be  told,  that,  by  your  own  con- 
fession, that  sacred  doctrine  is  not  condemned;  and,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  no  one  in  reality  maintains  these 
errors.  Thus  shall  it  be  known,  that  those  who  refused  to 
subscribe  what  you  required,  refused  only  on  the  ground 
of  a  fact :  and,  being  willing  to  sign,  as  far  as  regarded 
the  points  of  faith,  their  refusal  had  in  it  nothing  of  heresy. 
It  is  matter  of  faith  that  the  Propositions  are  heretical, 
but  it  is  not  matter  of  faith  that  they  are  the  doctrine  of 
Jansenius.  They  are  clear  of  error  themselves  :  let  that 
suffice.  Possibly  they  may  interpret  Jansenius  somewhat 
too  favorably ;  but  you,  it  is  equally  probable,  do  not  in- 
terpret him  with  sufficient  candour.  This  is  a  question 
which  I  enter  not  into.  I  know,  alone,  that  on  your 
principles,  you  believe  yourselves  at  liberty  to  charge  him 
with  heresy,  although  you  know  the  fact  to  be  the  con- 
trary ;  while  on  theirs,  they  are  forbidden  even  to  testify 
to  his  catholicity,  contrary  to  their  own  conviction.  Thus 
thei/  are  more  trust-worthy  than  you.  Reverend  Sir  :  they 
have  more  carefully  examined  Jansenius :  they  are  not 
less  capable  than  yourself  of  forming  an  intelligent  judg- 
ment :  they  are  not  less  entitled  than  your  Society,  to 
credit  with  the  impartial.  But  however  it  may  be  as  to 
the  question  of  fact,  they  are  certainly  true  Catholics ; 
although  in  order  to  prove  it,  it  may  not  be  necessary  to 
accuse  others  of  deviation  from  the  truth.     It  is  enough 

358  '         LETTER  XVII. 

to  clear  ourselves  of  error,  without  charging  it  upon  our 
neighbours. 

*-(-*  At  the  end  of  this  letter  there  was  the  following 
passage  in  the  first  edition  : 

My  revered  Father,  if  you  find  difficulty  in  reading  this 
letter  on  account  of  the  badness  of  the  type,  you  must 
take  the  blame  to  yourself.  I  am  not  indulged  with  such 
privileges  as  you.  You  have  miraculous  resources  of  this 
kind  ;  I  cannot  get  sufficient  to  defend  myself  with.  One 
has  to  seek  in  every  direction  for  printing-presses.  You 
would  not  yourself  advise  me  to  write  any  more  under 
such  difficulties ;  for  it  is  too  hard  to  be  reduced  to  the 
Osnabruck  types. 

LETTER.* 

(supplementary  to  letter  xvn.) 

TO  M.  E.  P.  ANNAT,  CONFESSOR  TO  THE  KING,  ON  HIS 
WORK,  ENTITLED  "  THE  GOOD  FAITH  OF  THE  JAN- 
SENISTS,"   &C. 

Reverend  Father.  Jan.  15,  1657. 

I  HAVE  read  attentively  your  work,  entitled  "  The  Good 
Faith  of  the  Jansenists,  &c."  I  observe  therein  that  you 
continue  in  so,  firm  and  determined  a  manner  to  treat 
your  opponents,  viz.  the  members  of  the  Port  Royal,  as 
heretics,  that  it  would  seem  as  if  you  had  resolved  that  no 
doubt  should  any  longer  be  entertained  upon  the  ques- 
tion ;  and  that  you  cover  yourself  with  that  accusation, 
as  with  a  buckler,  to  repel  all  the  attacks  of  the  "  Pro- 
vincial Letters,"  which  you  suppose  to  be  written  by  a 
member  of  the  Port  Royal.  Whether  he  be  so  or  not,  I 
know  not,  my  Reverend  Father  ;  but  I  would  rather 
believe,  that  he  is  not  such,  on  his  own  word,  than  that 
he  is,  on  yours ;  seeing  you  are  unable  to  furnish  any 

*  This  Letter,  which  is  wanting  in  several  editions,  appears  in  that  of  1779, 
at  the  beginning  of  the  third  volume,  containing  the  papers  attributed  to 
Pascal.  Although  it  is  not  improbable  that  Pascal  had  some  hand  in  it,  it  is 
thought  to  he  Nicole's ;  at  least  it  is  characterised  by  the  manner  of  reason- 
ing, the  intelligence,  and  precision  of  that  writer.    (Fr.  Editor.) 

360  LETTER  XVII.* 

better  evidence  of  the  facts.  As  for  me^  I  am  undoubtedly 
neither  inmate  of  Port  Royal,  nor  secretary  of  their  So- 
ciety ;  but  I  cannot  help  wishing  to  lay  before  you  cer- 
tain difficulties  in  respect  to  the  character  you  assign  to 
them,  upon  which  if  you  satisfy  me  plainly  and  without 
equivocation,  I  will  take  my  place  by  your  side,  and  agree 
with  you  in  regarding  them  as  heretics. 

You  know,  Eeverend  Sir,  that  merely  to  affirm  people 
to  be  heretics  is  a  very  vague  thing,  and  must  be  regarded 
as  an  ebullition  of  passion,  rather  than  as  truth ;  provided 
no  proof  be  furnished  in  what  the  heresy  consists.  The 
heretical  propositions  defended  by  them  should  be  ad- 
duced, as  well  as  the  books  in  which  they  are  defended 
and  maintained  as  orthodox. 

I  ask  you  then,  first  of  all.  Reverend  Fathers,  what  it 
is  in  which  these  Port  Royal  brethren  are  heretical  ?  Is 
it  in  that  they  do  not  receive  the  "  Constitution  "  of  Pope 
Innocent  X. ;  and  do  not  condemn  the  five  Propositions, 
which  he  has  condemned  ?  If  that  be  the  case,  then  I 
also  hold  them  to  be  heretical.  But  how  am  I  to  believe 
this  of  them,  when  they  both  say  and  write,  in  the  plain- 
est terms,  that  they  receive  this  Constitution,  and  condemn 
these  Propositions  ? 

Will  you  maintain  that  they  receive  it  ostensibly,  but 
in  their  hearts  reject  it  ?  I  rnust  entreat.  Reverend 
Fathers,  that  you  will  not  seek  to  carry  your  hostility  into 
the  very  interior  of  their  minds  :  you  should  be  satisfied 
with  the  evidence  of  their  words,  and  of  their  writings. 
Such  conduct  as  this  is  most  unjust ;  and  indicative  of  a 
strange  and  unchristian  animosity.  If  tolerated,  there 
lives  not  the  person  who  could  not  be  proved  to  be  here- 

TO   R.    P.    ANNAT.  361 

tic,  Mahomedan,  or  any  thing  you  might  please,  by  your 
simply  giving  out  that  they  do  not  in  their  heart  believe 
the  mysteries  of  the  Christian  religion. 

In  what  then  are  they  heretics  ?  Because  they  will  not 
acknowledge  that  these  propositions  are  to  be  found  in 
Jansenius  ?  I  tell  you,  Reverend  Father,  that  the  mere 
fact  whether  certain  condemned  propositions  be  in  a  book, 
or  not, — never  was,  and  never  can  be,  matter  of  heresy. 
For  instance,  any  one  affirming  that  the  doctrine  of  "  Re- 
gret *  for  Sin,"  as  set  forth  in  the  holy  Council  of  Trent, 
is  false  and  sinful,  is  heretical ;  but  for  any  one  to  doubt 
whether  that  censurable  proposition  be  in  Luther  or  Cal- 
vin, would  be  no  heresy  at  all.  In  like  manner,  to  main- 
tain to  be  catholic  the  five  propositions  condemned  by  the 
Pope  would  be  heretical ;  but,  the  question  whether  they 
be  in  Jansenius  or  not,  is  not  one  of  faith  ;  although  it 
ought  not  to  be  made  a  cause  of  division  or  schism. 
Add  to  this.  Father,  that  your  opponents  have  declared, 
they  should  give  themselves  no  concern  whether  these 
propositions  are  or  are  not  in  Jansenius ;  and  that, 
wherever  they  might  be  found,  they  equally  condemn 
them.  Where  then,  I  ask  again,  is  the  heresy  with 
which,  with  so  much  hardihood  and  pertinacity,  you  per- 
sist in  charging  them  ? 

Tell  me  not,  I  desire,  that  as  the  Pope  and  the  Bishops 
assert  these  things  to  be  in  Jansenius,  it  is  heresy  to  deny 
it.  I  maintain  that  the  sin  would  be  in  denying  it,  un- 
less conviction  went  along  with  such  denial.  I  admit 
further,  that  it  might  even  be  schismatic  to  differ  on  such 
a  point ;  but  it  would  be  no  heresy.  Surely  one  who  has 
*  '  Attrition.'  (Fr.) 
B 

363  LETTER,  XVII.* 

eyes  to  read,  and  cannot  discover  the  things  in  question, 
may  say,  "  I  read  them  not  there,"  without  being  branded 
as  a  heretic ! 

What  will  you  next  do,  Reverend  Sir,  to  support  your 
charge  ?  You  will  doubtless  assert  that  M.  Arnauld,  in 
bis  Second  Letter,  has  revived  one  of  the  five  propositions. 
But  who  are  they  that  say  this  ?  Some  Doctors  of  the 
"  Faculty/'  at  variance  upon  the  points  in  question  with 
their  fellows.  And  on  what  does  the  statement  rest  ? 
Not  on  his  words,  for  they  are  the  words  of  St.  Chrysos- 
tom  and  St.  Augustine  ;  but  on  a  certain  construction 
which  they  allege  M.  Arnauld  puts  upon  them  in  his  own 
mind,  and  which  M.  Arnauld  denies.  Now,  I  consider, 
mere  charity  demands  that  we  give  credit  to  the  state- 
ment which  an  ecclesiastic  or  a  doctor  offers  of  sentiments 
concealed  in  the  recesses  of  his  mind,  and  which  can  be 
known  only  to  his  Maker.  But,  besides  this,  my  Reve- 
rend Father,  the  faculty — not  divided,  but  unanimously 
- — have  so  often  censured  your  authors,  and  your  entire 
Society,  that  you  have  a  strong  interest  in  not  being 
understood  to  regard  as  heretics  all  those  whom  they 
condemn. 

I  seek  in  vain  then  for  the  grounds  on  which  these 
persons  whom  you  call  "  Jansenists,"  are  to  be  deemed 
heretical.  Surely,  Sir,  if,  according  to  the  words  of  Jesus 
Christ,  "  to  call  our  brethren  Fools  is  to  be  in  danger  of 
hell-fire,"  to  call  them,  without  proof  or  cause.  Heretics, 
is  a  greater  crime,  and  exposes  to  severer  punishment ! 
No  ;  these  charges  of  yours — charges  which  rest  on 
nothing  but  your  own  audacious  assertion — are  calculated 
only  to  astonish  the  ignorant,  and  frighten  silly  women ! 

TO  R.   P.   ANNAT.  363 

But  be  assuredj  that  men  of  spirit  and  intelligence  will 
demand  to  be  informed  wherein  the  heresy  consists  ? 
What,  Reverend  Sir  !  Lessius  is  to  be  allowed  to  shelter 
his  axioms  under  the  authority  of  Victoria  and  Navarre  ; 
but  Arnauld  is  to  have  no  such  indulgence^  when  he  ad- 
duces the  sentiments  of  St.  Augustine,  Chrysostom,  Hilary, 
St.  ThomaSj  and  the  whole  of  that  school  ?  Since  when 
has  the  theology  of  antiquity  become  criminal  ?  When,  I 
ask,  did  the  faith  of  our  Fathers  undergo  a  change  ? 

You  do  your  utmost  to  prove  that  the  Fathers  of  the 
Port  Eoyal  have  the  character  and  spirit  of  heretics ;  but 
before  you  succeed  in  that,  you  must  furnish  proof  that 
they  are  really  such.  This  you  are  unable  to  do ;  and  it 
shall  be  my  business  to  show  distinctly  that  they  exhibit 
no  mark  or  symbol  of  such  a  crime. 

When  the  Church  was  engagedin  controversy  with  the 
Arians,  she  charged  them  with  denying  the  consubstan- 
tiality  of  the  Son  with  the  Eternal  Father.  Did  the 
Arians  deny  that  proposition  ?  Did  they  declare  that 
they  admitted  the  equality  and  con  substantiality  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son  ?  Never  did  they  do  so,  and  there- 
fore they  were  heretics.  You  accuse  your  adversaries  of 
stating  that  "  the  observance  of  the  precepts  is  impos- 
sible." They  deny  it.  They  declare  it  to  be  heresy  to 
assert  that  proposition.  They  maintain  that,  neither 
before  nor  since  the  Pope's  "  Constitution,"  have  they 
propounded  any  such  axiom.  They  declare,  with  your- 
selves, that  those  are  heretics  who  propound  it.  Then,, 
they  are  no  heretics. 

When  the  Holy  Fathers  declared  Nestorius  to  be 
heretical,  because  he  denied  the  hypostatical  union  of  the 

E  2 

364  LETTER  XTII.* 

Word  with  the  purified  humanity,  and  held  that  there 
were  two  persons  in  Christ,  did  the  Nestorians  of  that 
time,  or  those  who,  in  the  Eastern  world,  have  subse- 
quently professed  the  doctrine,  deny  the  tenets  with 
which  they  were  charged  ?  Did  they  not  say,  "  True, 
we  admit  two  persons  to  be  in  Christ,  but  we  maintain 
that  this  is  no  heresy."  This  was  their  language,  and 
therefore  they  were  pronounced  heretical,  and  continue  to 
be  so  to  this  day.  But  when  you  say,  the  Port  Royal 
maintains  that  "  we  are  unable  to  resist  the  influence  of 
inward  grace,"  they  deny  it ;  and,  admitting,  in  common 
with  you,  its  heretical  nature,  they  avow  their  detestation 
of  the  proposition ;  while  others,  on  the  contrary,  admit 
the  proposition,  and  deny  its  heresy.  Then  are  they  not 
heretics. 

When  the  Fathers  condemned  Eutychus,  because  he 
held  that  there  is  only  one  nature  in  Jesus  Christ,  did  he 
deny  it,  and  say  he  believed  in  two  ?  Had  he  done  so, 
he  would  not  have  been  condemned ;  but  he  maintained 
that  there  was  but  one  nature,  and  contended  that  therein 
was  no  heresy.  On  that  account  he  was  condemned. 
When  you  say,  the  Port  Royal  Fathers  hold  "  that  Jesus 
died  not  for  the  whole  world,  or  for  all  men,  but  that  his 
blood  was  shed  only  for  the  Elect,"  what  is  their  reply  ? 
They  declare  that,  on  the  contrary,  they  consider  such  a 
sentiment  heretical ;  that  they  have  never  entertained  it, 
and  never  will  do  so.  They  maintain  it  to  be  false  that 
Christ  shed  his  blood  for  the  elect  only,  but  that  he 
poured  it  out  even  for  the  reprobate — for  those  who 
absolutely  reject  his  grace.  Finally,  they  hold  that  he 
died  for  all  men,  as  St.  Augustine  believed,  as  St.  Thomas 

TO  K.   P.   ANNAT.  365 

taught,  and  as  the  Council  of  Trent  ordained.  Now,  my 
Reverend  Father,  is  not  this  at  least  as  good  a  plea,  as 
that  we  helieve  like  the  Jesuits,  and  take  our  views  from 
Molina  ?     Then,  again,  they  are  no  heretics. 

When,  in  opposition  to  the  Monothelites,  it  was  con- 
tended that  there  were  two  kinds  of  will  and  two  kinds 
of  volition  in  Christ,  did  Cyril  of  Alexandria  and  Sergius 
of  Constantinople  allege  that  they  were  misrepresented  ? 
Did  they  declare  that  they  admitted  a  double  will — a 
double  volition,  in  the  person  of  our  Lord  ?  They  did 
not :  therefore  were  they  pronounced  heretics.  When 
you  charge  upon  the  Port  Royal  that,  in  our  present 
condition  of  a  corrupt  nature,  "  they  do  not  exclude  any 
necessity  of  action,  whether  meritorious  or  unworthy, 
excepting  the  necessity  of  constraint,^'  *  they  deny  it, 
and  maintain,  on  the  contrary,  that  we  have,  in  the 
present  life,  always  a  liberty  of  action  for  good  or  for  evil ; 
and  that,  even  with  the  influence  of  "  efiectual  grace," 
which  imposes  upon  us  no  necessity,  although  it  infallibly 
leads  to  good  conduct — as  is  held  by  all  Thomists.  There- 
fore they  are  not  heretics. 

Lastly,  when  the  Church  rebuked  Luther  and  Calvin 
for  denying  the  Sacraments  and  Transubstantiation,  and 
for  disobedience  to  the  Pope,  did  those  heretics  complain 
of  misrepresentation  of  their  views  and  tenets  ?  Did 
they  not  resolutely  maintain  those  propositions,  and  do 
they  not  maintain  them  to  this  hour,  and  have  been 
declared  heretics  for  doing  so  ?  But  when  you  tell  the 
brethren  of  the  Port  Royal,  "that  they  repudiate  the 

''  '  lis  n'excluent  et  ne  rejettent  aucune  necessity  de  I'action  mdritoire  ou 
ddraeritoire,  sinon  la  necessity  de  contrainte.'  (Fr.) 

366,  LETTER.  XTII.* 

Pope's  authority,  oppose  the  Council  of  Trent,  &c."  they" 
adopt — and  properly — the  "  Mentiris  impudentissime ; " 
that  is,  Keverend  Father,  they  say  it  is  false  !  For  in 
matters  of  such  importance  as  this  it  is  allowable  and  even 
necessary  to  charge  falsehood.  Then  are  they  not  here- 
tics ;  or  if  they  be  so,  they  exhibit  nothing  of  the  spirit 
and  character  of  heresy.  No  such  heresy  has  been  ever 
heretofore  seen  in  the  Church ;  and  far  easier  would  it  be 
to  demonstrate  on  the  part  of  their  enemies,  the  features 
of  calumny  and  imposition,  than  in  themselves  those  of 
heresy. 

I  find,  indeed,  that  heretics  have  frequently  endeavoured 
to  affix  upon  the  truly  Catholic  the  stigma  of  erroneous 
opinions.  The  Pelagians  charged  St.  Augustine  with 
a  denial  of  free-will ;  the  Eutychians  asserted  that  the 
Catholic  opposed  the  substantial  union  of  the  divinity  and 
humanity  in  Christ :  the  Monothelites  accused  the  true 
Church  of  raising  a'  distinction  and  contrariety  between 
the  divine  and  human  will  in  the  Saviour ;  the  Iconoclasts 
declared  that  we  give  to  images  the  worship  due  only  to 
God;  the  Lutherans  and  Calvinists  call  us  "  Popelitres," 
and  give  out  that  the  Pope  is  Antichrist.  We  say,  all 
these  propositions  are  heretical,  and  we  equally  detest 
them  all :  ^  therefore  we  are  not  heretics.  But  I  iear,  my 
Reverend  Father,  there  may  be  more  ground  for  charging 
you  with  a  heretical  taint,  than  for  your  imputations 
against  your  opponents  j  for  you  avow  the  "  Molinean " 
propositions  with  which  they  reproach  you,  but  allege 
they  are  not  heretical.  Those  opinions  which  you  make 
matter  of  charge  against  them,  they  utterly  deny,  while 
they  admit  them  to  be  in  themselves  heretical.     Thus 

TO   R.   P.   ANNAT.  367 

they  take  the  course  which  has  always  been  pursued  by 
true  Cathohcs — you.  Reverend  Father,  take  that  which 
as  uniformly  has  been  pursued  by  heretics. 

But  when  you  avail  yourself  of  their  piety,  and  their 
zeal  in  support  of  Christian  morality,  as  proofs  of  heresy, 
you  reach  the  climax  of  audacity  !  Had  ypu  succeeded 
in  demonstrating  their  heretical  propensities,  it  might 
have  been  allowable  to  brand  them  with  hypocrisy  and 
dissimulation ;  but  that  you  should  turn  into  an  instru- 
ment for  establishing  your  charge  of  heresy,  their  holy 
devotedness,  their  zeal  for  the  discipline  of  the  Church, 
and  for  the  doctrines  of  the  Fathers — this.  Reverend  Sir, 
is  not  to  be  endured,  and  assuredly  we  shall  not  be  wanting 
in  means  to  frustrate  your  base  designs. 

To  hear  the  language  you  affect,  it  might  be  supposed, 
indeed,  that  all  your  purpose  was  accomplished — they  are 
heretics — rtheir  heresy  is  as  palpable  as  that  of  Luther  and 
Calvin.  But^  my  good  Father,  you  must  permit  me,  in 
a  matter  of  such  importance,  to  suspend  my  judgment,  or 
in  fact,  utterly  to  disbelieve  your  assertion,  till  I  find  these 
men  io  open  contumacy  against  the  Pope,  and  distinctly 
maintaining  the  Propositions  which  he  has  condemned — 
aye,  and  in  the  very  terms  also  in  which  they  were  con- 
demned. For  I  ask  you,  Reverend  Sir,  should  these  holy 
men  prove  to  be  no  heretics — as  I  verily  believe  to  be  the 
fact — would  you  be  able  to  justify  me  before  God  for 
admitting  them  to  be  such  ?  And  all  those  other  persons 
also,  who,  on  your  authority  have  believed  in  their  heresy, 
and  universally  circulated  the  reproach  of  their  heresy — 
tell  me,  will  it  be  sufficient  for  their  exculpation  before  the 

368  LETTER.  XVII.* 

tribunal  of  the  Sovereign  Judge,  to  plead  that  they  adopted 
the  charge  from  your  publications  ? 

I  have  now  done ;  for,  as  to  the  details  of  your  fallacies 
and  misrepresentationSj  I  leave  you  to  the  author  of  the 
"  Letters."  He  has  already  effectually  discomfited  your 
associates,  who  thought  to  overwhelm  him  with  similar 
reproaches ;  and  he  will  not  spare  you ;  unless  he  should 
deem  it,  after  all,  unnecessary  to  make  any  reply ;  seeing 
you  have  brought  forward  nothing  of  importance  which 
had  not  been  said  before  by  your  brethren.  All  these 
things  have  been  completely  disposed  of  by  the  author ; 
for  your  present  production,  which  you  state  has  been 
composed  within  these  four  months,  is  an  old  work :  you 
say  not  a  word  of  the  10,  11,  13,  13,  14  and  15th 
Letters,  all  which  appeared  before  the  date  of  your  pub- 
lication, although  you  undertake  in  the  Preface  to  "  con- 
vict of  bad  faith  the  Letters  written  since  Easter."  What 
is  to  be  said  of  a  book,  whose  impostures  begin  even  with 
the  title-page  ! 

LETTER  XVIII. 

ADDRESSED  TO  R.  P.  ANNAT,  JESUIT. 
SHOWING  STILL  MORE  INCONTROVERTIBLY,  AND  EVEN 
FROM  THE  PERE  ANNATES  OWN  ANSWER,  THAT  NO 
HERESY  EXISTS  IN  THE  CHURCH;  THAT  EVERY  ONE 
CONDEMNS  THE  DOCTRINE  UNJUSTLY  ALLEGED  BY 
THE  JESUITS  TO  BE  FOUND  IN  THE  WRITINGS  OP 
JANSENIUSj  AND  CONSEQUENTLY  ALL  THE  FAITHFUL 
ARE  AGREED  ON  THE  SUBJECT  OF  THE  FIVE  PROPO- 
SITIONS. THE  DIFFERENCE  BETWEEN  MATTERS  OF 
BELIEF  AND  OF  FACT,  AND  THAT  IN  THE  LATTER 
WE  SHOULD  RELY  RATHER  ON  THE  EVIDENCE  OF 
THE   SENSES    THAN   ON   HUMAN   AUTHORITY. 

Reverend  Father,  March  24,  1657. 

You  have  long  been  labouring  at  the  task  of  attaching 
the  reproach  of  error  to  your  adversaries ;  but  I  believe 
you  will  at  last  be  brought  to  the  acknowledgment  that 
nothing  is  so  difficult  as  to  prove  those  to  be  heretical 
who,  not  only  are  not  such,  but  who  would  dread  nothing 
so  much  as  the  being  such  in  reality.  I  proved  in  my 
last  Letter  how  sedulously  you  had,  one  after  another, 
imputed  heresies  to  them,  without  being  able  in  a  single 
instance  to  establish   the  charge :    so  that  nothing  re- 

R  5 

370  LETTER  XVIII. 

niained  for  you  but  to  accuse  them  of  refasing  to  condemn 
Jansenius,  yet  without  any  explanation  of  the  ground  on 
which  their  censure  should  rest.  You  must  have  been 
indeed  reduced  to  extremity  for  matter  of  crimination; 
for  who  ever  before  heard  of  a  heresy  which  should  not  be 
susceptible  of  explanation?  Their  reply  was  therefore 
sufficiently  easy,  being  simply,  that  if  Jansenius  was  not 
in  error  it  was  unjust  to  condemn  him ;  if  he  was,  then 
the  errors  should  have  been  explained,  that  it  might  be 
known  on  what  ground  he  was  to  be  condemned.  This, 
however,  you  have  not  thought  fit  to  do  ;  but  you  have 
endeavoured  to  strengthen  your  own  denunciations  by 
alleging  certain  decrees,  which  proved  nothing,  inasmuch 
as  they  in  no  degree  expounded  the  meaning  of  Jansenius 
in  regard  to  the  five  Propositions. 

Now  this  was  not  the  proper  way  to  settle  the  contro- 
versy. Had  you  been  mutually  agreed  as  to  the  true 
interpretation  of  Jansenius,  and  had  the  only  question 
between  you  been,  whether  his  sentiments  so  interpreted 
were  heretical  or  not,  then  the  decisions  as  to  their  inno- 
cent tendency  might  have  been  relevant.  But  the  main 
dispute  being  as  to  his  actual  meaning— the  one  party 
afiirming  that  they  could  see  in  his  sentiment's  only  those 
of  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Thomas,  and  the  other  that  they 
perceived  in  them  heresy,  yet  without  explaining  in  what 
such  heresy  consists — it  is  clear  that  an  ordonnance 
which  declares  nothing  respecting  this  difference,  and 
only  condemns  in  general  terms  the  sentiments  of  Jan- 
senius without  explanation,  decides  nothing  as  to  the  real 
points  in  dispute. 

Therefore  it  is  that  you  have  been  told  a  hundred  times, 

TO  R.   P.   ANNAT.  371 

that,  the  controversy  being  alone  on  this  point,  you  could 
determine  nothing  without  a  declaration  of  your  own 
understanding  in  respect  of  the  meaning  of  Jansenius. 
But,  as  you  always  pertinaciously  declined  this,  I  resolved 
to  press  you  upon  this  point  in  my  last  letter ;  in  which 
I  set  forth  that  it  was  not  without  an  occult  design  that 
you  aimed  at  procuring  a  censure  of  his  views,  without 
an  explanation  ;  and  that  your  object  was  that,  hereafter, 
this  undefined  condemnation  should  fall  upon  the  doc- 
trine of  effectual  grace  itself,  by  showing  that  it  and 
Jansenius  were  identical — a  thing  which  you  would  not 
find  difficult  to  accomplish.  This  has  unavoidably  drawn 
from  you  a  reply ;  for  had  you,  after  that,  obstinately 
refused  an  explanation,  it  would  have  been  obvious  to  the 
simplest  understanding  that  your  designs  were  directed 
only  against  this  sacred  doctrine ;  and  you  would  herein 
have  exposed  yourselves  to  irretrievable  disgrace,  and  the 
reprobation  of  the  universal  Church,  united  together  for 
its  defence. 

You  have  now,  therefore,  been  compelled  openly  to  ex- 
plain yourselves  in  your  reply  to  my  Letter ;  in  which  I 
advanced  the  proposition,  ''  that  if  Jansenius  had  put 
any  other  construction  upon  the  five  Propositions  than 
such  as  was  consistent  with  the  doctrine  of  effectual  grace, 
there  was  no  excuse  to  be  made  for  him ;  but  if  he  had 
put  upon  them  no  other  than  this  construction — then  he 
was  guilty  of  no  error."  This,  my  Father,  is  a  position 
which  you  could  not  gainsay ;  but  I  find  you  taking  a 
distinction  of  this  nature,  p.  21 ;  "  It  is  not  sufficient," 
you  say,  "  for  the  justification  of  Jansenius,  to  say  that 
he  holds  the  doctrine  of  effectual  grace ;  for  that  dogma 

373  -  LETTER,  XVIII. 

may  be  held  in  two  ways  j — the  one  heretical^  after  Calviny 
which  consists  in  saying  that  the  will,  when  under  the 
influence  of  grace,  has  not  power  to  resist  it ;  the  other, 
orthodox,  according  to  the  Thomists  and  the  Sorbonne, 
and  founded  on  principles  established  by  the  Councils — 
which  is,  that  effectual  grace,  by  its  nature,  operates  in 
such  a  manner  on  the  will,  as  that  there  is  always  in  man 
the  power  to  resist  its  influences." 

All  this.  Reverend  Father,  may  be  conceded  to  you : 
you  conclude,  however,  by  saying,  "  that  Jansenius  would 
be  orthodox,  if  he  defended  the  doctrine  of  grace  in 
the  manner  of  the  Thomists;  but  that  he  is  heretical, 
because  he  opposes  the  Thomists,  and  agrees  with  Calvin^ 
who  denies  in  man  a  power  of  resistance  to  grace."  I  do 
pot  pause  here,  to  inquire  into  the  fact  assumed;  viz. 
whether  Jansenius  be,  in  reality,  in  agreement  with  Calvin. 
It  is  sufficient  that  you  assume  it ;  and  that  you  now  assert 
openly,  that  by  the  statements  of  Jansenius  you  intend 
only  those  of  Calvin.  Is  not  that,  Reverend  Sir,  what 
you  really  intended?  Is  it  not  the  error  of  Calvin 
alone  that  you  meant  to  condemn,  under  the  name  of 
Jansenius?  Why  not  have  avowed  this  before?  You 
would  have  saved  much  trouble ;  for  all  the  world  would 
have  agreed  in  condemning  this  error  with  you,  without 
the  authority  of  briefs  or  bulls.  Truly  this  explanation 
was  not  a  little  necessary,  and  obviates  much  difficulty. 
We  did  not  know  before  what  errors  they  were  that  the 
Popes  and  Bishops  sought  to  put  down,  under  the  name 
of  Jansenius.  The  whole  Church  was  bewildered,  and  no 
one  could  supply  an  explanation.  You,  Sir,  at  length 
have  done  this — you,  whom  their  entire  party  consider 

TO  R.   P.   ANNAT.  373 

their  head  and  the  prime  mover  of  their  counsels ;  and 
who  are  acquainted  with  all  the  secrets  of  their  polity. 
You  have  now  told  us  that  the  condemnation  in  Council 
of  Jansenius  is  no  other  than  the  condemnation  of  Calvin. 
Our  doubts  are  at  length  resolved.  We  now  know  that 
the  error  which  was  intended  to  be  condemned  under 
cover  of  the  sentiments  of'JanseniuSj  is  alone  the  doctrine 
of  Calvin ;  and  thus  we  are  showing  our  dutiful  obedience 
to  the  decrees  of  the  Church,  in  condemning,  with  them, 
sentiments  upon  which  they  have  placed  their  ban.  We 
are  no  longer  surprised  at  the  zeal  of  the  Popes  and 
certain  of  the  Bishops  against  Jansenius.  How  could  it 
have  been  otherwise,  I  pray,  if  credit  was  to  be  given  to 
those  who  publicly  announced  that  his  opinions  were  iden- 
tical with  those  of  Calvin  ? 

Let  me  then  take  upon  myself  to  declare  to  you,  my 
Father,  that  you  have  now  no  further  ground  of  censure 
of  your  opponents,  for  you  and  they  are  agreed  in  the 
object  of  your  reprehension,  I  am  only  surprised  that  you 
should  be  ignorant  of  the  facts  ;  and  should  have  so  little 
knowledge  of  their  sentiments  on  a  subject  upon  which 
their  writings  left  no  room  for  doubt.  Be  assured  that, 
had  you  been  better  informed,  you  would  regret  not  to 
have,  in  an  amicable  spirit,  made  yourself  acquainted  with 
a  system  of  doctrines  so  pure  and  so  catholic,  but  which 
passion  urges  you  now,  in  mere  ignorance,  to  oppose. 
You  would  find.  Reverend  Sir,  that  not  only  do  they  hold, 
that  resistance  may  be  effectually  made  to  those  feeble 
graces  which  are  styled  "  existing  or  ineffectual,"  *  but 

*  '  Excitantes  ou  inefficaces.'  (Fr.) 

374  LETTER   XTIII. 

that  they  firmly  maintain,  in  opposition  to  Calvin,  the 
power  inherent  in  the  will  to  resist  even  effectual  arid 
conquering  grace;  as  also  that  they  defend — (but  in  op- 
position to  Molina) — the  power  of  that  grace  over  the 
will;  so  jealous  are  they  in  the  support  alike  of  all  these 
great  truths.     Too  well  do  they  know  that  man,  in  his 
own  nature,  has  always  the  power  to  fall  into  sin,  and  to 
offer  resistance  to  grace ;  and  that,  since  his  fall,  he  has 
borne  about  with  him  a  fatal  body  of  concupiscence,  which 
infinitely  aggravates  this  evil  tendency ;  but  that,  never- 
theless, when  it  pleases  God  in  his  mercy  to  touch  the 
heart,  he  influences  it  to  do  such  things,  and  in  such 
manner,  as  please  him,  although   the  irresistibleness  of 
the  Divine  power  does  not  in  any  degree  infringe  upon 
the  natural  liberty  of  the  human  will.     Such  are  the  adr 
mirable  and  mysterious  methods  by  which  God  carries  on 
his  operations,  as  St.  Augustine  has  beautifully  unfolded  ! 
It  is  in  this  way  that  are  dissipated  all  those  imaginary 
contradictions  which  the  enemies  of  the  doctrines  of  grace 
conjure  up,  between  its  sovereignty  over  the  will,  and  the 
power   of  the  will  for  the  resistance  of  grace.     For,  ac- 
cording to  the  same  holy  authority  (whom  the  heads  of 
the  Church  have  constituted  her  guide  upon  this  subject), 
Jehovah  effects  his  changes  in  the  heart  of  man  by  the 
diffusion  of  a  divine  and  gracious  influence ;  which,  over- 
coming the  evil  propensities  of  the  flesh,  opens  up  to  the 
man,  on  the  one  hand,  a  view  of  his  own  mortality  and 
nothingness,  and,  on  the  other,  the  greatness  and  eternity 
of  God ;  and  thus  produces  in  him  a  disgust  for  the  plea- 
sures of  sin,  which  tend  to  separate  him  from  the  great 
source  of  unchangeable  good.     Finding,  then,  his  most 

TO    R.   P.    ANNAT.  375 

sacred  delights  to  arise  from  communion  with  God,  he  is 
urged  towards  him  by  a  free,  an  ardent,  and  an  affec- 
tionate impulse,  which  it  would  be  an  infliction  and  pun- 
ishment to  him  to  resist.  Not  that  man  has  not  the 
power  to  separate  himself  from  God,  if  he  be  conscious  of 
the  inclination.  But  how  can  he  incline  to  do  so,  when 
his  will  is  even  subservient  to  his  pleasure ;  and  his  chief 
pleasure  is  now  centered  in  Him,  who  is  the  alone  source 
of  real  good,  and  who  comprehends  all  other  good  in 
Himself  ?  "  Quod  enim  amplius  non  delectat,  secundum 
id  operemur  necesse  est,"  as  saith  St.  Augustine,  Exp. 
Ep.  ad  Gal.  n.  49. 

It  is  in  this  manner  that  God  disposes  the  will  of  man, 
without  any  irresistible  constraint ;  and  that  his  will — 
which  possesses  always  the  power,  although  not  always 
the  inclination,  to  resist  the  Divine  grace — tends  freely, 
but  infallibly,  towards  God,  when  placed  within  the  influ- 
ence of  his  sweet  and  powerful  inspirations.* 

These,  Reverend  Father,  are  the  holy  principles  of  St. 
Augustine  and  St.  Thomas.  According  to  them,  it  is 
true  "  that  grace  may  be  resisted,"  in  opposition  to  Cal- 
vin's opinion ;  and  therefore  Pope  Clement  says,  in  his 
Congregational  Rescripts,  de  Auxiliis,  art.  5  and  6,  "  God 
excites  in  us  the  motions  of  our  will,  and  disposes  our 
hearts,  by  the  sway  which  his  supreme  Majesty  exercises 
over  the  will  of  man,  no  less  than  over  the  inhabitants  of 
heaven,  as  saith  St.  Augustine.^' 

*  The  reader  will  here  again,  perhaps,  notice  a  confiiination  of  a  remark  in 
the  Memoir,  that  Pascal,  while  vehemently  controverting  some  of  the  extreme 
positions  of  Calvin  and  Luther  upon  the  doctrines  of  Grace  in  their  general 
scope  and  spirit,  approximated  more  closely  than  he  supposed  to  the  views  of 
those  great  men.  (Transl.) 

376  LETTER  XVIII. 

On  these  principles  it  is  that  our  actions  emanate  from 
ourselves;  our  good  works — (contrary  again  to  Calvin's 
views) — are  our  own  J  yetj  God  being  the  first  cause  of 
our  actions,  and  "  working  in  us  according  to  his  plea- 
sure," according  to  St.  Paul,  "  our  good  works  are  the 
gifts  of  God,"  as  saith  the  Council  of  Trent. 

In  this  way  is  overthrown  the  impious  *  sentiment  of 
Luther,  censured  by  the  same  Council,  "  that  we  co- 
operate not  in  any  measure  in  our  own  salvation,  any 
more  than  the  inanimate  creatures : "  and  thus  also  is 
equally  exposed  the  impiety  of  Moliaa's  school,  which 
denies  even  that  it  is  the  power  of  grace  which  causes  us 
to  co-operate  in  the  work  of  our  salvation ;  a  doctrine  by 
which  is  subverted  that  principle  of  faith  established  by 
St.  Paul,  that  "  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  us  both  to 
will  and  to  do." 

And  it  is  by  this  method  also  that  all  those  passages  of 
Holy  Writ,  which  seem  the  most  opposed,  are  brought 
into  a  sacred  harmony  :  "  Turn  you  unto  the  Lord : " 
"  Lord,  turn  thou  us."  "  Cast  away  your  iniquities  from 
you."  "  It  is  the  Lord  who  taketh  away  the  iniquities  of 
his  people."  "  Do  works  meet  for  repentance :  "  "  Lord, 
thou  hast  wrought  all  our  works  in  us."  "  Make  you  a 
new  heart  and  a  new  spirit :  "  "I  will  give  you  a  new 
heart,  and  create  a  right  spirit  within  you." 

The  only  true  way  to  reconcile  these  apparent  anomalies, 
which  seem  to  attribute  our  good  works,  now  to  God, 
and  now  to  ourselves,  is  to  acknowledge,  with  St.  Augus- 
tine, "  our  actions  are  our  own,  because  of  the  free  will 

*  Vide  Memoir. 

TO  R.   P.   ANNAT.  377 

which  produces  them ;  hut  they  are  also  of  God,  on  ac- 
count of  his  grace  which  influences  our  will  to  produce 
them."  And  because,  as  he  says  elsewhere,  God  causes 
us  to  do  what  pleases  him,  in  causing  us  to  incline  to  do 
that  to  which  otherwise  we  could  not  be  inclined  :  "  a  Deo 
factum  est  ut  vellent  quod  nolle  potuissent." 

Thus,  my  Father,  it  is  clear  that  your  opponents  are 
perfectly  in  agreement  even  with  the  modern  Thomists 
themselves ;  for  they  hold,  equally  with  them,  both  the 
power  of  resistance  to  grace,  and  the  irresistibleness  of 
the  effects  of  grace;  regarding  both  these  as  cardinal 
points  of  doctrine.  This,  Alvarez,*  one  of  their  most  dis- 
tinguished members,  frequently  reiterates  in  his  work,  and 
explains  in  these  terms,  Disp.  72,  B.  8.  n.  4;  "  When 
grace  operates  upon  the  will,  the  latter  infallibly  ac- 
quiesces ;  for  the  effect  of  grace  is  such,  that  although 
there  is  power  in  the  will  to  resist,  it  in  reality  never  does 
resist."  For  this  he  assigns  the  following  reason  from 
his  master,  St.  Thomas,  1,  2,  q.  112,  N.  3 ;  "  The  will  of 
God  cannot  fail  of  its  accomplishment ;  thus,  when  it  is 
his  will  that  a  man  should  yield  to  grace,  he  does  so  yield 
infallibly,  and  even  necessarily  ;  not,  however,  by  an  ab- 
solute necessity,  but  by  a  necessity  of  infallibility."  In 
which,  grace  does  not  infringe  upon  "  the  power  a  man 
possesses  to  resist,  if  he  choose  j "  because  it  only  influ- 

*  Diego  (or  Didacus)  Alyarez  was  one  of  the.  most  eminent  theologians 
among  the  Dominicans ;  he  lived  in  the  16-17th  century,  and  died  in  1635; 
He"  was  brought  from  Spain  to  Rome  in  1S96,  to  maintain,  with  Pere  Lemos, 
the  doctrine  of  Grace,  which  had  heen  weakened  and  almost  overthrown  by 
the  Jesuit  Molina.  He  distinguished  himself  highly  in  the  famous  congre- 
gation '  De  Auxiliis.'  The  work  of  Alvarez,  above  referred  to,  is  entitled 
'  Didaci  Alvarez  de  auxiliis  divinae  gratise,  et  humani  arbitrii  viribus  et  liber- 
tate,  &c.,  &c.'  (Note  Edit.  1812.) 

378  LETTER  XVIII. 

ences  him  in  such  way,  that  he  does  not  incline  to  resist- 
ance ;  as  your  Pere  Petau  states  in  these  words,  Vol.  1, 
Theol.  Dogm.  B.  9,  c.  1,  p.  602  ;  "  The  grace  of  Christ 
causes  us  to  persevere  in  an  unfailing  course  of  piety, 
although  not  by  any  necessity ;  for  the  will  is  capable  of 
resisting  its  influences,  according  to  the  Councils  j  but 
the  same  grace  produces  an  incapability  of  such  resist- 
ance." * 

This,  Reverend  Sir,  is  the  uniform  doctrine  of  St.  Au- 
gustine, St.  Prosper,  the  Fathers  who  succeeded  to  them, 
the  Councils,  St.  Thomas,  and  the  whole  of  the  Thomists. 
It  is  also  the  doctrine  of  those  very  men  whom  you  are 
opposing,  little  as  you  thought  it  to  be  so.  And  lastly, 
it  is  that  which  you  yourself  have  recently  sanctioned,  in 
the  following  terms ;  "  The  doctrine  of  effectual  grace, 
in  which  is  recognized  a  power  of  resistance  to  its  in- 
fluences, is  orthodox,  confirmed  by  Councils,  and  main- 
tained by  the  Thomists  and  the  Sorbonne."  Be  candid, 
my  good  Father ;  had  you  been  aware  that  your  adver- 
saries really  held  this  doctrine,  a  regard  for  the  interests 
of  your  own  Society  might  have  perhaps  withheld  you 
from  this  public  testimony  to  its  truth ;  but,— believing 
that  they  were  opposed  to  it, — that  very  motive  of  in- 
terest has  led  you  to  authorise  sentiments  which  you 
fancied  were  opposed  to  theirs ;  and,  expecting  by  your 
stigmas  to  bring  their  principles  into  obloquy,  you  have  in 
reality  achieved  their  entire  establishment.  In  this  way 
it  is  that,  by  a  species  of  prodigy,  we  at  this  moment  see 
the  defenders  of  the  doctrines  of  grace  countenanced  by 

*  '  Car  ou  pent  n'y  pas  consentir,  si  on  le  veut,  comme  dit  le  conseil ;  mais 
cette  m6me  grace  fait  que  Ton  ne  peut  pas.'  (Fr.) 

TO    R.   P.   ANNAT.  379 

the  partizans  of  Molina :  such  is  the  beautiful  process  by 
which  God  causes  all  things  to  work  together  for  his  glory 
and  his  truth  ! 

Let  it  then  henceforth  be  known  to  the  whole  world, — 
and  that  by  your  own  express  declaration, — that  this 
sacred  truth,  the  doctrine  of  effectual  grace — a  truth  so 
needful  for  every  holy  action — so  cherished  by  the  Church, 
and  the  costly  purchase  of  her  Saviour's  blood — that  this 
truth  is  so  essentially  catholic,  that  there  lives  not  a 
member  of  the  Church — not  even  the  Jesuit  himself — 
who  does  not  acknowledge  its  orthodoxy  !  And  at  the 
same  time  it  will  be  known — and  that  also  by  your  own 
acknowledgment^ — that  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  error  in 
the  views  of  those  whom  you  have  so  grossly  maligned. 
When  your  charges  against  them  were  mysterious  and 
undefined,  it  was  as  difficult  for  them  to  defend  as  it  was 
easy  for  you  to  accuse  ;  but  now  that  you  openly  declare 
the  errors  you  are  combatting  to  be  those  of  Calvin,  which 
you  suppose  them  to  have  espoused,  it  is  manifest  to  all 
that  they  are  wholly  free  from  heterodoxy ;  inasmuch  as 
they  have,  in  their  writings,  in  discourse,  and  by  every 
means  in  their  power,  testified  their  unqualified  opposition 
to  those  errors;  and  that  in  an  equal  degree  with  the 
Thomists,  whom  you  have  no  scruple  in  recognising  to  be 
orthodox ;  and  who  indeed  have  never  by  any  one  been 
suspected  of  being  otherwise. 

What  then.  Reverend  Sir,  becomes  of  your  accusations 
against  them  ?  Are  they,  while  repudiating  this  doctrine 
of  Calvin,  to  be  regarded  as  heretical,  because  they  will 
not  admit  the  doctrine  of  Jansenius  to  be  that  of  Calvin  ? 
Would  you  now  dare  to  assert  that  this  is  a  matter  of 

380  LETTER   XTIII. 

heresy  ?  will  you  not  rather  allow  it  to  be  a  mere  ques- 
tion of  fact,  with  which  heresy  can  have  no  concern  ?  If 
it  be  heresy  to  aflSrm  that  man  cannot  resist  the  influences 
of  grace,  is  it  equally  such  to  doubt,  that  Jansenius  main- 
tains the  opinion  ?  Is  this  a  truth  of  revelation  ?  Is  this 
an  article  of  faith,  which  must  be  received  on  pain  of 
damnation  ?  In  spite  of  all  your  efforts,  what  is  it  in 
reality  but  a  simple  question  of  fact,  which  to  turn  into 
heresy,  is  to  make  utterly  ridiculous  ? 

Give  it  then  no  longer,  my  good  Father,  this  name,  but 
any  other  you  please,  that  shall  suit  the  nature  of  your 
controversy.  Say  they  are  ignorant — obtuse ;  that  they 
do  not  understand  Jansenius :  these  would  be  invectives 
in  character  with  your  style  of  discussion ;  but  to  charge 
them  with  heresy  is  not  so.  And  as  that  is  the  only  re- 
proach which  I  have  any  anxiety  to  avert  from  them,  I  shall 
give  myself  no  trouble  to  demonstrate  that  they  do  under- 
stand Jansenius  aright.  All  I  shall  say  is,  that,  judging 
by  your  own  rules,  it  does  appear  to  me  difficult  to  main- 
tain them  not  to  be  orthodox ;  for  this  is  the  way  in  which 
you  proceed  to  investigate  the  matter. 

"  To  prove,"  you  say,  "  whether  Jansenius  is  in  error 
or  not,  it  must  be  ascertained  whether  he  defends  the  doc- 
trine of  '  effectual  grace,'  after  the  manner  of  Calvin,  who 
denies  the  existence  of  any  power  to  resist  it ;  for  then  he 
would  be  heretical ;  or  after  the  manner  of  the  Thomists, 
who  admit  it ;  then  he  would  be  catholic." 

See  then,  for  yourself.  Sir,  whether  he  holds  an  inability 
to  resist  the  influence  of  grace,  when  he  declares  through- 
out several  entire  treatises,  and  among  others,  in  Vol.  3, 
B.  8,  ch.  20,  "  We  have  always,  according  to  the  Council, 

TO  R.  P.   ANNAT,  381 

a  power  to  resist  grace.  The  free-will  of  man  has  always 
an  ability,  either  to  act,  or  not  to  act  j  to  will,  or  not  to 
will ;  to  consent,  or  not  to  consent ;  to  do  good,  or  to  do 
evil ;  and  man  has  even  in  this  life  these  twa  species  of 
liberty,  which  you  call  contrariety  and  contradiction."  * 
Say,  again,  whether  it  be  not  to  oppose  Calvin,  according 
to  your  own  representation  of  his  opinions,  to  maintain,  as 
does  Jansenius,  throughout  his  31st  chapter,  "  that  the 
Church  has  condemned  the  heresy,  that  efifectual  grace 
does  not  operate  upon  the  will,  in  the  manner  which  has 
been  so  long  received  in  the  Church,  to  the  eflFect  that  it 
is  in  the  power  of  the  will  to  consent  or  not ;  whereas, 
according  to  St.  Augustine  and  the  Council,  the  will  has 
always  the  power  to  withhold  consent,  if  disposed  to  do 
so  ;  and,  according  to  St.  Prosper,  God  bestows  even  upon 
his  elect,  the  inclination  to  persevere,  although  he  does 
not  take  from  them  power  to  do  the  contrary."  And, 
lastly,  judge  whether  he  does  not  agree  with  the  Thomists, 
when  you  find  him  declaring,  c.  4,  "  all  that  which  the 
latter  have  written  to  harmonize  the  efficaciousness  of 
grace  with  the  power  of  resistance  to  it,  is  so  in  accordance 
with  his  views,  that  it  is  sufficient  to  peruse  their  works  to 
be  acquainted  with  his  sentiments.  "  Quid  ipsi  dixerunt 
dictum  puta." 

You  see  then  how  he — more  emphatically  than  all  the 
leading  theologians — expresses  himself  upon  this  head ; 
thus  evincing  that  he  disagrees  with  Calvin,  and  is  equally 
orthodox  with  yourselves.  But  if  you  are  in  possession 
of  a  method  of  ascertaining  the  meaning  of  an  author 

*  '  Que  voHS  appelez  de  contrariete^,  et  de  contradiction.'  (Fr.) 

382  LETTER   XVIII. 

otherwise  than  by  his  own  words,  and  are  able,  not  only 
without  quotations  from  himself,  but  in  contradiction  to 
his  very  expressions,  to  maintain  that  he  denies  the  resist- 
ance of  the  will,  and  "  supports  Calvin  in  opposition  to 
the  Thomists  " — if  you  can  do  all  this,  you  need,  never- 
theless, have  no  fear,  th9,t  I  shall  accuse  you  of  heresy  : 
all  I  shall  say  is,  simply,  that  you  ill  understand  Janse- 
nius :  but  we  may  both  be,  notwithstanding,  very  good 
members  of  the  Catholic  Church  ! 

Why  is  it  then.  Sir,  that  you  are  so  carried  away  by 
acrimony  and  passion  in  this  controversy ;  and  treat  as 
your  bitterest  enemies,  and  as  the  most  dangerous  of  here- 
tics, those  whom  you  can  convict  of  no  error,  except  that 
they  do  not  read  Jansenius  in  the  same  way  as  yourself? 
About  what  is  it  that  you  are  disputing,  but  the  meaning 
of  the  writer  ?  You  ask  for  his  followers'  condemnation ; 
but  they  ask  you  his  meaning.  You  say  it  is  Calvin's 
heresy :  they  reply,  they  condemn  it  equally  with  your- 
self ;  and  therefore,  if  you  would  have  the  candour  to 
look  beyond  the  mere  words  to  the  things  signified,  you 
ought  to  be  satisfied.  If  censure  be  withheld  from  Janse- 
nius, it  is  because  it  is  feared  that  it  must  embrace 
St.  Thomas  also.  Thus,  between  you,  words  themselves 
become  equivocal  in  their  meaning.  On  your  part  they 
signify  Calvin — on  his,  St.  Thomas;  so  that,  your  difier- 
ent  ideas  of  the  same  expressions  being  the  cause  of  such 
dissension,  were  I  the  arbiter  of  the  controversy,  I  should 
interdict  the  naming  of  Jansenius,  both  on  the  one  side 
and  on  the  other.  And  thus,  taking  only  your  under- 
standing of  the  matter,  it  would  be  found  that  you  aimed 
only  at  procuring  the  condemnation  of  Calvin,  in  which 

TO   E.   P.   ANNAT.  383 

they  would  support  you ;  and  that  they  endeavour  alone 
to  defend  the  opinions  of  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Thomas, 
with  which  you  profess  cordially  to  agree. 

As  for  myself,  I  hesitate  not  to  say,  I  shall  still  regard 
them  as  orthodox,  whether  they  condemn  Jansenius,  in 
the  belief  that  he  is  in  error,  or  whether  they  acquit  him, 
finding  in  his  opinions  nothing  but  what  you  esteem  to 
be  catholic ;  and  shall  address  them  as  St.  Jerome  ad- 
dressed John,  Bishop  of  Jerusalem,  when  accused  of  hold- 
ing the  eight  Propositions  of  Origen  :  "  Either  condemn 
Origen,''  he  said,  "  provided  you  believe  he  entertained 
these  errors,  or  deny  that  he  does  entertain  them, — 'Aut 
nega  hoc  dixisse  cum  qui  arguitur ;  aut  si  locutus  est 
talik,  eum  damna  qui  dixerit."  ' 

This,  Reverend  Father,  is  the  conduct  of  those  who 
desire  to  censure  errors,  but  not  persons ;  while  you,  who 
have  more  hostility  to  persons  than  to  errors,  care  little 
for  the  heterodoxy  of  your  opponents,  provided  you  can 
succeed  in  procuring  them  personal  condemnation.  You 
urge  your  proceedings  with  vehemence ;  but  you  will  not 
succeed.  I  have  told  you  before,  and  I  now  repeat  it — 
violence  can  never  prevail  over  truth  !  Never  were  your 
accusations  more  clamorous ;  never  was  the  innocence  of 
your  adversaries  more  apparent !  Never  was  the  doctrine 
of  Grace  more  subtilly  attacked ;  and  never  was  it  seen  to 
be  more  irresistibly  established  !  Your  utmost  efforts  are 
exerted  to  cause  it  to  be  believed  that  your  disputes  are 
upon  questions  of  faith ;  and  the  more  evident  does  it 
become  that  they  relate  to  the  simplest  matters  of  fact. 
You  labour  incessantly  to  induce  a  belief  of  your  facts ; 
and   yet   the  more  universally  are  those  facts  doubted. 

384  LETTER   XVIII. 

And  the  reason  is  plain— it  is,  that  you  have  no  inclina- 
tion to  resort  to  the  most  obvious  method  of  proving  a 
matter  of  fact,  that  of  convincing  the  senses — of  showing 
in  the  book  itself  the  very  words  which  you  assert  to  be 
contained  in  it. 

No  !  your  indisposition  to  this  simple  procedure,  must 
strike  the  most  obtuse.  "Why  do  you  not  adopt  the  course 
that  /  have  uniformly  pursued  in  my  Letters,  that  of 
accurately  marking — page — chapter — volume — the  places 
in  your  publications  from  which  my  quotations  are  taken  ? 
This  is  what  has  been  done  by  the  ecclesiastics  of  Paris; 
and  this  is  a  method  which  never  fails  in  convincing  the 
public.  But  what  would  you  have  said — what  would  you 
have  thought — when,  for  instance,  such  a  proposition  as 
that  of  Pere  Launy's  was  brought  forward  against  you, 
viz.,  "  That  an  ecclesiastic  may  take  the  life  of  any  one 
that  threatens  the  publication  of  calumnies  against  him, 
or  against  his  community,  provided  he  has  no  other  way 
of  defending  himself," — what,  I  ask,  would  have  been 
said,  if  these  expressions  had  not  been  quoted  from  the 
context  in  actual  terms ;  if  every  demand  to  point  out  the 
place  whence  the  passage  was  taken,  had  been  obstinately 
resisted ;  and,  on  the  contrary,  a  mere  application  had 
been  made  to  Rome  for  a  £uU,  directing  that  the  fidelity 
of  the  quotation  should  be  recognized.''  Would  it  not 
have  been  believed  that  his  Holiness  had  been  taken  by 
surprise;  and  that  so  extraordinary  a  procedure  would 
not  have  been  resorted  to,  had  not  the  more  simple 
methods  failed,  which  truth  and  reality  furnish  to  all  who 
rely  upon  their  aid  ?  On  the  other  hand  all  that  was 
necessary  was  to  state  that  Pere  Launy  laid  down  the 

TO   R.   P.    ANNAT.  385 

proposition  in  question  at  t.  5,  disp.  36^  N.  118,  p.  544, 
Edition  of  Douay— then,  every  one  might  seethe  very 
words  for  themselves,  and  every  doubt  would  be  dissipated. 
This,  when  we  have  right  on  our  side,  is  the  prompt  and 
easy  way  to  set  at  rest  effectually  matters  of  pure  fact. 

Why  then.  Sir,  have  you  not  adopted  this  method  ? 
You  have  asserted  in  your  '  Cavilli,'  "  that  the  five  Pro- 
positions are  contained  in  the  writings  of  Jansenius,  word 
for  word,  and  in  their  own  precise  terms — '  iisdem  ver- 
bis." This  is  denied.  What  was  your  conduct  thereon  ? 
Did  you  quote  the  page  in  which  you  had  seen  them  with 
your  own  eyes,  or  did  you  at  once  confess  that  you  had 
been  deceived  ?  You  did  neither  the  one  nor  the  other. 
But,  perceiving  that  none  of  the  passages  of  Jansenius 
which  you  adduced  to  deceive  the  world,  were  actually 
"  the  condemned  Propositions,  literally  and  specifically," 
which  you  had  engaged  to  produce  from  his  works,  you 
present  us  with  the  "  Constitutions,"  which  it  is  pre- 
tended are  extracted  from  them,  although  without  indi- 
cating from  what  parts  they  are  taken. 

I  well  know,  my  Father,  the  reverence  due  from  Chris- 
tians to  the  Holy  See ;  and  your  opponents  are  not  back- 
ward in  showing  the  same  disposition  towards  her  also. 
But  deem  it  not  to  be  any  irreverence  to  his  Holiness, 
that  they  should  have  represented  (with  all  the  submission 
of  children  to  a  parent,  and  of  members  to  their  Head) 
that  he  may  have  been  surprised  into  error  upon  this 
question  of  fact ;  that  he  had  instituted  no  examination 
into  it  during  his  Pontificate ;  and  that  his  predecessor. 
Innocent  X.,  had  only  caused  an  investigation  to  be  made 

s 

386  LETTER   XVIII. 

whether  the  Propositions  were  heretical,  but  not  whether 
they  were  to  be  found  in  Jansenius.  This  it  was  that  in- 
duced the  representation  that  was  made  to  the  commissary 
of  the  Holy  See,  one  of  the  principal  examiners,  "  that 
they  could  not  be  censured,  as  being  the  sentiments  of 
any  author,  in  particular :  "  non  sunt  qualiftcabiles  in 
sensu  proferentis :  "  because  they  had  been  presented  to 
them  for  examination  on  their  own  merits,  and  without 
reference  to  any  author  from  whom  they  proceeded — "in 
abstracto,  et  ut  prsescindunt  ab  omni  proferente."  This 
may  be  seen  in  the  lately  published  account  of  their  pro- 
ceedings ;  where  also  it  appears,  that  above  sixty  doctors 
and  a  large  number  of  able  and  pious  persons  had  care- 
fully read  the  work,  without  perceiving  the  matter  in 
question  ;  but,  on  the  contrary  could  find  nothing  of  the 
kind;  that  those  who  conveyed  the  impression  to  the 
Pope  seemed  to  have  abused  the  confidence  his  Holiness 
reposed  in  them,  being  vitally  interested  in  crying  down  an 
author  who  had  convicted  Molina  of  above  fifty  errors  ;  * 
that  what  renders  this  the  more  probable  is,  that  they 
hold,  as  one  of  the  most  authentic  maxims  of  their  theo- 
logical system,  "  that  they  may  lawfully  calumniate  those 
by  whom  they  believe  themselves  unjustly  attacked ;"  and 
that  thus,  their  testimony  being  so  suspicious,  and  the 

*  This  is  stated  to  have  been  the  origin  of  the  aversion  of  the  Jesuits  to 
Jansenius.  When  his  "  Augustinus  "  was  published  in  1 640,  Libertus  Fro- 
mond,  a  celebrated  Professor  of  Louvaine,  recommended  to  annex  to  the  work 
of  his  friend,  who  had  then  been  dead  two  years,  a  parallel  of  the  Jesuits' 
doctrines  of  Grace  with  the  errors  of  the  Marseillais,  or  semi-Pelagians.  The 
Jesuits,  who  erroneously  supposed  Jansenius  to  be  the  author  of  this  parallel, 
immediately  began,  even  in  the  Low  Countries,  to  denounce  the  work  in  a 
large  number  of  theological  treatises,  which  are  now  very  curious  and  scarce- 
folio,  164L  (Ed.  1812.) 

TO  R.   P.   ANNAT,  387 

counter-evidence  of  others  so  importantj  they  felt  justified 
in  entreating  the  Pope  with  all  humility,  to  institute  an 
investigation  into  this  fact  in  the  presence  of  the  learned 
Professors  on  both  sides  of  the  question,  in  order  to  come 
to  a  regular  and  solemn  decision.  "  Let  them  assemble 
able  arbitrators "  said  St.  Basil  on  a  similar  occasion, 
ep.  75  :  "  Let  them  be  chosen  without  bias ;  let  them  ex- 
amine my  writings,  and  see  if  there  be  any  violations  of  - 
the  truth ;  let  them  then  read  the  objections  and  the  re- 
plies, and  thus  come  to  a  decision  on  mature  grounds 
and  in  due  form ;   one  not  hasty,  partial,  or  superficial." 

Think  not  then.  Sir,  to  represent  as  wanting  in  defer- 
ence to  the  Holy  See,  persons  who  act  in  this  manner. 
The  Papacy  itself  is  little  disposed  to  exercise  over  its 
adherents  that  imperious  authority,  and  those  arbitrary 
pretensions  which  some  would  put  forward  in  its  name. 
"  The  Church,"  says  St.  Gregory,  in  Job  B.  8,  Ch.  1., 
"  which  has  been  bred  in  the  school  of  humility,  com- 
mands not  with  authority,  but  appeals  to  the  reason  of 
such  of  her  children  as  she  believes  to  be  in  error  :  '  recta 
quae  errantibus  dicit,  non  quasi  ex  auctoritate  prsecipit,  sed 
ex  ratione  persuadet.'  "  And,  far  from  feeling  it  to  be 
derogatory  to  rectify  an  erroneous  judgment  into  which 
she  may  have  been  surprised,  she  glories,  on  the  contrary, 
in  doing  so,  as  St.  Bernard  testifies,  Ep.  180 :  "  The 
Apostolical  See,"  he  says,  has  this  distinguished  merit, 
that  it  stands  not  upon  false  scruples,  but  willingly  re- 
vokes any  error  into  which  it  may  have  been  drawn  by 
surprise ;  therefore  no  one  can  avail  himself  of  its  aid  in 
any  unjust  procedure. 

This  is  the  true  aspect  under  which  to  view  the  Papacy; 

S  2 

388  LETTER  ^VIII. 

for  all  theologians  are  agreed  tbat  the  Holy  See  is  liable 
to  surprises  of  this  kind.  And  so  far  is  the  supremacy  of 
its  position  from  affording  a  security  against  them,  that 
the  multifarious  range  of  its  superintendence  tends  rather 
to  render  it  liable  to  them.  This  again  is  what  was  stated 
by  St.  Gregory  himself,  in  reply  to  those  who  expresssed 
astonishment  that  a  Pope  should  have  had  a  deception 
practised  upon  him.  "  Why  are  you  surprised,"  he  said. 
Book  1,  Ch.  4,  Dial : — "  That  we  should  be  deceived — 
we  who  are  but  men  like  yourselves  ?  Know  you  not.  that 
David — a  Sovereign  endued  with  the  spirit  of  prophecy — 
lending  too  ready  an  ear  to  the  impostures  of  Ziba,  gave 
an  unjust  judgment  against  the  son  of  Jonathan  ?  Who 
then  can  think  it  strange  that  we,  who  are  no  prophet, 
should  be  sometimes  surprised  into  error  by  impositions  ? 
We  are  oppressed  by  the  multitude  of  affairs  j  and  our 
mind,  dissipated  in  the  variety  of  objects  that  solicit  atten- 
tion, can  often  give  very  insufficient  consideration  to  each 
individually,  and  may  be  thus  led  into  mistake. 

Now  truly,  my  good  Father,  I  should  think  the  Popes 
themselves  must  know  better  than  you  whether  they  are 
liable  to  error  or  not.  They  tell  us  that  the  most  exalted 
rulers,  ecclesiastical  and  civil,  are  more  exposed  to  decep- 
tion, than  even  those  of  inferior  station.  This  indeed 
may  be  well  believed ;  and  equally  easy  is  it  to  compre- 
hend by  what  means  the  fraud  is  accomplished.  St.  Ber- 
nard gives  a  description  of  them  in  a  letter  addressed  to 
Innocent  11. ,  in  these  energetic  terms,  Ep.  327:  "  It  is 
no  new  or  surprising  thing  to  find  the  mind  of  man  ad- 
dicted both  to  deceive  and  to  be  deceived.  Certain  eccle- 
siastics have  gained  access  to  you  in  a  spirit  of  illusion  and 

TO  E.   P.  ANNAT.  389 

falsehood.  They  filled  your  ear  with  disparagements  of 
a  bishop,  of  exemplary  life,  but  who  had  become  an  object 
of  their  hatred.  Like  dogs  ravening  their  prey,  they  turn 
his  good  deeds  into  evil.  Your  displeasure,  most  holy 
Father,  was  excited  against  your  faithful  son.  Oh  !  why 
did  you  thus  give  cause  of  triumph  to  his  adversaries  ? 
'  Believe  not  every  spirit ;  but  try  the  spirits  whether 
they  be  of  God ! '  Let  me  trust,  that  when  the  truth 
shall  become  apparent  to  your  mind,  all  your  erroneous 
impressions  will  be  removed.  I  pray  the  Spirit  of  Truth 
to  give  you  his  grace  to  separate  the  light  from  darkness, 
to  rebuke  the  evil  and  to  justify  the  good  !  " 

You  see  then.  Reverend  Sir,  that  the  eminence  of  the 
Holy  See  does  not  avail  to  exempt  its  occupants  from 
surprises  into  error,  but,  from  their  weight  and  im- 
portance, renders  such  errors  only  the  more  dangerous. 
This  consideration  is  again  represented  by  St.  Bernard  to 
the  Pope  Eugenius— '  de  Consid.  B.  3,  C.  ult.'  "There 
is  another  defect  so  general,  that  I  have  known  few  per- 
sons of  eminence  exempt  from  it.  It  is.  Holy  Father, 
that  excessive  credulity,  the  source  of  so  many  evils  ! 
Thence  arise  furious  persecutions  of  innocence,  unjust 
prejudices  against  the  absent,  and  storms  of  passion  about 
the  merest  trifles — 'pro  nihilo.'  This,  holy  Father,  is 
an  universal  evil,  from  which  if  you  be  exempt,  I  nmst 
say  that  you  enjoy  an  advantage  unshared  by  any  of  your 
brethren." 

I  should  hope,  my  Father,  that  you  are  beginning  now 
to  perceive  that  Popes,  like  other  men,  may  be  surprised 
into  mistakes.  But,  more  thoroughly  to  convince  you  of 
this,  I  would  only  recal  to  your  recollection  some  ex- 

390  LETTER  xyiii. 

amples,  reported  in  youx  own  work,  of  both  Popes  and 
Emperors  who  have  in  this  manner  been  signally  deceived. 
You  state  that  ApoUinarius  led  into  error  the  Pope  Dama- 
sus,  and  that  Celestius  entrapped  Zozimus  by  misrepre- 
sentations :  you  say  also  that  one  Athanasius  deceived 
the  Emperor  Heraclius,  and  instigated  him  to  a  persecu- 
tion of  the  Catholics ;  and  lastly,  that  Sergius  prevailed 
with  Honorius  to  obtain  from  him  that  decree  which  was 
burnt  by  the  Sixth  Council ;  "  by  means,  as  you  state, 
"  of  plying  successfully  the  office  of  an  assiduous  Valet 
about  the  Pope's  person." 

It  is  therefore  established  by  your  own  testimony,  that 
instances  are  not  wanting  of  persons  who  thus  sur- 
round these  great  Potentates,  urging  them  by  unworthy 
artifices  to  persecutions  of  the  defenders  of  the  truth ; 
while  they  believe  that  they  are  only  opposing  mischievous 
heresies.  Thence  it  arose  that  the  Holy  See,  which 
dreads  nothing  more  than  such  surprises,  constituted  a 
certain  letter  of  Alexander  III  into  an  ecclesiastical  law, 
and  inserted  it  in  the  canonical  code,  to  the  effect  of 
suspending  the  ^execution  of  bulls  and  decrees,  when  there 
might  be  reason  to  suppose  deception  to  have  been  prac- 
tised in  securing  them.  "  If  it  should  happen  "  (writes 
this  Pope  to  the  Archbishop  of  Ravenna,  C.  v.  Ex.  de 
Rescrip.)  "  that  we  should  issue  to  your  brethren  certain 
decrees  which  do  violence  to  your  principles,  do  not  let  this 
cause  you  any  disquiet.  For  you  have  only,  either  to 
execute  them  reverently,  or  to  furnish  us  with  reasons  for 
not  doing  so,  seeing  we  shall  not  disapprove  of  your  with- 
holding obedience  to  orders  which  may  prove  to  have  been 
obtained  from  us  by  surprise  or  artifice."     This  is  the 

TO   R.   P.   ANNAT.  391 

way  in  which  Pontiffs  have  acted,  whose  only  desire  was 
to  assuage  the  differences  of  Christians,  and  not  to  follow 
the  passionate  views  of  those  who  would  cause  trouble  in 
the  Church,  They  affect  not  mere  domination  over  men's 
spirits,  as  saith  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  following  herein 
the  sentiments  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  spirit  which  breathes 
through  their  proceedings  is  that  only  of  peace  and  truth. 
This  leads  them  to  subjoin  to  all  their  ordinances  the 
clause,  "  Si  ita  est;  si  preces  veritate  nitantur :  "  "  if  the 
matter  be  as  represented  to  us ;  if  duly  borne  out  by  the 
facts."  Whence  it  follows,  that  since  the  Popes  only 
allow  efficiency  to  their  bulls,  as  far  as  they  may  be  in 
accordance  with  truth  and  fact,  the  bulls  in  themselves 
are  not  evidence  of  that  truth  and  fact,  but  on  the  con- 
trary it  is  the  truth  and  the  fact  that  give  vaUdity  to  the 
bulls. 

How  then  are  we  to  attain  to  certainty  as  to  matters 
of  fact  ?  It  is  the  sense — the  eye,  which  herein  is  the 
proper  judge;  in  the  same  way  that  reason  is  the  judge 
of  things  intellectual,  and  faith  of  such  as  are  super- 
natural and  revealed.  For  (since  you  oblige  me  to  con- 
tinue the  discussion)  I  must  tell  you  that  according  to 
the  views  of  two  of  the  greatest  authorities  of  the  Church 
— St.  Augustine  and  St.  Thomas — those  three  sources  of 
our  intelligence,  sense,  reason,  and  faith,  have  each  their 
separate  objects,  and  their  assigned  limits.  And,  as  God 
has  seen  fit  to  use  the  medium  of  the  senses  for  the 
entrance  of  faith — '  fides  ex  auditu' — ^just  as  faith  would 
destroy  the  certitude  of  the  senses,  so  faith  would  itself 
be  destroyed  by  bringing  into  doubt  the  faithful  testimony 
of  sense.     On  this  account,  St.  Thomas  remarks  that  God 

392  LETTER   XVIII. 

has  seen  fit  that  the  sensible  accidents  *  should  subsist 
in  the  Eucharist,  in  order  that  the  senses,  which  can  judge 
only  of  these  accidents,  may  not  be  deceived — '  ut  sensus 
Jl  deceptione  redderentur  immunes.' 

We  ought  hence  to  conclude  that,  whatever  be  the 
proposition  presented  for  our  examination,  we  should  first 
satisfy  ourselves  as  to  its  nature,  in  order  to  ascertain  to 
which  of  these  three  principles  it  should  be  referred.  If 
it  relate  to  any  thing  supernatural,  it  should  be  weighed, 
not  by  sense  or  reason,  but  by  Scripture  and  the  decisions 
of  the  Church.  If  it  be  not  matter  of  revelation,  but 
within  the  limit  of  human  reason,  then  reason  may  lawfully 
be  its  judge.  And,  lastly,  if  it  be  a  question  of  fact,  then 
sense,  within  whose  province  it  lies,  will  bs  its  most 
competent  arbiter. 

This  rule  is  so  general,  that  according  to  St.  Augustine 
and  St.  Thomas,  whenever  Holy  Writ  presents  to  us  a 
passage  whose  primary  and  literal  meaning  appears 
opposed  to  what  sense  or  reason  recognize,  with  certainty, 
we  must  not  endeavour  to  disavow  this  contradiction,  in 
order  to  subject  it  to  the  authority  of  this  apparent  sense 
of  Scripture ;  but,  in  our  interpretation  of  Scripture,  we 
must  seek  for  another  meaning  which  shall  be  in  agree- 
ment with  the  sensible  truth ;  because,  the  Word  of  God 
being  infallible  even  as  to  facts,  and  the  evidence  of  the 
senses  and  of  reason  being  in  its  full  extent  positive  also, 
these  two  species  of  truth  must  ever  harmonize.  Then, 
as  Scripture  admits  of  different  modes  of  interpretation, 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  evidence  of  the  senses  is 

*  '  Les  accidents  scnsibles.'  (Fr. ) 

TO   R.   P.   ANNAT.  393 

uniform,  we  ouglit,  upon  such  points,  to  receive  as  the 
true  interpretation  of  Scripture  that  which  is  in  accord- 
ance with  the  faithful  testimony  of  the  senses.  "  We 
must,"  says  St.  Thomas,  1  st  Part,  g.  68,  a.  1,  "  accord- 
ing to  St.  Augustine,  observe  two  things ;  the  one,  that 
Scripture  has  ever  a  true  meaning ;  the  other  that,  as  it 
admits  of  more  than  one  interpretation,  when  any  inter- 
pretation is  assigned  to  it  which  reason  clearly  ascertains 
to  be  untrue,  we  ought  not  to  persist  in  maintaining  such 
to  be  the  natural  meaning,  but  seek  for  another  which 
shall  be  in  accordance  with  it." 

This  he  illustrates  by  the  instance  of  that  passage  in 
Genesis,  in  which  it  is  said,  "  God  created  two  great 
lights,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  the  stars  also."  Herein ' 
Scripture  would  seem  to  imply  that  the  moon  is  greater 
than  the  stars ;  but,  as  it  is  certain  by  indubitable  proofs 
that  the  fact  is  otherwise,  we  ought  not,"  says  this  great 
writer,  "  obstinately  to  defend  this  literal  interpretation, 
but  seek  for  another  in  conformity  with  the  fact  of  the 
matter,"  such  as  "  that  the  term  '  great  light '  denotes 
only  the  magnitude  of  the  moon^s  lustre  in  its  appearance 
to  our  eyes,  and  not  the  positive  magnitude  of  its  orb."  * 
If  this  method  were  not  pursued,  the  effect  would  be,  not 
to  enhance  men's  reverence  for  the  Holy  Scriptures,  but 
rather  to  lay  them  open  to  the  cavils  of  the  infidel ;  "  for," 
as  St.  Augustine  remarks,  '  de  Gen.  ad.  Lit.  1,  C.  19,' 
"  when  he  perceives  that  we  receive,  on  the  authority  of 

*  The  command  of  Joshua  to  the  Sun  to  stand  stilly  is  another  and  obvious 
instance  of  the  same  kind.  It  will,  however,  be  quite  evident  to  all  who  are 
acquainted  with  Pascal's  writings,  and  with .  his  implicit  reception  of  scrip- 
tural truth,  that  from  the  propositions  laid  down  in  the  preceding  paragraphs, 
all  revelations  of  a  miraculous  kind  are  strictly  excluded.    (Transl.) 

S  5 

394  LETTER   XVIII. 

Scripture,  facts  which  he  knows  to  be  untrue,  he  smiles  at 
our  credulity  in  regard  to  other  questions  of  a  more  re- 
condite nature,  such  as  the  Eesurrection  of  the  dead,  and 
everlasting  Life."  "Thus,"  adds  St.  Thomas,'  "we 
should  render  our  religion  contemptible  in  the  eyes  of 
the  prejudiced,  and  increase  their  aversion  to  its  truths." 

In  the  same  way,  Sir,  you  would  shut  the  door  against 
heretics,  and  render  the  authority  of  the  Papacy  despicable 
in  their  esteem,  were  you  to  refuse  to  regard  as  catholic 
those  who  will  not  admit  certain  passages  to  be  in  a 
publication,  which  they  themselves  are  unable  to  find  in 
it,  merely  because  a  Pope  has  been  surprised  into  a 
declaration  that  they  are  to  be  found  there.  It  is  only 
the  personal  examination  of  the  book  that  can  produce 
conviction  upon  such  a  point.  Questions  of  fact  are 
only  to  be  determined  by  the  senses.  If  what  you  assert 
be  true,  prove  it  to  be  so ;  if  it  be  not,  you  labour  in 
vain  to  induce  belief.  All  the  authority  in  the  world 
cannot  enforce  or  alter  belief  as  to  facts;  nothing  can 
possibly  have  power  to  cause  that  not  to  be  which  ac- 
tually is. 

It  was  in  vain,  for  example,  that  Certain  monks  of 
Eatisbon  obtained  from  Pope  St.  Leo  IX.  a  solemn  de- 
cree, by  which  he  declared  that  the  body  of  St.  Denis, 
first  Bishop  of  Paris,  who  was  commonly  believed  to  be 
an  Areopagite,  had  been  removed  from  France,  and  trans- 
ported to  the  church  of  their  monastery.  This  had  no 
effect  in  invalidating  the  fact,  that  the  body  of  the  Saint 
remained,  and  is  to  this  day,  in  the  celebrated  abbey  which 
bears  his  name ;  although  the  Pope  states  that  he  had 
investigated  the  circumstance  with  all  the  diligence  pos- 

TO  R.  P.   ANNAT.  395 

sible — *  diligentissime/  and  assisted  by  the  advice  of 
many  bishops  and  prelates  of  the  church;  for  which 
reason  he  strictly  enjoins  all  Frenchmen  — '  districte 
prsecipientes ' — to  acknowledge  that  we  no  longer  possess 
these  holy  relics."  Notwithstanding  which^  the  French, 
who  well  know  the  contrary  of  all  this  by  the  evidence  of 
their  own  eyes,  and,  having  had  the  shrine  opened,  found 
(according  to  the  testimony  of  all  the  chronicles  of  the 
day)  the  relics  in  entire  preservation,  believed  then,  and 
continue  to  do  so  to  the  present  day,  the  direct  reverse  of 
what  his  Holiness  enjoined  upon  them  ;  knowing  well  that 
saints  and  prophets  are,  like  other  men,  liable  to  surprisals 
into  error. 

On  the  same  principles,  it  was  in  vain  that  you  suc- 
ceeded in  procuring  from  Rome  a  decree  against  Galileo, 
condemning  his  theory  of  the  earth's  motion.  This  has 
been  of  no  avail  in  proving  that  she  is  stationary ;  and  if 
our  own  observations  have  convinced  us  that  it  is  she  that 
revolves  in  the  system,  all  the  men  in  the  world  will  not 
prevent  her  from  so  revolving,  or  prevent  them  from 
revolving  with  her.  Can  you  imagine,  also,  that  the 
letters  of  excommunication  of  Pope  Zachary  against  St. 
Virgile  for  maintaining  the  existence  of  our  Antipodes, 
have  had  the  effect  of  annihilating  this  new  World;  and 
that  although  this  opinion  was  thus  declared  to  be  a 
dangerous  error,  the  Spanish  monarch  would  not  have 
preferred  taking  the  word  of  Christopher  Columbus  for 
its  existence  (who  had  returned  from  it,)  rather  than  the 
opinion  of  the  Pope  who  had  not  been  there ;  while  the 
Church  derived  incalculable  advantages  from  the  dis- 
covery, in   conveying  the  .  knowledge   of  the  Gospel  to 

3S6  LETTER   XVIII. 

multitudes,  who  would  otherwise  have  perished  in  their 
infidelity  ! 

You  see  then,  in  these  instances,  what  is  the  nature  of 
testimony  from  facts,  and  the  principles  by  which  they 
are  to  be  judged.  Hence  (to  return  to  our  proper  subject) 
it  is  easy  to  understand  that,  if  the  Propositions  in 
question  are  actually  not  contained  in  the  writings  of 
Jansenius,  they  cannot  by  possibility  have  been  extracted 
from  them.  The  only  way  to  set  the  matter  at  rest  with 
the  world  is  to  have  his  book  regularly  examined,  with 
that  view,  in  an  authorized  conference — a  proceeding 
which  you  have  been  long  importuned  to  adopt.  Until 
that  be  done  you  have  no  right  to  charge  your  opponents 
with  pertinacity ;  for  they  will  be  held,  by  all  impartial 
persons,  justified  by  facts  as  well  as  sound  in  faith; 
accurate  in  the  one,  catholic  in  the  other,  and  free  from 
blame  or  offence  in  both. 

Who  then,  Sir,  but  must  be  astonished  to  see,  on  the 
one  side,  a  justification  so  complete,  and,  on  the  other, 
denunciations  so  violent  ?  Who  would  suppose  that  the 
question  between  you  was,  in  reality,  one  of  no  importance, 
when  they  see  the  earnestness  with  which  it  is  sought  to 
enforce  belief  entirely  without  proof  ?  Who  would  con- 
jecture that  the  Church  could  be  thrown  into  such 
agitation,  actually  for  a  nulUty — '  pro  nihilo ' — as  St. 
Bernard  styles  it  ?  But  herein  consists  the  refinement 
of  your  proceeding,  in  aiming  to  make  it  believed  that 
such  momentous  issues  depend  upon  a  matter  so  un^ 
important ;  and  to  impress  upon  the  influential  persons, 
whose  ear  you  have  gained,  that  the  questions  in  debate 
involve   the  most   pernicious    errors   of   Calvin,  and  the 

TO  R.   P.   ANN"AT.  397 

most  solemn  articles  of  faith^  in  order  thatj  under  such 
conviction,  they  may  exert  all  their  zeal  and  all  their 
weight  of  authority  against  your  opponents,  as  if  the  very 
existence  of  the  Catholic  religion  were  at  stake  !  Could 
they,  on  the  other  hand,  be  made  to  perceive  that  the 
question  regards  a  simple  fact  (as  we  have  repeatedly  said,) 
their  disproportionate  excitement  would  subside,  and  they 
would  regret  rather  to  have  lent  themselves  to  subserve 
your  personal  prejudices  arid  passions,  in  a  matter  utterly 
unimportant  to  the  interests  of  the  Church. 

For  even — to  take  the  matter  at  the  worst — were  it 
true  that  Jansenius  did  hold  the  propositions  in  question, 
where  had  been  the  great  evil,  that  a  few  persons  laboured 
under  doubt  of  the  fact,  provided  they  proved  that  they 
actually  detested  those  dogmas,  and  had  made  public 
declarations  to  that  effect  ?  Is  it  not  enough  that  they 
have  been  condemned  by  all  the  world,  without  exception, 
in  the  sense  in  which  they  ought  to  be  condemned  ? 
Could  they  be  more  the  object  of  censure,  if  it  were 
established  that  Jansenius  adopted  them  ?  For  what 
purpose  is  it  then  that  you  require  this  condemnation, 
except  to  asperse  the  memory  of  a  divine  and  a  bishop, 
who  died  in  the  faithful  communion  of  the  Church  ?  I 
am  unable  to  see  that  this  would  be  so  great  a  benefit,  as 
to  compensate  for  all  these  perturbations.  What  interest 
in  a  question  such  as  this  has  the  State,  the  Papacy,  the 
Bishops,  the  Doctors,  the  entire  Church  ?  It  concerns 
them  not  in  any  the  slightest  degree ;  and  it  is  in  reality 
your  Society  alone.  Reverend  Father,  that  could  derive 
satisfaction  from  defaming  a  writer,  who  has  inflicted  upon 
yourselves  an  injury  never  to  be  forgiven  !     This  is  the 

398  LETTER   XVIII. 

secret  cause — this  the  originating  impulse — of  agitations, 
which  would  subside  at  once  if  the  motives  of  your  contro- 
versy were  seen  through.  And  therefore  it  is,  that  it 
became  a  matter  of  the  highest  importance  to  the  repose 
of  the  Church  to  give  the  present  explanation,  in  order  that 
— all  your  obliquities  being  exposed — it  might  be  manifest 
to  the  world  that  your  accusations  are  without  founda- 
tion, your  opponents  without  blame,  and  the  Church 
without  heresy. 

This,  Reverend  Sir,  is  the  object  I  had  at  heart.  It 
was  an  object,  to  my  apprehension,  so  momentous,  that  I 
have  found  it  difficult  to  understand,  how  those  who  must, 
equally  with  myself,  have  been  alive  to  its  importance, 
could  be  content  to  remain  silent.  If  the  injuries  they 
had  endured  from  yourselves  were  not  sufficient  to  arouse 
them,  those  which  the  Church  has  sustained,  might,  me- 
thinks,  have  found  in  them  a  voice  :  nor  can  I  see,  how 
an  ecclesiastic  can,  especially  in  matters  which  involve  the 
soundness  of  his  faith,  justifiably  abandon  his  reputation 
to  calumnious  reproach.  Yet  have  they,  without  resist- 
ance, allowed  you  to  publish  whatever  representations  you 
thought  proper ;  and,  thus,  but  for  the  opportunity  which 
accident  put  into  my  hands  to  take  up  the  cause,  there 
would  perhaps  have  been  given  no  check  or  counteraction 
to  those  scandalous  statements  which  you  have  been  so 
assiduous  in  circulating  in  every  direction.  I  must  con- 
fess, therefore,  that  their  forbearance  occasions  me  some 
surprise ;  and  the  more  so,  as  they  cannot  be  suspected, 
either  of  a  failure  of  courage  or  a  want  of  ability ;  they  are 
deficient  neither  in  ground  of  justification,  nor  in  zeal  for 

TO  R.   P.   ANNAT.  399 

truth.  Such  conscientiousness  of  endurance  may,  it  is 
possibkj  be  carried  to  an  extreme.*  For  me,  however, 
my  good  Father,  I  am  unable  to  follow  their  example. 
Do  you  leave  the  Church  in  peace,  and  I  will  gladly  be 
silent.  But  so  long  as  you  continue  unceasingly  to  vex 
her  with  your  outrages,  be  assured  there  shall  never  be 
wanting  those  who — lovers  of  peace  themselves — do  not 
deem  it  inconsistent  with  Christian  duty,  to  use  active 
efforts,  for  the  purpose  of  enforcing  her  tranquillity  ! 

*  This  ebullition  of  momentary  impatience  against  his  aggrieved  and  patient 
colleagues,  will  be  seen  to  be  gracefully  atoned  for  in  the  beautiful  tribute  to 
their  virtues  and  sufferings,  in  the  ensuing  short  but  precious  fragment. 
(Transl.) 

LETTER  XIX. 

fragment  op  a    nineteenth    provincial.  letter, 
addressed  to  the  peee  annat. 

Reverend  Sir, 
If  I  have  caused  you  some  dissatisfaction,  in  former 
Letters,  by  my  endeavours  to  establish  the  innocence  of 
those  whom  you  were  labouring  to  asperse,  I  shall  afford 
you  pleasure  in  the  present,  by  making  you  acquainted 
with  the  sufferings  which  you  have  inflicted  upon  them. 
Be  comforted,  my  good  Father,  the  objects  of  your  en- 
mity are  in  distress  !  And  if  the  Reverend  the  Bishops 
should  be  induced  to  carry  out,  in  their  respective  dio- 
ceses, the  advice  you  have  given  them,  to  cause  to  be 
subscribed  and  sworn  a  certain  matter  of  fact,  which  is, 
in  itself,  not  credible,  and  which  it  cannot  be  obligatory 
upon  any  one  to  believe — you  will  indeed  succeed  in 
plunging  your  opponents  into  the  depth  of  sorrow,  at 
witnessing  the  Church  brought  into  so  abject  a  condition. 
Yes,  Sir,  I  have  .seewthem;  and  it  was  with  a  satis- 
faction inexpressible !  I  have  seen  these  holy  men ;  and 
this  was  the  attitude  in  which  they  were  found.  They 
were  not  wrapt  up  in  a  philosophic  magnanimity ;  they 
did  not  affect  to  exhibit  that  indiscriminate  firmness, 
which  ui'ges  implicit  obedience  to  every  momentary  im- 
pulse of  duty  ;  nor  yet  were  they  in  a  frame  of  weakness 
and  timidity  which  would  prevent  them  from   either  dis- 

TO   R.   P.    ANNAT.  401 

cerning  the  truth,  or  following  it  when  discerned.  But  I 
found  them  with  minds  pious,  composed,  and  unshaken  ; 
impressed  with  a  meek  deference  for  ecclesiastical  autho- 
rity ;  with  tenderness  of  spirit,  zeal  for  truth,  and  a  desire 
to  ascertain  and  obey  her  dictates :  filled  with  a  salutary 
suspicion  of  themselves,  distrusting  their  own  infirmity, 
and  regretting  that  it  should  be  thus  exposed  to  trial : 
yet,  withal,  sustained  by  a  modest  hope  that  their  Lord 
will  deign  to  instriict  them  by  his  illuminations,  and  sus- 
'  tain  them  by  his  power ;  and  believing,  that  that  grace  of 
their  Saviour,  whose  sacred  influences  it  is  their  endeavour 
to  maintain,  and  for  whose  cause  they  are  brought  into 
suffering,  will  be,  at  once,  their  guide  and  their  support ! 
I  have,  in  fine,  seen  them  maintaining  a  character  of  Chris- 
tian piety,  whose  power 

I  found  them  surrounded  by  their  friends,  who  had 
hastened  to  impart  to  them  those  counsels  which  they 
deemed  the  most  fitting  in  their  present  exigency.  1  have 
heard  those  counsels ;  I  have  observed  the  manner  in 
which  they  were  received,  and  the  answers  given  :  and 
truly,  my  Father,  had  you  yourself  been  present,  I  think 
you  would  have  acknowledged  that,  in  their  whole  proce- 
dure, there  was  the  entire  absence  of  a  spirit  of  insubordi- 
nation and  schism ;  ..and  that  their  only  desire  and  aim 
was,  to  preserve  inviolate  two  things — to  them  infinitely 
precious — peace  and  truth. 

For,  after  due  representations  had  been  made  to  them, 

of  the  penalties  they  would  draw  upon  themselves  by  their 

refusal  to  sign  the  Constitution,  and  the  scandal  it  might 

cause  in  the  Church,  their  reply  was 

* 

*  See  Appendix,  No.  IX. 

LETTER  XX.* 

ORIGINALLY  PUBLISHED  UNDER  THE  TITLE  OP  A  LETTER 
FROM  AN  ADVOCATE  OP  PARLIAMENT  TO  A  PRIENDj 
RESPECTING  THE  INQUISITION  PROPOSED  TO  BE  ESTA- 
BLISHED IN  PRANCE,  IN  PURSUANCE  OP  THE  RECENT 
BULL   OP   POPE   ALEXANDER   VII. 

Sib,  June  \,  1657. 

You  imagine  that  all  your  affairs  are  going  on  satisfac- 
torily, because  your  process  is  not  unsuccessful ;  but  you 
will  soon  discover  that  you  are  very  insufficiently  ac- 
quainted with  what  is  passing.  You  are  fortunate  in 
looking  at  the  course  of  affairs  only  from  a  distance.  We 
have  found  ourselves  on  the  verge  of  the  establishment  of 
an  Inquisition  in  France,  and  are  not  as  yet  free  from  the 

*  This  Letter  is  not  Pascal's;  it  is  the  production  of  M.  Le  Maitre, 
trother  of  Le  Maitre  de  Sacy,  both  nephews  of  M.  Amauld  on  the  side  of 
their  mother,  the  daughter  of  the  celebrated  Ant.  Amauld,  advocate,  so  well 
known  in  the  controversies  of  the  Jesuits  with  the  University  of  Paris. 
M.  L.  Maitre,  whose  pleadings  are  still  extant,  was  one  of  the  most  able, 
eloquent,  and  virtuous  men  of  his  time.  He  quitted  the  profession  of  advocate 
to  retire  within  the  Port  Royal  at  Paris,  as  into  the  bosom  of  his  own  family ; 
and  afterwards,  in  order  to  lead  a  life  of  yet  greater  solitude,  he  proceeded  to 
seclude  himself  within  the  walls  of  the  Port  Royal  in  the  Fields,  which  was 
then  deserted  of  all  but  himself.  He  there  abandoned  himself  wholly  to  re- 
ligious studies  and  penitential  exercises.  He  died  the  4th  of  November,  1658. 
(Fr.  Editor.) 

THE  INQUISITION.  403 

danger.  The  agent  of  the  Court  of  Rome,  and  certain 
Bishops  of  influence  in  that  assembly,  have  been  uniting 
their  efforts  for  its  institution,  taking  for  their  authority 
the  Bull  of  Pope  Alexander  VII.,  on  the  subject  of  the 
five  propositions.  This  Bull  has  been  addressed  to  the 
Clergy,  and  conditions  annexed  to  it  suited  to  their  ob- 
ject ;  for  it  has  been  decreed  in  the  assembly,  that  it  shall 
be  subscribed  *  by  all  the  ecclesiastics  in  the  kingdom, 
without  exception,  and  that  those  refusing  to  sign  shall  be 
proceeded  against  by  all  the  usual  means  for  suppressing 
heresy,  that  is,  the  loss  of  their  benefices,  and  other  well- 
known  violent  measures. 

You  see  now  what  is  the  meaning  of  all  this  :  the  In- 
quisition is  established,  unless  the  Parliament  should 
interpose.  To  its  decision  this  Bull  is  to  be  submitted  ; 
and  if  its  consent  be  given,  France  is  yoked  and  coerced 
like  other  nations. 

I  reflect  much  upon  this  proceeding,  and  can  see  in  it 
nothing  but  evil.  The  world  at  large  perceives  not  its 
tendency  and  consequences.  This  is  not  a  question  of 
religion  but  of  policy ;  and  I  am  much  mistaken  if  Jan- 
senism, against  which  it  is  ostensibly  directed,  be  any 
thing  more  than  a  pretext  j  for — an  Inquisition  once  "esta- 
blished— while  we  are  amused  with  the  promise  of  its 
abolition,  we  shall  insensibly  yield  to  its  imposition,  and 
by  degrees  become  accustomed  to  its  tyranny. 

Admit  that  to  enforce  the  belief  that  the  propositions 
are  contained  in  Jansenism  is  right :  yet  are  the  means 

*  The  formulary  referred  to  was  administered  to  and  subscribed  by  the 
clergy  throughout  France,  with  more  or  less  strictness,  according  to  the  per- 
sonal character  of  the  bishops.     (Fr.  Editor.) 

404  LETTER   XX. 

used  for  the  purpose  objectionable.  This  privation  of 
benefices  is,  I  maintain,  a  novel  and  dangerous  precedent, 
and  one  that  aflFects  many  more  than  you  may  imagine. 
Do  you,  Sir,  suppose  that  yfe  have  no  interest  in  the 
matter,  because  we  are  not  ecclesiastics  ?  Let  us  not  de- 
ceive ourselves  :  this  concerns  us  all,  vehoever  we  may  be 
— if  not  in  our  own  persons,  at  least  for  our  relatives,  our 
friends,  our  children.  Your  son — for  example — now 
studying  at  the  Sorbonne,  may  he  not  hereafter  come  into 
some  benefice,  through  his  uncle?  And  my  son,  the 
Prior,  has  not  he  a  direct  and  personal  interest  ?  You  will 
say  they  have  only  to  subscribe,  and  they  are  secure. 
Granted.  But  is  it  nothing  to  us,  that  their  safety  depends 
on  such  a  contingency  as  this  ?  Suppose  my  son  should 
have  a  fancy  that  these  propositions  are  not  to  be  found 
in  Jansenius  (as  it  is  too  much  to  be  feared  he  may,  for 
he  is  in  frequent  communication  with  his  cousin  the 
doctor,  who  maintains  that  he  has  never  been  able  to  find 
them  there) — and  thus,  not  believing  the  fact  to  be  so, 
he  cannot  affirm  it  by  his  subscription,  for  this  would  be 
a  falsehood ;  and  he  would  rather  lose  everything,  in  the 
world  than  offend  against  his  God — suppose  him,  I  say, 
to  have  such  a  fancy  as  this — 'what  becomes  of  my  bene- 
fices, which  I  have  been  at  such  pains  to  procure  for  him  ? 
You  see  plainly  then,  that  a  man  may  have  no  concern 
in  the  matter  to-day,  but  he  may  have  much  to-morrow. 
Can  no  means  be  found  to  prove  that  these  propositions 
are  in  the  book,  without  troubling  the  whole  kingdom  ? 
A  worthy  cause  indeed  for  all  this  hubbub  !  When  their 
controversies  were  only  about  books,  I  allowed  them  to 
go   on  without  interfering.     But  it  is  a  happy  method, 

THE   INQUISITION.  405 

truly,  of  terminating  their  differences,  to  bring  all  this 
trouble  into  families  that  have  taken  no  part  in  their  dis- 
pute, and  to  introduce  into  France  a  new  Inquisition, 
with  all  its  agreeable  consequences.  God  only  knows  what 
it  will  grow  into,  when  once  it  has  fixed  its  root  in  our 
soil.  We  shall  speedily  see  that  no  one  can  be  safe ;  for 
let  a  man  only  have  some  influential  enemies,  who  bear  a 
grudge  against  him,  and  charge  him  with  Jansenism,  on 
account  of  his  having  a  few  of  their  books  in  his  library, 
or  putting  forth  a  somewhat  free  discourse  on  the  subject 
of  these  new  Bulls  (as  other  advocates  with  whom  you  are 
acquainted  have  done  before)  ;  and  at  once  he  is  put  in 
jeopardy.  And  then,  there  is  the  miserable  prospect  of 
legal  proceedings  !  Why,  what  is  so  easy  as  to  involve  a 
man  in  such  a  process ;  a  man  too,  perhaps,  of  all  others 
the  most  free  from  offence !  We  have  already  had  in- 
stances of  this.  It  is  not  now  the  first  time  that  these 
schemes  have  been  formed :  they  have  been  long  prac- 
tising the  art  of  tormenting  their  unoffending  victims, 
upon  the  Bull  and  Briefs  of  Innocent  X. ;  and  you  know 
how  the  Canons  of  Beauvais  were  persecuted  by  attempts 
to  compel  them  to  subscribe,  on  pain  of  expulsion  from 
their  prebends ;  of  which  they  would  at  this  time  have 
been  dispossessed,  had  they  not  resorted  to  an  appeal  to 
the  courts;  by  means  of  which  the  attempts  of  their  ene- 
mies were  frustrated. 

Indeed  there  is  nothing  so  effectual  against  the  Inquisi- 
tion as  this  kind  of  appeal.  This  they  are  well  aware  of; 
and  they  take  care  to  preclude  the  subjects  of  their  perse- 
cution from  this  resource,  when  they  determine  to  tyran- 
nize over  them  at  their  pleasure.     Thus  it  was  that  they 

406  LETTER   XX. 

proceeded  against  the  Curate  of  Lebulne  in  Guienne^ 
against  whom  they  caused  to  be  got  up  a  charge  of  Jan- 
senism,  and  cited  him  before  certain  Commissioners,  ap- 
pointed by  the  Council  of  the  Archbishop  of  Bordeaux. 
But  as  these  persons  were  not  his  proper  judges,  and 
seemed,  besides,  deeply  prejudiced  against  him,  he  ap- 
pealed from  them,  and  demanded  to  be  heard  before  the 
Vicars  General,  or  the  chief  Judge  of  the  Archbishop's 
Court.  This  was  refused.  He  then  appealed  to  the 
Archbishop  himself^  and  finally  to  the  Pope ;  while  still 
the  Commissioners  would  not  desist  from  their  proceedings 
against  him.  As  his  last  resource,  he  took  his  cause  into 
the  Civil  Courts.  There  his  defence  was  allowed,  and  he 
was  on  the  point  of  escaping;  when  his  opponents  ob- 
tained an  arrest  of  judgment,  ignoring  the  competency  of 
the  court, ,  and  referring  his  case  back  to  the  original 
Commission.  In  this  way  he  was  persecuted  for  above 
six  months ;  during  which  period  he  was  compelled  to 
quit  his  curacy,  and  repair,  at  much  trouble  and  expense, 
to  Paris,  in  order  to  demand  justice  at  the  hands  of  the 
King  and  his  Archbishop.  By  him,  I  hear,  he  has  been 
re-instated  in  his  cure ;  but  who  could  repay  all  the 
labour  and  anxiety  which  the  adversaries  of  this  poor  man 
caused  him,  while  they  themselves  incurred  no  risk  or 
trouble  ? 

It  is  plain,  then,  that  the  Inquisition  is  a  sure  and  most 
convenient  instrument  of  molesting  an  opponent,  how- 
ever innocent  he  may  be.  Here  was  a  person  utterly  free 
from  real  cause  of  censure ;  and  similar  was  the  case  of 
the  Curate  of  Pomegrol,  also  in  Guienne,  who  was  arrested, 
and  thrown  into  a  dungeon,  without  any  legal  charge  or 

THE   INQUISITION.  407 

explanation,  precisely  in  the  manner  of  the  Romish  In- 
quisition. Then,  proofs  were  sought  for,  to  convict  him 
of  Jansenism.  But  the  judges  were  astonished  to  dis- 
cover, by  means  of  the  evidence  tendered  to  them,  the 
entire  innocence  of  this  good  man,  and,  at  the  same  time, 
the  incredible  superstition  of  his  parishioners ;  for  one  of 
their  principal  charges  against  him  was,  "  that  he  had 
preached  that  Jesus  Christ  was  in  the  holy  sacrament,  and 
not  in  their  flag  !  "  And  this,  because  he  had  reproved 
them  for  turning,  when  the  host  was  elevated,  to  the 
banner  on  which  was  a  painting  of  Christ,  and  not  in 
adoration  to  the  holy  element !  This  so  entirely  con- 
founded the  judges,  that  they  instantly  caused  him  to  be 
released  from  prison,  where  he  had  been  confined  above 
two  months ;  yet  notwithstanding  all  his  demands  that  the 
proceedings  should  be  brought  to  a  conclusion,  and  due 
judgment  awarded  against  either  him  or  his  adversaries, 
he  could  procure  no  satisfaction  for  his  shameful  treatment. 
Now,  Sir,  these  must  be  confessed  to  be  no  unfair  spe- 
cimens of  the  proceedings  of  these  Commissioners,  seeing 
they  are  but  in  the  commencement  of  their  career.  And 
if  they  can  make  such  good  use  of  Constitutions  and 
Briefs  not  yet  sanctioned  by  the  courts,  what  will  they  not 
do  with  their  Bulls,  when  invested  with  full  legal  autho- 
rity ?  It  is  utterly  ludicrous  to  pretend,  as  by  some  is 
done,  that  the  registration  of  the  Bull  is  not  to  involve 
the  establishment  of  the  Inquisition,  and  to  be  without 
prejudice  to  our  liberties.  I  should  as  soon  expect  to  be 
told  that  we  can  be  killed  without  danger  to  life.  It  is 
not  the  name  of  Inquisition  we  fear;  it  is  the  thing. 
By  whatever  name  it  is  called,  it  is  a  real  and  effective 

40S  .      LETTER   XX. 

violation  of  liberty,  to  be  treated  as  the  clergy  pretend  to 
treat  us  ! 

And  do  you  not  also  perceive  how  poor  a  satisfaction  it 
is  to  tell  us,  that  the  Courts  retain  always  in  their  own 
breast  the  final  decision  upon  the  appeals  ?  By  entertaining 
the  Bull  in  question,  they  do  away  with  the  chief  ground 
upon  which  such  appeals  rest,  and  which  would  have  still 
existed  if  the  Bull  had  not  been  received.  For,  although 
the  power  to  appeal  may  remain,  to  what  persecutions  may 
those  unhappy  persons  be  exposed  who  are  in  situations 
too  remote  to  avail  themselves  of  this  resource !  What 
would  not  a  poor  curate  of  Lyons  or  Poitou  endure,  rather 
than  expose  himself  to  the  evils  and  expense  of  a  journey 
to  Paris  ! 

If  this  Bull,  then,  be  once  received,  they  will  find  their 
strength  pretty  considerable,  even  should  the  right  of 
appeal  be  continued.  Therefore  I  think  they  have  been 
but  ill-advised  to  entertain  the  question,  which  I  see  re- 
ported in  the  last  Report,  printed  by  Vitre,  page  2; 
"  That  the  King  be  humbly  requested  to  transmit  to  all 
his  Courts  a  general  order,  forbidding  them  to  entertain 
any  appeals  which  may  be  lodged  with  them  on  the  sub- 
ject of  these  signatures  ! "  What  have  they  gained  by 
this,  except  to  prove  that  they  feel,  themselves,  the  injustice 
of  their  schemes,  since  they  are  afraid  of  the  opposition  of 
the  Courts,  and  are  desirous  of  tying  up  their  hands,  in 
order  to  ensure  their  success  ?  Could  they  take  any 
better  way  of  evincing  their  passion  for  supremacy  and 
Inquisition  ?  They  show  want  of  policy,  therefore,  in  bcr 
traying  openly  to  the  world  their  designs.  It  was  not  the 
best  method  to  obtain  the  registration  which  they  sought, 

THE   INQUISITION,  409 

to  show  thus  beforehand  the  purposes  to  which  they 
meant  it  should  be  applied.  They  perceived  this,  indeed, 
themselves ;  but  it  was  too  late.  For,  after  having  the 
Keport,  referred  to,  printed,  and  formally  furnishing  the 
Bishops  with  copies,  signed  by  the  clerical  agents ;  when 
they  discovered  the  injury  it  might  cause  them,  they 
began  to  take  measures  for  suppressing  it;  all  which 
tended  only  the  more  clearly  to  reveal  their  artifices. 
Notwithstanding  this,  however,  they  fancy  that,  as  their  de- 
mand is  so  moderate,  and  the  simplest,  in  appearance,  that 
they  could  possibly  have  made,  the  Courts  will  fall  into 
the  snare,  and  merely  look  at  the  surface  of  the  measure 
proposed,  without  weighing  the  ulterior  consequences ; 
but  which  they  themselves  have  unreservedly  revealed  in 
their  own  authentic  documents. 

It  was  a  happy  conceit  indeed,  that  they  could  make 
the  Courts  their  dupe !  But  I  am  mistaken  if  they  do 
not  find  that  they  are  the  dupes  themselves.  I  see  the 
course  that  the  afiair  is  taking.*  I  converse  daily  with 
Councillors  fresh  from  the  Palace,  and  there  is  not  one 
that  does  not  see  clearly  into  the  matter.  Your  ovm  re- 
porter told  me  this  very  morning,  that  he  did  not  look 
upon  this  as  an  ordinary  question ;  and  that  this  ought 
not  to  be  regarded  as  a  simple  Bull,  which  was  to  arbitrate 
upon  some  contested  but  insignificant  point ;  but  as  the 
foundation  of  a  new  Inquisition  sought  to  be  established, 
and  which  waited  only  the  consent  of  the  Courts  to  be 
irrevocably  fastened  upon  the  nation  ! 

I  have  felt  quite  at  ease  since  I  found  the  Parliament* 

*  The  Pope  and  Bishops,  and  even  the  Jesuits  themselves,  feared  nothing 
so  much  as  the  Parliament  of  Paris.  (Fr.  Edit.) 

T 

410  LETTER   XX. 

thus  considerately  dealing  with  the  matter.  For,  in  fact, 
had  there  been  nothing  objectionable  in  this  Bull  itself — 
instead  of  being  filled  with  important  nullities  ;*  still  the 
Parliament  could  not  in  these  days  entertain  it,  were  it 
only  for  the  consequences  which  were  sought  to  be  drawn 
from  it.  How  many  things  are  there  which  may  be 
proper  at  one  time,  and  not  at  another  ?  This  was  well 
represented  by  the  Sorbonne,  when  it  was  attempted  to 
compel  all  her  learned  members  to  protest,  "  that  they 
would  say  nothing  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  the  Popes, 
without  restriction,  and  without  reservation,  that  they 
should  not  be  opposed  to  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the 
kingdom," — a  measure  to  which  they  were  urged  by  the 
example  of  certain  ancient  doctors,  who  it  was  said  had 
done  the  same  thing.  They,  however,  in  their  proceed- 
ings upon  this  matter,  declared  that  M.  Fillesac,  Presi- 
dent of  the  Sorbonne,  published  in  1628,  first  of  all, 
"  that  if  any  persons  had  on  any  former  occasion  made 
such  a  disclaimer,  it  was  an  extraordinary  act,  not  binding 
upon  them  now ;  and  further,  that  such  a  thing  might 
have  been  done  conscientiously  in  past  times,  and  yet,  in 
consequence  of  change  of  circumstances,  not  be  expedient 
at  present."  And  the  reasons  assigned  p.  89,  are,  "  that, 
in  the  lapse  of  several  centuries,  the  Popes  have  issued 
numerous  Decrees,  Acts,  and  Bulls,  of  Constitutions,  con- 
trary to  ancient  Decrees,  and  even  opposed  to  Holy 
Writ." 

Of  these  they  adduced  many  instances,  both  of  such  as 
were  contrary  to  Scripture,  as  well  as  such  as  were  repug- 

*  '  Nnllit^s  essentielles.'  (Fr.) 

THE  INQUISITION.  411 

nant  to  the  liberties  of  the  Gallic  Church  and  the  kingly 
authority ;  and,  among  others,  that  of  Pope  Boniface  VIII, 
which  pronounces  heretical  those  who  do  not  hold  that 
the  King  of  France  is  subject  to  him,  even  in  things  tem- 
poral j  and  the  Bull — "Unam  Sanctam" — which  declares 
"  that  it  is  necessary  to  salvation  to  believe  that  the  Pope 
holds  both  the  swords — as  well  the  spiritual  as  the  tem- 
poral— and  that  every  human  creature  is  subject  to  him  : 
so  that,  according  to  this  declaration,  it  is  heretical  to 
assert  the  contrary.  To  which  these  Professors  added  the 
Bull  "  Cum  ex  apostolatus,''  which  declares  "  that  all 
persons,  whether  kings  or  private  individuals,  who  fall 
into  heresy,  or  give  countenance  to,  or  conceal  the  per- 
sons of  heretics,  shall  be  removed  from  and  rendered  for 
ever  incapable  of  all  honours,  dignities,  or  properties,  but 
that  such  shall  belong  to  any  persons  who  can  get  posses- 
sion of  them."  Hereupon  they  assert,  that  in  the  present 
state  of  circumstances  at  the  Com-t  of  Rome,  it  is  impos- 
sible that  any  persons  should  bind  themselves  to  obey 
these  Bulls  without  reservation  ;  and  thus  further  allege 
against  such  conformity  the  universal  temper  of  menu's 
minds  at  that  day. 

This  is  their  language,  p.  47  :  "  We  are  now  arrived  at 
a  period  at  which — and  that  during  the  last  fifty  years — 
we  have  witnessed  the  pubHcation  of  various  similar  Bulls, 
which  challenge  this  imagiuary  right  over  the  disposition 
of  kingdoms.  We  have  also  observed  during  the  same 
time  the  publication  of  many  works  of  the  same  descrip- 
tion, highly  prejudicial  to  the  State,  and  threatening  the 
life  even  of  our  kings ;  among  others  that  execrable  one 

T  2 

412  LETTER   XX.' 

entitled  '  Admonitio ; '  *  and  that  of  Sanctarel,  a  Jesuit^ 
both  composed  for  the  purpose  of  supporting  these  doc- 
trines against  the  King  and  his  prerogatives.  From 
whence  it  clearly  appears,"  they  further  say,  pp.  53  and 
95,  "  what  is  the  object  of  those  who  demand  of  us  these 
new  protestations,  being  no  other  than  artfully  to  over- 
turn the  fundamental  laws  of  this  realm,  to  which  these 
Papal  Decrees  are  opposed ;  making  it  but  too  plain  and 
manifest  that  the  practices  and  artifice  employed  in  fur- 
therance of  these  novelties  have  no  other  aim  and  object 
than  to  authorize  the  Bulls  against  the  King's  authority, 
and  to  elude  the  censure  of  the  works  of  the  Jesuits  Sanc- 
tarel  and  Mariana,  as  also  those  Decrees  of  the  Council 
and  Parliament  which  condemn  this  detestable  doctrine." 
Whence,  they  conclude,  as  they  had  argued  at  pp.  46  and 
47,  "  that  even  w€re  it  true — which  it  is  not — that  these 
protestations  had  been  acquiesced  in  during  a  long  period 
of  time,  it  would  now  be  necessary  to  reject  them. 

I  say  the  same  now  in  our  own  case.     If  it  were  to  be 

*  This  scandalous  publication  appeared  in  1625,  under  the  title  of  '  G.  R. 
Theologi  ad  Ludovlcum  XIII.  Admonitio,  &c.  in  4to.  Augusta  Vindelicorum, 
1625.'  Also,  in  German,  4to.  1625.  Also,  in  French,  4to.  Francheville, 
1627.  It  was  at  first  attributed  to  John  Boucher,  a  celebrated  Leaguer,  for- 
merly Curate  of  St.  Benoit,  in  Paris,  and  afterwards  Archdeacon  of  Toumay : 
but  it  has  been  since  ascertained  to  have  been  written  by  Andre  Endcemon- 
Johannes,  a  Jesuit,  who  came  to  France  with  Cardinal  Barberin,  Pope's 
Legate.  This  Jesuit  died  at  Rouen,  24th  Dec,  1625.  In  this  Book  he 
attacks  the  alliances  which  the  King  had  formed,  for  the  defence  of  his  realm, 
with  the  Protestant  States ;  and  has  scattered  throughout  the  work  such  a 
multitude  of  pernicious  maxims  upon  State  matters,  as  disgusted  all  classes  of 
persons.  It  was  several  times  publicly  condemned  ;  but  it  is  now  entirely 
forgotten.  Sanctarel  was  another  Jesuit,  whose  writings  have  been  con- 
demned by  the  Sorbonne.  Both  these  condemnations  may  be  seen  in  the 
'  Collectio  Judiciorum,'  of  M.  Dargentr^,  Bishop  of  Tulles. 

THE   INQUISITION.  413 

maintained — which  it  is  not^that  this  Bull  might  be  re- 
ceived, simply  on  its  own  meritsj  it  could  not  be  admitted 
at  the  present  time,  because,  to  do  so  would  be  to  favor 
the  palpable  designs  of  those  who  urge  its  reception  only 
to  abuse  its  powers,  and  to  subject  us  to  this  atrocious  tri- 
bunal of  the  Inquisition,  under  the  terrors  of  which  almost 
the  whole  of  Christendom  is  groaning.  But,  further,  I 
maintain  that  it  is  in  itself  so  full  of  informalities,  that  it 
cannot  be  received  without  violating  all  the  rules  of  justice. 
I  will  state  a  few  of  these — for  I  have  not  yet  forgotten 
all  my  canonical  law. 

I  beg  you  will  not  laugh  at  the  first  I  mention,  viz., 
the  gross  solecism,  which  every  one  is  acquainted  with, 
contained  in  the  term  "  imprimantur."  For  this  in  itself, 
renders  it  void  by  the  decrees  of  Pope  Lucian  III.  C.  ad 
Audientiam,  tit.  de  Rescriptis — and  so  unquestionably 
void,  that  the  Commentary  adds,  "  in  the  opinion  of  all 
canonists,  it  is  not  competent  to  entertain  any  proof  of 
the  validity  of  a  Bull,  in  opposition  to  such  a  presumption 
of  its  falsity  :  '  contra  istam  prcesumptionem  non  est  ad- 
mittenda  probatio  : '  so  plain  is  the  proof  thus  afforded 
that  it  has  been  obtained  by  surprise  and  irregularity. 
This  it  was  that  produced  so  great  a  sensation  in  Flan- 
ders ;  for  it  is  clear  that  this  defect  is  in  the  original,  and 
therefore  it  has  answered  no  purpose  to  cancel  the  later 
impressions ;  because,  the  original  being  void,  the  copies 
must  be  void  also.  Besides  that  it  is  established  in  law, 
"  that  the  slightest  change — even  of  a  mere  punctua-' 
tion — renders  a  Bull  void,  and  exposes  the  party  making 
the  change  to  the  penalty  of  excommunication."  "  In 
Bulla  Coense,  c.  licet,  Rebuf.  in  praxi." 

414  LETTER  XX. 

Another  irregularity— and  one  which  touches  us  the 
most  nearly — is,  that  the  Pope  menaces  therein  with 
penalties  all  who  disobey  the  Bull.  Here  I  leave  it  to  the 
Courts  to  decide,  whether  it  is  competent  to  the  Pope  to 
threaten  with  penalties  liege  subjects  of  the  king  :  "  sub 
poenis  ipso  facto  incurrendis." 

Another  important  irregularity  is  the  offensive  way  in 
which  the  high  and  sacred  order  of  the  Episcopacy  has 
been  degraded,  by  putting  it  on  a  level  with  the  lowest 
orders,  by  that  clause  in  which  the  Pope,  speaking  of 
himself,  when  a  cardinal  and  bishop,  says,  he  was  then 
"  in  minoribus" — an  expression  which  renders  the  Bull 
void,  according  to  the  Chapter  :  "  Quam  gravi,  titul :  de 
crimine  falsi ;  "  in  which  it  is  set  forth  that,  if  a  Pope, 
speaking  of  a  Bishop,  calls  him  "  his  Son,"  instead  of 
"  his  Brother,"  to  the  detriment  of  the  bond  subsisting 
between  him  and  the  whole  episcopal  body,  the  Act  in 
which  the  expression  occurs  shall  be  void.  What  then  is 
to  be  said  of  the  one  in  question,  in  which  the  Pope  treats 
the  bishops,  not  as  sons,  but  as  inferiors :  *  a  term  so 
offensive  and  degrading,  that  the  assembled  clergy,  who 
had  not  ordinarily  shown  too  much  zeal  on  behalf  of  the 
Episcopate,  changed  the  expression  in  their  version  of  the 
Bull,  making  the  best  they  could  of  the  passage  in  which 
it  occurred  ?  They  did  not,  however,  by  this  means  suc- 
ceed in  removing  the  affront  to  their  character,  which 
continued  under  the  stigma  in  the  original  document,  as 
well  as  in  the  Latin  version :  so  that  the  alteration  seemed 
only  to  render  more  striking  the  outrage  done  to  their 
dignity,  and  their  own  weakness  in  submitting  to  it. 

*  '  Mineurs.'  (i'r.)  ■ 

THE  INQUISITION.  415 

Do  you  ask  for  other  instances  ?  What  will  you  say 
to  the  fact  that  the  Pope  is  not  satisfied  with  forbidding 
to  write,  preach,  or  say  any  thing  against  his  decisions,  as 
it  is  admitted  he  has  the  power  to  do  by  virtue  of  his 
supreme  station  in  the  Church ;  but  he  would  go  beyond 
all  this,  and  insist  upon  our  believing  implicitly  all  his 
decisions — "  Teneant :  "  all  which,  we  might  perceive, 
without  confessing  "  that  we  and  our  king  are  his  sub- 
jects even  in  temporal  matters  ;"  since  their  Bulls  declare 
plainly,  "  that  it  is  heresy  to  affirm  the  contrary  :  '  Aliter 
sentientes  hcereficos  reputamus  ;'  "  as  said  Boniface  VIII. 
to  our  own  King  Philip  le  Bel.  It  is  then  incontro- 
vertible, that  if  we  hold  the  Pope  to  be  infallible,  we  must 
either  acknowledge  ourselves  to  be  his  slavesy  or  pass  for 
heretics  ;  since  we  should  otherwise  be  opposing  ourselves 
to  an  infallible  authority.  Therefore  it  is  that  the  Church 
has  never  recognized  this  infallibility  in  the  Pope,  but 
only  in  the  General  Council,  to  which  there  has  always 
been  a  right  of  appeal  from  unsound  decisions  on  the  part 
of  the  Popes.  And  while,  in  order  to  establish  their 
supremacy,  they  have  often  assumed  to  treat  as  heretics 
such  as  appealed  from  them  to  their  Councils,  as  did 
Pius  II.,  Julius  II„  and  Leon  X. ;  the  Church,  on  the 
contrary,  maintains,  on  the  authority  of  a  decision  in  full, 
assembly,  that  the  Pope  is  obnoxious  to  such  appeal. 
And  on  this  account  it  is,  that  our  Sovereigns,  their  Pro- 
curator General,  the  entire  Universities,  and  various  indi- 
vidual members  of  the  body,  have  so  often  appealed  from 
the  Bulls  to  the  Council,  as  may  be  seen  set  forth  through- 
out the  thirteenth  chapter  of  the  "  Liberties  of  the  Galli- 
can  Church."     Thus  the  main  foundation  of  our  liberties. 

416  LETTER   XX. 

and  tLat  which  M.  Pithou  considers  them  all  to  depend 
upon,  is  the  ancient  maxim,  "  That  although  the  Pope  be 
supreme  in  spiritual  things,  in  France,  nevertheless,  a 
sovereign  power   has  no  existence,  but  is  bounded  and 
limited  by  the  rules  and  decisions  of  ancient  Councils ; 
'  et  in  hoc  maxime  consistit  libertas  Ecclesiee  Gallicanse,' 
according  to  the  University  of  Paris."     Upon  which  M. 
Du  Puy,  in  his  Commentaries  upon  these  liberties,  dedi- 
cated to  the  late  M.  Mole,  First  President  and  Keeper  of 
the  Seals,  printed  under  authority  by  Cramoisy,  reports, 
page  30,  that  our  theologians  style  the  plenary  power  of 
the  Pope,  "  an  instrument  of  commotion,  and  a  diabolical 
term — 'plenum  tempestatem  et  verbum  diaholicum..'  "    ■ 
These   are  the    sentiments  of  our   doctors,  following 
whom,  we  have   always  held,  "  that  the  decision  of  the 
Pope  does  not  bind  us  to  believe  in  conformity  therewith, 
even  in  matters  of  faith ;  because  he  himself  is  liable  to 
error  in  faith ;  but  only,  not  to  gainsay  such  decision  ex- 
cept for  weighty  considerations :  '  In  causis  fidei,  deter- 
minatio  solius  Papse,  ut  Papse,  non  ligat  ad  credendum, 
qui&,  est  deviabilis  a  fide,'  "  as  Gerson  affirms  !     The  Pope 
then  aims  to  contravene  our  liberty  in  this  Bull,  by  com- 
pelling us  to  submit  to  his  decisions,  and  thus  it  becomes 
a  palpable  nullity. 

There  is  also  more  of  importance  in  this  matter  than 
might  at  first  sight  appear,  inasmuch  as  the  Pope  states 
that  it  has  been  investigated  with  all  the  diligence  and 
care  that  can  be  desired — "  qu^  major  desiderari  non 
possit."  Now  herein  lies  a  secret  artifice  proper  to  be 
exposed ;  which  is,  as  I  have  already  explained,  that  the 
Popes  are  desirous  to  have  it  believed,  that  they  alone  can 

THE  INQUISITION.  417 

decide  points  of  faith,  and  that  after  them  nothing  further 
can  be  desired;  instead  of  which,  we  maintain  that  it  is 
the  Councils  alone  which  can  compel  men's  belief}  and 
which  leave  nothing  further  to  be  desired.  Thus  the 
Pope  does  well,  in  supporting  his  pretensions,  to  endea- 
vour to  make  us  acknowledge  that  every  thing  has  been 
done  in  the  matter  in  question  that  can  be  desired ; 
although  he  has  in  reality  done  nothing  more  than  con- 
sult with  a  few  officials.  But  we  should  be  very  ill-ad- 
vised to  acquiesce  in  this ;  since  it  would  be  to  acknow- 
ledge the  Pope's  infallibility ;  to  impair  incalculably  our 
liberties,  to  overthrow  the  right  of  appeal  to  the  Councils; 
and  even  to  render  those  Councils  useless ;  since  the 
Pope's  word  alone  would  be  sufficient,  if  he  is  to  be  held 
infallible.  And  doubt  not  that  the  partizans  of  the 
Romish  Court  will  one  day  make  their  advantage,  and 
draw  all  these  consequences  from  this  Bull,  if  once  you 
should  fall  into  their  views  by  allowing  its  reception. 

There  are  various  other  important  informalities,  which 
it  would  be  tedious  to  particularize.  No  Bull  that  was 
ever  issued  contains  so  many.  But  that  which  utterly 
precludes  its  reception  by  the  Parliament  is  that,  being- 
issued  by  the  Pope  alone  without  sanction  of  his  Council, 
and  even  without  the  advice  of  the  Cardinal's  College,  it 
can  only  be  considered  as  emanating  from  his  individual 
will — "  motu  propria," — which  is  a  thing  not  recognized 
in  this  country  :  France  never  has  admitted  Bulls  issued 
''  motu  proprio  "  in  matters  of  faith,  or  in  the  general 
affairs  of  the  Church,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  of  various 
Popes  to  induce  her  to  do  so.  Such  was,  among  others, 
the  abortive  endeavour  of  Innocent  X.  on  occasion  of  his 

T  5 

418  LETTER   XX. 

Bull  respecting  the  residence  of  cardinals,  in  1646,  in 
whicli  he  declares,  "  that  although  issued  on  his  indivi- 
dual authority,  he  demands  that  it  shall  have  the  same 
force  as  if  it  had  been  sanctioned  by  the  Council  of  Car- 
dinals." On  which  the  late  Advocate-General,  M.  Tulon 
said,  "  that  the  Pope  in  vain  endeavoured,  by  such  a 
clause  as  that,  to  supply,  on  his  own  prerogative,  the  want 
of  that  authority  which  was  essential  to  an  Act  so  import- 
ant ;"  in  consequence  of  which  it  was  rejected  as  informal. 
And  the  last  constitution  of  the  same  Pope  respecting  the 
five  Propositions,  even  if  it  had  pronounced  upon  points  of 
faith  acknowledged  by  all  theologians,  without  exception, 
yet,  on  the  sole  ground  that  it  had  issued  on  his  individual 
authority,  could  not  have  supported  its  claim  to  registra- 
tion, much  as  his  Holiness  might  have  desiderated  such  a 
sanction.  How  then  could  that  of  Alexander  be  other- 
wise than  rejected,  seeing  that,  besides  so  many  other  irre- 
gularities, this  cardinal  defect  of  its  having  issued  on 
individual  and  unsupported  authority,  renders  it  utterly 
incapable  of  admission  ? 

It  is,  Sir,  incontestible  therefore,  that  no  Papal  Bull 
was  .ever  less  entitled  to  reception  than  the  present ;  for 
even  were  its  scope  and  tendency  not  so  injurious,  it 
ought  to  be  rejected  for  informalities ;  and  its  tendency 
and  contemplated  objects  being  so  bad,  it  ought  to  be 
rejected,  if  its  matter  were  not  informal.  What  is  it  then 
good  for,  when  considered  in  both  views — its  irregularity 
in  form,  and  its  viciousness  in  substance  ?  Is  it  not  clear 
that  if  this  should  pass,  none  can  ever  be  refused  in 
future;  and  we  are  defencelessly  exposed  to  all  the  com- 
mands which  the  Court  of  Rome  may  hereafter  see  fit  to 

THE   INQUISITION.  419 

impose — a  consequence  of  no  slight  moment !  Let  us 
judge  of  what  may  befal  us  in  future,  by  what  has  oc- 
curred abeady.  Do  you  not  see  that  this  systematic  mul- 
tiplication of  Bulls  aims  at  strengthening  progressively 
the  greedily-desired  title  of  Infallibility;  and  that,  by  im- 
perceptible degrees,  the  world  will  be  brought  at  length  to 
a  blind  and  ignorant  belief  in  their  authority  ?  When 
once  they  have  thus  acquired  a  mastery  over  the  mind  of 
the  people,  in  vain  will  the  Courts  oppose  themselves  to 
the  attempts  of  Rome  against  the  royal  prerogatives  ! 
Their  resistance  will  be  regarded  as  mere  political  anta- 
gonism—not conscientious  repugnance.  They  will  them- 
selves be  branded  with  heresy,  if  such  shall  be  the  pleasure 
of  Rome ;  for  how  should  means  be  ever  wanting  to  push 
'  forward  such  ends  ?  According  to  the  decrees  of  Boni- 
face VIII.,  and  others  lik^  him,  there  is  little  difiference 
between  holding  that  the  Pope  is  infallible,  and  that  we 
are  his  subjects. 

You  see,  then,  from  all  this,  how  dangerous  this  Bull  is, 
both  from  the  purpose  which  it  is  intended  to  serve,  and 
from  the  defects  in  its  preparation.  It  remains  now  only 
to  remark  how  inconsiderable  it  really  is,  in  its  origin  and 
in  the  matter  upon  which  it  seeks  to  arbitrate;  which 
being  simply  a  question  of  fact,  is  far  from  deserving  all 
the  importance  it  has  acquired.  It  is  clear,  by  the  con- 
sent of  every  good  theologian,  that  the  denial  of  the  fact 
in  question  cannot  possibly  convict  any  one  of  heresy ; 
but  at  the  very  utmost  of  indiscretion.  Now,  that  a  mere 
indiscretion  should  be  made  to  involve  the  loss  of  benefices 
and  the  penalties  of  heresy,  is  truly  monstrous.  Are  we 
to   treat  as  heretics  those  who  are  not  at  all  such,  and 

420  LETTER   XX. 

when  tbe  question  at  issue  is  one  that  cannot  constitute 
heresy  ?  And  yet,  certain  Bishops,  who  have  made  up 
their  minds  to  these  expulsions  from  benefices,  and  who 
have  no  plea  to  assign  for  it  but  this  mere  question  of  a 
fact,  have  taken  upon  themselves  to  order,  in  their  circular 
of  the  17th  of  last  March,  "  That  such  as  should  refuse  to 
subscribe  to  the  fact,  shall  be  dealt  with  as  if  they  refused 
to  subscribe  upon  the  merits."  This,  however,  will  avail 
them  little;  with  all  their  efibrts,  they  will  not  be  able  to 
confound  things  which,  in  their  very  nature,  are  distinct. 
A  simple  fact  will  ever  remain  a  simple  fact,  and  this  can 
never  justify  the  depriving  people  of  their  benefices — for 
this  is  the  point  to  which  I  always  come  back. 

Then  is  it  not  as  clear  as  the  very  day,  that  in  all  this 
the  object  is,  not  to  improve  us  in  our  faith,  but — to 
bring  us  in  subjection  to  the  Inquisition  ?  I  could  prove 
this  in  the  amplest  detail,  if  I  had  leisure ;  and  that, 
both  by  the  object  they  have  selected  for  their  decisions, 
and  by  the  methods  they  have  pursued  in  pronouncing 
them.  A  worthy  object  of  faith  indeed,  that  Propositions 
which  every  one  condemns,  are  to  be  found  in  a  certain 
book  !  Would  any  one  believe,  that  it  is  merely  to  en- 
force belief  upon  such  a  point  as  this,  that  the  signatures 
of  the  whole  Church  are  demanded  ?  Credulous,  indeed, 
must  be  such  a  person  !  Had  such  truly  been  their 
objects,  what  had  they  to  do  but  to  cite  the  pages  con- 
taining them  ?  And  if  they  had  really  intended  our  edi- 
fication, ought  they  not  to  have  explained  the  objection- 
able opinions  of  Jansenius ;  which  they  however  condemn 
without  explanation — as  is  well  expressed  in  the  18th,* 

*  Proy.  Letter. 

THE  INQUISITION.  421 

which  my  son  showed  me  this  morning.  Mark  this,  then, 
Sir.  It  is  themselves  they  have  been  thinking  of — not 
us.  They  have  selected  this  position,  because  from  the 
prevaihng  prejudices  against  Jansenius,  they  thought  it 
favourable  to  their  views.  They  have  hoped  to  improve 
the  opportunity  thus  afforded  them ;  and  turning  to  their 
own  purposes  the  desire  the  public  has  manifested  for  the 
condemnation  of  these  doctrines,  they  fancied  we  should 
be  so  much  carried  away  in  their  own  favour,  as  to  pur- 
chase their  Bulls  at  the  cost  of  our  liberties  ! 

Just  as  I  was  writing  the  last  lines,  I  happened  to  meet 
with  a  very  distinguished  Councillor,  who  told  me  that  it 
is  an  invariable  rule  of  the  Courts  that  they  are  the  legiti- 
mate and  natural  judges  of  all  questions  of  fact  coming 
before  them  in  ecclesiastical  affairs ;  and  therefore,  there 
being  here  no  other  point  at  issue  than  to  ascertain 
whether  the  five  condemned  Propositions  are  in  Jansenius 
or  not,  it  will  be  their  province  to  institute  such  an  in- 
vestigation, in  case  the  Bull  should  be  brought  before 
them.  The  case  was  the  same  in  the  celebrated  confer- 
ence of  Fontainbleau,  when  the  Cardinal  Du  Perron 
charged  with  error  five  hundred  passages  of  the  Fathers, 
cited  by  Du  Plessis  Mornay;  and  the  king  appointed 
certain  lay-commissioners  to  adjudicate  the  matter.  Then 
the  question  was  to  ascertain  whether  these  passages 
really  were  in  the  Fathers,  as  it  now  is,  whether  these 
Propositions  are  in  Jansenius ;  and  in  spite  of  all  the 
clamour  raised  by  the  Nuncio,  such  as  that  none  but 
ecclesiastics  should  take  cognizance  of  an  ecclesiastical 
question,  &c.,  the  cause  remained  in  their  hands,  as  the 
only  question  before  them  was  a  simple  examination  of  facts. 

423  LETTER   XX. 

He  furnislied  me  with  some  other  cases ;  but  this  is 
sufficient  to  place  the  matter  beyond  doubt,  and  to  show 
that  if  the  Parliament  should  be  pressed  on  the  subject  of 
this  Bull,  we  shall  enjoy  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  it 
examined  with  every  due  formality,  and  in  full  assembly 
of  the  Chambers,  whether  these  Five  Propositions  are  in 
the  book  of  Jansenius.  We  shall  then  learn  whether  it 
be  an  indiscretion  to  doubt  the  fact,  and  shall  see  the 
judgment  of  the  Pope  submitted  to  the  judgment  of  the 
Parliament. 

I  cannot  therefore  but  wonder  to  see  this  project  of  an 
Inquisition  so  ill-concocted,  considering  it  emanates  from 
persons  otherwise  so  astute.  Never  could  they  have 
chosen  a  basis  more  feeble  and  unsafe  for  such  a  Bull, 
which— treating  only  of  a  question  of  fact — was  wholly 
ifladequate  to  sustain  so  weighty  a  design.  Would  it  not, 
let  me  ask,  be  shameful  and  intolerable,  that  such  a 
tribunal  as  the  Inquisition,  which  Prance  would  never 
endure  even  for  the  regulation  of  faith,  should  now-a-days 
be  admitted  for  the  adjudication  of  a  mere  matter  of  fact; 
and  that  all  parties  should  voluntarily  concur  in  such  a 
measure: — the  Bishops  in  its  origination,  and  the  Parlia- 
ment in  its  sanction  ? 

I  utterly  disbelieve,  however,  that  it  will  come  to  this. 
The  matter  becomes  far  too  serious  for  a  jest.  It  comes 
home  to  themselves,  to  their  relatives,  to  their  friends;  — 
it  is  of  vital  and  universal  interest.  The  less  of  servitude 
the  better !  The  wise  will  never  willingly  submit  to  it. 
Let  them  seek  other  means  of  establishing  their  point. 
Let  them  write  as  much  as  they  please — or,  rather,  let 
them   hold  their   peace.     They   have   prated   too  much 

THE  INQUISITION.  423 

already.     It  is  time  to  leave  the  woi-ld  in  quiet,  and  our 
benefices  in  security ! 

Should,  however,  the  Parliament  take  cognizance  at  all 
of  the  matter,  I  shall  not  be  unfurnished  with  proofs  to 
show  the  difference  between  that  pre-eminence,  with  which 
the  Papacy  was  first  invested  by  God  himself,  for  the 
edification  of  the  Church,  and  the  infallibility  which  its 
flatterers  would  attribute  to  it,  for  the  destruction  both  of 
the  Church  herself  and  our  liberties. 

END    OF   PKOVINCIAIi   LETTERS. 

APPENDIX. 

No.  I. 

Censure  and  Condemnation  of  the  Provincial  Letters. 

(From  the  French  of  M,  Villemain.) 

It  is  well  known  that  the  censure  pronounced  by  a  portion  of 
the  Sorbonne  against  Amauld,  gave  occasion  to  the  Provincial 
Letters.  We  have  seen  that  Pascal,  in  defending  his  friend, 
was  not  sparing  in  his  inflictions  upon  the  Jesuits,  who  had 
clandestinely  taken  an  active  part  in  procuring  the  condemna- 
tion ;  and  dearly  did  he  make  them  pay  for  the  satisfaction  they 
had  enjoyed  in  their  success. 

The  Jesuits  soon  relinquished  a  conflict  which  had  become 
a  source  of  mortification  to  themselves  ;  and  to  revenge  them- 
selves of  an  adversary  who  had  inflicted  upon  them  such 
deadly  wounds,  they  succeeded  in  obtaining  from  the  Court 
of  Rome,  in  1657,  a  formal  condemnation  of  the  Provincial 
Letters, 

A  remark  suggests  itself  here,  which  will  not  be  without 
utility,  and  may  furnish  the  observer  of  human  nature  with 
a  key  to  other  anomalies  of  a  similar  kind  :  It  is,  that  this 
very  Court  of  Rome,  with  an  inconsistency  common  in  man's 
judgments,  passed  a  condemnation  in  September  1 665  and 
March  1666,  upon  the  identical  maxims  which  the  illustrious 
author  of  the  Provincials  had  so  eloquently  denounced. 

This  first  act  of  vengeance,  far  from  proving  advantageous 

426  APPENDIX. 

to  the  Jesuits,  was  regarded  by  the  thinking  part  of  the  pub- 
lic as  only  a  fresh  triumph  for  their  opponents ;  and  the 
"  Apology  "  of  their  Casuists,  which  these  devout  and  perse- 
cuted men  published,  had  the  effect  of  enlisting  on  their  side 
those  who  had  hitherto  kept  aloof  from  the  dispute.  Every 
one  was  eager  to  see  the  Provincials  ;  and  the  Jansenists,  to 
give  them  greater  publicity,  hastened  to  translate  them  into 
several  different  languages. 

Such  various  humiliations  could  not  fail  to  pique  the  pride, 
and  inflame  the  hatred  of  the  Jesuits.  They  put  in  requisi- 
tion all  the  resources  of  their  subtle  -policy,  and  by  means  of 
their  intrigues  they  succeeded  in  obtaining  from  the  royal 
authority,  the  condemnation  and  proscription  of  the  Provincial 
Letters.  It  will  be  seen  by  the  terms  of  the  Decree,  in  Royal 
Council,  that,  to  ensure  success  to  the  attempt,  the  Sorbonne 
did  not  scruple  to  unite  with  the  Society  of  Jesuits  in  "  pre- 
senting "  the  work,  as  insolent  and  seditious,  to  spiritual  and 
temporal  authority. 

In  order  to  give  an  idea  of  the  conscientious  dealing  of  the 
detractors  of  the  Provincial  Letters,  I  subjoin  here  some  pas- 
sages prefixed  to  the  documents,  which  were  put  forward  in 
support  of  the  condemnation.  They  are  taken  from  a  collec- 
tion of  BuUs  and  other  similar  Acts,  forming  an  octavo 
volume,  printed  five  or  six  times  in  the  course  of  the  seven- 
teenth century. 

"  In  1656,  while  the  examination  of  Mr.  Arnauld's  Letters 
in  the  Sorbonne  was  pending,  the  famous  Letters  to  a  Pro- 
vincial made  their  appearance,  and  produced  great  sensation  : 
they  were  from  the  pen  of  M.  Pascal,  Arnauld's  intimate 
friend,  and  the  ablest  writer  of  their  party.  It  was  fancied 
that  these  would  prove  an  excellent  method  of  turning  off 
from  the  scent,  persons  only  superficially  informed ;  and  of 
throwing  into  the  shade  the  erroneous  opinions  which  the 
Jansenists  had  so  obstinately  defended,  by  bringing  them 
forward  as  defenders  of 'the  purity  and  severity  of  Christian 
morality. 

APPENDIX.  427 

"  The  earlier  Letters  did  not  meet  with  the  success  that 
had  been  anticipated ;  because,  treating  of  the  dogmas  of 
grace,  and  endeavouring  by  every  kind  of  artifice,  to  keep  in 
the  back-ground  the  Second  Letter  of  Arnauld,  they  failed  in 
their  object  in  arresting  the  Censure,  as  well  as  that  of  esta- 
blishing the  pretended  charge  of  injustice  ;  and  of  throwing 
back  upon  the  Jesuits  the  odium  of  agitating  a  dogma  of  faith 
which  had  been  attacked,  and  in  which  the  whole  Catholic 
Church  was  equally  interested. 

"  It  was  thus  found  necessary  to  abandon  the  question  of 
grace,  and  to  fasten  exclusively  upon  the  morality  of  the 
Jesuits ;  this  was  done  in  the  fourteen  subsequent  Letters, 
published  in  succession  up  to  the  month  of  March  1657. 

"  The  Jesuits  replied  to  these  at  first  by  various  publica- 
tions, and  afterwards  in  a  more  methodical  manner  ;  proving 
the  various  misinterpretations  in  the  Letters,  and  the  bad 
faith  with  which  the  quotations  from  their  authors  were  fur- 
nished ;  as  well  as  the  palpable  difference  between  the  severe 
maxims  of  M.  Pascal,  and  the  relaxations  introduced  by  the 
Jansenists  into  their  moral  code. 

"  This  proceeding  closed  the  writer's  mouth ;  and  subse- 
quently, all  the  letters  were  condemned  by  the  Pope,  on  the 
6th  September,  1657,  having  been  previously  burnt  by  the 
hands  of  the  public  executioner,  by  a  Decree  of  the  Parlia- 
ment of  Aix,  of  Feb.  22,  1657 — the  same  having  been  also 
done  at  Paris,  by  a  Decree  of  the  Council  of  State  held  coin- 
cidently  with  a  convocation  of  Prelates  and  Doctors." 

Condemnation  of  the  Letters  of  M.  Pascal,   this  Tuesday, 
6th  September,  1657. 

At  a  general  congregation  of  the  holy  and  universal  Inqui- 
sition of  Rome,  held  at  the  Apostolical  Palace  of  St.  Marie- 
Majeure,  in  presence  of  our  most  holy  Father  Alexander,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  Pope,  the  seventh  of  that  name,  and  of  the 

428  APPENDIX. 

most  eminent  and  reverend  Cardinals,  Inquisitors  General  of 
the  heretics,  in  the  Christian  Repuhlic,  specially  appointed  hy 
the  ApostoUc  See. 

Our  most  holy  Father,  Pope  Alexander  VII.  interdicts  and 
condemns  hy  this  Decree,  and  declares  to  he  interdicted  and 
condemned,  under  the  penalties  and  censures  directed  by  the 
Council  of  Trent,  and  in  the  Index  of  Condemned  Books,  and 
all  other  such  penalties  and  censures  as  it  shall  please  His 
Holiness  to  appoint : 

Eighteen  Letters  written  in  French,  whose  titles  are — 
[Here  follow  the  titles  of  the  eighteen  Letters,  and  of  several 
other  small  treatises ;  and  then  another  work,  unconnected 
with  the  Provincials.] 

(Votes  of  thirteen  Theologians.) 

"  In  order  to  give  wider  circulation  to  the  Provincial  Let- 
ters, and  to  excite  still  more  disgust  at  the  alleged  laxities  of 
the  Jesuits,  it  was  determined  to  translate  them  into  Latin,* 
and  to  add  to  them  notes  still  more  calumnious  than  the  text. 
The  success  of  the  proceeding  was  not  what  had  been  antici- 
pated. Montaltius,  which  was  the  name  adopted  by  the 
translator,  and  Wendrock,  that  of  the  author  of  the  notes, 
were  examined  by  Royal  order ;  for  which  purpose  a  com- 
mission was  appointed  of  four  of  the  most  eminent  Bishops 
and  six  learned  Doctors.  They  gave  an  opinion  upon  the  two 
works,  to  the  effect  that  the  heresies  condemned  in  Jansenius 
were  openly  maintained  in  them,  and  that  they  abounded  in 
sentiments  injurious  to  the  Pope,  the  Bishops,  the  sacred  per- 
son of  the  King,  his  Ministers,  the  faculty  of  Paris,  and  the 
religious  orders.  Accordingly  they  were  remitted  by  Decree 
of  the  Council  of  State,  on  the  report  of  M.  Balthazar,  to  the 
Civil  Lieutenant,  to  be  burnt  by  the  common  executioner. 
The  Decree  is  dated  the  23rd  September,  1660  :  the  sentence 
of  the  Lieutenant,  the  8th  Oct. ;  and  they  were  carried  into 

*  Nicole  translated  the  Provincials  into  Latin,  under  the  title,  '  Litters 
de  Morali  et  Politick  Jesuitorura  discipline.' 

APPENDIX.  429 

execution  at  the  Croix-du-Tiroirj  on  the  14th  of  the  same 
month,  1660.  They  added  to  these  two  works,  one  entitled 
'  Disquisitions  of  Paul  Ir^n^e,'  which  shared  the  same  fate." 

Sentence  of  the  Bishops  and  Doctors  upon  the  Latin  Transla- 
tion of  the  Provincial  Letters. 

We  the  undersigned,  nominated  by  the  Decree  in  Council 
of  his  Majesty  to  report  our  opinion  of  a  work  entitled  "  Let- 
ters to  a  Provincial,  by  Louis  de  Montalte,"  &c.  Having 
diligently  examined  the  said  work,  we  declare  that  we  find 
the  heresies  of  Jansenius,  condemned  by  the  Church,  to  be 
contained  and  defended  therein,  both  in  the  Letters  of  the 
said  Louis  de  Montalte,  and  the  notes  upon  the  same  by 
Guillaume  Wendrock ;  as  also  in  the  Disquisitions  of  Paul 
Ir^nee,  subjoined  to  the  same  :  all  which  is  so  manifest,  that 
if  any  one  deny  it,  he  either  cannot  have  read  or  understood 
the  books,  or,  what  is  worse,  he  does  not  allow  to  be  heretical 
that  which  has  been  condemned  as  such  by  the  Galilean 
Church  and  the  sacred  faculty  of  Paris.  We  further  declare, 
that  these  three  authors  are  so  insolent  and  so  hardened  in 
defamation  that  they  spare  neither  rank  nor  persons ;  neither 
the  Sovereign  Pontiff,  nor  Bishops,  nor  the  King,  nor  his 
Ministers,  nor  the  sacred  faculty  of  Paris,  nor  religious  orders : 
and  therefore  we  hold  the  said  work  to  be  liable  to  the  penal- 
ties adjudged  against  defamatory  libels  ahd  heretical  writings. 
Given  at  Paris  this  7th  Sept.  1660. 

Henry  de  la  Motte,  Bishop  of  Rennes  ;  Harduin,  Bishop  of 
Rhodes ;  Francis,  Bishop  of  Amiens  ;  Charles,  Bishop  of 
Suissons ;  M.  Grandin ;  G.  de  L'Estocq  ;  C.  Morel ;  L.  Bail; 
Chapelas,  Curate  of  St.  Jacques  ;  Chamillard ;  Saussay ;  F. 
Jean  Nicolay,  de  L'ordre  de  Freres  Prescheurs;  F.  M.  de 
Gangy,  Carme. 

430  APPENDIX. 

Decree  of  the   Council  of  State   against   the  Letters   to   a 
Provincial. 

Seeing,  by  the  King  in  Council,  a  Decree  was  issued  on  the 
12th  of  August  last,  on  the  subject  of  various  complaints 
made  to  his  Majesty,  purporting  that,  besides  that  the  Con- 
stitutions of  Popes  Innocent  X.  and  Alexander  VII.  condemn 
the  doctrine  of  Jansenius,  Bishop  of  Ypres,  contained  in  the 
work  entitled  "  Augustinus,''  and  the  said  conclusions  have 
been  admitted  by  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Clergy  of 
France,  published  by  the  prelates  in  their  dioceses,  executed 
by  the  Universities,  confirmed  also  by  the  declarations  of  his 
Majesty,  and  registered  by  the  Parliamentary  Courts  :  not- 
withstanding which,  writings  are  being  continually  published, 
which  support  the  said  condemned  doctrine ;  and,  among 
others,  a  publication  under  the  title  of  "  Ludovici  Montalti 
Litterse  Provinciales,"  &c.,  which,  besides  containing  heretical 
propositions,  is  defamatory  of  the  memory  of  the  late  King 
Louis  XIII.,  of  glorious  memory,  and  to  that  of  his  principal 
Ministers  of  State ;  by  which  Decree  his  Majesty,  in  his  care 
for  public  welfare,  has  directed  that  the  said  book  shall  be 
remitted,  through  the  Sieur  Balthazar,  Commissioner,  to  be 
read  and  inspected,  and  to  receive  the  opinions  of  the  Bishops 
of  Rennes,  Rhodes,  Amiens,  and  Soissons,  together  with  Mes- 
sieurs Grandin,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.,  and  Fathers  Nicolai  and  Gangy, 
Doctors  of  the  Sorbonne,  and  a  report  to  be  made  by  them 
thereupon :  the  Procfes  verbal  of  the  said  Commissioners  of 
the  7th  of  this  September,  purports,  that  having  diligently 
examined  the  said  book,  they  declare  that  the  heresies  of  Jan- 
senius, condemned  by  the  Church,  are  maintained  and  de- 
fended in  all  the  aforesaid  writings.  So  manifest  is  this,  that 
if  any  one  deny  it,  &c.,  &c.,  (as  in  the  preceding  document) 
and  the  said  works  are  liable  to  the  penalties  awarded  against 
defamatory  libels  and  heretical  works. — Upon  these  premises, 
his  Majesty  in  Council  ordains  and  commands  that  the  said 

APPENDIX.  431 

book  shall  be  remitted  to  the  Sieur  Daubrai,  Lieutenant  of 
the  Chatelet,  Paris,  to  be  caused  by  him  to  be  burnt  by  the 
common  executioner  :  of  the  execution  of  which  Decree  his 
Majesty  is  to  be  apprized  in  eight  days  herefrom  :  and  in  the 
mean  time  all  booksellers,  printers,  librarians,  colporteurs,  and 
others,  are  expressly  forbidden  to  print,  sell,  and  publish,  or 
to  have  in  their  possession  the  said  Book,  with  or  without 
notes,  additions,  and  disquisitions  of  the  said  Wendrock  and 
Paul  Ir6n6e,  on  pain  of  condign  punishment.  And  this  De- 
cree shall  be  at  once  carried  into  execution  :  any  opposition 
or  appeal  notwithstanding,  of  which,  if  any  such  be  made,  his 
Majesty  reserves  to  himself  the  cognizance  thereof,  without 
intervention  of  any  other  authorities.  Given  at  the  Council 
of  State — his  Majesty  being  present  thereat — at  Paris,  this 
23rd  day  of  September,  1660. 

(Signed)  Philippeaux. 

(The  Decree  was  carried  into  execution,  with  all  the  pre- 
scribed formalities,  and  an  Act  of  Registration  of  the  same 
regularly  drawn  up,  signed  "  Berthelot.") 

No.  II. 

AB.NAULD. 

Antoine  Arnauld  was  the  son  of  the  eminent  advocate  of  the 
same  name,  who  is  distinguished  in  the  annals  of  the  French 
bar,  by  having  sustained  the  cause  of  the  University  of  Paris, 
in  their  proceedings  against  the  Jesuits,  at  the  close  of  the 
sixteenth  century.  His  brilUant  invectives  on  that  memorable 
occasion,  raised  a  storm  against  the  principles  and  practice  of 
that  body,  which  was  never  afterwards  allayed.  His  name, 
also,  as  well  as  that  of  his  illustrious  son,  and  other  members 
of  his  family,  is  intimately  associated  with  the  records  of  the 

433  APPENDIX. 

Port  Royal.  He  bore,  indeed,  the  title  of  its  "  Father ; " 
having  made  large  contributions  to  its  funds  :  and,  after  his 
death,  his  widow  and  several  surviving  daughters  became  in- 
mates within  its  walls. 

His  son  Anthony,  as  has  been  elsewhere  remarked,  seemed, 
like  the  descendants  of  Hannibal,  to  inherit  his,  father's  anti*- 
pathy  to  the  Jesuits,  and — as  was  to  be  expected — experienced 
even  an  aggravated  share  of  their  hostility.  What  he  did  not 
inherit,  however,  was  the  predilection  for  celibacy,  which,  under 
mistaken  views  of  Christian  duty,  and  social  obhgations,  he  and 
his  devoted  colleagues,  lay  as  well  as  clerical,  cherished  and 
acted  upon.  His  father  had  entered  into  the  married  stage  in 
his  25th  year  ;  and  his  wife,  who  was  the  daughter  of  another 
distinguished  advocate,  and  whose  affections  he  is  said  to  have 
gained  by  the  charms  of  his  forensic  eloquence,  was,-  according 
to  common  report,  only  twelve  years  of  age,  when  she  gave  her 
hand  to  the  foremost  man  in  the  French  law-courts.  This 
precocious  union  (at  least  on  the  female  side)  was  crowned 
with  an  abundant  progeny ;  for  Anthony,  who  was  bom  in 
1612,  was  the  youngest  of  twenty  children,  of  whom  eleven 
were  sons,  and  nine  daughters. 

He  received  the  early  part  of  his  education  with  his  nephew 
Isaac  le  Maitre  (or  de  Sacy)  who  was  very  little  his  junior  ; 
and  who  afterwards,  like  himself,  became  a  distinguished  or- 
nament of  the  French  Church.  His  studies  were  next  pur- 
sued in  the  College  of  Calvi :  he  then  completed  a  course  of 
theology  in  the  College  of  Lisieux ;  and  after  that  entered 
the  Sorbonne.  In  1641,  he  was  ordained  priest;  shortly 
afterwards  he  gained  his  degree  of  _doctor,  and  became  a  can- 
didate for  admission  to  the  membership  of  the  Sorbonne. 
The  known  freedom  and  severity  of  his  opinions,  however, 
upon  some  important  theological  questions,  seem  already  to 
have  excited  prejudices  against  him .  On  the  ground  of  al- 
leged informality  in  some  of  the  previous  stages,  objections 
were  made  to  his  election.  Cardinal  Richelieu,  who  was  not 
likely  to  favour  any  one  whom  the  Jesuits  disliked,  was  ap- 

APPENDIX.  433 

pealed  to,  as  visitor  of  the  university ;  and  his  decision  vfas 
given  against  Arnauld.  He  would  perhaps  never  have  obtained 
the  solicited  distinction,  had  not  Richelieu's  death,  shortly  after 
this  time,  removed  the  obstacle ;  and,  in  1 643,  he  became  a 
member  of  Sorbonne. 

It  was  probably  about  this  period  that  he  imbibed  those 
deep  views  of  religious  truth,  which  ever  after  influenced  him, 
and  of  which,  through  a  long  life,  he  became  the  uncompro- 
mising champion.  In  common  with  his  nephew,  De  Sacy,  he 
placed  himself  under  the  theological  instructions  of  the  pious 
St.  Cyran,  the  confessor  of  the  Port  Royal.  This  devoted 
man  may  be  regarded  as  the  Luther  or  Cranmer  of  the  semi- 
reformation,  which  was  then  dawning  in  the  French  Church. 
He  was  at  that  time  an  object  of  persecution,  for  his  propaga- 
tion of  the  doctrines  and  practice  of  Jansenius ;  and  passed 
the  five  closing  years  of  his  life  in  imprisonment  in  Vincennes, 
on  charges  of  heresy.  Arnauld  visited  him  in  his  confine- 
ment ;  and  such  was  the  mutual  comfort  and  edification  from 
their  conferences,  that  the  suffering  confessor  was  wont  to 
call  his  young  friend  and  pupil  "  the  child  of  his  bonds." 
There  are  those  who  may  sneer  at  the  term  ;  but  it  will  be 
understood  by  all  who  know  the  important  effects  which  may 
be  produced  at  the  outset  of  a  religious  life,  by  the  counsels 
of  experience  and  piety ;  and  the  tender  recollections  which 
will  remain  from  such  communications  in  the  hearts  of  both 
the  instructor  and  the  pupil.  He  shortly  after  gave  up  some 
ecclesiastical  preferment  which  had  been  conferred  upon  him, 
but  which  he  now  deemed  inconsistent  with  duty  to  hold  ; 
joined  the  recluses  of  the  Port  Royal ;  devoted  to  its  funds 
the  principal  part  of  his  property ;  and  from  the  ascendancy 
of  his  attainments  and  talents,  soon  found  assigned  to  him  the 
leading  place  in  that  remarkable  association.  It  was  indeed 
in  all  respects  a  remarkable  one.  Never,  perhaps,  was  more 
learning  and  talent,  more  purity  of  life,  and  more  singleness 
and  disinterestedness  of  aim  and  object,  united  in  a  body  of 
men,  than  in  the  Associates  of  Port  Royal.     Their  theological 

V 

434.  APPENDIX. 

system  was  far,  indeed,  from  being  unalloyed,  either  in  doc- 
trine or  practice,  with  many  of  the  errors  of  Popery.  They 
had  not  attained  to  those  clear  views  of  scriptural  truth,  which 
it  is  our  privilege,  in  the  full  maturity  of  Protestantism,  now 
to  enjoy.  But  they  were  greatly  in  advance  of  the  age  in 
which  they  lived  ;  their  voice  was  boldly  lifted  up  against  the 
moral  corruptions  of  Popery,  especially  as  embodied  in  the 
system  of  Jesuitism  ;  and  their  ardour  for  truth,  their  sincerity 
in  its  advocacy,  and,  above  all,  their  own  profound  study  of 
the  Scripture,  and  earnest  efforts  for  its  diffusion,  would  assur- 
edly have  led — ^had  circumstances  remained  favourable  to  their 
endeavours — to  the  effectual  purification,  in  doctrine  and 
discipline,  of  the  Church,  to  whose  communion  they  so  fondly 
adhered. 

The  eager  spirit  of  Arnauld  soon  impelled  him  into  contro- 
versy. The  subject  on  which  he  first  essayed  his  polemical 
powers,  was  the  abuses  introduced  by  the  Jesuits  into  the 
doctrine'  of  the  Eucharist.  His  treatise  was  entitled,  "  De  la 
frequente  Communion  ;  "  and  in  this  tract  he  vehemently  op- 
posed the  dogmas  of  intrinsic  virtue  and  effectual  operation 
(the  "  opus  operatum  ")  in  the  sacrament,  and  insisted  on  the 
necessity  of  preparation  for  the  solemnity,  by  faith  and  re- 
pentance. This  was  soon  followed  by  other  publications  on 
the  doctrines  of  Grace,  grounded  on  the  views  of  St.  Augus- 
tine ;  and  these  drew  forth  angry  but  ineffective  answers  from 
the  Jesuits,  and  rendered  him  the  object  of  their  relentless 
antipathy.  Their  great  aim  was  to  embroil  him  with  the  Sor- 
bonne  ;  and  in  this,  after  some  years  had  elapsed,  they  were 
successful.  The  immediate  cause  of  the  dispute  was  the 
following.  The  Duke  de  Liancour,  a  friend  and  patron  of 
Port  Royal,  had  placed  one  of  his  daughters  for  education  in 
the  convent  of  the  same  name ;  and  had  further  taken  into 
his  house,  as  a  kind  of  domestic  chaplain,  one  of  their  asso- 
ciates, the  Abb6  de  Bourzaye.  This  double  instance  of  dis- 
loyalty to  the  dominant  party  in  the  Church,  excited  so  much 
irritation  on  their  part,  that  on  the  Duke  presenting  himself 

APPENDIX.  435 

to  his  confessor  for  absolution,  he  found  the  rite  refused 
him ;  and  was  informed  that  it  would  only  be  granted  on  con- 
dition of  removing  his  daughter  from  the  convent,  and  dis- 
missing the  Abbe  from  his  establishment.  This  indecent 
proceeding  brought  Arnauld  promptly  into  the  field.  First, 
in  an  anonymous  letter  to  the  Duke,  and  then  in  a  more 
elaborate  publication,  to  which  he  affixed  his  name ;  he  de- 
nounced the  tyranny  attempted  to  be  exercised  over  conscience 
and  private  right ;  and  overwhelmed  the  opponents  of  the 
Jansenists  with  severe  invective.  On  this  occasion  the  Je- 
suits succeeded  in  bringing  before  the  Sorbonne  the  obnoxious 
Propositions  extracted  from  his  works,  and  alleged  to  be 
founded  on  those  of  Jansenius,  which  had  been  previously 
subjected  to  the  Papal  censure.  Their  history  is  immortalized 
by  Pascal  in  the  foregoing  pages  ;  and  the  sequel  of  the  pro- 
ceeding was  the  expulsion  of  Arnauld  from  the  Sorbonne. 

Great  learning  and  force  of  reasoning  is  thrown  into  these 
his  earlier  productions,  and  the  style  of  Arnauld  is  considered, 
by  French  critics,  to  have  exhibited  much  of  that  purity  and 
strength  which  were  characteristics  of  the  Port  Royal  school. 
JBut  a  large  part  had  been  composed  in  Latin,  and  all  were  of 
a  nature  too  didactic  and  abstruse  for  the  generality  of 
readers.  In  the  present  crisis  of  the  Society,  it  was  considered 
that  some  easy  and  popular  compositions  would  be  desirable, 
to  interest  and  act  upon  the  popular  mind  ;  and  Arnauld 
accordingly  produced  a  manuscript  which  he  had  carefully 
prepared  for  that  purpose.  With  all  their  deference  for  his 
authority,  his  friends  were  unable  to  avoid  showing,  by  their 
silence,  that  he  had  not  succeeded.  The  chord  that  was  to  vi- 
brate to  the  general  sympathy  was  not  struck.  His  controversial 
powers,  in  fact,  partook  more  of  the  nature  of  the  heavy 
.artillery  that  sweeps  the  field,  and  mows  down  the  ranks, 
than  of  the  skirmishers  that  do  their  work  by  harassing  and 
annoyance.  Pascal,  then  much  the  junior  of  Arnauld,  and 
who  had  but  lately  entered  into  his  confidence  and  that  of  his 
colleagues,  was  appealed  to ;  and  it  was  suggested  that  younger 

V  2 

436  APPENDIX. 

friends  should  give  their  aid  in  the  controversy.  He  modestly 
undertook  to  draw  up  a  sketch  of  a  paper  to  meet  their  views ; 
and  the  first  Letter  was  shortly  after  produced  and  adopted, 
with  the  admiration  of  the  whole  body.  Thus  originated  the 
"  Provincial  Letters." 

Arnauld,  on  the  adverse  decision  of  the  Sorbonne  being 
pronounced,  withdrew  into  retirement ;  and  for  twelve  years 
was  absent  from  Paris.  During  that  time,  and  in  the  still 
longer  term  of  banishment  to  which  he  was  afterwards  sub- 
jected, his  history  afforded  little  material  for  biography. 
Partly  anonymous,  and  partly  with  his  name,  his  publications 
continued  without  intermission,  and  their  number  and  quantity 
were  enormous.  His  ascertained  treatises,  at  the  close  of  his 
life,  amounted  to  above  320,  besides,  as  is  believed,  many  that 
did  not  bear  his  name,  and  could  not  be  identified.  In  addi- 
tion to  their  staple  material  of  theology,  both  practical  and 
controversial  (the  latter  including  his  voluminous  missives 
against  Jesuitism),  his  writings  comprised  almost  every  subject 
of  science  and  literature.  The  following  are  a  mere  sample  of 
their  multifarious  topics  :  a  Grammar,  well-known  as  "  the 
Port  Eoyal  Grammar,"  "  Elements  of  Geometry,"  "  Art  of 
Thinking,"  "  Rules  for  Literary  Studies,"  "  Reflections 
on  the  eloquence  of  Preachers,"  "  True  and  False  Ideas," 
"  On  Grace,"  "  Reflections,  Philosophical  and  Theological," 
"  Translations  from  St.  Augustine,"  &c.  &c.  Some  further 
account  will  be  found  at  the  close  of  this  little  memoir, 
of  the  manner  in  which  the  task  of  posthumously  pub- 
lishing this  immense  produce  of  a  single  mind  was  accom- 
plished. 

During  this  period,  the  persecutions  against  the  Jansenists 
continued.  Bulls  were  fulminated  from  Rome,  by  the  insti- 
gation of  the  Jesuits,  against  the  censured  Propositions ;  and 
a  formulary  was  drawn  up  and  administered  to  the  French 
clergy  generally,  to  the  effect  that  they  received  these  Bulls, 
and  condemned  the  doctrine  of  the  Propositions.  The  whole 
body  of  the  Port  Royalists  refused  submission  to  the  ordon- 

APPE^fDIX.  437 

nance ;  and  were  supported  in  their  opposition  by  four  bishops 
and  many  ecclesiastics.  On  the  death  of  Pope  Alexander,  in 
1667,  and  the  accession  of  Clement  IX.,  a  lull  took  place  in 
this  unhappy  controversy.  The  period  of  tranquillity,  which 
was  termed  the  "  Peace  of  Clement,"  lasted  about  ten  years. 
In  1669,  consequently,  Arnauld  returned  to  Paris,  and  was 
received  with  the  distinction  that  his  talents  and  manly  con- 
sistency had  won  from  both  friends  and  opponents.  He  was 
introduced  by  the  Archbishop  of  Sens  to  the  Pope's  Nuncio, 
and  treated  by  him  with  marked  esteem.  The  King  ne.xt 
expressed  a  wish  to  see  the  man  whose  polemical  powers  had 
produced  so  much  sensation  in  the  Church,  and  received  him 
with  much  courtesy  and  respect. 

His  writings  were,  some  time  after  this,  directed  against 
what  he  and  his  co-religionists  continued  to  regard  as  the 
Calvinistic  heresies  on  the  doctrines  of  the  Eucharist — in 
fact,  in  defence  of  "  Transubstantiation."  A  work  of  prodi- 
gious learning  and  research — and,  like  all  his  writings,  very 
voluminous — was  produced  under  the  title  of  "  Grande  Per- 
pltuite  de  la  Foi  de  I'Eglise  Catholique  touchant  I'Euchar- 
iste ; "  which  he  and  the  able  Nicole,  who  was  thought  to 
have  assisted  him  in  it,  doubtless  believed  would  effectually 
set  at  rest  this  long-controverted  question.  A  Protestant  will 
regret,  that  so  much  learning  and  labour,  and — may  it  not  be 
added  ? — so  much  piety,  were  not  bestowed  upon  a  subject 
more  consistent  with  the  truth  of  Scripture,  and  the  religious 
well-being  of  man ! 

In  another  ten  years,  the  respite  of  tranquillity  ceased,  and 
the  scene  changed.  If  Arnauld,  in  his  controversies  with 
Calvinistic  doctrine,  was  valued  as  a  bulwark  of  the  Romish 
faith,  his  continued  advocacy  of  evangelical  purity  and  truth 
upon  other  questions,  caused  him  still  to  be  looked  upon  by 
the  hierarchy  with  suspicion  and  dislike.  The  demonstrations 
of  the  Jesuits  were  renewed  against  him.  He  received  an 
iatiraation  from  authority,  that  his  residence  in  the  metropolis 
would  be  no  longer  safe.     He  found  himself  obliged  to  quit, 

438  APPENDIX. 

not  only  Paris,  but  France  ;  when  he  retired  to  the  Netherlands; 
and  never  afterwards  returned  to  the  land  of  his  birth. 

This  was  in  1690.  His  age  was  67,  when  this  cruel  ex- 
patriation was  forced  upon  him.  He  was  obliged  to  live  in 
strict  retirement,  and  to  resort  to  frequent  changes  of  place. 
But  in  every  successive  retreat  he  carried  with  him  into  his 
solitary  '  Patmos'  a  conscience,  that  assured  him  he  had 
borne  witness  to  what  he  believed  to  be  truth :  his  health 
continued  vigorous ;  and  he  enjoyed  the  resource  of  his  ex- 
haustless  and  untiring  pen.  His  publications  continued 
uninterrupted,  and  showed  unabated  acuteness  and  vigour  to 
the  last ;  and  in  the  closing  months  of  his  existence  he  wrote 
several  long  and  well-digested  letters  and  papers,  which  appear 
in  the  collections  of  his  works.  Within  a  short  period  of  his 
decease,  an  abortive  attempt  was  made  to  molest  him,  by 
procuring  the  issue  against  him  of  a  canonical  writ,  on  the 
part  of  the  monastic  fraternities  at  Liege.  In  this,  he  was 
contemptuously  styled  by  them  "  certum  Arnauldum,"  and 
charged  with  heresy.  The  proceeding,  however,  fell  to  the 
ground  ;  and  he  remained  in  shelter  from  their  pitiiul  malignity 
till  his  death,  which  took  place  at  Brussels,  in  August,  1694, 
at  the  well-ripened  age  of  83. 

He  was  buried  furtively — by  night — with  little  attendance, 
and  without  tomb  or  inscription,  in  the  church  of  St.  Cath- 
erine in  that  city.  But  the  choicest  part  of  his  earthly  remains 
found  its  way  back  to  his  native  country — to  the  chosen  haunt 
of  his  youth,  and  the  scene  of  his  literary  and  polemical  tri- 
umphs. It  was  a  graceful  act  of  the  veteran  divine  to  direct 
his  heart  to  be  sent  for  interment  to  the  Port  Eoyal.  It 
seems  almost  a  trait  of  romance  mingling  with  the  rigid  habits 
of  the  scholar  and  the  controversiaUst.  Poetry  might  see  in 
it — and  he  himself  had  once  been,  if  not  a  poet,  certainly  a 
lover  of  poetry — a  parting  ray,  like  that  which  had  gilded  his 
morning  sky,  sent  up  from  the  cloud  and  shadows  of  evening ; 
or  the  flower  of  spring  blooming  under  the  decay  and  nodosity 
of  the  hoary  oak.     The  bequest  was  indeed  a  precious  one. 

APPENDIX.  439 

His  was  a  heart  consecrated  to  the  highest  of  vocations,  that 
of  the  service  of  God,  the  promotion  of  his  glory,  and  the 
advancement  (as  far  as  it  had  heen  discovered  to  him)  of  his 
truth.  The  gift  was  appreciated  by  the  devout  sisterhood  to 
whom  it  was  consigned ;  it  was  reverently  interred  in  the 
shades  of  the  Port  Royal;  and  a  touching,  but  somewhat 
fanciful,  epitaph  marked  the  spot  where  the  valued  relic  was 
deposited;  and  where  it  rested  in  peace,  till'the  vindictiveness 
of  the  Jesuits  succeeded,  some  years  after,  in  mingling  the 
sheltering  walls  of  the  Uving,  and  the  memorials  of  the  dead, 
in  one  common  destruction. 
The  follovring  are  the  lines  : — 

"  Ad  sanctas  rediit  sedes,  ejectas  et  exul ; 

"  Hoste  triumphato,  tot  tempestibus  actus, 

"  Hoc  portu  in  placido,  hoc  sacrl,  tellure  quiescit, 

"  Amauldus,  veri  defensor,  et  arbiter  asqui : — 

"  lUius  ossa  memor  sibi  vindicet  extera  tellus  ; 

"  Hoc  ccElestis  amor  rapidis  cor  transtulit  alis, 

"  Cor  nunquam  avulsum,  nee  atnatis  sedibus  absens."  * 

Little  remains  on  record  of  the  private  history  and  per- 
sonal habits  of  this  remarkable  man.  What,  in  fact,  could  be 
known  of  one,  of  whose  existence  more  than  the  half,  since  the 
age  of  manhood,  had  been  spent  in  fugitive  retirement  in  his 
own  country,  or  in  banishment  in  another ; — of  one  who  was, 
as  pathetically  described  by  Boileau, — 

"  Errant,  pauvre,  banni,  proscrit,  persecute  "  ? 

His  books  were  the  annals  of  his  life ;  his  study  was  his 
world.     But  though  thus  cut  off  from  the  society  of  which  he 

•  "  Within  this  hallowed  ground— from  early  youth 
"  His  fond  retreat — great  champion  of  the  Truth, 
"  Rests  Arnauld;  all  his  well-fought  contests  o'er, 
"  Long  tossed  by  storms,  now  reached  a  peaceful  shore  : — • 
"  Though  in  the  exile's  land  his  bones  are  laid, 
"  From  this  loved  spot  kind  memory  never  strayed ; 
"  And  lo  1  his  Heart,  on  love's  swift  pinions  flies, 
"  And  calmly  in  this  sacred  precinct  lies." 

440  APPENDIX. 

was  the  ornament  and  instructor,  and  from  the  associates 
whom  he  loved,  his  wanderings  were  cheered  and  his  solitude 
irradiated,  hy  the  presence  of  his  God  and  Saviour;  and 
his  faithful  desires  and  efforts  to  promote  His  glory  and  the 
spiritual  welfare  of  man,  will  be  known  and  rewarded  in  that 
day  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  discovered. 

He  is  said  to  have  been  unattractive  in  person,  but  to  have 
possessed  an  eye  of  much  expression  and  intelligence.  Bayle 
describes  him  as  extremely  simple  and  unpretending  in 
manners,  and  exhibiting  little  that  was  remarkable  in  ordinary 
intercourse  ;  but  he  says,  that  when  any  topic  that  interested 
him  was  started,  he  would  kindle  with  animation,  and  seem 
transformed  into  another  man ;  and  then  pour  forth  vast 
stores  of  learning  and  illustration  from  the  recesses  of  his 
capacious  memory.  He  had  been  (as  has  been  just  noticed) 
addicted  in  early  life  to  poetry  ;  and  to  his  latest  years  would 
occasionally  delight  his  hearers  by  reciting  verses  which  he 
could  ha,ve  had  no  opportunity  of  seeing  since  his  youth. 

The  history  of  the  posthumous  publication  of  his  works  is 
curious.  From  the  period  of  his  death  in  1 694,  up  to  the 
year  1758,  the  immense  mass  of  his  publications  remained  in 
the  state  in  which  they  had  been  originally  put  forth — in 
pamphlets  and  volumes — some  anonymous,  others  bearing  his 
name ;  besides  multitudes  of  letters  and  manuscripts  which 
remained  in  the  hands  of  individuals.  At  the  last-named 
period,  however,  under  the  encouragement  of  the  reigning 
Pope,  Benedict  XIV,  who  extended  much  indulgence  to  the 
class  of  opinions  advocated  by  Arnauld  and  his  successors  in 
the  Church,  a  society  of  Booksellers  formed  a  project  for 
collecting  and  publishing  his  works,  and  were  permitted  to 
issue  proposals  for  the  purpose  under  an  official  notice  that  it 
was  "  par  desir  du  Pope,  et  de  plusieurs  membres  du  Sacr6 
College."  The  good  Pope,  however,  was  able  to  do  no  more 
than  leave  on  record  an  expression  of  his  wishes.  His  death 
ensued  within  little  more  than  a  year  after  the  issuing  of  the 
order,  and  the  scheme  was  discountenanced  by  his  successor 

APPENDIX.  441 

Clement  XIII.  In  fact  the  Jesuits  prevailed  with  him  to 
issue  a  Papal  orderj  forbidding,  under  pain  of  excommunica- 
tion, to  circulate  the  prospectus  of  the  proposed  publication. 
Another  turn  of  affairs,  however,  under  Clement  XIV,  brought 
about  the  memorable  dissolution  of  the  Jesuits'  Society  :  the 
path  was  now  clear  ;  and  the  long-suspended  project  of  the 
publication  was  renewed.  The  parties  interested  delegated 
the  task  to  an  individual,  whose  modesty  has  not  suffered 
him,  by  recording  his  own  name,  to  share  the  honours  which 
his  labours  were  preparing  for  the  object  of  this  long  and 
difficult  undertaking.  The  publication  was  not,  however,  so 
much  a  proof  of  bibliopolist  enterprize  as  of  faith  in  the 
public  vrillingness  to  absorb  such  a  mass  of  reading  :  the  work 
was  published  by  subscription.  In  1775,  at  Lausanne,  ap- 
peared the  entire  works  of  Arnauld,  in  forty-five  quarto 
volumes,  closely  printed,  and  each  containing  the  quantity  of 
some  half-dozen  widely  margined  octavos  of  modern  fashion  ; 
and  from  these  are  excluded  (with  an  apologetic  notice  of  the 
omission  from  the  editor)  the  elaborate  work  on  the  '  Per- 
petuite  de  foi,'  which  in  its  original  form  tilled  three  bulky 
quartos.     The  classification  of  contents  is  as  follows  : 

1.  On  the  Scriptures. 

2.  Dogmatical,  on  Truths  of  Religion. 

3.  Polemical,  against  Jesuits,  defences  of  Jansenism. 

4.  Polemical,  against  Calvin. 

5.  Moral  and  Polemical  (again)  against  Jesuits. 

6.  Ecclesiastical  Discipline. 

7.  Philosophical. 

8.  Belles  Lettres. 
Letters  Separate. 

The  Editor  further  expresses  regret  that  many  more  of  the 
anonymous  works  had  been  omitted,  having  eluded  his  most 
vigilant  search. — Such  were  then  the  productions  of  this 
giant  of  literature  !  What  must  have  been  the  universality 
of  learning,  what  the  depth  of  thought,  and  the  extensiveness 

u  5 

442  APPENDIX. 

of  observation,  that  had  served  to  accumulate  the  materials  of 
his  Herculean  labours ! 

These  mighty  tomes,  however,  although  they  excited  the 
deepest  interest,  and  served  important  purposes,  in  their 
time,  want  the  etherial  fire  of  genius  to  give  them  permanent 
vitality,  to  enrol  them  among  the  classics  of  a  country,  and 
hand  them  down  to  a  late  posterity.  His  writings  were  con- 
spicuous for  clearness  and  power,  and  his  style  has  a  severe 
purity,  which  contributed  much  to  the  improvement  of  the 
French  language,  and  was  at  that  time  new  in  controversy. 
The  following  extract  from  one  of  his  letters,  given  in 
M.  Faugfere's  valuable  collection,  will  be  regarded  with  in- 
terest, from  the  subject  of  which  it  treats,  as  well  as  from  its 
furnishing  a  pleasing  specimen  of  the  lucid  simplicity  of  his 
famiUar  style.  It  is  taken  from  a  communication  of  Arnauld's 
to  a  personage  of  high  rank — a  Princess  de  Guimen^ — who 
had  asked  his  counsel  on  the  education  of  a  son : — 

"  It  is.  Madam,  an  undoubted  fact,  and  your  own  experi- 
ence, under  the  teaching  of  divine  grace,  as  well  as  your 
personal  trials,  assure  you  of  it,  that  high  birth,  illustrious 
condition,  and  great  wealth,  are  sore  hindrances  to  our 
spiritual  welfare.  I  may  however,  without  flattery  tell  you, 
that  you  have  reason  to  hope  God  will  bless  the  design  with 
which  he  has  inspired  you,  to  dedicate  the  young  Prince  to 
his  service,  and  thus  to  procure  him  a  distinguished  place  in 
Heaven,  provided  you  continue  faithful  to  your  object,  and 
that  you  are  sincere  and  earnest  in  your  endeavour  to  confer 
this  great  benefit  upon  him.  He  possesses  many  gracious 
dispositions,  and  especially  that  which  is  the  most  needful  of 
all — docility  to  instruction  and  submissiveness  to  authority, 
when  exercised  with  gentleness  and  prudence.  But  the  very 
heathen  have  confessed,  that  their  most  promising  dispositions 
degenerated  into  vice,  if  not  cultivated  by  good  education. 
And  our  religion  further  instructs  us  that  the  best  tuition 
needs  the  aid  of  divine  grace ;  and  though  man  may  plant 
and.  water,  all  will  be  vain  unless  God  give  the  increase. 

APPENDIX.  443 

"  If,  therefore,  Madam,  you  would  follow  the  rules  of  our 
fUith — as  I  know  indeed  you  are  desirous  of  doing — you  will 
readily  see  that  the  most  important  thing  of  all  is  to  find  holy 
men,  who  will  train  your  child  in  the  ways  of  God,  and 
nourish  him  with  the  influences  of  his  Spirit.  For,  permit 
me  to  say,  it  is  a  mere  delusion  to  fear,  as  you  seem  to  do, 
that  to  render  him  pious  will  degrade  and  make  him  heart- 
less, and  that  to  walk  in  the  ways  of  God  will  unfit  him  for 
the  aifairs  of  life.  On  the  contrary,  permit  me  to  assure  you, 
that  if  he  be  placed  under  good  instruction,  it  will  tend  to 
elevate  and  inure  his  mind  :  for  there  is  nothing  so  great  as 
Christian  philosophy,  and  no  being  so  noble  as  the  true 
Christian.  The  especial  aim  of  such  teaching  will  be  to 
render  him  able,  courteous,  and  accomplished  ;  directing  him 
to  the  true  use  of  all  things — to  employ  them  in  the  service 
of  God,  and  not  to  the  vanities  of  the  world." 

No.  III. 

NICOLE. 

Peter  Nicole  was  born  at  Chartres  in  1625,  where  he  also 
received  the  rudiments  of  his  education.  His  talents  early 
developed  themselves,  and  at  the  age  of  fourteen  he  became  a 
proficient  in  the  Latin  and  Greek  classics.  His  father  then, 
seeing  in  him  the  promise  of  great  attainments,  sent  him  to 
Paris,  for  a  course  of  philosophical  studies ;  and  there  he 
early  made  acquaintance  with  the  members  of  the  Port  Eoyal, 
formed  the  determination  to  share  their  labours,  and  even- 
tually became  a  partaker  of  their  celebrity  and  persecu- 
tions. 

As  soon  as  he  had  finished  his  allotted  course  of  instruction, 

444  APPENDIX. 

he  formally  joined  their  Society,  and  his  distinguished  attain- 
ments in  general  literature  pointed  him  out  as  the  most 
suitable  among  their  number  for  the  department  of  the  '  Belles 
Lettres.'  Their  choice  was  fully  justified  by  the  names  of 
the  distinguished  scholars  who,  in  that  class,  enjoyed  the 
benefits  of  his  instruction ;  especially  the  great  Racine,  the 
superiority  of  whose  genius  he  at  once  discerned,  and  took  the 
greatest  pains  to  develop  and  direct. 

After  Racine  had  finished  his  studies  under  Nicole,  and  had 
acquired  pubUc  admiration  by  some  of  his  earlier  works,  a 
circumstance  occurred  which  evinced  in  him  an  amiable  trait 
of  character,  and  does  him  high  honour.  Nicole  had  engaged 
in  a  controversy  with  a  certain  Abb6  St.  SoeUn,  a  .  writer  of 
inferior  plays  and  romances,  and  who  had  put  out  a  fanciful 
and  mischievous  work  on  the  Apocalypse.  In  his  refutation 
of  the  Abba's  errors,  he  took  occasion  to  inveigh  generally 
against  romance-writers  and  theatrical  poets  in  general,  which 
Racine  considered  to  be  an  oblique  reflection  upon  himself. 
The  young  poet  was  especially  stung  with  the  quarter  from 
whence  the  supposed  attack  came,  took  up  a  hostile  attitude 
against  the  entire  Port  Royal,  and  published  a  tart  reply  to 
Nicole's  work,  which  at  once  became  very  popular  with  the 
Parisian  public.  He  was  about  to  follow  up  his  success  by  a 
second  letter,  when  Boileau,  the  common  friend  of  himself 
and  Nicole,  remonstrated  with  him  on  the  pain  which  he 
would  occasion  to  the  latter,  and  the  ingratitude  his  proceed- 
ings would  show  to  his  former  preceptor,  to  whom  he  owed 
so  much.  "  It  shall  never  be  published,"  said  Racine  ;  and 
so  strictly  did  he  adhere  to  his  resolution,  that  although  the 
pamphlet  was  actually  printed,  he  suppressed  the  entire 
edition  ;  and  it  was  not  till  some  years  after — and  not  with 
his  own  sanction — that  a  copy  made  its  appearance  in  an 
edition  of  Boileau' s  work.  Racine  went  further  even  than 
this ;  he  gracefully  sought  reconciliation  with  his  respected 
friend  and  tutor,  and  made  an  ample  apology  for  the  wound 
he  had  inflicted  upon  him. 

APPENDIX.  445 

A  close  friendship  soon  sprung  up  between  Nicdle  and  the 
most  eminent  of  the  Port  Royalists — Arnauld ;  and  by  him  he 
was  strongly  advised  to  enter  into  holy  orders.  He  was  about 
to  comply  with  his  recommendation,  and  took  some  steps  for 
the  purpose,  when  his  plans  were  impeded  by  the  contro- 
versies in  the  Sorbonne  respecting  the  Propositions  of  Janse- 
nius,  which  ended  in  the  publication  of  the  Provincial  Letters. 
Nicole  was  at  this  time  engaged  in  preparing  his  work  en- 
titled "  Essays  upon  Morals  ;  "  but  he  immediately  hastened 
to  the  assistance  of  his  persecuted  friend  Arnauld,  and  threw 
himself  into  the  thickest  of  the  controversy.*  When  the 
Jesuits  had  succeeded,  by  means  of  the  public  condemnation 
of  Arnauld's  works,  in  procuring  his  banishment  from  Paris, 
and  afterwards  from  France,  he  boldly  defended  him  in  every 
possible  way  ;  and  assisted,  as  has  been  seen,  their  mutual 
friend  Pascal  in  some  of  the  Provincial  Letters,  till  at  length 
he  himself  became  the  object  of  similar  persecution,  and  was 
compelled  to  follow  his  friend  into  exile  from  their  common 
country. 

Nicole  also  translated  the  Letters  into  Latin  of  a  high 
order  of  classic  purity,  accompanied  by  valuable  notes.  His 
style  is  especially  formed  upon  the  model  of  Terence,  whom 
he  had  closely  studied. 

The  death  of  his  friend  and  patroness  the  Duchess  de 
Longueville,-!-  an  eminent  supporter  of  the  Jansenists,  seems 
to  have  increased  his  indifference  to  remain  longer  in  his  own 

*  In  the  midst  of  this  polemical  war,  which  at  last  became  sodeadly  in 
its  spirit,  and  so  fatal  in  temporal  consequences  to  the  suffering  Jansen- 
ists, Nicole  once  complained  of  weariness  to  his  friend,  and  expressed  a 
wish  for  some  rest  from  the  toils  of  controversy.  "  Rest ! "  impetuously 
exclaimed  Arnauld,  whose  untiring  labours  were  attested,  as  has  been  seen, 
in  the  preceding  memoir,  by  the  largest  posthumous  productions  that 
were,  perhaps,  ever  left  by  man — "  will  you  not  have  time  enough  for 
rest  in  eternity  ?  " 

■f-  The  Duchess  de  LongueviUe  was  the  daughter  of  the  illustrious  Prince 
de  Conde.  In  early  life  she  was  distinguished  for  her  beauty,  and  held  a 
prominent  place  in  the  circles  of  fashion.     She  also  took  a  warm  part  in 

446  APPENDIX. 

country.  "I  have  now  lost,"  he  said,  "  all  my  little  reputa- 
tion ;  I  have  even  lost  my  '  Abbey,'  for  she  was  the  only 
person  who  ever  called  me  '  Mons.  L'Abbe.'  " 

On  his  return  some  years  after  to  France,  he  employed 
himself  in  the  composition  of  a  number  of  works  which  have 
acquired  a  high  reputation  in  French  literature.  The  most 
profound  of  these  are  his  Essays  on  Morals,  and  which 
extended  to  the  number  of  15  volumes  :  his  Essay  on  "  The 
Methods  of  preserving  Peace  in  Society"  is  much  admired  ; 
and  to  both  works,  Voltaire,  although  httle  sympathizing  with 
the  devout  principles  of  the  writer,  has  awarded  the  high 
meed  of  his  critical  approbation.  In  these  tranquil  studies 
and  pursuits  he  attained  to  a  good  old  age  (unlike  the  prema- 
ture decay  of  his  youthful  friend  Pascal,)  and  died  in  1695,  in 
his  70th  year. 

No.  IV. 

DE    SACY    (LOUIS    ISAAC    LE    MAITEe).* 

The  family  name  of  this  member  of  the  Port  Royal  brother- 
hood was  Le  Maitre,  but  the  designation  above  given,  derived 
from  an  inversion  of  his  Christian  name  Isaac,  is  that  by 
which  he  is  most  commonly  known.  He  was  born  at  Paris, 
in  1613;  and  from  a  very  early  age  exhibited  marks  of  supe- 

politics,  and  signalized  herself  as  a  partizan  on  the  popular  side,  against  the 
Court  party,  in  the  contentions  of  the  Fronde,  encouraging  the  troops,  and 
employing  herself  in  making  favours  and  decorations  for  the  officers.  She 
became  devotedly  pious,  and  attached  herself  ardently  to  the  principles  of 
Jansenius  and  the  fortunes  of  the  Port  Royalists. 

*  For  the  materials  of  this  brief  notice,  I  am  chiefly  indebted  to  a  Me- 
moir recently  published  in  the  Christian  Observer. 

APPENDIX.  447 

rior  talent,  and  still  more  of  piety  and  wisdom.  His  education 
was  carried  on  with  that  of  his  uncle,  by  his  mother's  side, 
the  eminent  Anthony  Arnauld.  The  uncle,  was,  however,  but 
little  older  than  his  nephew,  and  they  pursued  their  studies 
together,  till  the  latter  had  reached  his  fourteenth  year.  At 
that  time  his  mother  removed  to  a  house  which  she  had  built 
in  the  precincts  of  the  Port  Royal ;  and  that  step  at  once 
brought  the  young  student  into  intimate  communion  with  the 
devoted  fraternity  assembled  within  its  walls,  and  in  the  end 
led  to  his  joining  their  body. 

About  this  period,  he  was  placed  under  the  instruction  of 
the  eminent  and  pious  Abb6  St.  Cyran,  who  perceiviiig  his 
superiority  of  parts,  as  well  as  his  piety,  marked  him  out  as 
one  who  promised  to  be  an  honour  and  support  to  the  Church. 
He  shortly  entered  upon  a  course  of  diligent  study  of  the 
Scriptures  and  the  ancient  Fathers ;  and,  iu  due  time,  at  the 
instance  of  his  instructor,  the  Abb^,  assumed  the  tonsure, 
and  became  a  candidate  for  the  priesthood.  He  then,  fol- 
lowing the  example  of  his  two  elder  brothers — of  whom  some 
account  vrill  be  furnished  in  the  conclusion — gave  up  all  his 
property,  which  seems  to  have  been  not  inconsiderable,  to  the 
Monastery  of  the  Port  Royal,  retaining  only  a  small  income 
for  the  supply  of  his  own  simple  wants. 

On  the  death  of  St.  Cyran,  he  placed  himself  under  the 
spiritual  instruction  of  M.  Singlin,  confessor  to  the  nuns  of 
Port  Royal.  Not  long  after  he  took  np  his  residence  in  the 
monastery,  and  then,  in  company  with  his  relative  Arnauld, 
he  pursued,  with  fresh  devotedness,  his  theological  studies ; 
till,  at  the  mature  age  of  35  or  36  he  entered — and  then  not 
vpithout  some  reluctance  on  his  own  part — upon  the  office  of 
the  priesthood.  His  characteristic  humility  seems  to  have 
peculiarly  shrunk  from  the  responsibility  of  ecclesiastical 
duties ;  and,  in  the  same  spirit,  it  is  related  that,  after  his 
ordination,  he  deferred  for  forty  days  the  celebration  of  the 
mass. 

This  gracious  disposition  had  indeed  been  always  predomi- 

448 

APPENDIX. 

nant  in  his  demeanour,  and  was  embodied  by  him  in  these 
lines,  whicTi  he  drew  up  for  his  guidance : — 

"  To  despise  self;  to  despise  the  world ; 

To  despise  no  one ;  to  endure  contempt  from  others  : 

These  are  the  four  effects  of  a  virtue  above  all  price, 

Which  founds  all  its  glory  on  God  alone." 
His  ministerial  character  was  such  as  was  to  be  expected 
from  the  temper  in  which  he  entered  on  the  office.  To 
borrow  the  words  of  the  narrative  from  which  this  sketch  is 
derived,  "  he  was  especially  remarkable  for  moderation  and 
gravity ;  for  constancy  in  prayer,  to  draw  down  the  Divine 
blessing  ;  for  patience  in  bearing  with  the  defects  of  others  ; 
...  for  discrimination  in  judging  of  the  marks  of  true  piety ; 
and  for  zeal  to  furnish  religious  assistance  to  those  whom  he 
directed."  He  was  eminently  zealous  and  self-denying  also, 
in  every  call  of  duty ;  and  no  absorption  in  study,  no  per- 
sonal inconvenience,  no  indisposition,  or  severity  of  weather, 
ever  withheld  his  patient  footsteps  from  the  house  of  affliction, 
or  the  sick  and  dying  bed.  Shortly  after  his  entrance  into 
the  ministry,  he  was  appointed  Confessor  to  the  Port  Royal ; 
his  elder  brother  also,  who  had  then  become  an  inmate  in  the 
College,  placed  himself  under  his  spiritual  guidance  and  con- 
solations ;  and  he  continued  to  discharge  these  offices,  till  the . 
persecution,  to  which  the  recluses  were  not  long  after  sub- 
jected from  the  Jesuits,  obliged  him  to  discontinue  his  duties. 

The  consequence  of  those  persecutions  was,  as  is  well 
known,  to  effect  a  dispersion  of  the  leading  members,  and  to 
drive  some  into  exile ;  and  De  Sacy's  lot — more  severe  even 
than  that  of  the  others — was  to  be  imprisoned  in  the  Bastille. 
It  was  during  this  period — a  term  of  two  years  and  a  half — 
that  he  composed  some  of  his  most  important  theological 
works.  His  translation  of  the  Bible  was,  however,  the  most 
valuable  fruit  of  his  imprisonment.  Having  completed  that 
portion  of  the  New  Testament'  which  he  had  undertaken  in 
common  with  others  of  the  Port  Royalists,  he  conceived  the 
project  of  undertaking,  unaided,  that  of  the  Old  Testament ; 

APPENDIX.  449 

and  entering  upon  it  shortly  after  his  arrest,  he  arrived  at  its 
completion  exactly  at  the  period  of  his  release.  The  aid  of 
Divine  Providence  was  signally  yielded  to  him  in  the  faciUties 
he  enjoyed,  under  such  unpromising  circumstances,  for  this 
great  undertaking  :  he  acquired  an  ample  supply  of  the 
necessary  books,  and  had  the  benefit  of  a  reader  and  copyist 
in  a  fellow  prisoner  and  former  scholar  of  his  own,  M.  Fon- 
taine. These  solaces,  together  with  the  spirit  of  meek  sub- 
mission habitual  to  him,  and  especially  the  exercises  of  faith 
and  prayer,  so  cheered  his  captivity,  that  he  was  accustomed 
to  say,  his  "  abode  in  the  Bastile  was  one  of  the  happiest 
periods  of  his  hfe."  He  had  long  indeed  been  in  possession 
of  the  only  sources  of  true  happiness,  whether  in  solitude  or 
amidst  the  intercourse  of  the  world, — peace  with  God,  and 
faith  in  the  promises  and  hopes  of  the  Gospel ;  and  to  this 
was  now  added,  absorbing  occupation  in  the  noblest  work 
upon  which  the  understanding  can  be  engaged — the  commu- 
nications of  God  to  man  in  his  own  Word. 

On  his  liberation,  he  immediately  repaired  to  return  thanks 
at  the  Church  of  Notre  Dkme.  He  was  shortly  after  pre- 
sented by  the  Archbishop  of  Paris,  M.  Prefixe  (who  seems  to 
have  regarded  him  with  much  esteem,)  to  the  King,  and  was 
allowed  to  exhibit  to  him  his  translation  of  the  Bible.  From 
him  also  he  experienced  much  graciousness  ;  although  it  does 
not  appear  that  the  Royal  favour  was  extended  beyond  a 
benignity  of  reception.  The  only  reward  in  fact  asked  by 
De  Sacy  was  permission  to  visit  the  prisoners  in  the  Bastille  ! 
This  touching  incident  may  recal  to  memory  the  disinterested- 
ness of  the  Prophet  of  Israel  after  the  important  benefit  conferred 
by  his  instrumentality  upon  the  Syrian  Prince  ;  or  still  more 
forcibly,  the  yearning  tenderness  of  the  faithful  Nehemiah  for 
his  brethren  in  their  native  land,  when  the  only  use  he  made 
of  his  favour  with  his  indulgent  Sovereign  and  Master  was,  to 
ask  permission  to  rejoin  them  in  their  afflictions  and  labours. 
After  this  he  retired  to  the  country ;  but  the  ecclesiastical 
troubles  having,  in  1669,  for  a  time  subsided,  he  returned  to 

450  APPENDIX. 

Paris,  and  again  took  up  his  residence  in  the  Port  Royal. 
Ten  years  after,  however,  when  the  government  had  resolved 
upon  the  entire  dispersion  of  the  Institution,  the  then  Arch- 
bishop Haily,  who  seemed  to  have  inherited  his  predecessor's 
respect  and  consideration  for  De  Sacy,  recommended  him  to 
retire,  before  the  storm  broke  upon  the  devoted  monastery. 
He  obeyed  the  intimation,  and  returned  again  to  Pomponne, 
where  he  passed  the  very  few  remaining  years  of  his  life. 

He  here,  with  his  fast  decaying  powers — for  he  was  sixty- 
seven — still  laboured  incessantly  for  the  promotion  of  religion. 
He  applied  himself  with  great  ardour  and  diligence  to  com- 
pose a  Commentary  upon  the  Scripture,  and  made  consider- 
able progress  in  the  work ;  although  its  entire  completion  was 
reserved  for  other  hands.  It  is  described  by  those  acquainted 
with  it  as  eminently  learned  and  instructive.  The  habitual 
feeling  of  his  mind,  while  engaged  in  this  labour,  was  not  "  to 
take  from  sacred  Scripture  any  of  its  divine  energy ;  not  to 
study  only  to  please  the  taste,  or  satisfy  intellectual  curiosity, 
but  to  edify  the  heart,  and  excite  love  for  the  truths  of  the 
sacred  Books." — He  was  much  addicted  to  the  distribution  of 
religious  and  instructive  works,  especially  to  poor  clergymen, 
who  had  not  the  means  of  buying  them.  With  this  view  also 
he  intended  to  bequeath  his  own  library  to  a  friend,  who 
should  make  it  useful  to  general  circulation  ;  but  whether  he 
was  able  to  carry  this  design  into  effect  does  not  appear. 

His  last  days  were  now  at  hand.  Being  taken  ill  at  Pom- 
ponne in  1683,  his  friends  importuned  him  to  repair  to  Paris, 
probably  for  the  benefit  of  medical  advice.  On  the  third  of 
January  in  the  following  year,  being  the  F6te  of  St.  Genevieve, 
he  addressed  those  about  him  for  a  considerable  time  on  the 
life  of  that  Saint ;  and  on  the  conclusion  of  his  discourse,  one 
of  the  persons  present  exclaimed,  "  This  man  belongs  no 
more  to  this  world,  we  shall  not  have  him  much  longer ! "  He 
was  almost  immediately  after  seized  with  violent  fever :  the 
next  morning,  sensible_^  that  his  end  was  approaching,  he 
caused  the  last  offices  of  his  church  to  be  performed  ;  calmly 

APPENDIX.  451 

settled  his  few  worldly  affairs ;  and  then,  dismissing  all 
thoughts  but  of  God  and  eternity,  he  passed  some  hours  in 
prayer  and  meditation,  and  expired  on  the  evening  of  the 
same  day,  in  his  seventy-first  year.  He  left  many  valuable 
writings  ;  but  his  translation  of  the  Scripture,  and  the  por- 
tions of  Commentary  that  he  was  enabled  to  complete,- are 
works  that  have  conferred  an  enduring  benefit  upon  the 
church  of  his  own  land,  which  it  was  the  great  business  of  his 
life  to  purify  and  reform,  and  will  carry  down  his  name  to  a 
late  posterity.* 

In  reviewing  the  holy  and  laborious  life  of  this  good  man 
and  his  colleagues,  some  of  which  have  been  here  briefly 
traced,  there  are  few,  I  think,  who  will  not  respond  to  the 
sentiment  of  a  contemporary  writer,  f  of  whose  pages,  in  this 
simple  narrative,  I  have  availed  myself;  "  They  had  not, 
indeed,  outgrown  many  of  the  errors  of  the  Communion  in 
which  they  had  been  trained.  .  .  .  But  may  we  not  fear — is 

*  It  is  recorded  (and  is  a  striliing  instance  of  the  labour  that  must  be 
bestowed  upon  all  such  works,  to  give  them  the  requisite  perfection) , 
that  he  re-wrote  his  translation  three  times ;  the  style  of  the  first  ap- 
pearing too  refined,  and  that  of  the  second,  too  simple.  His  friend  Pascal, 
with  that  fine  taste  that  distinguished  him,  advised  him  to  lay  it  by  for 
a  considerable  time,  and  then  resume  it — an  exceUerit  rule  in  com- 
position. 

f  The  Editor  of  the  Christian  Observer. — The  writer  gladly  embraces 
this  opportunity  to  offer  a  passing  tribute — slight  as  is  its  value — to  the 
much  respected  individual,  whose  name  has  long  been  associated  with 
that  work.  Some  of  its  earlier  volumes  are  on  his  shelves — of  a  date 
when  its  pages  were  enriched  by  the  contributions  of  the  Macaulays,  the 
Grants,  and  the  Bowdlers  of  past  days.  In  younger  years,  the  monthly 
advent  of  its  (then)  blue  cover  was  one  of  his  greatest  pleasures ;  and  he 
never  sees  it  now  without  interest.  If  the  laborious  and  zealous  Editor 
is  now  left  to  toil  almost  alone,  and  the  aid  he  formerly  enjoyed  (espe- 
cially from  clerical  brethren)  has  been  transferred  to  newer,  but  certainly 
not  abler,  periodicals,  let  him  be  assured  that  his  efforts  in  support  of  the 
sound  doctrine  and  wholesome  discipline  of  our  common  Church,  are  not 
unattended  with  the  sympathies  of  m.any,  who  know  how  to  value — in 
times  when  they  are  not  a  little  needed — sound  taste,  extensive  polemical 
knowledge,  and  pure  and  scriptural  theology. 

452 

APPENDIX. 

it  not  certain — that  many  who  profess  to  belong  to  Reformed 
and  Protestant  Churches  would,  at  the  day  of  judgment, 
rejoice  that  their  souls  should  be  with  those  of  Pascal  and 
Amauld,  Fontaine  (Nicole)  and  De  Sacy,  Fenelon  and 
Quesnel?" 

The  family  of  the  Le  Maitres  was  prolific  in  distinguished 
men.  The  eldest  brother,  Anthony,  was  an  Advocate  of  high 
celebrity,  whose  pleadings,  we  are  informed  by  M.  Villemain, 
in  a  note  to  the  last  of  the  Provincial  Letters — said  to  be  his 
composition — are  still  extant  in  the  courts.  Early  in  life,  and 
in  the  midst  of  a  splendid  professional  career,  he  abandoned, 
to  the  surprise  of  all,  his  secular  pursuits,  and  retired  for  the 
exercises  of  piety  and  meditation,  to  the  walls  of  the  Port 
Royal.  "  I  have  been  busy,"  he  said,  "  in  pleading  the 
causes  of  others ;  I  am  now  studying  my  own."  It  was  at 
first  supposed  that  in  renouncing  the  bar  for  the  church  he 
was  looking  for  high  preferment,  but  he  wrote  to  the  Chan- 
cellor that  "  he  trusted  God  had  given  him  grace  to  renounce 
ambition."  He  had  projected  with  much  labour  a  work  "  of 
the  Lives  of  the  Saints,"  intended  to  be  purified  from  the 
superstitious  legends  of  former  publications — an  example, 
which  some  modern,  and  ostensibly  Protestant  biographers  of 
the  same  class  would  have  done  well  to  follow  ;^^but  in  his 
dying  moments,  speaking  of  his  disappointment  in  not  being 
able  to  accomplish  his  object,  he  said,  that  "  God,  who  in- 
spired him  with  the  desire,  had  not  permitted  him  to  carry  it 
into  effect,  because  the  lives  of  the  Saints  ought  to  be  penned 
by  the  hand  of  a  Saint."  Such  a  work  would,  independent 
of  other  merits,  have  been  a  high  intellectual  enjoyment ;  for 
the  specimen  of  his  composition,  above  referred  to,  in  the 
Provincials,  shows  him  to  be  a  master  of  acute  reasoning  and 
graceful  diction,  and  affords  a  proof  of  the  high  cultivation 
to  which  the  French  bar  had  attained  above  two  centuries 
since. 

Another  brother,  also  older  than  Isaac,  was  Simon  Sieur 
de  Sericourt.     He  had  attained  considerable   distinction  in 

APPENDIX.  453 

the  army,  but  in  the  midst  of  his  reputation  he  quitted  the 
profession  of  arms,  as  Anthony  did  the  bar,  and  joined  the 
recluses  of  the  Port  Royal,  making  over  to  the  Society  all  his 
property.  His  favourite  pursuit — for  none  of  these  good,  but 
enthusiastic,  and  perhaps  mistaken  men,  were  idlers — became 
that  of  a  gardener  and  agriculturist,  in  which  he  devoted 
himself  to  the  severest  personal  toil,  with  the  austerity  and 
self-denial  which  were  characteristic  of  the  brotherhood. 

No.  V. 

PEBE    ANNAT, 

Assistant  of  the  Society  of  Jesuits  in  France ;    afterwards 
Provincial;  and  Confessor  to  Louis  XIV. 

The  preceding  slight  sketches  of  the  leading  members  of  the 
Port  Royal  would  be  incomplete  without  a  notice  of  their 
opponent  and  persecutor  Annat,  the  head  of  the  Jesuits  at 
the  period  of  the  Arnauld-controversy.  He  was  born  at 
Rourgus,  in  1590,  entered  the  Society  in  1607,  and  took  the 
vows  in  1624.  He  became  a  teacher  of  philosophy  and 
divinity  at  Toulouse ;  and  his  acquirements  and  talents  attract- 
ing attention,  he  was  invited  to  Rome,  and  speedily  appointed 
to  the  office  of  Censor-General  and  Theologist  to  the  General 
of  the  Society.  In  1645,  he  was  promoted  to  the  office  of 
Assistant  iu  France  ;  and  on  the  death  of  Picolimini,  he  was 
made  Provincial  of  the  Province  of  France.  In  1654  he 
obtained  the  high  distinction  of  Confessor  to  the  King,  which 
appointment  he  held  till  1670,  when  age  and  infirmity  induced  ' 
him  to  seek  retirement,  and  he  died  shortly  after.  His  life 
and  character  exhibited  a  large  measure  of  the  usual  qualities 
of  the  higher  class  of  Jesuit  leaders  ;  he  was  irreproachable 
in  personal  conduct,  pohtic,  acute,  an  uncompromising  sup- 

454  APPENDIX. 

porter  of  his  church,  a  bitter  foe  to  all  opinions  that  deviated 
from  her  creed,  and  possessed  learning  and  talent,  but  no 
genius.  He  wrote ;  but  not  a  line  of  his  is  preserved  or 
remembered  ;  and  little  of  him  remains  but  the  name  ;  while 
the  objects  of  his  persecutions  are  embalmed  in  the  love  and 
veneration  of  posterity.  A  pleasing  trait  of  his  character  is 
said  to  have  been  his  disinterestedness,  and  marked  abstinence 
from. using  the  advantages  of  his  high  position  for  the 
advancement  of  relatives  and  friends. 

No.  VI. 

THE    DUKE    DE    EOUANNEZ. 
.  (Extracted  from  a  Memoir  of  Madame  Perier.*) 

M.  dE  RouANNEz  was  the  son  of  the  Marquis  de  Boissy. 
His  mother  was  daughter  of  M.  Henflequin,  President  of  the 
Parliament,  and  grandson  of  the  Duke  de  Rouannez :  his 
grandmother  was  sister  of  the  Count  d'Harcourt.  He  lost 
his  father  at  the  age  of  eight  or  nine  years,  and  was  placed 
under  the  care  of  his  grandfather,  who  was  a  person  destitute 
of  religious  principle,  of  a  violent  temperament,  and  little 
fitted  to  conduct  beneficially  the  training  of  a  young  person. 
He  committed  his  grandson  to  a  tutor,  as  ill  qualified  as  him- 
self; giving  him  directions  to  bring  him  up  with  court  man- 
ners, to  let  him  even  learn  to  swear,  and  in  every  way  to 
acquire  the  habits  common  then  to  the  youth  of  quality. 
Fortunately  for  him,  he  lost  his  grandfather  when  about  the 
age  of  thirteen,  and  then  became  his  own  master.  His  mother 
was  a  well-disposed  and  simple-minded  person,  but  not  fitted 
to  have  the  management  of  a  youth  of  his  age.  Under  all 
these  disadvantages,  however,  he  seems  to  have  early  imbibed 

*  Fauglre's  edition  of  Pens&s,  &g. — Appendix. 

APPENDIX.  455 

religious  sentiments  ;  his  parts  also  were  good,  but  he  had 
little  application  to  study.  It  is  not  certain  at  what  age  he 
was  when  he  first  made  the  acquaintance  of  Pascal,  who  re- 
sided in  his  neighbourhood  ;  but  he  was  much  impressed  with 
his  piety  and  intelligence,  and  several  times  took  him  to  his 
own  residence  in  Poitou  :  in  short  his  society  became  indis- 
pensable to  him. 

When  M.  de  Rouannez  was  about  twenty-two  or  twenty- 
three,  Pascal  having  then  entirely  given  himself  to  the  service 
of  God,  and  resolved  to  abandon  the  world,  persuaded  his 
youthful  friend  to  enter  into  his  views.  His  mind  became 
deeply  impressed  as  to  his  future  course  of  life,  and  in  about 
his  twenty-fourth  or  twenty-fifth  year,  he  resolved,  under  the 
advice  of  Pascal  and  his  friend  M.  Singlin,  to  set  apart  a 
period  of  time  to  seek  divine  direction  for  the  purpose. 
This  he  did.  Pascal  was  then  his  inmate  :  he  appropriated 
to  his  use  an  apartment  in  his  own  dwelling,  which  he  at  all 
times  commanded,  although  he  had  his  own  residence  in 
Paris.  At  length,  after  much  reflection,  M.  de  Rouannez  took 
the  decided  resolution  to  abandon  the  world.  He  announced 
his  purpose  to  Pascal  and  Singlin ;  and  told  them  that  he 
should  take  an  early  opportunity  to  obtain  the  King's  permis- 
sion to  dispose  of  his  estates,  *and  to  retire  into  the  Port 
Royal. 

His  determination  being  thus  formed,  and  announced  to  his 
friends,  a  singular  incident  occurred  to  him.  A  few  years 
before,  when  he  had  no  thought  of  the  present  step,  he  be- 
came acquainted  with  a  young  lady  of  rank,  and  the  richest 
heiress  in  France,  Madlle.  de  Menus,  who  was  not  then  of 
marriageable  age.  De  Rouannez  cast  his  eyes  upon  her  as  a  suit- 
able match ;  not  doubting  that  he  would  be  able  to  obtain  her 
hand,  as — the  ducal  rank  being  then  rare  in  France — he  was 
the  only  man  of  his  own  rank  in  the  country  that  she  could 
suitably  marry.  A  few  months  after  the  young  Peer  had 
taken  the  resolution  above  described,  some  mutual  friends 
suggested  to  the  Count  D'Harcourt  the  fitness  of  an  alliance 

456  APPENDIX. 

between  Mdlle  de  Menus,  and  his  great-nephew.  The  Count 
entering  into  the  plan  with  much  satisfaction,  at  once  repaired 
to  M.  de  Rouannez,  and  accosted  him  thus  :  "  Nephew,  I 
have  a  communication  for  you,  which  will  give  you  pleasure  : 
we  are  going  to  propose  for  you  to  Mdlle.  de  Menus."  Rou- 
annez, much  surprised,  said  :  "  Sir,  you  must  be  pleased  to 
allow  me  a  short  time  to  consider  of  the  matter."  His  uncle 
hereupon  fell  into  a  passion,  and  said,  "  Why,  nephew,  you 
must  be  a  fool !  Here  have  you  been  long  looking  out  for 
this  young  lady ;  and  are  you  not  satisfied,  now  you  are  in  a 
fair  way  to  get  her  ?  "What  has  put  it  into  your  head  that 
you  must  take  time  to  consider  ?  Don't  you  know  she  is  a 
woman  of  the  first  quaUty,  and  the  richest  heiress  in  the 
kingdom  ?  You  are  an  absolute  fool !  "  De  Rouannez,  how- 
ever, persisted  in  asking  for  time  ,  and  in  about  a  fortnight, 
he  announced  to  M.  D'Harcourt  that  he  had  come  to  the  de- 
termination not  to  marry.  The  Count  fell  into  the  greatest 
fury,  especially  towards  his  friend  Pascal.  The  news  soon 
spread  through  the  Hotel  de  Rouannez,  where  Pascal  still 
was  ;  and  in  consequence  the  house-steward  rushed  one  morn- 
ing into  his  room,  armed  with  a  poignard,  to  destroy  him. 
Fortunately  he  was  not  within,  having  left  home,  contrary  to 
his  custom,  at  an  early  hour."  He  was  informed  of  the  design 
conceived  against  him,  and  returned  no  more  to  the  hotel. 
Mdlle.  de  Menus  afterwards  married  M.  de  Vivonne. 

M.  de  Rouannez  persisted  in  his  resolution,  and  a  few  years 
after  sold  his  estates  and  paid  off  some  of  the  incumbrances, 
although  not  the  whole,  for  his  grandfather  had  left  them 
much  involved.  After  that,  his  mother  being  still  alive,  he 
continued  to  live  in  society,  although  adhering  to  a  religious 
course  of  life ;  but  was  disappointed  at  his  sister's  return  to 
the  gaieties  of  the  world. 

The  above  little  narrative  is,  of  course,  given  in  substance  as  it 
stands  in  the  original.  But  it  is  evident  that  this  accompUshed 
and  excellent  young  nobleman  was  placed  between  two  injurious 

APPENDIX, 

457 

alternatives ;  either,  to  remain  in  the  demoralizing  circle  of 
aristocratical  life,  as  it  then  existed  in  France ;  or,  as  his  de- 
vout friends  urged,  to  renounce,  not  only  the  evils  of  the 
world,  but  the  innocent  and  beneficial  ties  of  hfe,  and  to  aban- 
don the  duties  of  the  high  station  to  which  Providence  had 
called  him.  Happy  that  society  in  which  a  place  may  be 
found  for  the  virtuous  of  the  highest  rank  !  And  thrice 
happy  the  faith,  which  knows  how  to  reconcile  the  most  ex- 
alted piety  with  blameless  enjoyment,  and  with  the  due  dis- 
charge of  our  responsibilities  to  our  fellow-men  ! — (Transl.) 

No.  VII. 

The  following  is  the  passage  in  Pascal's  "  Essay  on  the 
Passion  of  Love,"  which  is  referred  to  in  the  Memoir  as 
indicative  that  he  had  conceived  a  secret  and  hopeless  at- 
tachment for  the  fascinating  and  high-born  Charlotte  de  Rou- 
annez : 

"  Man  in  a  state  of  solitude  is  restless  and  uneasy ;  com- 
panionship is  necessary  to  his  happiness.  He  most  usually 
seeks  it  in  his  own  condition  of  life,  as  being  that  which 
affords  the  greatest  facility  for  obtaining  his  object.  But  occa- 
sionally his  views  take  a  higher  direction,  and  the  flames  of 
passion  ascend  to  an  exalted  object,  although  he  may  be  hope- 
lessly restricted  from  the  avowal  of  his  wishes. 

"  When  an  attachment  is  conceived  for  a  female  of  an 
elevated  station,  ambition  may  at  first  co-exist  with  love  ;  but 
the  latter  shortly  obtains  the  mastery.  It  is  a  despotic  pas- 
sion, and  admits  of  no  rivalry ;  it  must  reign  alone  ;  every 
other  emotion  must  subserve  and  obey  its  dictates. 

"  An  elevated  love  is  more  suited  to  fill  the  heart  of  man 
than  those  more  common-place  feelings  sometimes  entertained 
for  an  equal  in  station  :  ordinary  objects  seem  but  to  float  on 

458  APPENDIX. 

the  surface  of  a  large  capacity ;  it  is  the  intenser  emotions, 
alone,  that  arrest  and  dwell  in  the  spirit." 

The  subjoined  passages  are  yet  more  to  the  purpose  : 
"  To  love,  without  daring  to  reveal  our  passion,  has  its 
sufferings,  but  it  has  also  its  joys.  Who  can  describe  the 
dehght  of  moulding  every  action  as  in  the  approving  view  of 
one,  who  is  the  absorbing  object  of  our  admiration !  To  study 
daily  new  methods  of  evincing  our  devotion,  and  to  be  as  assi- 
duous for  her  satisfaction,  as  if  we  were  in  the  enjoyment  of 
her  unrestricted  communication !  How  will  the  eye  in  a 
moment  kindle,  and  as  quickly  lose  its  fire  !  And,  although 
we  are  well  assured  that  she  who  is  the  cause  of  all  these 
emotions  is  unconscious  of  our  feelings,  who  would  desire  to 
forego  the  secret  joy  that  their  fluctuations  afford  us  ?  We 
could  wish  for  a  hundred  tongues  to  reveal  to  the  beloved 
object  our  thoughts ;  but  as  that  privilege  is  denied  us,  we 
seek  a  substitute  for  it  in  the  sileut  eloquence  of  action ! " 
"  The  first  effect  of  genuine  love  is  to  inspire  respect." 
"  The  deepest  attachment  may  often  be  conceived  when  the 
beloved  object  is  unconscious  of  the  passion ;  and  the  most 
inviolate  fidelity  preserved,  when  even  our  love  itself  is  un- 
known." 

These  and  other  sentiments  in  this  elegant  production,  do 
indeed  furnish  strong  internal  evidence  that  the  portraiture  of 
pure  and  elevated  passion  it  presents  is  drawn  from  far  deeper 
sources  than  a  general  knowledge  of  nature  and  the  heart. 
They  bear  all  the  stamp  of  personal  experience.  It  was  a 
"  love  "  probably  that  was  "  never  told ;  "  nurtured  in  the 
silent  recesses  of  his  own  bosom ;  not,  perhaps,  to  the  last, 
wholly  extinguished ;  but  abandoned  through  hopelessness,  or 
superseded  by  yet  higher  and  nobler  aspirations.  Whatever 
it  was,  however,  it  is  now  gone  down  with  his  ashes  to  that 
oblivion,  in  which  are  wrapt  many  of  the  secret  passages  that 
have  adorned  or  afflicted  the  feverish  existence  of  genius  and 
virtue!  (Transl.) 

APPENDIX.  459 

No.  VIII. 

The  following  is  a  literal  transcript  of  a  series  of  memo- 
randa, which  have  been  found  in  Pascal's  own  hand-writing,  on 
the  margin  of  the  manuscript  copy  of  the  beautiful  fragment 
of  his  19th  Letter. 

—  "  Le  jour  du  jugement. 

—  C'est  done  Ih,  mon  pfere,  ce  que  vous  appellez  le  sens  de 
Jansenius  ;  c'est  done  cela  que  vous  faites  entendre  et  au 
Pape,  et  aux  ev^ques. 

—  Si  les  J^suites  ^taient  corrumpus,  et  qu'il  fiit  vrai  que 
nous  fussions  seuls,  k  plus  forte  raison  devrions  nous  demeurer. 

—  Quod  helium  firmavit,  pax  ficta  non  auferat. 

—  Neque  benedictione,  neque  maledictione  movetur,  sicut 
angelus  domini. 

—  On  attaque  la  plus  grande  des  v6rit€s  chr^tiennes,  qui  est 
r  amour  de  la  v6rit6. 

—  Si  la  signature  signifie  cela,  qu'on  souifre  que  nous  I'ex- 
pliquions,  afin  qu'il  n'y  ait  point  d' equivoque  :  car  il  faut 
demeurer  d' accord  que  plusieurs  croient  que  signer  marque 
consentement. 

—  On  n'est  pas  capable  de  ne  pas  croire,  et  on  seroit 
coupable  de  jurer  sans  croire. 

—  Mais  vous  pouvez  vous  etre  trompe?  Je  jure  que  je 
crois  que  je  puis  m'gtre  tromp6 ;  mais  je  ne  jure  pas  que  je 
me  suis  tromp6. 

—  Se  le  rapporteur  ne  signait  pas,  I'arrSt  serait  invalide  ; 
si  la  bulle  n'^tait  pas  sign6e  elle  serait  valable  ;  ce  n'est  done 
pas  .... 

—  Cela  avec  Escobar  les  met  au  haut  bout ;  mais  ils  ne  le 
prennent  pas  ainsi ;  et  t^moignant  le  d^plaisir  de  se  voir  entre 
Dieu  et  le  Pape  .... 

—  Je  suis  fach6  de  vous  dire  tout :  je  ne  fais  qu'un  r^cit. ' 

X  2 

460 

APPENDIX. 

It  may  be  interesting  to  the  reader  to  see  a  few  more  of 
similar  memoranda  relating  to  others  of  the  Letters,  which 
have  been  collected  from  manuscripts. 

Pensies  ef  Notes  povr  les  Provinciales. 

Lettres  des  6tablissements  violents  des  J6suites  partout. 

—  Aveuglement  surnaturel. 

—  Cette  morale  qui  a  en  tSte  un  Dieu  crucifix. 

&6)  II  y  a  diverses  voies  pour  y  arriver.  St.  Ignace  a  pris 
les  unes ;  et  maintenant  d'autres.  II  ^toit  meilleur  pour  le 
commencement  de  proposer  la  pauvret^  et  la  retraite.  II  a 
(it€  meilleur  ensuite  de  prendre  le  reste.  Car  cela  eut  effray6 
de  commencer  par  le  haut ;  cela  est  contre  nature. 

Notes  ecrites  de  la  main  d'Amauld.      Contre-notes  de  la  main  de  Pascal. 

Ep.  16.   Aquavivse.    De   for- 

mandis  coricionatoribus. 
P.  373.  Longfe  falluntur  qui 

ad  irrigaturae. 

Ep.  1 .  Mutii  Vitelesci. 
P.  289.  Quamvis  enim  probfe 

norim — et  absolutum. 
P.   390.    Dolet  ac  queritur— 

esse  modestiam. 

Tons  les  Pferes  pour  les  eon- 
former  El  son  imagination, 
au  lieu  de  former  sa  pensde 
sur  celle  des  Pferes. 

Modestie. 

LaMesse.  Jenesaiscequ'ildit. 

Politique. 

Par  un  malheur  ou  plut6t  un 
bonheur  singnlier  de  la  so- 
ciety, ce  que  Ton  fait  est 
attribu6  a  tous. 

APPENDIX.  461 

Pour  parlerdes  vices  personnels.' 

—  Belle  lettre  d' Aquaviva,  1 8  Juin,  1611,  centre  les  opinions 
probables. 

St.  AugQstin.    282. 

—  Et  pour  S.  Thomas,  les  lieus  ou  il  a  traits  expres  les 
matiferes. 

Climaq.  pour  1 277. 

Et  nouveaut^s. 

Et  ce  n'est  pas  une  excuse  aux  Sup^rieurs  de  ne  1' avoir  pas 
su,  car  ils  le  devaient  savoir.  279.   194. 

—  Aquoquiez  a  confess^  les  femmes. 

II  est  permis  de  ne  point  donner  les  b^n^fices  qui  n'ont  pas 
charge  d'imes  aux  plus  dignes.  Le  Concile  de  Trente  semble 
dire  le  contraire ;  mais  voici  comme  il  le  prouve :  "  Car  si 
cela  ^toit,  tons  les  pr^lats  seraient  en  itat  de  damnation,  car 
ils  en  usent  tous  de  la  sorte. 

Et  en  un  autre  endroit,  oil  il  met  les  conditions  necessaires 
pour  qu'un  p6ch6  soit  mortel,  il  y  met  tant  de  circonstances, 
qu'S.  peine  p^che-t-on  mortellement :  et  aprfes  I'avoir  ^tabli,  il 
s'6crie ;  "  O  que  le  jong  du  Seigneur  est  doux  et  l^ger  !  "  (22.) 

Et  ailleurs :  "  Ton  n'est  pas  oblig^  de  donner  I'aumone  de 
son  superflu,  dans  les  communes  n^cessites  des  pauvres  :  si 
le  contraire  6tait  vrai,  il  faudrait  condamner  la  plupart  des 
riches  et  de  leurs  confesseurs." 

—  Ces  raisons  Ik  m'impatientaient,  lorsque  je  dit  au  P6re 
Mais  qui  empeche  de  dire  qu'ils  le  sont  ?  C'est  ce  qu'il  a 
prevu  aussi  en  ce  lieu,  me  r6pondit-il,  ou  aprfes  avoir  dit ;  "Si 
cela  6toit  vrai,  les  plus  riches  seraient  damn^s  ;  "  il  ajoute  : 
"  A  cela  Arragonius  r^pond  qu'ils  le  sont  aussi ;  et  Baunez 
ajoute  de  plus  que  leurs  confesseurs  le  sont  de  mSme ;  mais  je 
reponds  avec  Valentia,  autre  J6suite,  et  d'autres  auteurs,  qu'il 
J  a  plusieurs  raisons  pour  excuser  ces  riches  et  leurs  con- 
fesseurs.  (22.) 

463  APPENDIX. 

—  J'6tois  ravi  de  ce  raisonnement,  quand  il  en  finit  par 
celui-ci : 

"  Si  cette  opinion  ^tait  vraie  pour  la  restitution,  6  qu'il  y 
aurait  de  restitutions  k  faire. 

0,  mon  Pfere,  lui  dis-je,  la  bonne  raison ! — O  !  me  dit  le 
Pfere,  que  voil^  un  homme  commode  ! — Mon  Pfere,  repondis-je, 
sans  vos  casuistes  qu'il  y  aurait  de  monde  damn^ !  O  que 
vous  rendez  large  la  voie  qui  mfene  au  ciel !  O  qu'il  y  a  de 
gens  qui  la  trouvent !     Voilk  un 

Qu'avez  vous  gagn6  en  m' accusant  de  railler  des  choses 
saintes  ?  Vous  ne  gagnerez  pas  plus  en  m' accusant  d'impos- 
ture.*  (Barr6.) 

—  Je  ne  suis  point  h^r^tique  :  je  n'ai  point  soutenu  les 
5  Propositions.  Vous  le  dites,  et  ne  le  prouvez  pas.  Je  dis 
que  vous  avez  dit  cela,  et  je  le  prouve. 

—  Vous  me  m^nacez  ? 

—  Je  vous  dis  que  vous  6tes  des  imposteurs.  Je  vous  le 
prouve  ;  et  que  vous  ne  le  cachez  pas,  et  que  vous  I'autorisez 
insolemmeut. — Brisacier,  Minier,  D'Alby. 

—  Quand  vous  croyiez  M.  Puys  ennemi  de  la  society,  il 
6tait  indigne  pasteur  de  son  6glise,  ignorant  h^retique,  de 
mauvaise  foi  et  moeurs.  Depuis,  il  est  digne  pasteur,  de  bonne 
foi  et  moeurs. f 

—  Calomnier,  "  bsec  est  magna  csecitas  cordis." 

—  N'en  pas  voir  le  mal,  "  hsec  est  major  ceecitas  cordis." 
Le  defendre,  au  lieu  de  s'en  confesseur  comme  d'un  p6eh6, 
"haec  tunc  hominem  concludit  profunditas  iniquitatis,"  &c. 
2.  30,  Prosper. 

—  Ceux  qui  examinent  les  livres,  je  suis  stir  de  leur  appro- 
bation. Mais  ceux  qui  ne  lisent  que  les  titres,  et  ceux-lk  sont 
la  plus  grande  nombre,  ceux-l&,  pourraient  croire  sur  votre 
parole,  ne  supposant  pas  que  des  religieux  fussent  des  impos- 
teurs. (Barr6.) 

*  Letter  11th.  f  Letter  15th. 

APPENDIX.  463 

—  Les  saints  subtilisent  pour  se  trouver  criminels,  et  ac- 
cuser leurs  meilleures  actions.  Et  ceux-ci  subtilisent  pour  ex- 
cuser  les  plus  m^chantes. 

—  Jamais  homme  n'a  eu  si  bonne  cause  que  moi ;  et  jamais 
d'autres  n'ont  donn6  si  belle  prise  que  vous. 

—  Les  gens  du  monde  ne  croient  pas  Stre  dans  les  bonnes 
voies. 

—  Ne  pretendez  pas  que  ceci  se  passe  en  dispute :  on  fera 
imprimer  vos  ouvrages  entiers  et  en  frangais,  et  on  fera  tout  le 
monde  juge. 

—  Plus  ils  marquent  de  faiblesse  en  ma  personne,  plus  ils 
autorisent  ma  cause. 

^-  Vous  dites  que  je  suis  h^r^tique.  Cela  est-il  permis  ? 
Et  si  vous  ne  craignez  pas  que  les  hommes  ne  rendent  justice, 
ne  craignez  vous  pas  que  Dieu  ne  la  rende  ? 

—  C'est  p^cli6  de  croire  tem^rairement  les  medisances. 
("  Non  credebitur  temeri  ealumniatori."  S.  Aug.)  "  Fecitque 
cadendo  undique  me  eadere,"  par  la  maxime  dela  m^disance, 

—  Mentiris  impudentissimfe.* 

—  Je  suis  seul  contra  trente  mille  ?  Point.  Gardez-vous 
la  cour,  vous  Timposture  ;  moi  la  v6rit6 :  c'est  toute  ma  force; 
si  je  le  perds  je  suis  perdu.  Je  ne  manquerai  pas  d' accusa- 
tions et  de  persecutions.  Mais  j'ai  la  v^rit^  et  nous  verrons 
qui  I'emportera.-f 

—  M.  Amauld  et  ses  amis  protestent  qu'il  les  condamne  en 
elles-mtoes,  et  en  quelque  lieu  oti  elles  se  trouvent ;  que  si 
elles  sent  dans  Jans^nius  il  les  j  condamne ;  que  quand  m6me 
qu' elles  n'y  soient  pas,  si  le  sens  h^r^tique  de  ces  propositions 
que  le  Pape  a  condamn^  se  trouve  dans  Jans6nius,  qu'il  con- 
damne Jans^nius.J 

—  II  y  a  plaisir  d'etre  dans  un  vaisseau  battu  de  I'orage, 
lorsqu'on  est  assur^  qu'il  ne  perira  point.  Les  persecutions 
qui  travaillent  I'Eglise  sont  de  cette  nature. 

*  Letter  15. 
t  See  these  rudimental  thoughts  finely  amplified  in  the  opening  of 
Letter  17.  t  Letter  18. 

464  APPENDIX. 

No.  IX. 

I  am  tempted  to  transcribe  the  following  passage  from 
Pascal's  miscellaneous  "  Pens^es,"  -wbich  I  believe  has  not 
before  appeared  in  English,  because,  although  it  has  no  espe- 
cial reference  to  any  preceding  topic  in  this  work,  it  seems, 
with  other  principles  of  composition  laid  down  by  him,  to 
furnish,  in  a  great  measure  the  key  to  the  purity  and  force  of 
his  style : 

"  Eloquence  is  the  art  of  expressing  things  in  such  a  man- 
ner that,  1st,  the  persons  addressed  shall  listen,  not  only 
without  pain,  but  with  satisfaction ;  and  2ndly,  they  shall  feel 
an  interest  in  the  subjects  discussed,  and  shall  accompany 
them  with  beneficial  reflections.  It  consists,  then,  in  a  corres- 
pondence aimed  at,  on  the  one  hand,  between  the  mind  of  the 
writer  or  speaker,  and  the  feelings  of  those  who  are  addressed ; 
and,  on  the  other,  between  the  thoughts  as  they  arise  in  the 
mind,  and  the  language  of  which  they  are  made  the  vehicle ; 
all  which  supposes  a  profound  study  of  the  heart  of  man,  to 
acquire  j*-  knowledge  of  its  most  secret  springs,  and  to  draw 
out  the  desired  emotions  by  appropriate  language.  We  ought 
to  put  ourselves  in  the  place  of  those  whom  we  address,  and 
to  make  trial  upon  our  own  heart  of  any  touching  or  forcible 
turn  of  discourse ;  in  order  to  ascertain  whether  the  one  is 
calculated  to  affect  the  other ;  and  thus  be  assured  of  carrying 
with  us  the  sympathies  of  the  hearer.  We  ought,  as  much 
as  possible,  to  study  simplicity  and  nature  ;  to  give  no  undue 
elevation  to  what  is  in  itself  low,  nor  to  lower  what  is  great. 
It  is  not  enough  that  a  thought  or  an  illustration  be  intrin- 
sically beautiful ;  it  must  be  appropriate  to  our  subject,  in 
which  nothing  ought  to  be  excessive,  and  nothing  deficient."  * 

*  See  remarks  in  M.  Villemain's  Essay  on  Pascal's  style,  &c. 

APPENDIX. 

No.  X. 

465 

Document  entitled  "  Profession  de  Foi"  found  in  PascaPs 
handwriting  after  his  death. 

"  I  love  poverty,  because  Jesus  Christ  loved  the  poor.  I 
value  property,  because  it  affords  the  means  of  assisting  the 
distressed.  I  keep  faith  with  every  one.  I  do  no  injury  to 
those  who  have  injured  me  ;  but  I  wish  their  condition  to  be 
Uke  mine,  in  that  I  am  susceptible  of  neither  evil  nor  good,  on 
the  part  of  man.  I  seek  to  be  just,  true,  sincere  and  faithful 
to  all ;  I  have  an  especial  tenderness  towards  those  with  whom 
Providence  has  connected  me ;  and,  whether  alone,  or  under 
the  eye  of  my  fellow-men,  I  perform  every  action  as  in  the 
sight  of  God,  who  will  judge  them,  and  to  whom  I  have  con- 
secrated all. 

"  These  are  my  convictions ;  and  I  bless  every  day  my 
Redeemer,  who  has  inspired  me  with  them ;  and  who,  out  of  a 
man  full  of  weakness,  misery,  concupiscence,  pride,  and  am- 
bition, has  formed  one  exempt  from  all  these  evils,  by  the 
power  of  his  grace.  To  him  be  ascribed  all  the  glory :  in 
myself  is  nothing  but  wretchedness  and  error." 

X  5 

466  APPENDIX. 

No.  XI. 

Writing  found  on  the  person  of  Pascal,  after  his  Death. 

Erroneously  described  as  an  "Amulet."   See  Memoir. 

( Literally  transcribed  from  the  corrected  copy  of  the  original  in  M.  Faugere's 
edition.) 

L'an  de  grace,  1634. 

Lundi,  23  Novembre,  jour  de  St.  Clement,  Pape  et  martyr,  et  autres  au 

martyrologe. 

Veille  de  St.  Chrysogone,  martyr,  et  autres. 

Depuis  environ  dix  heures  et  demie  du  soir  jusques  environ  minuit  et  demi. 

Feu. 

Dieu  d' Abraham,  Dieu  d'Isaac,  Dieu  de  Jacob, 

Non  des  Philosophes  et  des  savants. 

Certitude.     Certitude.     Sentiment.     Joie.     Paix.* 

Dieu  de  J^sus  Christ. 

Deum  raeum,  et  Deum  vestrum. 

Ton  Dieu  sera  mon  Dieu. — 

Oubli  du  monde  et  de  tout  hormis  Dieu. 

II  ne  se  trouve  que  par  les  voies  enseign&s  dans  I'Evangile. 

Grandeur  de  I'^me  humaine. 

P^re  juste,  le  monde  ne  t'a  point  connu,  mais  je  t'ai  connu.f 

Joie,  joie,  joie,  pleurs  de  joie. 

Je  m'en  suis  separ^ 

Dereliquerunt  me  fontem  aquae  vivse. 

Mon  Dieu  me  quitterez  vous  ? 

Que  je  n'en  sois  pas  s^pare  eternellement. 

Cette  est  la  vie  ^temelle  qu'ils  te  connoissent  seul  vrai  Dieu  et  celui  que 
tu  as  envoy^  J.  C.J 

J&us  Christ  — 

J&us  Christ 

Je  m'en  suis  s^pare ;  je  I'ai  fui,  r^nonce,  crucifix. 
Que  je  n'en  sois  jamais  s^pare. 

II  ne  se  conserve  que  par  les  voies  enseign^es  dans  I'Evangile. 
Renonciation  totale  et  douce.§ 
&c. 

'■f  In  another  copy  on  parchment — "  Certitude,  joie,  certitude,  sentiment,  vue,  joie." 

t  St.  John  ch.  xvii.  ver.  25.  %  Idem,  ver.  3. 

§  The  parchment  copy  has  these  lines  in  addition : — 

"  Souraission  totale  k  J^sus  Christ  et  ^  mon  directeur. 

"  Eternellement  en  joie  pour  un  jour  d'exercise  sur  lateire.  (a) 

"  Non  ohliviscar  sennones  tuos.    Amen." 

{a)  In  the  margin  is  the  following  Note  in  the  writing  of  the  Abb£  Perier ; — "  On 
n'a  pu  veil-  distinctement  que  certains  mots  de  ces  deux  lignes." 

APPENDIX.  467 

No.  XII. 

The  passage  contained  in  the  annexed  Autograph  is  taken  from  a  large 
collection  of  detached  memoranda,  published  for  the  first  time  by 
M.  Faugfere,  in  the  work  already  referred  to,  from  the  original  manu- 
scripts. This  division  of  these  fragments  is  entitled  "  Pens^es  sur  les 
Jesuits,"  and  the  portion  transcribed,  as  far  as  it  can  be  decyphered,  is 
as  follows  : — 

"  Si  mes  Lettres  sont  condamn&s  k  Rome,  ce  que  j'y  condamne  est 
condamne  dans  le  ciel. 

—  Ad  tuum,  domine  Jesu,  tribunal  appello. 

—  Vous  m^mes  ^tes  corruptibles. 

—  J'ai  craint  que  je  n'eusse  mal  &rit,  me  voyant  condamne ;  mais 
I'exemple  de  tant  de  pieux  ecrits  me  fait  croire  au  contraire.  II  n'est  pas 
permis  de  bien  &rire. 

—  Tant  I'Inquisition  est  corrompue  ou  ignorante ! 

—  II  est  meillieur  d'obfir  k  Dieu  qu'aux  hommes. 

—  Je  ne  crains  rien,  je  n'espfere  rien.  *  Les  ^v^ques  ne  sont  pas  ainsi. 
Le  Port  Royal  craint,  et  c'est  une  mauvaise  politique  de  les  separer ;  t  car 
ils  ne  craindront  plus  et  se  feront  plus  craindre. 

—  Je  ne  crains  pas  m^me  vos  censures  personnelles,J  si  elles  ne  sont 
fondees  sur  celles  de  la  tradition. 

*  See  Provincial  Letter,  No.  17. 

t  Allusion  is  liere  made  to  tlie  threats  of  dispersion  -which  began  to  be  directed 
against  the  Solitaries  of  the  Port  Royal.     (Transl.) 

X  This  -word  is  written  in  an  abbreviated  form,  and  it  is  not  certain  that  "  person- 
nelles  "  is  the  right  expression. 

Pascal  was  interred  in  the  Church  of  St.  Etienne  du  Mont.  Over 
his  grave  was  placed  the  following  Epitaph,  written  by  Aimonius 
Pkoust  de  Chameourg,  Professor  of  Law  in  the  University  of  Orleans. 
On  the  opposite  page  will  be  found  an  attempted  paraphrase. 

468  APPENDIX. 

Nobilissimfe  Scutarii  Blasii  Pascalis  Tumulus. 

D.  O.  M. 

BLASIUS    PASCALIS   SCUTARIUS    NOBILIS   HIC   JACET. 

Pietas  si  non  moritur,  aetemilm  vivet, 

Vir  conjugii  nescius, 

Religione  sanctus,   virtute  clarus, 

Doctrinl  Celebris, 

Ingenio  acutus, 

Sanguine   et   animo    pariter  illustris ; 

Doctus,  non  Doctor, 

.^quitatis  amator, 

Veritatis    defensor, 

Virglnum  ultor; 

Christianae   moralis  corrumptorum   acerrimus  hostis. 

Hunc  Rhetores  amant  facundum, 

Hunc  Scriptores  n6runt  elegantem. 

Hunc   Mathematici   stupent    profundum, 

Hunc  Philosophi  quserunt  sapientem, 

Hunc  Doctores  laudant  Theologum, 

Hunc  Pii  venerantur  austerum. 

Hunc  omnes  mirantur,  omnibus  ignotum. 

Omnibus  licfet  notum. 

Quid  plura,  Viator,  quem  perdidimus 

PASCALEM 

Is  LuDOVicus  erat  Montaltius 

Heu! 

Satis  dixi,  urgent  lachrymse, 

Sileo. 

Ei   qui   benfe  precaberis,   bene  tibi  eveniat, 

Et  vivo  et  mortuo. 

Vixit  An.  39  M.  2.     Obiit  an.  rep.  Sal.  1662.   19  Kal.  Aug. 

nAETO    nASKAAIOS. 

*Er  !    *ET  !    nEN0O2   020N  I 

Cecidit  Pascalis 

Heu !  Heu !  qualis  luctus  ! 

Posuit  A.  P.  D.  C.  moerens  Aurelian.  Canonista. 

b 

APPENDIX.  469 

The  tomb  of  the  illustrious  Blaise  Pascal. 

D.  0.  M. 

Beneath   this    spot   rest   the   mortal   remains    of 

BLAISE  PASCAL. 

If  piety  never  dies,   his   memory  will   be   immortal : 

He  was  one 

"Whose  life,  devoted  to  celibacy. 

Was  sanctified  by  Religion,  and  eminent  for  Virtue. 

Unrivalled  in  erudition, 

Possessing  unbounded  intellectual  power, 

By  descent,  and  by  qualities  of  mind,  alike  illustrious  : 

Learned,  yet  not  bearing  the  titles  of  Learning ; 

A  lover  of  equity, 

A  Champion   of  Truth, 

The  avenger  of  slandered,  unprotected,  solitary  Women ; 

Uncompromising  foe  to  the  corrupters  of  Christian  morality  -. 

In  him 

The  Orator  admired  a  model  of  Eloquence, 

The  Critic  confessed  the  most  elegant  of  Writers, 

The   Scientific,   the   profoundest   of  Mathematicians ; 

The  Philosopher   sought   from  him    the  deepest  solutions  of 

the  wonders  of  Nature : 

His  Theology  was  the  praise  of  the  casuist, 

His  piety  the  admiration  of  the  devout : 

Behold,    then,    the   man,   by   all   admired. 

To  all  unknown. 

And,  now,  revealed  to  all: 

Reader !    He  whom  we  lament  among  the  dead, 

PASCAL, 

Was  once,  Alas  !  Ludovicus  Montaltius. 

What  more   need  I   say?      Your  tears  reply. 

My  words  are  ended. 

To  the  holy  and  prayerful,  all  shall  be  well. 

In  Death  or  in  Life. 

He  died  in  the  year  1662,  Aged  39  Years,  2  Months. 
Posuit,  &c.  &c.  &c. 

470  APPENDIX. 

The  stone  bearing  the  preceding  Epitaph  becoming  effaced  by  the 
feet  of  worshippers  in  the  Church,  another  Inscription  was 
placed  on  a  Tablet  adjoining,  by  M.  Perier,  his  Brother-in-Law, 
in  the  following  chaste  and  modest  terms. 

Pro  columna  superiori, 
Sub  tumulo  marmoreo, 

Jacet  Blasius  Pascal,  Claramontanus,  Ste- 
phani  Pascal,  in  Supremd  apud  Avernos  subsidi- 
orum  Curi^  Preesidis  filius.  Post  aliquot  annos 
in  severiori  secessu  et  divinse  legis  meditatione 
transactos,  feliciter  et  religiosfe,  in  pace  Christi 
vita  functus,  anno  1662,  ^t.  39.  die  19  Augusti. 
Optasset  ille  quidem  prse  paupertatis  et  humilitatis 
studio  etiam  his  sepulchri  honoribus  carere,  mor- 
tuusque  etiamntim  latere,  qui  vivus  semper  latere 
voluerat.  Verum  ejus  hac  in  parte  votis  cum 
cedere  non  posset  Florinus  Perier  in  eadem  sub- 
sidiorum  Curisl  Consiliarus,  ac  Gilbertse  Pascal, 
Blasii  Pascal  sororis,  conjux  amantissimus,  banc 
tabulam  posuit,  qui  et  suam  ilium  pietatem  signi- 
ficaret,  et  Christianos  ad  Christiana  precum  officia 
sibi  et  defuncto  profuture  cohortaretur. 

APPENDIX.  471 

Before  the  higher  column. 
Under  the  marble  tomb. 

Lie  the  remains  of  Blaise  Pascal,  son  of  Stephen 
Pascal  of  Clermont,  President  of  the  Court  of  Aids 
in  Auvergne. 

After  a  few  short  years  spent  in  strict  retire- 
ment, and  amidst  profound  meditations  on  the 
Divine  Law,  he  departed  this  life,  calmly  and 
devoutly,  in  the  peace  of  Christ,  on  the  19th  of 
August,  1662,  and  in  the  39th  year  of  his  age. 

His  poverty  of  spirit  and  deep  humility  would 
have  led  him  to  forego  all  honours  of  sepulture, 
and  in  death  to  repose  unknown,  as  he  would  have 
passed  his  life  in  privacy.  Unable,  however,  to 
comply  with  this  his  desire,  Florinus  Perier, 
Councillor  in  the  said  Court  of  Subsidies,  and 
Gilberte  Pascal  his  beloved  Wife,  and  the  Sister 
of  Blaise  Pascal,  have  erected  this  Tablet,  that  by 
means  of  it,  they  might  both  commemorate  his 
piety,  and  exhort  all  Christian  persons  to  the  holy 
duty  of  giving  to  him  and  to  themselves  the  benefit 
of  their  prayers. 

INDEX. 

Absolution,  must  be  given,  under  penalty  of  mortal  sin,  to  any  one  who 
cites  a  "  probable"  opinion  in  defence  of  his  sins,  according  to  Suarez, 
72 ;  must  be  granted  as  a  declaration  of  penitence,  even  though 
the  confessor  knows  it  to  be  insincere,  according  to  Filiutius,  Suarez, 
Bauny  and  Caussin,  162 — 164;  may  be  given  to  one  habitually  living 
in  sin,  if  it  is  inconvenient  to  leave  it  off — Bauny,  166.  Penitence  not 
necessai-y  to  absolution ;  heresy  to  assert  that  it  is,  according  to  Pin- 
tereau,  167  ;  the  contrary  maintained  by  Suarez  and  Comitolus,  168; 
but  the  "  probability"  of  this  doctrine  established  by  Diana,  Rastado, 
Vasques,  Fagundes,  and  Escobar,  170.  Penitence  held  to  be  rather 
injurious  than  otherwise  to  the  benefits  of  absolution,  by  Va- 
lentia,  171 

Actual  grace,  a  Jesuit's  definition  of,  40 

Alby,  a  Jesuit,  slanders  M.  Puys,  285  ;  his  retractation,  -  ••         286 

Almsgiving,  the  duty  of,  asserted  by  Cardinal  Cajetan,  and  St.  Thomas 
Aquinas,  199;  by  Augustine,  206;  evaded  by  Vasquez,  78,  199,  et 
seq. ;  and  by  Diana,  78,  202,  225 

Alvarez  Diego,  his  views  of  grace,  377 

Ambition,  no  sin,  according  to  Escobar,  144 

Anecdote  illustrating  the  absurdity  of  the  Dominican  doctrines  of  suffi- 
cient and  effectual  grace,  -  22 
Annat,  R.  P.,  a  Jesuit,  his  views  of  sin,  43.     Letters  to  him,  331,  369, 
400.    Memoir  of,  453.     His  work  entitled,  "  The  good  faith  of  the  Jan- 
senists,"                                                                                                    389 

474  APPENDIX. 

Aristotle,  Jesuitically  cited  by  Bauny,  53 ;  the  true  meaning  of  the  pas- 
sage, 54,  -  58 
Arnauld,  his  Propositions  condemned  by  the  Sorbonne,  not  as  to  their 
truth,  but  as  to  their  temerity,  3.     Censure  of  him,  29,  ei  sey.    Asserts 
his  belief  in  transubstantiation,  306.     Memoir  of  him,                      431 
Ascetics,  ridiculed  by  Le  Moine,                          -                                  143 
Assassin,  Jesuits'  definition  of  one,  78 
Augustine  quoted,  5,  31,  52,  56,  181,  184,  189,  190,  206,  228,  229,  259. 

274 

Artifices    of  Jesuits  to  evade  authority   of    Scripture,   Councils,,  and 

Popes,  77 

Bankrupt  allowed  to  conceal  his  property  from  his  creditors,  by  Lessius, 
Escobar,  VaSques,  Castro  Palao,  and  Bauny,  125,  126,  215 

Baronius,  on  the  authority  of  Councils,  -  346 

Basil  quoted,  387 

Bauny,  a  Jesuit,  his  Catalogue  of  Sins,  42  ;  quotes  Aristotle  falsely,  53 
his  doctrines  on  absolution,  67  ;  his  writings  censured  at  Rome,  82 ; 
asserts  that  opinions  acquire  probability  by  time,  83  ;  that  if  opinions 
are  not  censured  by  the  Church,  they  are  approved,  83 ;  that  priests 
may  perform  mass  after  mortal  sin,  88.  On  duties  of  servants,  91  ; 
allows  them  to  steal,  92.  His  summary  of  offences,  22.  His  paradise 
opened,  138 

Bellarmine,  on  Councils,  346 

Bernard,  on  slander,  329 

Boniface  VIII.,  Pope,  pronounces  those  heretical,  who  declare  the  King 
of  France  not  subject  to  him,  411 

Bribery  of  a  judge,  sanctioned  by  Castro  Palao,  Escobar,  Molina,  and 
Layman,  118 — 120,  130 

Brisacier,  asserts  that  the  Nuns  of  Port  Royal  make  no  invocations  to 
saints — denied  by  Pascal,  193.  Censured  for  his  calumnies  by  Arch- 
bishop of  Paris,  283 

Cajetan,  Cardinal,  on  almsgiving,  1 99 — 204 

Calumnies  of  the  Jesuits,  278 

Calumny,  no  sin,  according  to  Dicastillus  and  other  Casuists,  280 ;  so 
also  Caramuel,  289.    Effects  of  this  doctrine  illustrated  Vy  an  anec- 
dote, 282 
Casuists,  preferable  to  ancient  Fathers,  according  to  Cellot  and  Regin- 
aldus,  73,  89 
Caramuel,  on  probable  opinions,  84 

APPENDIX.  475 

Chrysostom,  quoted  by  Arnauld,  3 1 

Confession.    Two  confessors  recommended  by  Escobar,  one  for  venial, 
and  the  other  for  mortal  sins,  158.     Jesuits' evasions  of,  158 

Contract  of  Mohatra,     -  123 

Councils,  on  the  authority  of,  346 

Crasset,  a  Jesuit,  denounced  as  an  impostor  by  the  Bishop  of  Orleans, 

284 

D'Alba,  Jean,  story,  92 

D'Anjou,  a  Jesuit,  his  calumnies,  284 

Denis,  first  Bishop  of  Paris,  the  place  of  his  burial  questioned,  394 

De  Sacy,  Louis,  Isaac  (Le  Maitre,)  Memoir  of,  -  446 

"  Devotion  made  Easy,"  a  book  by  Le  Moine,  142 

Dicastillus  defends  the  use  of  calumny,  280  ;  his  violent  ab.use  of  Quiroga, 
a  Capuchin,  ib. 

Diana  quoted,  70,   71,  73,   75,  et  passim  ;  not  a  Jesuit,  75.     On  alms- 
giving, 78.     On  Lent,  81 
Dominicans  maintained  the  true  doctrines  of  grace  under  Clement  VIII. 
and  Paul  V.,  against  MoUna  and  the  Jesuits,  24 
Dress,  vanity  in,  allowed  to  woman,  by  Escobar  and  Bauny,  151 ;  but 
only  while  young;  by  Le  Plaine,                                                              152 
DueUing  defended  by  Reginaldus,  Escobar,  Hurtado  de  Mendoza,  Caspar 
Hurtado,  Layman,  Petrus  Hurtado,  Sanchez,  and  Navarrus,  97 — 104. 
Attempted  aboUtion  of,  by  Louis  XIV.,                                                 103 

Effectual  grace,  the  Dominican  doctrine  of,  15,  22,  380 

Escobar,  his  blasphemies,  64 ;  views  on  fasting,  65  ;  biographical  note  of, 

quoted,  215 

Fasting,  Jesuit  rules  for,  65 

Filiutius  on  Fasting,  66.     On  probable  opinions,  70 

Gambling;  a  wife  may  steal  her  husband's  money  to  play — Escobar,  153. 
Garasse,  ^is  blasphemies,  1 92 

Gluttony,  allowed  by  Escobar,  147 ;  but  not  so  as  to  cause  sickness,  ib. 
Grace,  Jansenist  views  of,  5 ;  sufficiency  of,  15,  24 

Gravina,  his  testimony  against  the  Jesuit  missionaries,  6 1 

Gregory  Nazianzen,  quoted,  184 

Hallier,  M.,  his  remarks  on  Father  Bauny's  doctrine  of  sins  of  ignorance, 
43  ;  censures  Bauny,  82 

476  APPENDIX. 

Halloix,  a  Jesuit,  maintains  the  purity  of  Origen's  faith,  349 

Hillary  quoted,  -  "  188 

Homicide  of  an  enemy,  defended  by  Navarrus,  Escobar,  Molina,  Regi- 
naldus,  Emmanuel  Sa,  Sotas,  Lessius,  Henriquez,  Filiutius,  Hurtado  de 
Mendoza,  Hereau,  Becan,  Flahaut,  Lecount,  Peter  Navarre,  Baldelli, 
Azos,  Tannerus,  Layman,  Launy,  Caramuel,  104 — 114,  238;  by  Vic- 
toria, 261.  Jesuit  maxim  on,  refuted  from  Scripture  and  the  Fathers, 
257.     Opinion  of  Augustine,  -  259 

Indolence,  Escobar's  definition  of,  146 

Inquisition,  remarks  on  the,  -  406 

Jansenist ;  may  a  Jesuit  kill  one  ?  point  discussed  by  Launy  and  Cara- 
muel, 113—116 

Jansenists,  calumnies  against  them,  337 

Jarrige,  a  Jesuit,  who  became  a  Protestant,  hung  in  eflSgy,  321,  and, note. 

Jesuits,  unite  with  the  Dominicans  on  condition  of  the  latter  asserting 
the  doctrine  of  sufficient  grace,  although  qualified  by  that  of  effectual 
grace,  22.  The  immoral  tendency  of  their  doctrines,  45.  Their  new 
moral  code,  57 ;  suit  themselves  to  all  opinions,  60  ;  conceal  from  the 
heathens  the  fact  of  the  crucifixion,  61  ;  permit  converts  to  practise 
idolatry,  61 ;  their  licenses  in  fasting,  65  ;  doctrine  of  probable  opi- 
nions, 68 ;  list  of  writers  quoted  by  Gravida,  74  ;  their  Society  answer- 
able for  all  the  writings  of  its  members,  141 

Launy ;  his  doctrines  censured  by  the  University  of  Louvaine,  248,  262, 

but  maintained  by  Desbois  and  others,  248 

Layman,  a  Jesuit,  -  71 

Le  Maitre,  Letter  XX.  attributed  to  him,  402,  note. 

Le  Moine;  his  views  on  grace,  8;  on   sin,  44.     His  "  Devotion  made 

Easy,"   142.     His  "  Praises  of  Modesty,"  191.     A  profane  Poem  by 

him,  ib. 

Liancour,  Duke  de,  Appendix,  '         434 

Longueville,  Duchess  de,  Appendix,  445 

Love  of  God;  sufficient  to  feel  it  some  time  before  death.     Suarez,  172, 

at  the  article  of  death  ;  Vasquez,  ib.,  at  festivals,  ib. — one  every  year; 

Hurtado,  ib. — every  five  years  ;  I-Ienriquez,  ib. — this  is  too  rigorous 

according  to  Filiutius,  ib. ;  Scotus,  his  views  on,  173 

Lying  and  false  Swearing — rules  for  practising  without  sin,   according  to 

Sanchez,  Escobar,  Filiutius,  and  others,  148,  149 

APPENDIX.  477 

Marca,  Archbishop  of  Toulouse,  on  Councils,  347 

Mass,  Jesuits'  rules  for  attendance  at,  153.     Expeditious  way  of  hearing 

one,  1 54 

Meynieri  his  false  quotations  of  the  Canons  of  Council  of  Trent,  318. 
Mohatra,  contract  of,  123 

Molina,  on  expelled  monks,  90 

Molinists,  the,  7,  -  8 

Monks,  more  plentiful  at  the  Sorbonne,  than  reasons,  35 

Monk,  may  lay  aside  his  habit  for  the  purpose  of  stealing,  and  other  sins, 

id  furetur  occulta  vel  fornicatur,  -  8 

Montrouge,  M.,  Judge  of  the  Chatelet,  has  a  man  flogged  in  spite  of 

"  probable  opinions."  93 

Motives,  Casuists,  method  of  regulating,  94 

Nicole,  supposed  to  be  author  of  Letter  XVIII*,  359,  memoir  of,         443 

Palaus  Castrus  on  Probabilities,  -  90 

Pascal,  his  indistinct  views  of  finished  redemption,  5 1 ,  and  note ;  shows 
undue  veneration  for  the  Virgin  Mary,  140  ;  devoted  to  many  of  the 
doctrines  of  Papacy  while  opposing  its  social  and  moral  corruptions, 
140,  193,  303—305  ;  declares  the  heresy  of  Geneva  to  consist  in  deny- 
ing the  real  presence,  307  ;  declares  there  is  no  salvation  out  of  the 
Romish  communion,  -  384 

Penance,  mitigation  of,  adopted  by  the  Jesuits,  -  -         110 

Perjury,  rules  for  practising  without  sin,  according  to  Bauny,  150 

Pope's  authority  over  the  King  of  France  discussed,  -         4U 

Port  Royal,  the  nuns  of,  slandered  by  Brisacier,  193  ;  defended  by  Pascal 
from  the  charge  of  not  invoking  saints,  nor  having^  images,  ib.,  and 
the  doctrine  of  transubstantiation,  303  ;  accused  of  Deism  by  Filleau, 
323 ;  composers  of  the  "  Secret  Chapelet  of  the  Holy  Sacrament," 

325 
Ponce,  Basil,  67 

Priests  may  kill  their  enemies,  according  to  Launy,  2  ;  Caramuel,  113, 

114 
Probable  Opinions,  the  doctrines,  68 

Propaganda,  interdict  on  proceedings  of  Jesuit  missionaries,        -  61 

Proximate  Power,  the  doctrine  of,  ...  7 

Rastado,  Thomas,  on  Jesuit  practices  amongst  the  heathen,         .  61 

478  APPENDIX. 

Raynauld,  a  Savoyard  Jesuit;  his  censure  of  the  Apostles'  Creed,  313, 

note. 
Reginaldus,  73,  -  89 

Regret,  the  Jesuit  doctrine  of,  171 

Reservation,  mental,  147  et  seq.  245 

Restitution  of  stolen  property.     Jesuit  regulations  to  avoid,  131,         134 
Rich  need  not  give  to  the  poor.     Escobar,  145 

Ridicule,  a  lawful  weapon  against  error,  179 ;  instances  of  from  Scrip- 
ture, 180 ;  defended  by  Chrysostom,  Augustine,  Jerome,  TertuUian, 
Irenaeus,  and  other  Fathers,  181,  182 

Rouannez,  Duke  de.  Memoir  of,  454 

Rouannez,  Charlotte  de,  Mdlle.  Ixvii 

St.    Emmanuel,  69,  70 

St.  Cyran,  M. ;  accused  of  Calvinism  by  the  Jesuits,  314.     Instructor  and 
spiritual  father  of  Amauld,  432 

Sanchez;  various  abominable  doctrines,  58,  71,  72,  90 

Saurez  ;   Jesuits,  72 

Sancius,  allows  a  priest  to  officiate  while  under  mortal  sins,  88 

Sanctorel,  a  Jesuit,  maintains  Popes'  authority  over  the  King  of  France, 

412 
Seduction,  no  sin  according  to  Bauny,  150 

Sequenet,  his  work  on  the  Holy  Virginity,  335 

Simony  defended  by  Jesuits,  85  ;  evaded  by  Valentia,  Sanchez,  Escobar, 
Tannerus,  207,  et  seq.  .  229 

Sorbonne,  dispute  of  the,  1  ;  trifling  of  the  Doctors  In  the  case  of  M.  Ar- 
nauld's  propositions,  -  8 

Stealing  can  be  done  without  sin,  according  to  Lessius,  Escobar,  and  Mo- 
lina, 127,  128 
Sufficient  grace,  the  doctrine  admitted  in  terms  by  the  Dominicans,  but 
denied  in  reality,  24 

Tannerus,  defends  Simony,  86 

TertuUian,  quoted,  182 

Thomists  (New) ,  their  views  on  grace,  8 

Transubstantiation  held  by  Pascal  and  the  Port  Royalists,  306 

"  Unam  Sanctam"  Bull,  not  binding  in  France,  411 

Usury  practically  allowed,  by  means  of  abominable  evasions,  by  Escobar 

and  Bauny,  121,  122 

APPENDIX.  479 

Valentia  defends  Simony,  ■•  86 

Valerian,  a  Capuchin,  slandered  by  the  Jesuits,  294 ;  his  defence,  295 
Vanity  a  gift  from  above,  according  to  Vhie  Garasse,  145 

Villalobos,  -  88 

Virgile,  St.,  excommunicated  by  the  Pope,  for  maintaining  the  existence 

of  the  Antipodes,  345 

Virgin  Mary,  easy  method  to  propitiate  her,  recommended  by  Bauny,  138, 

140.     Evidence  of  undue  veneration  for  her  in  Pascal  himself,         140 

Witchcraft,  sanctioned  by  the  Casuists,  1 33 

Ypres,  Jansenius,  Bishop  of,  calumnies  against  him  by  Jesuits,  300 

1..   SEELEY,  THAMES   DITTON. 

:,ii'F 

vMi;iSH|i|'iii!lPlil!!ll:llll!i!'i'lllii,
