Studies on Fermentation (Louis Pasteur (F. Faulkner and D. C. Robb, trans.), 1879)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/studiesonferment00past). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

university  of

Connecticut

ibraries


pge

w


CD


BRITL    589.9.P268    c.  1

PASTEUR    #   STUDIES    ON   FERMENTATION


3    T1S3    Q0m37TM    fi

:  r
m


i.

^   Q

m


o


'.•T-t      «1      'H'        ,t  jt


i.*'


A?;:.


t/


-'^k.^


STUDIES     ON    FEEMEISTTATION


STUDIES  ON  FERMENTATION  '^^

THE    DISEASES    OF    BEEE
THEIE  CAUSES,  AND  THE  MEANS  OF  PREVENTING  THEM


L.    PASTEUE

MLMIiLR    ay    IXSTITV-TE   01    FRAME,  THE   KOVAL  SOriETI   O?    I.OXDO.N,   ETC.


.4      TRANSLATION,     MADE     WITH     THE     AUTHOR'S     SANCTION,     OF

"  ETUDES  SUR  LA  BIERE,"  WITH  NOTES,  INDEX,  AND   ORIGINAL

ILLUSTRATIONS


F  E  A  N  K      F  A  U  L  K  N  E  E

AUTHOR   OF    "the    ART   OF   BREVVJ.NG,"    ETC.
AND

D.    CONSTABLE    E  0  B  B,    B.A.

LATE   SCHOLAR   01    IVOKCESTER   COLL.,  OXFOr.D


\  Honbon

MACMILLAN    &    CO

1879


r-^.q-^


c  t-


l^S^h


•Ai;lK)N    ANI>   SONS,    I'UINTEUS,   rATEUXOSTEK   KOW,    U'XDOK.


THE   MEMORY   OF

MY      r  A  T  H  E  li,

rOEMERLY   A   SOLDIER   UNDER   THE   FIRST   EMPIRE,

AND

KNIGHT   OF   THE   LEGION   OF   HONOUR.

THE  LONGSE  I  LIVE,  THE  BETTE-E  DO  I  UNDEESTAXD  THE  KIXDXESS  OF
THY     HEAET     AND     THE     EXCELLENCE     OF     THY     MIND.

TO  THY  EXAJH'LE  AND  COUNSELS  DO  I  OWE  THE  EFFOETS  THAT  HAVE
BEEN  DEVOTED  TO  THESE  STUDIES,  AS  WELL  AS  TO  ALL  THE  WOEK
I  HAVE  EVEE  DONE.  AND  NOW,  HOW  CAN  I  BETTEE  HONOUE  THESE
FILIAL     EE3IEMBEANCES    THAN    BY    DEDICATINCt     JIY     BOOK    TO     THY    ME3M0EY  r

L.  PASTEUR.


AUTHOR'S     PEEFACE.


Our  misfortunes  inspired  me  with  the  idea  of  these  researches,
d  I  undertook  them  immediately  after  the  war  of  ISToXaed  have
since  continued  them  without  interruption,  ^^with  the  determina-
tion of  perfecting  them,  and  tjierebj;  benefiting  a  branch  of
industry  wherein  we  are  undoubtedly  surpassed  by  Germany 71

I  am  convinced  that  I  have  found  a  precise,  practical  solution
of  the  arduous  problem  which  I  proposed  to  myself — that  of  a
process  of  manufacture,  independent  of  season  and  locality,
which  should  obviate  the  necessity  of  having  recourse  to  the
costly  methods  of  cooling  employed  in  existing  processes,  and
at  the  same  time  secure  the  preservation  of  its  products  for
any  length  of  time.

These  new  studies  are  based  on  the  same  principles  which
guided  me  in  my  researches  on  wine,  vinegar,  and  the  silkworm
disease — principles,  the  applications  of  which  are  practically
unlimited.  The  etiology  of  contagious  diseases  may,  perhaps,
receive  from  them  an  unexpected  light.

I  need  not  hazard  any  prediction  concerning  the  advantages
likely  to  accrue  to  the  brewing  industry  from  the  adoption  of


VI 11  AUTHORS   PREFACE.

such  a  process  of  brewing  as  ni}'  stud}'  of  the  subject  has
enabled  me  to  devise,  and  from  an  application  of  the  novel  facts
upon  which  this  process  is  founded.  Time  is  the  best  appraiser
of  scientific  work,  and  I  am  not  unaware  that  an  industrial
discovery  rarely  produces  all  its  fruit  in  the  hands  of  its  first
inventor.

I  began  my  researches  at  Clermont-Ferrand,  in  the  labora-
tory, and  with  the  help,  of  my  friend  M.  Duclaux,  professor  of
chemistry  at  the  Faculty  of  Sciences  of  that  town.  I  continued
them  in  Paris,  and  afterwards  at  the  great  brewerj'"  of  Tourtel
Brothers,  of  Tantonville,  which  is  admitted  to  be  the  first  in
France.  I  heartily  thank  these  gentlemen  for  their  extreme
kindness.  I  owe  also  a  public  tribute  of  gratitude  to  M.
Kuhn,  a  clever  brewer  of  Chamalieres,  near  Clermont-Ferrand,
as  well  as  to  M.  Velten,  of  Marseilles,  and  to  MM.  de  Tassigny,
of  Reims,  who  have  placed  at  my  disposal  their  establishments
and  their  products,  with  the  most  praiseworthy  willingness.

L.  PASTEUR.

Paris,  June  1,  1876.


PREFACE    TO    ENGLISH    EDITION.


My  first  idea  of  placing  before  English,  brewers  a  translation
of  "  Etudes  sur  la  Biere  "  was  meagre  in  the  extreme,  compared
with  the  final  realization  of  it  as  it  appears  in  the  following
pages.

Seeing  the  vast  importance  of  Pasteur's  work  from  a  practical
point  of  view,  after  writing  a  review  of  it  for  the  Brctcens'
Juurnaly  I  determined  to  procure,  at  any  rate  for  the  use  of  my
pupils,  a  literal  translation,  illustrated  by  photo-lithographic
copies  of  the  original  plates,  the  thankless  task  of  executing
this  preliminary  translation  for  so  limited  a  number  of  readers
being  most  kindly  and  generously  carried  out  for  me  by  my
friend  Mr.  Frank  U.  Waite,  who,  being  engaged  with  me  at
the  time  in  practical  brewing  operations,  shared  my  views  as
to  the  value  of  the  original  work.

It  was  on  the  completion  of  this  translation  that  my  views
and  desires  expanded.  The  more  I  studied  the  work,  the  more
I  was  convinced  of  its  immense  value  to  the  brewer  as
affording  him  an  intelligent  knowledge  of  the  processes
and  materials  with  which  he  deals,  but  over  and  above  all
this,  it  was  impossible  not  to  feel  that  the  researches  of  such


X  rUEFACE    TO    ENGLISH    EDITION.

a  devoted  and  accomplished  savant  as  Pasteur,  possessed  a
scientific  interest  much  wider  than  their  mere  relation  to  the
art  of  brewing  would  imply.  As  the  work  of  a  skilful  chemist
and  a  laborious  and  accurate  observer,  such  a  protracted  and
careful  study  of  the  lowest  and  simplest  forms  of  life,  must
necessarily  be  of  first  imi^ortance  to  the  biologist — to  the
beginner  as  an  admirable  introduction  to  the  study  of  practical
phj'siology  in  general,  as  well  as  to  the  more  advanced  student,
from  the  suggestive  light  which  it  throws  on  the  nature  of
analogous  phenomena  in  more  complex  organisms.

I  determined  accordingly  to  publuh  the  work  if  I  could
secure  the  consent  of  its  distinguished  author,  but  at  the  same
time  I  felt  that  the  publication  of  M.  Pasteur's  "Studies"  in
the  form  in  which  Mr.  Waite  had,  at  my  request,  translated  it,
and  illustrated  only  with  inferior  copies  of  the  original  plates,
would  not  be  either  advisable  or  just ;  but  that  I  was  bound  rather
to  put  the  book  before  the  English  public  in  as  satisfactory  and
complete  a  form  as  lay  within  my  power.  Under  these  cii'cum-
stances  I  was  induced  to  seek  the  aid  of  Mr.  D.  Constable
Robb,  B.A.,  of  The  Oxford  Universit}'  Museum,  who,  in  taking-
Mr.  Waite's  version  as  a  basis,  has  so  elaborated,  annotated,  and
recast  it,  that  I  feel  bound  to  say  that  much  of  the  value  of
"  Studies  on  Fermentation,"  as  it  now  appears,  is  due  to  the
cure  that  Mr.  Robb  has  bestowed  upon  the  revision  that  he  so
kindly  undertook ;  a  revision  the  result  of  which  has  created  a
feeling  of  confidence  in  the  success  of  the  translation  as  it  now
.stands,  which  I  could  not  have  had  in  any  mere  literal  version.

To  the  practical  worker  the  original  illustrations  alone,  which
appear  in  this  version,  cannot  but  be  of  immense  value  in  the
microscopical  study  of  the  changes  in  the  liquids  with  which
he  deals;  whilst  the  many  notes  and  additions,  which  are  a


PREFACE    TO    ENGLISH    EDITION.  XI

feature  peculiar  to  the  English  edition,  more  particularly  the
rendering  into  the  equivalents,  with  which,  unfortunately,
practical  men  on  this  side  of  the  channel  are  still  most  at  home,
of  the  metric  weights  and  measures  and  centigrade  tempera-
tures, as  well  as  the  Index  which  Mr.  Robb  has  compiled,  will,
I  trust,  render  the  book  of  still  greater  service  than  it  other-
wise would  have  been  to  many  of  those  who  may  favour  it
with  their  attention.

The  debt  which  we  English  brewers  owe  to  M.  Pasteur  can
hardly  be  over-estimated,  and  I  must  be  allowed  here  to  express
my  personal  obligations  to  that  distinguished  worker  for  the
permission  which  allows  this  translation  ;  and  to  the  French
publishers  for  their  help  with  regard  to  the  interleaved
illustrations.

The  author's  preface  and  dedication  are,  of  course,  reproduced,
the  former  making  it  unnecessary  for  me  to  refer  more  in  detail
to  the  contents  of  the  translation.

FRANK    FAULKNER.


The  Brewery,  St.  Helen's,  Lancashire,
September,  1879.


ERE  AT  A.

Page     80,  line  IS  from  top,  insert  *  after  imsubmerged.
,,      181,     ,,     13      ,,       ,,         ,,       "  aiter  piclliilf/ns.
,,      301,  place  *  before  footnote.


TABLE    OF    COIsTTElSTTS,


page-
Author's  Dedicatiox      ..........        V

,,        Preface vii

Translator's  Preface ix


CHAPTEIl    I.

ON  THE  IXTIJIATE  RELATIOX  EXISTING  BETWEEN  THE  DETERIORATION
OF  BEER,  OR  THE  "WORT  FROM  WHICH  IT  IS  MADE,  AND  THE
PROCESS   Ot  BREWING 1


CHAPTER    II.

ON   THE   CAUSES   OF   THE   DISEASES   WHICH   AFFECT   BEER   AND   WORT.

§  I.  Ever}-  unliealthy  change  in  the  qualitj"  of  beer  coincides  -ndth
a  development  of  microscopic  germs  which  are  alien  to  the
pure  fei-meut  of  beer  .         .         .         .         .         .         .         .       lf>

§  II.     The  absence  of  change  in  wort  and  beer  coincides  with  the

absence  of  foreign  ors-anisms        ......       25


.CHAPTER    III.

ON   THE    ORIGIN    OF   FERMENTS    TROPERLY   SO    CALLED.

§  I.       On  the  conditions  which  cause  variations  in  the  nature  of  the

organized  prodncts  existing  in  infusions        ....       33


XIV  TABLE    OF    COXTEXTS.


PAGE


§  II.  Experiments  on  blood  and  urine  taken  in  their  normal  state,
and  exposed  to  contact  ■with  air  that  has  been  deprived  of
the  particles  of  dust  which  it  generally  holds  in  suspension  .       40

§  in.  Experiments  on  the  juice  contained  in  grapes  ....       54

§  lY.   Wort  and  must  exposed  to  common  air 59

§  V.  New  comparative  studies  on  the  germs  held  in  suspension  by
the  air  of  different  places  which  are  near  each  other,  but
subjected  to  different  conditions  affecting  the  production  and
diffusion  of  the  particles  of  dust  found  in  them    .         .         .72

§  VI.    Yeast  may  become  dry  and  be  reduced  to  dust  without  losing

its  faculty  of  reproduction 81

CHAPTER    IV.

THE   GEOWXII   OF   DIFFERENT   OllGANISMS   IX   A   STATE   OF  PUKITX :
THEIR  AUT0X03IY.

§  I.  Growth  of  PeniciUium  fjlaucum  and  Asperf/illus  (jlauciis  in  a
state  of  purity. — Proofs  that  these  fimgoid  gro-n-ths  do  not
become  transformed  into  the  alcoholic  ferments  of  beer  or
wine. — Preliminary  inquirj'  into  the  cause  of  fermentation  .       86

§  II.  Growth  of  Mijcoderma  vini  in  a  state  of  purity. — Confirmation
of  our  original  conjectures  as  to  the  cause  of  fermentation. —
Ilycodenna  villi  does  not  change  into  yeast,  although  it  may
give  rise  to  fermentation      .         .         .         .         .         .         .108

§  III.  Growth  of  Mycinlcnna  acdi  in  a  state  of  purity        .         .         .121

§  IV.  Growth  of  Mucor  raccmosus  in  a  state  of  purity. — Example  of
life  more  active  and  lasting  when  removed  from  the  influence
of  air 127


CHAPTER    V.

THE   ALCOHOLIC   FER:MEXTS.


§  I.  On  the  origin  of  ferment

§  II.  On  "  spontaneous  "  ferment

§111.  On  "  high  "  and  "  low  "  ferments

§  IV,  On  the  existence  and  production  of  other  species  of  ferment

§  V.  On  a  new  race  of  alcoholic  ferments  :  Aerobian  ferments

§  VI.  The  purification  of  commercial  yeasts      ....


14;}

182
18G
19()
205
211)


TABLE    OF    CONTENTS.  XV

CHAPTER    VI.

THE   PHYSIOLOGICAL   THEORY   OF   FEE:ME:XT A.TIOX .

PAGE

§  I.       On  the  relations  existing  between  oxygen  and  yeast         .         .     235

§  II.     Fermentation  in  saccharine  fruits  immersed  in  carbonic  acid

gas 266

§  III.  Reply  to  certain  critical  observations  of  the  German  naturalists,

Oscar  Brefeld  And  Moritz  Traube.         .....     279

§  IV.    Fermentation  of  dextro-tartrate  of  Lime  .....     284

§  V.     Another  example  of  Life  without  air. — Fermentation  of  lactate

of  lime 292

§  VI.    Reply  to  the  critical  observations  of  Liebig,  piiblished  in  1870  .     316
CHAPTER    VII.

NEW   PROCESS   FOE   THE   3IAXUFACTUKE   OF   BEEE.

§  I.       Preliminary  experiment? 338

§  II.     Method  of  estimating  the  oxygen  held  in  solution  in  wort         .     353

§  III.  On  the  qiiantity  of  oxygen  existing  in  a  state  of  solution  in

brewers'  worts      .........     364

§  IV.    On  the  combination  of  oxygen  with  wort 371

§  V.     On  the  influence  of  oxygen  in  combination  on  the  clarification

of  wort 381

§  VI.    Application  of  the  principles  of  the  new  process  of  brewing

■nath  the  use  of  limited  quantities  of  air       ....     387


Appendix 396

Index 403


IIN'DEX    TO    PLATES.


TO   FACE
PAOE


I.    Principal  disease-ferments  met  with  in  wort  and  beer      •         .         6

II.    Appearance  under  the  microscope  of  the  deposit  from  "turned  "

beer 20

III.  Toruhe  in  process  of  development    .         .         ...         .72

IV.  Blycodcrma    vini  functioning  as  an  alcoholic  ferment. — Right

half,  showing  appearance  of  spores  just  sown  ;  left  half,  their
appearance  after  an  interval  of  submerged  life


V.    Iliicor,  vegetating  submerged,  in  deficit  of  air

VI.    Ferment  of  jiivcor  ........

VII.    Yeast-cells — worn  out  and  dissociated  (left),  after  revival  in
sweet  wort  (right)

VIII.    Fertile  mould-cells  from  the  outer  surface  of  grapes

IX.    Various  examples  of  the  mode  of  growth  of  mould-cells  from
the  outer  surface  of  grapes  ......

X.    One  of  the  ferments  of  acid  fruits  at  the  commencement  of
fermentation  in  its  natural  medium.      ....

XI.    Sacclinrotnyccs piistoyianus,  in  course  of  regular  growth  .

XII.    Ferment-cells  from  a  spontaneous  fermentation  just  starting


116
136
138

148
152

154

166

168

184


STUDIES     ON     FEKMENTATION.


CHAPTER    I.

On  the  Intimate  Relation  existing  between  the  Detkrio-
RATiON  OF  Beer,  or  the  Wort  from  which  it  is  Made,
AND  the  Process  of  Brewing.

At  the  outset  of  these  "  Studies,"  let  us  briefly  consider  the
nature  of  beer  and  the  methods  of  its  manufacture.

Beer  is  a  beverage  which  has  been  known  from  the  earliest
times.  It  may  be  described  as  an  infusion  of  germinated
barley  and  hops,  which  has  been  caused  to  ferment  after  having
been  cooled,  and  which,  by  means  of  "settling"  and  racking,
has  ultimately  been  brought  to  a  high  state  of  clarification.  It
is  an  alcoholic  beverage,  vegetable  in  its  origin — a  barley  wine,
as  it  is  sometimes  rightly  termed.*

Beer  and  wine,  however,  differ  widely  in  their  composition.
Beer  is  less  acid  and  less  alcoholic  than  wine ;  it  holds  more
ingredients  in  solution,  and  the  nature  of  these  ingredients  is
by  no  means  similar  to  that  of  those  which  are  found  in  wine.

These  differences  in  the  component  parts  of  wine  and  beer  give
rise  to  corresponding  differences  in  the  keeping  qualities  of  the

*  This  expression  is  found  for  the  first  time,  it  would  appear,  in  Theo-
phrastus,  B.C.  371.  [See,  however,  Herodotus,  Bk.  II.,  chap.  77.  Speak-
ing of  some  Egyptians  he  says,  "  They  drink  a  kind  of  wine  made  from
barley  (oww  8'  eK  Kpidtav  7re7ro6r;/xei/a)),  for  the  grape  does  not  grow  in  that
part  of  the  country."  Herodotus  wrote  about  450  B.C.  ^schylus
(48Q  B.C.)  has  a  similar  expression,  Suppl.  953. — D.  C.  E.]


2  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

two  liquids.  The  small  amount  of  aciditj'  in  beer,  its  povert}'  in
alcohol,  and  the  presence  of  matter  that  is  saccharine,  or  liable
to  become  so,  all  operate  in  imparting  to  beer  a  tendency  to
change,  which  wine  does  not  possess.  That  this  unequal  resist-
ance to  the  aggression  of  diseases  is  due  to  such  differences,
may  be  proved  by  the  fact  that  wine  could  be  made  much
more  liable  to  change  than  it  actually  is,  by  a  diminution  of
its  acidity  and  its  usual  proportion  of  alcohol,  or  by  increasing
the  proportion  of  viscid  or  saccharine  matters,*  modifications
which  would  tend  to  assimilate  its  composition  to  that  of  beer.

We  have  remarked  elsewhere  that  the  pains  devoted  to  the
rearing  of  vines,  and  to  the  ordinary  operations  of  vinification,
such  as  ouiUaffe,f  sulphuring,  and  repeated  rackings,  as  well  as
the  use  of  cellars  and  vessels  hermetically  closed,  are  entailed
by  the  necessity  of  counteracting  and  preventing  the  diseases  to
which  wine  is  liable.  The  same  may  be  said,  a  fortiori,  of  beer,
inasmucb  as  it  is  more  liable  to  change  than  wine.  Manufac-
turers and  retailers  of  this  beverage  have  to  strive  constantly
with  the  difficulty  of  preserving  it,  or  the  wort  used  in  its
manufacture.  We  may  readily  be  convinced  of  this  hj  review-
ing the  usual  processes  of  the  art  of  brewing.

When  the  infusion  of  malt  and  hops,  which  is  termed  wort,  is
completed,  it  is  left  to  cool.  It  is  next  put  into  one  or  more  casks
or  vats,  in  which  it  is  made  to  undergo  alcoholic  fermentation —
the  most  important  of  all  the  processes  in  brewing.

The  cooling  must  be  as  rapid  as  possible.  This  is  a  condition
of  success ;  otherwise,  the  wort  may  deteriorate,  which  will
necessarily  lead  to  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  the  beer.  As
long  as  the  wort  is  at  a  high  temperature  it  will  remain  sound ;

*  One  of  these  modifications  is  a  real  source  of  serious  danger  to  the
preservation  of  wine ;  for  instance,  during  rainy  years,  at  the  time  of
vintage,  the  grapes  may  happen  to  be  covered  with  earthy  matter,
consisting  principally  of  carbonate  of  lime;  this  will  dissolve  in  wine
and  partly  neutralize  its  acidity,  and  the  wine  will  thus  become  more
liable  to  disease.

t  Transferring  from  one  cask  to  another  for  the  purpose  of  clarifying
the  wine.


STUDIES    ON    FERMEISTATION.  3

when  under  70°  C.  (158°  F.),  and  particularly  when  at  a  tem-
perature of  from  25°  C.  to  35°  C.  (77°  F.  to '95°  F),  it  wiU  be
quickly  invaded  by  lactic  and  butyric  ferments.  Rapidity  in
cooling  is  so  essential  that  to  secure  it  recourse  is  had  to  special
apparatus.*  Even  in  the  preparation  of  wort,  especially  when
it  is  effected  by  successive  mashings,  in  summer,  deterioration
is  imminent :  in  fact,  it  is  not  rare  to  see  the  wort  becoming
acid  during  the  mashes,  if  these  are  not  accomplished  with  all
possible  celerity.

After  the  wort  has  been  cooled,  it  is  mixed  with  yeast.
This  is  obtained  from  a  previous  fermentation,  and,  after  being
thoroughly  pressed,  is  added  at  the  rate  of  from  one  to  two
thousandth  parts  of  the  weight  of  the  wort,  that  is,  from  100  to
200  grammes  per  hectolitre  (about  4  oz.  to  8  oz.  average  for
every  25  gallons).  At  first  sight,  this  yeast  seems  free  from
the  possible  diseases  of  the  wort  and  beer  ;  but  this  is  by  no
means  the  case.

Now,  why  do  we  add  yeast  to  our  wort  ?  This  practice  is
unknown  in  the  art  of  vinification.  The  must  is  alwaj's  left
to  spontaneous  fermentation.  Why  should  we  not  leave  the
wort  to  operate  in  the  same  manner  ?

It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  in  the  brewing  of
beer  yeast  is  added  with  the  sole  object  of  accelerating  fer-
mentation, and  making  it  more  rapid.  Rapidity  in  fermen-
tation is  a  very  questionable  advantage,  and  one  which  is  not
desired  by  brewers,  who  rather  agree  in  pronouncing  it  injurious
to  the  quality  of  beer.  It  is  in  the  easy  deterioration  of  the
wort,  or  what  is  tantamount  to  it,  in  the  facility  it  afibrds  to
various  spontaneous  fermentations,  that  we  find  an  answer  to
these  questions.  The  must,  through  its  acidity,  due  to  the
presence  of  bitartrate  of  potash — which  seems  to  promote
alcoholic  fermentation — through  its  proportion  of  sugar,  and
perhaps  in  consequence  of  some  other  peculiarity  of  its  compo-
sition, always  undergoes  regular  alcoholic  fermentation.     The

*  We  shall  hereafter  revert  to  this  rapidity  in  cooling,  to  show  that  it
is  also  of  use  in  the  subsequent  clarification  of  beer.

B   2


4  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

diseases  of  wine,  at  the  commencement  of  its  manufacture,
show  themselves,  so  to  say,  in  a  latent  state  only.  Therefore
a  vintage  can  be  left,  without  inconvenience,  to  spontaneous
fermentation.

With  wort  the  case  is  quite  diflferent.  Under  certain
accidental  circumstances  it  is  possible  that  alcoholic  fermenta-
tion alone  may  take  place  in  a  wort  left  to  ferment  spontaneously,
and  the  quality  of  the  beer  remain  unimpaired,  but  such  an
event  would  be  exceptional,  and  of  very  rare  occurrence.  In
most  cases  we  should  obtain  an  acid  or  putrid  liquid  resulting
from  the  production  and  multiplication  of  alien  ferments.

The  addition  of  yeast  is  made  in  consequence  of  the  necessity
of  exciting  through  the  whole  bulk  of  wort,  as  soon  as  it  is
cold,  a  single  fermentation — viz.,  the  alcoholic,  the  only  one
that  can  produce  beer  properly  so  called.

The  alcoholic  ferments  concerned  in  the  production  of  beer
will  be  found  represented  in  several  of  the  engravings  in  this
work.  Other  ferments  we  may  term  "  diseased  "  ;  these  include
all  those  that  may  occur  spontaneously — that  is,  whose  germs
have  not  been  directly  and  intentionally  introduced — amongst
the  actual  alcoholic  ferments.

The  expression,  "  diseased  ferments,"  is  justified  by  the  cir-
cumstance that  the  propagation  of  these  ferments  is  always
accompanied  by  the  production  of  substances  which  are  acid,
putrid,  viscous,  bitter,  or  otherwise  unpalatable,  a  consideration
of  commercial  rather  than  scientific  importance.  From  a  physio-
logical point  of  view,  all  these  ferments  are  of  equal  interest
and  importance.  The  botanist,  as  a  man  of  science,  in  contem-
plating nature,  must  give  equal  attention  to  all  plants,  whether
useful  or  noxious,  since  they  are  all  governed  by  the  same
natural  laws,  among  which  no  order  of  merit  could  be  estab-
lished. The  exigencies  of  industry  and  health  require,  however,
wide  distinctions.

The  first  engraving  (Plate  I.)  represents  the  difierent  diseased
ferments,  together  with  some  cells  of  alcoholic  yeast,  to  show
the  relative  size  of  these  organisms.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  O

No.  1  of  the  engraving  represents  the  ferments  of  turned
beer,  as  it  is  called.  These  are  filaments,  simple  or  articulated
into  chains  of  different  size,  and  having  a  diameter  of  about
the  thousandth  part  of  a  millimetre  (about  vrxroo"  inch).  Under
a  very  high  power  they  are  seen  to  be  composed  of  many  series
of  shorter  filaments,  immovable  in  their  articulations,  which
are  scarcely  visible.

In  No.  2  are  given  the  lactic  ferments  of  wort  and  beer.  These
are  small,  fine  and  contracted  in  their  middle.  They  are
generally  detached,  but  sometimes  occur  in  chains  of  two  or
three.     Their  diameter  is  a  little  greater  than  that  of  No.  1.

In  No.  3  are  given  the  ferments  of  putrid  wort  and  beer.  These
are  mobile  filaments  whose  movements  are  more  or  less  rapid,
according  to  the  temperature.  Their  diameter  varies,  but  is
for  the  most  part  greater  than  that  of  the  filaments  of  Nos.  1
and  2.  They  generally  appear  at  the  commencement  of  fermen-
tation, when  it  is  slow,  and  are  almost  invariably  the  result  of
very  defective  working.

In  No.  4  are  given  the  ferments  of  viscous  wort,  and  those
of  ropy  beer,  which  the  French  call  filante.  They  form
chaplets  of  nearly  spherical  grains.  These  ferments  rarely
occur  in  wort,  and  still  less  frequently  in  beer.

No.  5  represents  the  ferments  of  pungent,  sour  beer,  which
possesses  an  acetic  odour.  These  ferments  occur  in  the  shape
of  chaplets,  and  consist  of  the  mycoderma  aceti,  which  bears  a
close  resemblance  to  lactic  ferments  (No.  2),  especially  in  the
early  stages  of  development.  Their  physiological  functions  are
widely  different,  in  spite  of  this  similarity.

The  ferments  given  in  No.  7  characterize  beer  of  a  peculiar
acidity,  which  reminds  one  more  or  less  of  unripe,  acid  fruit,
with  an  odour  sui  generis.  These  ferments  occur  in  the  form  of
grains  which  resemble  little  spherical  points,  placed  two  together,
or  forming  squares.  They  are  generally  found  with  the  fila-
ments of  No.  1,  and  are  more  to  be  feared  than  the  latter,
which  cause  no  very  great  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  beer,
when  alone.     "When  No.  7  is  present,  by  itself  or  with  No.  1,


b  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

the  beer  acquires  a  sour  taste  and  smell  that  render  it  detestable.
AVe  have  met  with  this  ferment  existing  in  beer,  unaccompanied
by  other  ferments,  and  have  been  convinced  of  its  fatal  effects.

No.  6  represents  one  of  the  deposits  belonging  to  wort.  This
must  not  be  confounded  with  the  deposits  of  diseased  ferments.
The  latter  are  alwa^'s  visibly  organized,  whilst  the  former  is  shape-
less, although  it  would  not  always  be  easy  to  decide  between  the
two  characters,  if  several  samples  of  both  descriptions  were  not
present.  This  shapeless  deposit  interferes  with  wort  during  its
cooling.  It  is  generally  absent  from  beer,  because  it  remains  in
the  backs,  or  on  the  coolers ;  or  it  may  get  entangled  in  the
yeast  during  fermentation  and  disappear  with  it.

Among  the  shapeless  granulations  of  No.  6  may  be  discerned
little  spheres  of  different  sizes  and  perfect  regularity.  These  are
balls  of  resinous  and  colouring  matter  that  are  frequently  found
in  old  beer,  at  the  bottom  of  bottles  or  casks ;  sometimes  they
occur  in  wort  preserved  after  Appert's  method.  They  resemble
organized  products,  but  are  nothing  of  the  kind.  We  have
remarked  before,  in  "  Studies  on  Wine,"  that  the  colouring
matter  of  wine  would  settle,  in  course  of  time,  in  that  form.

It  is  evident  that  the  diflFerent  ferments  delineated  in  Plate  I.
are  worthy  of  thorough  study,  in  consequence  of  the  fermenta-
tions to  which  they  may  give  rise.  Care  must  be  taken  to  isolate
the  action  of  each  of  them  in  fermentations  which  we  may  call
pure — a  condition  of  some  difficulty,  but  one  that  maybe  carried
out  by  an  adoption  of  the  methods  explained  in  this  work.

All  these  diseased  ferments  have  a  common  origin.  Their
germs,  infinitesimal  and  hardly  perceptible  as  they  are,  even
with  the  aid  of  the  microscope,  form  a  part  of  the  dust  conveyed
through  the  air.  This  dust  the  air  is  continually  taking  from
or  depositing  upon  all  objects  in  nature,  so  that  the  dust  that
clings  to  the  ingredients  from  which  our  beer  is  manufactured,
may  teem  with  the  germs  of  diseased  ferments.

During  the  process  of  fermentation,  the  occult  power  of
diseased  ferments,  although  it  may  escape  the  observation  of  the
brewer,  is  manifested  in  a  high  degree.


Principal  Disease-ferments  met  with  in  Wort  and  Beer.


Imp  G€ny-&r0s.PariJ


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  7

During  the  lust  thirty  years,  or  so,  the  art  of  brewing  has
undergone  a  radical  change,  at  least  in  Europe.  This  change
has  been  effected  by  a  partial  abandonment  of  the  process  of
fermentation  formerly  used.  Thirty  years  ago  only  one  kind
of  beer  \Vas  known ;  there  are  nowadays  two  distinct  kinds —
beer  fermented  at  a  high  temperature,  and  beer  fermented  at  a
low  temperature.  Each  of  these  is  subdivided  into  many  varieties,
to  which  different  names  are  given,  according  to  their  strength
or  colour.  This  is  the  case  in  England,  where  we  find  porter,
ale,  pale  ale,  stout,  bitter  beer,  and  other  varieties  of  beer,
although,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  English  have  but  one  kind  of
beer,  all  the  English  beers  being  fermented  at  a  high  tem-
perature.

Let  us  briefly  examine  tlie  diflPerences  existing  between  the
two  kinds  of  beer.

Formerly  all  beer  was  fermented  at  a  high  temperature.  The
wort,  after  having  been  cooled  in  the  backs,  was  run  into  a
large  vat,  at  a  temperature  of  about  20°  C.  (68°  F.).  Yeast
was  then  added  to  it,  and  when  the  fermentation  began  to  show
itself,  in  the  formation  of  a  light,  white  froth,  upon  the  surface
of  the  liquid,  the  wort  was  run  into  casks,  having  a  capacity
of  from  50  to  100  litres  (11  to  22  gallons) — 75  litres  being  the
commonest  size.  These  casks  were  placed  in  cellars,  having  a
temperature  of  from  18°  C.  to  20°  C.  (64°  F.  to  68°  F.).  The
activity  of  fermentation  soon  produced  a  froth  that  grew  thicker
and  more  and  more  viscous  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of
yeast  it  contained.  The  yeast  worked  out  of  the  bung-holes
and  dropped  into  a  vessel  placed  under  the  casks  ;  there  it  was
gathered  for  subsequent  operations.  It  alwaj^s  exceeded  the
quantity  used  in  the  first  instance,  the  ferment  increasing
greatly  during  the  process  of  fermentation.  The  increase  in
its  weight  varied  with  the  weight  of  yeast  used  and  the  com-
position of  the  wort.  Under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  brewing,
where  the  weight  of  the  pitching  yeast  was  about  one  thou-
sandth part  of  the  weight  of  the  wort,  the  increase  is  said  to
have  been  from  five  to  seven  times  the  weight  of  the  yeast ;


8  STUDIES    (JN    F]:ilMKNTATl()N.

but  such  increase  must  naturally  have  been  determined  by  the
quality  of  the  wort,  the  quantity  of  hops  used,  the  action  of
oxj^geu,  and  the  proportion  of  barm  employed.  The  process  of
fermentation  lasted  from  three  to  four  days.  By  that  time  the
beer  was  finished,  and  had  become  limpid,  the  fermentation
having  been  completed.  The  bungs  could  then  be  placed  in
the  casks,  and  the  beer  be  delivered  to  the  customer.*  A  cer-
tain amount  of  yeast  still  remained  in  the  casks,  and  caused  the
beer  to  become  thick,  in  transit ;  but  a  few  days'  rest  sufficed  to
restore  its  brilliancy,  and  render  it  fit  for  drinking  or  bottling.

Here  we  have  an  explanation  of  the  term  "  liigli  fermenta-
tion," which  has  been  applied  to  the  foregoing  process.  This
process  is  conducted  at  a  high  temperature,  which,  commencing
at  19°  C.  or  20'  C.  (66°  F.  or  68°  F.),  is  raised  to  20°  C.  or  21°  C.
(68°  or  70°  F.)  by  the  action  of  fermentation,  which  is  always
accompanied  by  an  increase  of  heat.f

*  In  some  breweries  (at  Lyons  especiallj')  fermentation  at  a  high  tem-
perature is  practised  in  largo  vats  at  about  15'  C.  (59'  F.).  The  yeast
which  covers  the  surface  of  the  liquid  is  skimmed  off  and  stored  in  flat
tubs.

t  The  initial  temperature  of  the  wort  must  be  regulated  bj'  the
quantity  of  wort  subjected  to  fermentation.  In  English  breweries,  where
large  quantities  are  brewed  at  a  time,  the  heat  created  by  the  action  of
fermentation  would  produce  a  temperature  sufficiently  high  to  aff'ect  the
quality  of  the  beer,  if  the  yeast  were  added  at  19°  C.  or  20°  C.

The  following  are  the  temperatures  at  which  the  worts  are  pitched,  in
the  principal  London  breweries  : — For  common  ale,  60'  F.  or  15-5°  C.  ;
for  pale  ale,  58°  F.  or  14-4"  C.  ;  for  porter,  G4°  F.  or  17-8'  C.  The  fer-
mentation is  commenced  in  large  vats  ;  from  these  the  beer  is  run  into
vessels  of  a  much  smaller  capacity,  in  which  it  completes  its  fermentation
by  working  off"  the  yeast  and  cleansing  itself.

For  white  beer  of  superior  qualitj^  the  temperature  during  fennenta-
tion  must  not  rise  bej'^ond  72^  F.  or  22*2°  C.  ;  some  brewers  never  allow
it  to  exceed  18°  C.  (()5'  F.).  The  temperature  is  lowered  by  means  of  a
current  of  cold  water,  which  circulates  through  a  coil  fixed  in  the  vats
or  other  fermenting  vessels.

'In  the  case  of  poi-ter,  the  initial  heat  of  which  is  64'  F.  or  17 '8'  C,
the  temperature  in  the  vats  sometimes  rises  to  78°  F.  or  25"5°  C. ;  but
such  an  increase  in  temp(!rature  excites  considerable  ajiprehension.

We  have  seen  a  tun  for  pale  ale,  containing  200  barrels  of  36  gallons,


STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATION.  9

This  is  not,  however,  the  only  reason  for  the  use  of  the  term
'^  high  fermentation."  We  have  just  seen  that  the  fermenting
casks  were  so  arranged  that  most  of  the  yeast  produced  during
the  process  of  fermentation  would  rise  to  the  upper  part
of  the  casks  and  work  out  of  the  bung-holes.  In  this
practical  fact  we  have  the  actual  origin  of  the  expressions
'■^  high  fermentation^^  and  ^^  high  beer,'"  which  are  used  to
distinguish  this  peculiar  fermentation  and  the  quality  of  beer
derived  from  it.

As  we  have  alread)^  observed,  all  beer  was  formerly  produced
by  this  mode  of  fermentation,  which  even  at  the  present  time
is  still  practised  in  the  breweries  of  Great  Britain,  where  beer
fermented  at  a  low  temperature  is  absolutely  unknown.

"  Low  fermentation "  is  a  slow  process,  eflfected  at  a  low
temperature,  during  which  the  yeast  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  the
vats  or  casks.  The  wort,  after  cooling,  is  run  into  open  wooden
vats.  In  cooling,  the  wort  is  brought  to  as  low  a  temperature
as  8°  0.  (47°  F.),  or  even  6°  C.  (43°  F.),  at  which  point  it  is
maintained  by  cones  or  cylinders  (styled  nageurs,  i.e.,  floats,  by
the  French)  floating  in  the  fermenting  vats.  These  floats  may
be  filled  with  ice  if  the  outside  temperature  requires  it,  as  is
invariably  the  case  in  summer.

pitched  with  600  lbs.  of  fairly  solid  yeast.  In  forty-six  hours  the  attenu-
ation was  considered  sufficient,  and  the  beer,  which  from  an  initial  heat
of  o8-r  F.  or  14-5°  C,  had  risen  to  72°  F.  or  22-2°  C,  was  cleansed
to  working  casks.  The  large  vats  in  which  the  fermentation  is  started
may  be  considered  as  equivalent  to  the  cuves  guilloires  of  French
breweries,  the  casks  in  which  it  is  completed  and  the  yeast  thrown  off
representing  their  7  5 -litre  vessels,  improperly  called  quarts.  Notwith-
standing the  enormous  English  beer  manufacture,  and  although  the
fermenting  vat,  as  in  making  porter,  for  instance,  sometimes  attains  the
capacity  of  2,000  to  3,000  litres  (400  to  600  gallons),  the  casks  into
which  it  is  run  are  never  larger  than  15  to  20  hectolitres  (300  to  400
gallons);  and  even  at  Burton,  in  the  celebrated  breweries  of  Allsopp
and  Bass,  the  pale  ale  is  finished  in  casks  of  a  capacity  less  than
10  hectolitres,  and  yet  the  average  turn-out  of  these  immense  works
reaches  3,000  to  4,000  hectolitres  (60,000  to  80,000  gallons)  of  beer
per  day.


10  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

The  duration  of  this  fermentation  i.s  ten,  fifteen,  or  even
twenty  days.  The  yeast,  which  is  produced  less  abundantly
than  in  the  case  of  beer  fermented  at  a  high  temperature,  is
gathered  after  the  beer  has  been  drawn  off,  and  is  partly  used  in
subsequent  fermentations.

The  term  "  low  fermentation "  is  derived  partly  from  the
lowness  of  the  temperature  during  the  fermenting  process,  and
partly  from  the  fact  that  the  yeast  is  gathered  at  the  bottom,
and  not  at  the  upper  part  of  the  fermenting  vessels.*

Beer  fermented  at  a  low  temperature,  of  which  there  are
several  varieties,  differing  in  colour  and  quality,  is  of  Bavarian
origin.-f-  The  preference  of  the  public  for  this  kind  of  beer,  and
the  increased  facilities  that  such  a  beer  affords  the  trade,  are
the  two  reasons  why  its  manufacture  has  so  greatly  increased.
In  Austria,  Bavaria,  Prussia,  and  other  Continental  countries
this  new  method  of  brewing  is  almost  exclusively  adopted.

In  the  Monitmr  dc  la  BraHserie  of  the  23rd  April,  1871,  may
be  found  the  following  significant  remarks  on  the  increase  in
the  production  of  beer  fermented  at  a  low  temperature  on  the
Continent :  "  The  number  of  breweries  manufacturing  high  beer
is  rapidly  decreasing,  whilst  the  number  of  those  producing  loio
beer  is  still  more  rapidly  increasing.  There  were  in  Bohemia,
in  1860,  281  breweries  in  which  high  fermentation  was  practised  ;
in  1865,  only  81  of  these  remained  ;  in  1870,  the  number  had
declined  to  18.  On  the  other  hand,  the  number  of  brew'eries
practising  low  fermentation  increased  from  135  in  1860  to  459
in  1865,  and  in  1870  had  risen  to  831.  In  1860  there  were
620  breweries  in  which  the  two  methods  were  employed ;  in
1865  there  w'ere  486;  in  1870  only  119  remained.  The  number
of  breweries  at  present  existing  in  Bohemia  amounts  to  968."

*  [The  expressions  "high"  and  "low"  fermentation  or  beer  strictly
refer  to  temperature,  whereas  the  other  expressions  used  ("top"  or
"bottom")  refer  to  the  behaviour  of  the  yeast.  The  French  words
haute  and  basse  seem  to  look  both  ways. — D.  C.  R.]

t  It  is  said  that  the  floating  cones  or  cylinders  filled  with  ice,  which
enable  brewers  to  manufacture  beer  at  a  low  temperature,  even  in
summer,  were  first  used  in  Alsace.


STUDIES    ON     FERMENTATION.  11

In  France,  we  are  still  in  a  period  of  transition  ;  but  year  by
year  the  manufacture  of  "  low  beer  "  is  increasing,  to  the  evident
detriment  of  its  competitor.

It  is  unnecessary  to  dwell  upon  certain  differences  exist-
ing between  the  two  kinds  of  beer,  such  as  may  be  traced
to  the  preparation  and  composition  of  their  respective  worts.
The  brewing  of  "  high  beer,"  by  hand  or  machinery,  is
effected  in  one  operation ;  the  brewing  of  "  low  beer  "  is
accomplished  by  successive  mashings,  the  temperatures  of  which
are  gradually  raised.  These  differences,  and  others  that  result
from  the  longer  boiling  of  the  wort,  in  the  "  high  fermentation  "
process,  give  rise  to  diversities  in  the  composition  and  colour  of
the  worts,  from  which  circumstance  "  low  beers  "  are  sometimes
termed  ivhite  beers,  in  contradistinction  to  the  others,  which
have  a  deeper  colour,  and  are  known  as  dark  beers  (brims).  The
name  of  Strasburg  is  generally  given  to  "  low  beer  "  in  France,
but  sometimes  it  is  called  German  beer.

It  is  easy  to  account  for  the  changes  introduced  into  the
construction  and  working  of  breweries  bj""  the  new  process  of
"  low  fermentation."  A  low  temperature  is  essential  not  only
to  the  manufacture  but  also  to  the  preservation  of  "  low  beer,"
and  must  be  secured  by  the  use  of  ice-cellars  in  which  the
temperature  may  be  maintained  at  5""  R.  or  6°  11.(43°  F.  or  45°F.),
and  even  at  1°,  2°,  or  3°  E.  (35°  to  39  °F.)  throughout  the  year.
This  necessitates  an  accumulation  of  ice  and  the  construction  of
cellars  of  enormous  extent,  for  the  storage  of  the  beer.  "  Low
beer  "  is  essentially  a  stock  beer,  especially  if  brewed  in  winter,
when  due  advantage  is  taken  of  the  low  temperature  of  the
season.  It  is  kept  in  cold  cellars  until  the  spring  or  summer,
when  beer  is  consumed  in  larger  quantities.  It  is  calculated
that  100  kilos.  (1*96  cwt.)  of  ice  is  the  average  quantitj'  used
per  hectolitre  (22  gallons)  of  good  beer,  between  the  cooling  of
the  wort  and  the  day  of  sale.*

*  45  million  kilos,  of  ice  are  annually  consumed  in  the  brewery  of  M.
Dreher,  in  Vienna.  The  brewery  of  Sedlmayer,  at  Municli,  uses  about
10  million  kilos.    {Journal  cles  Brasseurs,  22nd  June,  1873.)


12  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

In  the  manufacture  of  "  high  beer "  we  find  none  of  these
complications,  nor  have  we  in  that  manufacture  any  similar
difficulty  of  working  or  expense  of  construction  to  contend
against.  The  whole  process  of  brewing,  including  the  delivery
of  the  beer,  does  not  take  more  than  eight  days.  Why  should
a  mode  of  brewing  so  simple,  so  rapid,  and  comparatively  so
inexpensive,  have  been  abandoned  by  the  greater  part  of  Europe
in  favour  of  a  system  disadvantageous  to  the  brewer  in  so  many
respects  ?  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  supj)ose  that  the  sole  reason
for  such  a  change  might  be  found  in  the  superior  quality  of
"low  beer.'^  That  such  a  superiority  does  exist  is  admitted  as  a
fact  by  the  majority  of  beer  drinkers  ;  but  taken  by  itself,  this
fact  is  not  sufficient  to  account  for  the  radical  transformation
that  has  taken  place  in  the  manufacture  of  beer,  as  is  proved
by  the  example  of  England,  which,  we  believe,  does  not  possess
as  yet  one  single  "low  beer"  brewery,  from  which  circumstance
we  may  fairly  suppose  that  the  English  liave  a  decided  pre-
ference for  "high  beer."

The  principal  advantage  of  working  at  a  low  temperature
lies  in  the  fact  that  "  low  beer  "  is  less  liable  to  deterioration,
and  is  less  prone  to  contract  diseases  than  "  high  beer,"  especially
whilst  it  remains  in  the  brewery — a  circumstance  that  places
the  brewer  in  a  position  vastly  superior  to  that  which  he
occupied  in  former  times.  With  the  help  of  ice  the  brewer
can  manufacture  beer  during  winter  and  the  early  part  of
spring,  for  consumption  in  summer.*     "High   beer,"    on   the

*  It  should,  however,  bo  borne  in  mind  that  these  remarks  on  the
relative  preservative  powers  of  the  two  beers  hold  true  on  account  of
three  things — differences  in  the  respective  modes  of  brewing,  artificial
cooling  during  the  process  of  fermentation,  and  the  storing  of  the  ' '  low
beer"  in  ice-cellars.  In  itself,  perhaps,  "low  beer"  is  more  liable  to
change  than  "  high  beer  ;  "  that  this  does  not  actually  take  place,  is  due
to  the  employment  of  artificial  cooling.  A  brewery  which  has  an  average
annual  production  of  10,000  hect.  will  use  cS,000  cwt.  of  ice.  If
we  add  to  this  the  ice  used  during  the  retail  of  the  beer,  which  is
best  di'unk  at  12"  C.  (54°  F.),  we  shall  arrive  at  the  total  of  100  kilos,
per  hectolitre.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  13

other  hand,  must  be  consumed  within  a  short  time  of  its  pro-
duction. The  brewer  is  thus  compelled  to  manufacture  it  as
it  is  wanted,  and  as  orders  are  sent  in,  the  demand  for  it  being
in  a  great  measure  dependent  upon  the  state  of  the  weather.

Conditions  so  unfavourable  as  these  must  necessarily  operate
prejudicially  against  trade.  Industry  requires  more  stability
and  uniformity,  both  in  the  production  and  the  sale  of  its  goods.
"  Low  beer ''  can  be  brewed  in  large  quantities  at  any  time  to
be  delivered  at  any  other  time,  according  to  requirements ;  its
manufacture,  therefore,  is  unattended  by  the  inconveniences
which  we  have  just  noticed.*

How  is  it  that  the  use  of  ice  and  yeast  operating  at  a  low
temperature  so  greatly  facilitates  the  preservation  of  our  beer

*  [In  connection  with  the  comparison  here  instituted  by  M.  Pasteur
between  the  drinking  and  keej^ing  qualities  of  the  two  kinds  of  beer,  it
may  be  useful  to  draw  the  reader's  attention  to  a  review  by  Dr.  Charles
Graham  of  the  French  edition  of  this  work,  published  in  Nature  for
January  11th,  1877,  page  216.  At  the  same  time  we  must  remark  that
Dr.  Graham  appears  to  have  overlooked  M.  Pasteur's  footnote,  page  12,
English  edition: — "His  assertion,  that  by  bottom  fermentation  store
beers  can  be  produced,  whereas  those  produced  by  top  fermentation  must
be  consumed  at  once  and  cannot  be  transported,  are  certainly  strange  to
an  Englishman.  So  far  from  these  unfavourable  comparisons  being  true
in  all  cases,  the  exact  opposite  is  generally  the  case.  Bavarian  and
other  bottom  fermentation  beers  are  in  fact  those  which  can  neither  be
preserved  nor  transported  without  the  liberal  employment  of  ice ;  even
that  sent  from  Vienna  to  London  must  be  kept  cold  artificially,  in  order
to  avoid  rapid  destruction.  As  regards  flavour,  there  are  many  who
think  a  glass  of  Burton  pale  ale,  or  of  good  old  College  rent  ale,  to  be
superior  to  any  Bavarian  beer.  The  chief  cause  of  the  decline  in  the
production  of  top  fermentation  beers  on  the  Continent  has  been  the
want  of  attention  in  the  fermentation  process ;  whereas  the  English
brewer,  especially  the  brewer  of  high-class  ales,  has  been  unremitting  in
his  attention  to  the  temperature  in  fermentation  and  to  the  perfect
cleansing  of  the  ale.  Now,  where  such  attention  is  given,  it  is  not
difficult  to  obtain  ales  which  will  keep  a  few  years.  "While  objecting  to
oui-  EngHsh  produce  being  so  hastily  depreciated  by  M.  Pasteur,  our
brewers  will  be  the  first  to  avail  themselves  of  his  biological  researches,
in  order  to  render  their  produce  more  stable  and  better  flavoured,
without  having  recourse  to  the  general  adoption  of  the  vastly  more
costly  system  of  bottom  fermentation."— D.  C.  E.]


14  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

and  enables  us  to  secure  such  striking  advantages?  The  expla-
nation is  simple  :  the  diseased  ferments,  which  we  have  pointed
out,  rarely  appear  at  a  lower  temperature  than  10°  C.  (50°  F.),
and  at  that  temperature  their  germs  cease  to  be  active.  The
adoption  of  low  temperatures  by  brewers  is  mainly  due  to  this
phvsiological  fact.  On  one  occasion  only  have  we  met  with
active  vibrios  (No.  3,  Plate  I.),  at  a  very  low  temperature  ;  these
were  forming  with  great  difficulty  in  wort  fermenting  at  5°  C.
(41°  F.),

From  this  we  see  that  the  changes  which  the  manufacture  of
beer  has  undergone  during  the  present  century  have  been  based
mainly  on  the  diseases  to  which  beer  is  liable,  either  during  or
after  the  process  of  brewing.  The  fact  that  English  brewers
have  not  as  yet  adopted  "low  fermentation^^  may  be  accounted
for,  in  a  great  measure,  by  the  difficulty  of  enlarging  existing
breweries,  in  cities  like  London,  to  the  extent  required  for  the
new  method  of  manufacture.  Even  in  the  event  of  public  taste
demanding  a  "  low  beer,"  English  brewers  will  hesitate  a  long
time  before  converting  their  breweries.  Such  conversion  would
impose  upon  them  expenses  and  difficulties  of  a  very  serious
nature.  If  ever  such  a  change  should  take  place,  it  will  probably
be  inaugurated  out  of  London.  It  is,  however,  worthy  of  remark
that  English  brewers,  without  adopting  "low  fermentation,"
have  introduced  considerable  improvements  in  brewing,  especialh^
in  the  management  of  the  temperature  during  fermentation  ;
this  must  be  preserved  within  narrow  and  exact  limits,  for  fear
of  injury  to  the  product.  It  might  easily  be  shown  that  these
improvements  have  resulted  from  the  liability  of  the  beer  to
contract  diseases,  although  this  fact  may  not  have  been  recog-
nized by  the  brewers  who  have  introduced  them.

Besides  the  yeasts  which  belong  to  the  two  principal  kinds
of  fermentation,  there  exist  many  varieties  of  alcoholic  ferment
that  produce,  each  of  them,  a  special  kind  of  beer.  Among  these
special  beers  some  are  deficient  in  taste,  others  in  aroma,  others
in  brilliancy.  Let  us  suppose  that  in  the  manufacture  of  a
beer  with  one  of  these  yeasts,  from  which  a  peculiar  flavour


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  15

is  derived,  a  diflferent  and  inferior  variety  is  accidentally
mixed  with  that  which  we  intend  to  use  ;  in  such  a  case,
the  inferior  variety,  the  product  of  which  will  possess  an  inferior
quality,  will  exercise  such  an  influence  on  the  brewing  as  to
induce  the  belief  that  disease  must  be  present.  The  microscope,
if  consulted,  will  reveal  no  special  organism,  nor  any  of  those
diseased  ferments  of  which  we  have  given  specimens.  It  is  in
the  study  of  yeast  that  we  must  endeavour  to  find  the  cause  of
the  results  we  observe.  This  point,  which  is  of  the  greatest
importance  to  brewers,  will  become  clearer  as  we  proceed.

If  we  examine  the  practices  of  the  beer  trade,  in  its
retail  as  well  as  in  its  export  branches,  we  shall  find  that
many  of  them  aftbrd  evidence  of  the  liability  of  the  beer  to
deteriorate.  We  may  cite  some  of  these.  When  taken  out  of
the  ice-cellars,  the  beer  is  kept  in  casks  of  small  capacity,  that
it  may  be  the  sooner  consumed ;  when  exposed  to  a  high  tem-
perature, the  beer  will  not  keep  sound  for  any  length  of  time,
but  will  speedily  effloresce  with  mycoderma  vini  or  mycoderma
aceti.

Beer  which  is  intended  for  bottling  should  not  be  kept  for
more  than  a  month  or  six  weeks.  Even  in  bottling  we  may
perceive  the  tendency  of  the  liquid  to  deteriorate.*  It  is  neces-
sary that  the  bottles,  immediately  after  being  filled,  should  be
laid  on  their  sides  for  twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours  ;  they
ma}'-  then  be  placed  upright ;  the  reason  for  this  is  that  the  air

*  To  preserve  bottled  beer  from  deterioration,  some  bottlers  employ,
at  the  moment  of  filling,  a  small  quantity  of  bisiilpliite  of  lime.  Others
heat  the  bottles  to  a  temperature  of  bb°  0.  (131°  F.)  In  the  north  of  Ger-
many and  in  Bavaria,  this  practice  has  been  widely  adopted  since  the
publication  of  the  author's  "  Studies  on  Wine,"  and  some  of  M.  Velten's
writings.  The  process  has  been  termed  pasteurizaiion  in  recognition  of  the
author's  discovery  of  the  causes  of  deterioration  in  fermented  liquors,  and
of  the  means  of  preserving  such  liquors  by  the  application  of  heat.  Unfor-
tunately this  process  is  less  successful  in  the  case  of  beer  than  in  that  of
wine,  for  the  delicacy  of  flavour  which  distinguishes  beer  is  affected  by
heat,  especially  when  the  beer  has  been  manufactured  by  the  ordinary
process.  This  effect  would  be  less  felt  in  beer  manufactured  by  the
process  which  is  advocated  in  this  work.


16  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

left  between  the  cork  and  the  beer  might  give  rise  to  the  pro-
duction of  efflorescence.  If  we  lay  the  bottles  down  on  their
sides,  the  oxygen  of  this  air  will  be  absorbed  by  the  oxidizable
substances  in  the  liquid,  and  there  will  be  little  fear  of  germs
developing  themselves  when  the  bottles  are  placed  upright.  The
bottles  should  not,  however,  be  left  on  their  sides  longer  than
forty-eight  hours ;  otherwise  the  supplementary  fermentation
may  force  the  corks  out.  Moreover,  when  the  bottles  stand
upright  the  products  of  fermentation  collect  at  the  bottom,  and
not  at  the  sides.

Beer  which  is  intended  for  keeping,  if  exported  or  conveyed
some  distance  off,  must  be  surrounded  with  ice.  Without  this
precaution  it  will  ferment  too  much  or  contract  some  disease.

"  High  beer  "  cannot  stand  travelling.  This  kind  of  beer
should  not  be  exported  unless  the  ordinary  proportion  of  hops
has  been  greatly  increased — hop  oil  acting  in  some  respects  as  an
antiseptic,  and  preventing  the  beer  from  contracting  diseases.*
The  export  of  English  beer  to  India  and  the  Continent  has
fallen  off  of  late  years,  or  rather,  has  not  increased  to  the  extent
that  was  anticipated  ;  in  fact,  this  trade  has  entailed  great  losses
upon  those  engaged  in  it.  It  is  said  that  an  English  firm  lost
as  much  as  £48,000  on  one  consignment,  which  on  its  arrival
in  India  was  found  to  be  all  turned.

There  are  no  breweries  in  hot  countries,  where  beer  would
command  a  very  large  sale.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  beer
is  a  remarkably  pleasant  drink  in  tropical  climates,  provided  its
temperature  be  a  few  degrees  below  that  of  the  atmosphere,  but
the  expenses  of  its  production  would  be  enormous,  on  account
of  the  immense  quantity  of  ice  that  would  be  required  in  its
manufacture  and  for  its  preservation.  It  is  in  hot  countries
that  beer  is  most  liable  to  deterioration.

Beer  is  said  to    be  the   beverage  of  northern  regions,    which

*  A  convincing  proof  of  the  influence  of  hops  on  the  ferment  organisms
is  contained  in  the  fact  that  beer,  even  after  being  raised  to  ()0°  C.  or
70"  0.  (140"  or  160°  F.),  will,  if  unhopped,  readily  take  on  the  butyric
fermentation,  from  which,  if  hopped,  it  would  remain  perfectly  free.


STUDIES    ON    FEKMKNTATION.  1^

are  deprived  of  the  vine^  b}^  the  rigour  of  their  climate.  In
these  regions  man  has  sought  in  the  abundance  of  grain-fruit
a  substitute  for  grapes.  To  a  certain  extent  this  is  true ;  never-
theless, it  is  an  undoubted  fact  that  beer  was  first  brewed  in
Egypt,  a  very  hot  country,  whence  its  manufacture  has  spread
over  Europe.  It  was  called  Pelusian  wine,  from  Pelusium,  a
city  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  which  produced  a  beer  that  was
held  in  high  esteem.*

Beyond  a  doubt,  hot  countries,  even  those  in  which  the  vine
is  cultivated,  would  consume  much  beer,  could  it  but  stand  their
high  temperature. t  A  considerable  quantity  of  beer  is  now
brewed  in  British  India,  but  its  manufacture  entails  an  enor-
mous outlay  for  ice.

The  complications  which  result  from  the  tendency  of  wort
and  beer  to  deteriorate,  underlie  almost  all  the  details  of  the
process  of  brewing  and  the  sale  of  beer,  and  have  been  the
cause  of  most  of  the  changes  and  improvements  that  have  been
eifected  in  brewing,  during  the  present  century.

*  For  historical  details,  see  V Encyclopedic,  Art.  Biere.

t  As  a  -wine-producing  country  France  has  been  highly  favoured  by
nature,  but  the  consumption  of  beer  in  France  is  increasing  every  year.
In  1873  the  quantity  of  beer,  paying  excise  duties,  amounted  to  7,413,190
hect.,  which  yielded  to  the  Treasury  the  sum  of  20,165,136  fr.  These
figures  are  taken  from  a  report  published  in  1875  by  M.  Jacqueme,
inspector  of  finances,  who  remarks  that  the  quantity  of  beer  upon  which
excise  duties  are  paid  represents,  probably,  not  more  than  one-third  of
the  total  production :  two-thirds  of  the  quantity  brewed  evades  the
duties.


18


CHAPTER    II.

On  the  Causes   of  the  Diseases  which  affect  Beek
AND  Wort.

From  our  preceding  observations  it  will  be  evident  that  the
manufacture  of  beer,  the  arrangement  of  breweries,  and  all  the
processes  practised  by  the  brewer  immediately  depend  upon  this
fact,  that  beer  and  wort  are  fluids  essentially  liable  to  change.
Thus  it  becomes  a  matter  of  extreme  importance  that  we  should
have  an  exact  knowledge  of  the  causes  and  nature  of  the
changes  which  affect  our  produce,  and  it  may  be  that  this
knowledge  will  lead  us  to  regard  the  conditions  of  the  brewing
industry  from  a  novel  point  of  view,  and  bring  about  important
modifications  in  the  practices  of  the  trade.  We  might  vainly
search  the  numerous  works  which  have  been  written  on  brewing
for  information  respecting  the  proposed  subject  of  these  studies.
At  the  most  we  should  find  the  diseases  to  which  beer  is  liable
in  the  course  of  its  manufacture,  or  afterwards,  vaguely  hinted
at ;  perhaps  we  might  be  favoured  with  certain  empirical
recipes  for  disguising  the  evil  effects  of  those  diseases.

It  will  be  our  endeavour  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of  the
proposition  we  have  already  laid  down,  that  every  change  to
which  wort  and  beer  are  liable  is  brought  about  solely  by  the
development  of  organic  ferments,  whose  germs  are  being  per-
petually wafted  to  and  fro  in  the  dust  floating  through  the
air,  or  distributed  over  the  surface  of  tlie  dift'erent  materials  and
utensils  used  in  brewing,  such   as  nuiU,   yeast,   water,   coolers,


STUDIES    ON    FEKMEKTATIO^.  19

vats,  tubs,  casks,  shovels,  workmen's  clotiies,  and  innumerable
other  things.

It  is  evident  that  this  proposition  bears  a  marked  resembiance
to  the  one  which  we  have  demonstrated  concerning  the  diseases
of  wine.*

By  the  expression  diseases  of  wort  and  beer,  we  mean  radical
changes  which  so  affect  the  nature  of  those  liquids  as  to  make
them  unpalatable,  especially  if  they  are  kept ;  such  changes
produce  beer  which  is  sharp,  sour,  turned,  oily,  putrid,  and
otherwise  bad.  It  would  be  unreasonable  to  apply  the  term
disease  to  certain  modifications  in  the  quality  of  beer,  which
may  be  produced  by  practices  more  or  less  commendable.  Such
modifications,  too,  may  result  from  want  of  skill  in  the  brewer,
from  the  composition  of  the  wort,  from  the  specific  nature  of
the  yeast,  or  from  the  inferior  quality  of  ingredients.  It  is  a
well-known  fact  that  "  low  beer,"  if  manufactured  according  to
the  ordinary  process,  has  not  that  same  delicacy  of  flavour
which  characterizes  beer  fermented  at  a  lower  temperature  than
10°  C.  (50°  F.).  Fermented  at  10^  C.  (50°F.),or  12^^  C.  (53°  F.)
or  at  a  higher  temperature,  it  loses  the  peculiar  properties
which  consumers  prize.  Nevertheless,  in  point  of  soundness  it
may  be  as  good  a  beer  as  one  which  has  been  fermented  at  6°  C.
(43°  F.),  or  8°  C.  (46°  F.).  One  might  say  of  the  former  beer
that  it  is  inferior  to  the  latter  in  estimation ;  but  we  could  not
rightly  call  it  diseased,  for  we  are  supposing  a  case  in  which
disease  does  not  actually  exist.

§  I. — Every  Unhealthy  Change  in  the   Quality  of  Beer

COINCIDES      with     A     DEVELOPMENT     OF     MICROSCOPIC      GeRMS
which  are  ALIEN  TO  THE  PuRE  FeRMENT  OF  BeER,

Our  proposition  concerning  the  causes  of  the  diseases  of  wort
and  beer  might  be  demonstrated  in  several  ways.  The  follow-
ing is  one  of  the  simplest : — Take  a  few  bottles  of  sound  beer,

*  A  statement  of  this  proposition,  as  far  as  it  concerns  beer,  appeared
first  in  outline  in  the  author's  Etudes  sur  le  vin,  published  in  1866.

C  2


'iO  STUDIES    ON    FEUME  STATION.

say,  for  instance,  that  which  is  known  in  Paris  as  Tourtel's,
Griiber's,  or  Dreher's,  from  the  name  of  the  brewer  who  manu-
factures it.  Place  some  of  these  bottles  in  a  hot-water  bath  and
raise  the  temperature  to  about  60°  C.  (140°  F.).  Permit  them  to
coof  and  then  place  them  by  the  side  of  the  other  bottles  that
have  not  been  heated.  In  every  case,  especially  if  we  conduct  this
experiment  in  summer,  we  shall  find  that  in  the  course  of  a  few
weeks — the  length  of  time  varying  according  to  the  tempera-
ture and  the  quality  of  the  beer — all  the  bottles  which  have  not
been  heated  will  have  become  diseased,  in  some  cases  even  to
the  extent  of  being  undrinkable.  Let  us  next  examine,  by
way  of  comparison,  the  deposits  in  the  heated  and  non-heated
bottles.  We  shall  find  associated  with  the  pure  alcoholic  fer-
ment other  organisms,  filiform  and  for  the  most  part  very  slender,
and  either  simple  or  articulated,  as  represented  in  Plate  IT.,  the
design  of  which  is  taken  from  actual  deposits  occurring  iu  beer
that  had  been  kept  for  some  time  at  the  ordinary''  temperature.
A  number  of  bottles  of  beer  which  had  been  heated  on  October
8th,  1871,  were  compared  with  those  of  an  equal  number  of
bottles  of  the  same  beer  which  had  not  been  heated.  The
examinaticm  took  place  on  July  27th,  1872.  The  beer,  which
had  been  heated  to  55°  C.  (131°  F.),  was  remarkably  sound,
well  flavoured,  and  still  in  a  state  of  fermentation.  As  a  matter
of  fact,  Ave  have  proved  by  exact  experiments  that  alcoholic
ferments,  heated  in  beer,  can  endure  a  temperature  of  55°  C.
(131°  F.),  without  losing  the  power  of  germination  ;  but  the
action  is  rendered  somewhat  more  difficult  and  slower.  Diseased
ferments,  however,  existing  in  the  same  medium,  perish  at  this
temperature,  as  they  do  in  the  case  of  wine.  The  beer  which
had  not  been  heated,  had  undergone  changes  which  rendered  it
quite  undrinkable.  Its  acidity,  due  to  volatile  acids,  was  higher
than  that  of  the  other  beer  in  the  proportion  of  5  to  1.  The
beer  which  had  been  heated  contained  A  per  cent,  of  alcohol
more  than  the  other.

The  deposits  in  the  heated   bottles  also  showed  filaments  of
disease,  but  in  such  rninutc  quantity  that  it  was  necessary  to


I'l  11


la      ^  ■  \:


a'  O"^'


^


<@o"/    9


<f


<9


i


(§)       •


'/


/


O


%    <3b


u    u    ^


c^


©"    "^^   ..■         ^


;    -^
</


@


,^


i  ^


A^^l^vf,    i


(:^


©


'^


hfOC,


Deyrolle  del


Appearance  under  the  Microscope  of  the  Deposit  from  "Turned"  Beer.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION,  21

search  many  fields  of  the  microscope  to  discover  their  existence.
Those  which  we  found  after  the  heating  must  have  existed  in
the  beer  before  that  operation ;  the  heat  had  destroyed  them,
without  sensibly  altering  their  shape  or  size  ;  they  could  neither
multiply  nor  continue  to  exert  any  influence  upon  the  compo-
nents of  the  beer.*

From  these  experiments  we  may  easily  perceive,  on  the  one
hand,  that  beers  apparently  sound  to  the  taste  do  not  contain
these  or  any  other  filiform  ferments,  save  in  a  scarcely  appreci-
able quantity  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  these  same  ferments
appear  with  the  first  unfavourable  change  in  the  quality  of  the
beers,  and  that  they  exist  more  or  less  abundantly  in  propor-
tion to  the  intensity  of  disease.

In  certain  extremely  rare  cases  it  may  happen — so,  at  least,
we  have  been  assured,  but  we  have  not  proved  the  fact  ourselves
— that  beer  may  keep  sound  in  bottle,  even  without  the  prelimi-
nary heating.  This  exception  can  only  occur  in  the  case  of
certain  beers  of  a  peculiar  composition,  which  are  highly
hopped,  and  are  made  during  the  favourable  months  of  Novem-
ber or  December,  out  of  the  choicest  materials,  and  fermented
with  yeast  that  happens  to  be  pure.  In  the  deposit  of  such  beer,
even  after  a  lapse  of  several  months  or  several  years,  we  should
find  only  the  ordinary  alcoholic  ferment,  the  slow  action  of
which  would  merely  cause  a  gradual  increase  in  the  quantity
of  alcohol  existing  in  the  beer,  and  a  diminution  in  the  propor-
tion of  dextrine.  This  beer  might  grow  old,  as  wine  does,  and
remain  perfectly  sound.

Very  often  the  whole  work  of  the  brewer  is  jeopardized  by
the  unsuspected   presence  of  diseased  ferments,  a  remedy  for

*  As  the  deposit  in  the  heated  bottles  is,  as  a  rule,  inconsiderable,  it  is
necessary  to  exercise  some  precaution  in  collecting  it.  The  bottles  are
taken  up  ;  after  some  days'  rest  they  are  decanted  very  carefully,  -with
as  little  shaking  as  possible,  until  not  more  than  one  or  two  cubic  centi-
metres (about  a  tea-spoonful)  of  the  liquid  remains  at  the  bottom.  The
bottles  are  then  shaken  vigorously,  with  the  object  of  collecting  the
whole  of  the  deposit  from  the  bottom  and  the  sides  into  this  small  quantity
of  liquid ;  a  drop  of  this  is  then  examined  under  the  microscope.


22  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

which  is  only  devised  after  the  evil  has  evoked  the  complaints
of  customers.  In  such  a  case  the  brewer  avails  himself  of  the
kindness  of  some  other  brewer  to  obtain  a  change  of  yeast — a
custom  which  is  recognized  and  valued  in  the  trade,  since  all
managers  of  breweries  have  an  interest  in  keeping  it  up.  The
brewer  whose  produce  is  most  satisfactory  recognizes  the  fact
that  unforeseen  circumstances  may  compel  him  at  any  moment
to  change  his  yeast.

We  have  frequently  had  occasion  to  sliow  that  this  necessity
for  a  change  of  yeast  depends,  in  most  cases,  on  some  change
brought  about  by  the  presence  of  diseased  ferments,  the  multi-
plication of  which  has  resulted  fortuitously  from  some  uncon-
scious neglect  during  the  process  of  brewing,  or  from  climatic
influences.  When  we  reflect  that  yeast  is  a  living  being,  and
that  the  medium  which  serves  as  its  aliment,  and  the  water  in
which  it  lives,  are  remarkably  well  adapted  for  the  development
of  a  vast  number  of  other  microscopic  beings,  the  comparative
purity  of  yeast  should  surprise  us  even  more  than  its  deteriora-
tion does.

Now  by  means  of  microscopical  observations  we  might  often
detect  the  existence  of  the  evil  long  before  we  are  warned
of  it  by  a  defective  working,  wliich  invariably  entails  great
losses.*

In  proof  of  this  remark  we  may  cite  the  following  facts.  In
the  month  of  September,  1871,  we  were  permitted  to  go  through
a  large  London  brewery,  in  which  the  microscopical  study  of
yeast  was  altogether  unknown.  We  were  allowed  to  make
certain  experiments  in  the  presence  of  the  managers  of  the
establishment.  We  first  examined  porter  yeast,  which  was
collected  in  a  channel  that  received  the  yeast  as  it  worked  out
of  the  fermenting  vessels.  One  of  the  ferments  of  disease
abounded  in  this  yeast,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  accompanying

*  Since  the  publication  of  the  author's  "  Studies  on  the  Diseases  of
Wine,  and  the  Dangers  resulting  to  Wine  and  Beer  from  the  Microscopic
Parasites  found  therein,"  some  intelligent  brewers  havejderived  consider-
able profit  from  the  application  of  the  theories  laid  down  in  that  work.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  23

sketch,  which  was  taken  on  the  spot  (Fig.  1).  It  was  evident
that  the  working  of  the  porter  was  extremely  unsatisfactory,
and  had,  perhaps,  been  so  for  a  long  time  ;  indeed,  we  weie  told
that  they  had  obtained  a  change  of  yeast  from  another  London
brewery  that  same  day.  We  made  a  point  of  examining  this
yeast  with  the  microscope.  It  was  beyond  comparison  purer
than  the  preceding  yeast.

It  is  evident  that  if  these  brewers  had  been  in  the  habit  of
using  the  microscope  they  might  have  detected  the  unsoundness
of  their  produce  before  the  time  when  they  actuall}'^  made  the

a  &

®^    <©  Q      QUO

Fig.  1.  Fig.  2.

discovery,  which,  no  doubt,  was  forced  upon  them  by  the  com-
plaints of  their  customers,  or  some  other  annoying  circumstance,
that  led  to  their  obtaining  a  change  of  yeast.

We  next  obtained  permission  to  examine  the  yeast  of  the
other  beers  undergoing  fermentation,  especially  those  of  white
beers,  such  as  ale  and  pale  ale.

In  the  sketch  which  we  made  of  these  yeasts  one  may  detect
the  presence  of  the  filaments  peculiar  to  turned  beer  (Fig.  2).

We  examined  with  much  interest  the  ales  which  had  imme-
diately preceded  those  undergoing  fermentation,  the  yeast  of
which  we  had  just  inspected.  We  were  furnished  with  two
kinds,  both  in  casks,  the  one  fined,  the  other  not  fined.  The
latter  was  visibly  turbid,  and,  examining  a  drop  of  it,  we  dis-
covered three  or  four  filaments  present  in  every  field  of  tlie
microscope.  The  ale  which  had  been  fined  was  nearly  clear,
but  wanting  in  brilliancy ;  it  contained  about  one  filament  to  the
field.     We  asserted  in  the  presence  of  the  head  brewer,  who


24  STUDIES    ON    FEKMEXTATTON.

had  been  suiiiinouerl,  that  these  ales  were  extremely  liable  to
change,  that  it  was  liighly  necessary  to  dispose  of  them  without
delay,  and  that  they  were  necessarily  already  faulty  in  flavour
— a  fact  which  all  admitted  after  some  hesitation — attributable,
of  course,  to  the  natural  reluctance  which  every  manufacturer
feels  to  own  that  his  produce  is  not  above  reproach.  We
were  shown  some  of  the  finings  used  in  the  brewery ;  the)'
were  swarming  with  the  same  filaments  of  disease-organisms.

We  then  propounded  to  the  managers  certain  questions  on
the  subject  of  the  losses  which  a  brewery  may  sustain  from
changes  in  its  beer.  We  had  heard  from  several  brewers  that
the  selling  price  of  beer  differed  so  greatly  from  the  cost  of  its
production  solely  in  consequence  of  the  losses  which  the
unavoidable  waste  of  large  quantities  of  beer  was  constantly
causing  ;  several  brewers  have  in  our  presence  estimated  these
losses  at  20  per  cent,  of  the  total  production,  on  the  average.

At  first  the  English  brewers  returned  somewhat  vague
answers  to  our  questions  ;  however,  after  what  had  taken  place,
they  doubtless  recognized  the  fact  that  a  mutual  understanding
between  a  savant  and  a  practical  man  may  often  be  of  con-
siderable benefit  to  the  latter,  and  in  the  end  they  confessed
to  us  that  they  had  stowed  away  in  their  brewery  a  large
quantity  of  beer  which  had  gone  bad  in  cask  a  fortnight  or  so
after  it  was  brewed.  Having  avowed  thus  much  they  expressed
their  great  anxiety  to  learn  the  cause  of  so  serious  a  change  in
their  beer,  which  was  quite  undi'inkable.  We  examined  it
under  the  microscope,  without  being  able  to  detect  immediately
any  diseased  ferments,  but  being  aware  that  the  beer  had
probably  been  clarified,  by  remaining  undisturbed  for  a  very
long  time,  and  that  these  ferments  might  have  become  inert  and
precipitated  to  the  bottom  of  the  enormous  vats  containing  the
beer,  we  examined  the  deposits  which  had  formed  at  the  bottom
of  these  vats.  They  were  composed  solely  of  filaments  of  disease-
organisms,  without  even  the  least  trace  of  the  globules  of  alco-
holic yeast.  The  supplementary  fermentation  of  this  beer  had
evidently  been  nothing  but  a  diseased  fermentation.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  25

The  resemblance  between  these  fihiments  and  those  which,  in
considerably  smaller  proportion,  accompanied  the  globules  of
alcoholic  ferment  in  our  preceding  observations,  the  change
in  the  beer,  which  was  almost  as  bad  as  beer  could  possibly  be,
along  with  an  abundance  of  filaments,  and  the  change,  to
a  minor  extent,  in  that  beer  which  only  jaresented  a  few
filaments  in  a  field  of  the  microscope,  impressed  those  managers
of  the  brewery  who  were  present  with  an  entire  belief  in  the
theory  which  we  had  been  endeavouring  to  impress  on  their
minds  concerninsr  the  causes  of  the  badness  of  their  beer.
Some  eight  days  afterwards  we  paid  another  visit  to  this  same
brewery,  and  learnt  that  the  directors  had  lost  no  time  in
acquiring  a  microscope,  and  in  procuring  changes  of  yeast  for
all  the  varieties  of  beer,  which  they  had  put  in  working  since
our  first  visit.

There  are  some  periods  of  the  year — early  spring,  summer,
and  autumn,  for  instance — when  the  working  of  a  brewery
is  a  matter  of  great  difiiculty.  The  preservation  of  yeast
becomes  a  subject  requiring  the  most  delicate  treatment,  in
consequence  of  the  increase  in  the  temperature.  In  the  early
part  of  autumn  the  most  important  ingredients  used  in  brewing
are  of  inferior  quality  ;  the  deteriorating  influences  which  have
been  at  work  have  covered  them  with  a  variety  of  parasites.
All  these  circumstances  contribute  to  facilitate  the  development
of  diseased  ferments.


i:^  II. — The  Absence  of  Change  in  Wout  and  Beer  Coincides
WITH  the  Absence  of  Foreign  Organisms.

The  method  which  we  have  just  pursued  in  demonstrating
the  existence  of  a  relation  between  the  diseases  of  beer  and
certain  microscopic  organisms  can  scarcely  leave  a  doubt,  it
seems  to  us,  as  to  the  correctness  of  the  principles  which  we  are
advocating.  In  every  case  where  the  microscope  reveals  in  a
yeast,  especiall}^  a  yeast  which  is  in  a  state  of  activity,  products


26  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

which  are  foreign  to  the  composition  of  alcoholic  ferment,
properly  so  called,  the  flavour  of  the  beer  is  more  or  less  un-
satisfactory, according  to  the  abundance  or  nature  of  these
minute  organisms.  Moreover,  when  a  finished  beer  of  superior
qual'ty  loses  in  the  course  of  time  its  agreeable  flavour,  and
becomes  sour,  it  may  readily  be  shown  that  the  alcoholic
ferment  in  the  deposit  existing  in  bottles  or  casks,  although
originally  pure,  at  least  in  appearance,  becomes  gradually
intermixed  with  these  same  filiform  ferments  or  other  ones.
These  facts  may  be  deduced  from  what  precedes  ;  nevertheless,
some  prejudiced  minds  might  perhaps  urge  that  these  foreign
ferments  are  the  consequence  of  some  diseased  condition,
produced  by  circumstances  of  which  we  know  nothing.

Although  this  gratuitous  supposition  may  be  difiicult  to
sustain,  we  shall  endeavour  to  corroborate  our  preceding  obser-
vations by  the  method  of  experiment  which  will  be  seen  to  be
the  more  decisive.

This  method  consists  in  proving  that  beer  never  possesses  any
unpleasant  flavour,  so  long  as  the  alcoholic  ferment,  properly
so  called,  is  not  associated  with  foreign  ferments  ;  that  this  also
holds  good  in  the  case  of  wort,  and  that  wort,  liable  to  change
as  it  is,  may  be  preserved  in  a  state  of  purity,  if  it  is  kept  under
conditions  that  protect  it  from  the  invasion  of  microscopic
parasites,  to  which  it  presents  not  only  favourable  nutriment,
but  also  a  field  for  development.

By  employing  this  second  method  we  shall,  moreover,  have
the  advantage  of  proving  with  certainty  a  proposition  that  we
just  advanced,  and  showing  that  the  germs  of  these  organisms
proceed  from  the  particles  of  dust  which  the  common  air  wafts
about  and  deposits  on  every  object,  or  which  are  spread  over
the  utensils  and  materials  used  in  a  brewer}-,  materials  that
are  naturally  charged  with  microscopic  germs,  which  various
changes  in  the  store-houses  and  maltings  may  multiply  to  an
indefinite  extent.*

*  If  we  put  a  handful  of  germinating  barley  from  a  maltster's  cistern  into
a  little   water,  and  examine  drops  of  the  liquid,  after  it  has  become


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


27


Let  us  take  a  glass  flask  having  a  long  neck  (Fig.  3  a),  and
holding  from  250  c.c.  to  300  c.c.  {i.e.,  about  9  or  10  fl.  oz. )  ;
let  us  put  into  it  some  wort,  hopped   or  not,   and  then  draw


out  the  neck  of  the  flask  in  the  flame  of  a  lamp,  so  as  to
give  to  it  the  shape  b  (Fig.  3)  ;  let  us  next  heat  the  liquid
to  the  boiling  point,  when  the  steam  will  rush  with  a
hissing  sound  out  of  the  curved  end.  We  may  then,
without  further  precaution,  permit  our  flask  to  cool,  or,  as
an  additional  safeguard,  we  may  introduce  a  small  quantity  of
asbestos  into  the  open  extremity,  at  the  very  moment  when  the
flame  is  taken  away  from  the  flask.  Before  introducing  the
asbestos,  we  may  pass  it  through  the  flame,  and  we  may  repeat
this  after  it  has  been  placed  in  the  end  of  the  tube.*  The  air
which  first  re-enters  the  flask  must  come  in  contact  with  the


turbid,  under  a  microscope,  we  shall  be  amazed  at  the  wonderful  number
of  strange  microscopic  organisms  that  swarm  on  the  surface  of  the  grains
and  on  the  sides  of  the  cistern.  There  is  no  doubt  that  their  presence  is
injurious  to  germination,  inasmuch  as  they  absorb  much  oxygen  ;  more-
over, they  acidify  the  grain  and  cause  it  to  deteriorate.

*  In  these  experiments  the  asbestos  is  only  introduced  by  way  of
extra  precaution.  Originally,  in  his  early  experiments  in  connection
with  the  subject  of  spontaneous  generation,  the  results  of  which  were
published  in  1860-62,  the  author  did  not  use  it,  and  he  observed  no
ill  effects  resulting  from  the  omission ;  now,  however,  he  constantly
makes  use  of  it.  In  studies  of  this  kind  novel  precautions  are  never
thrown  away ;  moreover,  the  presence  of  this  asbestos  is  a  sure  bar  to
the  entrance  of  insects.  The  author  has  preserved  for  a  long  time  a
flask,  in  the  slender  neck  of  which  an  insect  is  contained;  he  killed  it
with  a  flame  just  as  it  was  approaching  the  liquid.  Quite  recently,  M.
Calmettes,  a  young  engineer  from  the  Ecole  Centrale,  when  engaged,  at


28  STUDIES    ON    FEllMENTATION.

heated  glass  and  tlie  hot  liquid,  and  these  will  destroy  the
vitality  of  any  germs  existing  in  such  particles  of  dust  as  this
air  may  introduce.  The  re-entrance  of  the  air  will  be  effected
very  gradually — sufficiently  so  to  enable  the  drop  of  water
which  the  air,  as  it  enters,  forces  up  the  curved  tube,  to
catch  all  particles  of  dust.  Ultimately,  the  tube  will  become
dry,  but  then  the  passage  of  the  air  will  proceed  so  slowly
that  every  foreign  particle  will  get  deposited  on  its  interior
sides.

Experience  tends  to  prove  that  external  particles  of  dust
cannot  find  their  way  into  flasks  of  this  pattern,  having  free
communication  with  the  air,  at  all  events  within  ten  or  twelve
years — the  longest  time  that  has  been  devoted  to  experiments  of
this  kind  ;  the  liquid  in  the  flasks,  if  originall)''  clear,  will  not
become  in  the  least  degree  contaminated,  either  upon  its
surface  or  throughout  its  bulk,  although  the  outside  of  the  flasks
may  be  covered  with  a  thick  coat  of  dust.  This  is  an  undeniable
proof  of  the  impossibility  of  particles  of  dust  finding  their
way  inside  such  flasks.

Wort  treated  thus  will  preserve  its  purit}^  for  an  indefinite
time,  notwithstanding  its  extreme  liability  to  rapid  change
when  exposed  to  the  air,  under  conditions  which  cause  it  to
come  in  contact  with  the  particles  of  dust  that  air  contains.
This  also  holds  good  in  the  case  of  wine,  beef-tea,  the  must  of
grapes,  and,  generally  speaking,  of  all  liquids  which  are  subject
to  putrefaction  or  fermentation,  and  which  possess  the  faculty,
when  their  temperature  is  raised  to  about  100°  C.  (212°  F.),
of  destroying  the  vitality  of  those  microscopic  germs  that  are
found  in  dust.

A  flask  such  as  we  have  described  (Fig.  3)  is  all  that  we
require  when  we  have  to  demonstrate  the  facts  that  we  have

Tantonville,  in  Tourtel's  brewery,  in  carrjnng  out  certain  practical  ox-
perimonts  in  connection  with  the  process  that  will  be  described  in  ote  of
the  later  chapters  of  this  work,  wrote  complaining  that  his  flasks  had
been  suddenly  invaded  by  a  swarm  of  aphides,  scarcely  larger  than
phylloxeras,  and  that  manj'  of  them  had  even  penetrated  into  the
inside  of  the  curved  tubes.


STUDIKS    ON    FERMENTATION.  29

just  reviewed,  a  more  detailed  account  of  which  may  be
found  in  our  Memoir  published  in  the  A/iiiaks  cie  Chimie  et
de  Physique,  for  1862,  under  the  title  Memoire  sur  les  corpuscules
organises  en  suspension  dans  Patniospltere.  Examen  de  la  doctrine
des  generations  spontanees.  The  shape  of  the  flask  represented
in  Fig.  4  only  differs  from  that  of  the  preceding  one  in  having
a  second  little  tube  attached  to  the  globular  part  of  the  flask ;
this  presents  great  advantages  for  difi'erent  objects  of  study,  and
it  was  adopted  in  the  subsequent  investigations  detailed  in
this  work.

This  flask  will  permit  us  to  study  without  difficulty  every
separate  kind  of  microscopic  organism  in  the  liquid  best  adapted
to  it  without  fear,  if  we  take  reasonable  precautions,  that  the
subject  of  our  study  may  become  associated  with  other  organisms,
the  accidental  presence  of  which  cannot  fail  to  seriously  affect
the  results  of  our  observations.

Let  us  use  one  of  those  flasks  in  our  experiment  on  yeast,  at
the  same  time  expressly  assuming  that  the  minute  germs  of
yeast  are  free  from  all  contamination  by  foreign  germs,  an
object  which  we  shall  learn  how  to  realize  by  a  variety  of
methods  in  a  subsequent  chapter.

Let  us  introduce  some  wort  into  our  flask    (Fig.  4)  ;  then,


Fig.  4.

after  we  have  fitted  an  india-rubber  tube  to  the  little  supple-
mentary tube,  let  us  boil  the  liquid  ;  the  steam,  finding  an
easier  exit  through  the  india-rubber  opening  than  through  the
drawn-out  tube,  will  rush  out  through  the  india-rubber  tube,  and
thus,  as  it  passes,  destroy  any  germs  which  may  be  adhering  to
the  sides  of  the  little  supplementary  tube.  If  we  close  tlie  india-
rubber  tube  by  means  of  a  glass  stopper,  the  steam  will  imme-


30  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

diately  issue  through  the  bent  tube.  On  permitting  the  flask  to
cool,  it  will  then  be  ready  for  impregnation.  If  there  were  any
fear  that  some  foreign  germ  of  an  unknown  nature  might  have
effected  an  entrance  during  cooling,  or  had  not  been  destroyed  by
the  steam  (which  is  always  a  little  super-heated,  in  consequence
of  the  resistance  which  it  meets  in  escaping),  we  need  only
place  the  flasks  on  a  warm  stove,  and  leave  them  there  for  a  few
days  or  a  few  weeks  to  ascertain  whether  the  liquid  in  them
has  undergone  any  change.  We  should  then  only  use  those
flasks  which  contain  a  sound  liquid.

At  the  same  time  we  must  warn  our  readers  that  this  cause  of
error  does  not  exist  once  in  a  thousand  times,  especiall)^  if  we  use
an  asbestos  stopper  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  little  insects  which
are  attracted  by  the  odour  of  the  liquid,  and  which  instinctively
seek  to  enter  at  the  extremity  of  the  tube,  and  to  pass  through
it  into  the  flask.  In  going  so  far,  and  incurring  such  labour  in
search  of  their  food,  they  condemn  themselves  to  certain  death,
for  they  are  sure  to  be  drowned,  since  it  would  require  an
intelligence  superior  to  that  which  they  possess  to  enable  them
to  get  out  of  the  flask ;  the  liquid,  morever,  could  not  fail  to
undergo  some  change,  in  consequence  of  the  particles  of  dust
that  the  insects  would  introduce  into  it.

After  having  passed  the  flame  of  a  spirit-lamp  quickly  over
the  india-rubber  tube,  the  glass  stopper,  the  curved  tube,  and
even  over  the  fingers  of  the  operator,  we  mav  withdraw  the
glass  stopper,  and  introduce  the  pure  yeast  by  means  of  a  glass
pipette  that  has  been  previously  heated.  This  yeast  is  kept  in  a
vessel  also  free  from  the  dust  floating  in  the  air.  However  few
globules  of  yeast  tlie  glass  tube  may  take  up,  it  is  sure  to
introduce  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  times  more  than  is  necessary
for  the  impregnation  of  the  liquid.  The  glass  stopper  must  then
be  replaced  immediately,  after  having  been  again  quickly  passed
through  the  flame.  In  transferring  our  yeast  from  the  vessel
containing  it  to  the  flask,  by  means  of  a  glass  pipette,  it  is
exposed  to  another  cause  of  impurity,  since  we  cannot  avoid
bringing  it  in  contact  with   the    common    air.     If    this    risk


STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATJON.  31

frequently  troubled  us  in  our  experiments,  we  might  banish  it
or  minimize  it  by  some  new  arrangement ;  but  this  is  unneces-
sary. We  have  suffered  no  inconvenience  from  this  cause,  as
there  does  not  exist  in  the  atmosphere  anything  like  a  con-
tinuous supply  of  that  from  which  the  so-called  spontaneous
generation  arises,  as  was  erroneously  believed  to  be  the  case
before  the  publication  of  our  Memoir  in  1862,  to  which  we
have  already  alluded.

The  following  are  the  results  of  the  experiments  conducted
in  the  manner  just  described.

The  yeast  which  we  sowed,  in  ever  so  small  a  quantity,
seemed  to  acquire  vigour,  to  bud,  and  to  multiply.  Soon,  that
is  to  say  in  the  course  of  twent^^-four  or  forty-eight  hours  or
longer,  according  to  the  temperature,  and,  more  especially,  the
degree  of  vitality  in  the  globules,  we  found  that  the  sides  of  our
flasks  were  covered  with  a  white  yeasty  deposit,  and  noticed  on
the  surface  of  the  liquid  a  fine  froth,  which  at  first  appeared
like  little  islets  formed  by  groups  of  bubbles  so  minute  that  they
would  have  been  imperceptible  had  they  not  been  joined  to-
gether. These  patches  increased  in  size,  and  gradually  attached
themselves  to  each  other,  finally  forming  a  thick  froth.  In  the
course  of  two  or  three  days  this  froth  fell,  the  fermentation  pro-
ceeded less  rapidly,  and  then  ceased  completeh'.  The  beer  was
finished.  This  beer  might  be  preserved  for  an  indefinite  period
in  the  flask  without  undergoing  any  change.  The  external  air
passes  freely  into  and  out  of  the  flask,  as  the  pressure  of  the
atmosphere  and  the  temperature  vary,  and  the  beer  in  the
course  of  time  becomes  flat ;  it  acquires  age  in  much  the  same
manner  as  wine  does,  but  it  never  contracts  any  taste  of  disease,
it  never  becomes  sour,  or  sharp,  or  bitter,  or  putrid  ;  it  does  not
even  become  covered  with  mycoderma  vini  as  is  usually  the
case  with  all  beer  exposed  to  the  common  air  in  the  course  of
trade.

After  some  weeks,  or  perhaps  months,  a  white  ring  may  show
itself  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid  on  the  glass.  This  is  a  crown
formed  by  a  mass  of  young  yeast  globules,  which  grow  there


32  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

like  a  moulfl,  by  absorbing  the  ox3'geii  of  the  air  as  it  enters
the  flask.  The  bulk  of  the  yeast  which  has  been  fermenting
remains  at  the  bottom  of  the  liquid  in  the  form  of  an  inert
deposit.  This  inertness,  however,  is  apparent  rather  than
real  ;  the  globules  may  be  internally  active,  without  any
development  of  new  buds,  and  the  effects  of  this  working  may
cause  them  to  become  more  and  more  languid,  and  in  the  course
of  time  may  even  destroy  them.

The  case  is  quite  different  when  the  yeast  with  which  our
wort  is  impregnated,  instead  of  being  pure,  is  mixed  to  any
extent  whatsoever  with  diseased  ferments.  Should  there  be
any  of  these  in  the  yeast  with  which  we  impregnate  our  wort,
even  though  their  quantity  were  so  infinitesimal  that  the  most
skilful  observer  could  scarcely  discover  them  with  the  microscope,
they  would  multiply  in  the  flask  after  the  beer  had  been
finished,  especially  if  the  beer  were  left  for  a  short  time  on  a
stove.  In  this  manner  we  may  secure  an  excellent  test  of  the
original  purity  of  the  yeast  which  we  employ  in  the  impregna-
tion of  our  wort.

Thus  it  may  be  seen  that  the  absence  of  microscopic  organ-
isms that  are  foreign  to  the  nature  of  pure  yeast  may  invariably
be  noticed  in  the  case  of  a  beer  which  is  sound,  and  which  will
remain  sound  for  any  length  of  time,  when  in  contact  with  pure
air,  at  any  temperature.  We  may  see,  too,  that  the  presence
of  these  organisms  may  invariably  be  detected  in  an  unsound
beer,  the  peculiar  unsoundness  of  which  depends  upon  the
peculiar  species  of  the  organisms  contained  in  it.  It  would  be
difficult  to  adduce  clearer  proofs  than  those  which  we  have
given  as  to  the  intimate  relation  existing  between  these  organ-
isms and  the  deterioration  of  beer.  The  relation  between  cause
and  effect,  in  the  succession  of  physical  phenomena  in  general,
is  established  by  proofs  tliat  are  by  no  means  more  decisive.


33


CHAPTER    III.

On  the  Origin  of  Ferments  properly  so  called.

The  new  process  of  brewing-,  which  it  is  the  principal  object  of
this  work  to  explain,  and  which  will  follow  as  an  immediate  and
inevitable  deduction  from  the  novel  facts  herein  demonstrated,
cannot  be  fully  understood  without  a  knowledge  of  all  the
principles  upon  which  it  is  founded.  One  of  the  most  essential
of  these  has  reference  to  the  purity  of  our  fermentation.  We
should  gain  but  little  from  the  use  of  a  yeast  uncontaminated
by  any  foreign  germs  if  natural  organic  substances  had  the
power  of  organizing  themselves  by  means  of  spontaneous  gene-
ration, or  by  some  transformation  which  took  place  amongst
them,  or  even  by  a  conversion  of  certain  microscopic  beings
into  certain  others.  Theories  of  this  kind  are  still  warmly  ad-
vocated, but,  to  our  thinking,  rather  from  sentimental  considera-
tions or  prejudice  than  from  any  basis  of  serious  experimental
proofs.

Be  this  as  it  may,  we  must  free  our  minds  from  all  suppo-
sitions which  might  qualify  the  exactness  of  the  principles  upon
which  our  new  process  is  founded,  or  cause  any  doubt  in  the
minds  of  our  readers  as  to  the  possibility  of  its  application  and
the  benefits  to  be  derived  from  its  adoption.

§  I. — On  the  Conditions  which  cause  Variations  in  the
Nature  of  the  Organized  Products  existing  in
Infusions.

We  have  proved  by  experiment,  in  the  preceding  chapter,


31:  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

that  a  few  minutes'  boiling  renders  liquids,  and  more  especially
wort,  absolutely  free  from  liability  to  change  when  in  contact
with  pure  air,  that  is,  air  which  contains  none  of  the  germs  of
organisms  that  are  continually  floating  about  in  the  atmo-
spheie.

What  is  true  in  the  case  of  wort  is  equally  so  in  the  case  of
all  organic  liquids  ;  there  is  not  a  single  one  that  could  not
be  rendered  inaccessible  to  any  subsequent  change  if  it  were
brought,  first  of  all,  to  a  suitable  temperature,  which  would  vary
with  the  nature  of  the  liquids.  Amongst  them  there  are  some
which,  like  vinegar,  lose  their  tendency  to  change  after  having
been  rapidly  raised  to  a  temperature  of  not  more  than  50°  C.
(122°  F.)  ;  others,  like  wine,  require  a  greater  heat.  "Wort,
to  which  no  hops  have  been  added,  should  be  subjected  to  a
temperature  of  not  more  than  90"  C.  (19-1°  F.)  ;  milk  to  about
110°  C.  (230°  F.).*

It  is  easy  to  show  that  these  differences  in  temperature,  which
are  required  to  secure  organic  liquids  from  ultimate  change,
depend  exclusively  upon  the  state  of  the  liquids,  their  nature,
and,  above  all,  on  the  conditions  that  affect  their  neutrality,
whether  towards  acidity  or  alkalinity  ;  for  it  is  not  difficult  to
observe  that  the  least  changes  in  these  respects  lead  to  consider-
able variations  in  the  temperatures  which  we  must  employ. t
We  could  adduce  many  examples  of  this.  The  only  diflference
between  the  nature  of  must  and  that  of  wine  is  caused  by
fermentation.  We  may  say  the  same  thing  of  wort  and  beer,
and,  better  still,  of  new  milk  and  sour  milk.  Must,  to  be
secured  from  change,  requires  a  much  higher  temperature  than
wine  does ;  similarl}^,  wort  requires  a  much  higher  temperature
than  beer.  Milk  must  be  heated  to  about  110°  C.  (230°  F.),  as
we  have  just  stated,  but  sour  milk  would  require  20°  C.  or  30°  C.

•  We  have  heard  of  liquids  even  less  sensitive  than  these,  which  re-
quired a  temperature  of  120°  C.  (248°  F.)  or  more,  hut  we  have  had  no
opportunity  of  studying  them.

t  See  Pasteur,  Memoire  sur  les  Generations  dites  Spontanees  {Annalea
dc  Chiviie  et  de  Physique,  t.  Ixiv.  Z'  serie,  annee  1862).


STUDIES    OX    FERMENTATION.  35

(36°  F.  or  54°  F.)  less.  Wine,  when  fresh,  ceases  to  be  liable  to
change  after  it  has  been  brought  to  a  temperature  below
100°  C.  (212°  F.) ;  it  requires  a  temperature  of  more  than
100°  C.  in  the  presence  of  carbonate  of  lime.

As  regards  the  explanation  of  the  influence  which  acidity  or
alkalinity  exerts  in  diminishing  or  increasing  the  tempera-
ture required  to  protect  infusions  and  organic  matters  from
ultimate  change,  although  this  is  a  subject  which  claims  special
study,  we  are  inclined  to  believe  that  acidity  permits,  and
alkalinit}'  prevents,  the  penetration  of  moisture  into  the  interior
of  the  cells  of  the  germs  belonging  to  infusions,  so  that  in
heating  the  outer  cases  of  these  cells  in  an  alkaline  medium  we
heat  the  germs  in  a  dry  state  ;  and  in  heating  the  outer  cases  in
an  acid  medium  we  heat  the  germs  when  they  are  moist.  We
all  know  that  these  conditions  make  a  great  difference  in  the
resistance  which  bodies  offer  to  the  action  of  heat.  A  particle
of  mould  which,  in  a  moist  state,  cannot  survive  a  temperature
of  from  60°  C.  to  100°.  C.  (140°  to  212°  F.),  will  preserve  its
fecundity  even  if  heated  to  120°  C.  (248°  F.),  if  it  has  been
previously  well  dried.*

The  nature  of  the  spontaneous  productions  which  we  see
appear  in  organic  liquids  is  affected  to  a  remarkable  extent  by
the  smallest  change  in  the  compositions  of  those  liquids.
Generally  speaking,  as  we  have  often  proved  in  our  former
works,  a  feeble  acidity  is  unfavourable  to  the  development  of
bacteria  and  infusoria,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  favourable  to  the
growth  of  mould.  A  liquid  which  is  neutral  or  of  feeble  alka-
linity behaves  in  an  exactly  inverse  manner.

Those  who  support  the  theory  of  spontaneous  generation
seek  to  find  in  the  natural  differences  between  the  organic  pro-
ductions of  various  liquids  which  are  simultaneously  exposed  to
the  same  atmosphere,  an  argument  in  favour  of  their  doctrine.
These  differences,  however,  are  only  an  effect  of  the  greater  or
less  fitness  of  a  peculiar  liquid  for  a  certain  kind  of  growth.
When  an  acid  organic  liquid,  such  as  the  must  of  grapes  for

*  See  mv  Meraoire  sur  les  Generations  dites  Spontanees,  already  cited.

D    2


.'36  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

example,  is  exposed  freely  to  the  air,  it  is  besieged  simul-
taneously by  spores  of  miicecUnes,  as  well  as  germs  of  bacteria,
leptofhnx,  vibrios,  dc,  but  the  latter  germs  are  checked  in  their
development,  if,  indeed,  they  are  not  actually  destroyed,  by  the
acidicy  of  the  liquid  ;  and  we  should  never  find  them  there  in
their  adult  state.

Most  moulds,  on  the  other  hand,  thrive  in  acid  liquids,  and
therefore  they  are  generally  found  alone.  If  we  began  by
saturating  must  with  carbonate  of  lime,  previously  dried  or
otherwise,  we  should  observe  opposite  phenomena ;  bacteria,
lactic  ferments  and  butyric  vibrios  would  invade  our  fields  long
before  the  spores  of  mould  had  time  to  grow,  since  the  germina-
tion of  these  proceeds  very  languidly  in  neutral  or  alkaline
liquids,  and  an  infusion  once  occupied  by  a  living  organism  has
much  trouble  in  nourishing  others  ;  the  early  developments
consume  the  alimentary  substances,  especially  the  oxygen.

Differences  as  marked  as  these  in  the  adaptability  of  certain
liquids  to  certain  growths  give  rise  to  innumerable  illusions,  and
are  one  of  the  chief  sources  of  error  in  the  study  of  this  subject.
If  we  sow  in  aa  acid  liquid,  such  as  must,  an  alcoholic  ferment,
the  development  of  which  is  not  arrested  by  the  acid  character
of  our  medium,  it  will  multiply  there,  and  we  shall  have  no
difficulty  in  growing  it  over  and  over  again  in  the  same  acid
medium.  This  being  the  case,  let  us  suppose  that  our  alcoholic
ferment  is  impure — let  us  say,  mixed  with  filaments  of  turned
wine,  which  are  due  to  a  ferment  checked  in  its  development
by  the  peculiar  qualities  of  the  must.  In  repeating  the  growth
of  this  alcoholic  ferment  in  the  must  the  filaments  which  were,
by  supposition,  present  in  our  first  sowing,  and  which  cannot
reproduce  themselves  in  the  must,  or  do  so  with  great  difficulty,
will  become  very  scarce  in  the  fields  of  our  microscope ;  they
will  not,  however,  cease  to  exist,  for  the  repetition  of  our  attempts
to  grow  them  only  serves  to  spread  the  original  germs  over  a
larger  surface  ;  and,  although  the  eye  fails  to  detect  them,  they
will  only  have  become  more  difficult  to  discover.  At  this  point
the  experimentalist  is  in  danger  of  falling  into  error,  for  when


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  37

he  no  longer  perceives  the  foreign  ferment  he  will  be  inclined
to  believe  that  it  has  vanished,  and  that  he  may  regard  the
alcoholic  ferment  as  being  free  from  all  impurity,  without  testing
for  the  purity  by  a  direct  experiment.

An  example  of  this  mistake  is  to  be  found  in  a  recent  work
by  M.  Jules  Duval.  This  writer  has  published  a  theory  accord-
ing to  which  yeast  becomes  transformed  into  lactic  ferment,
and  likewise  into  other  ferments — that  of  urea,  for  example —
the  only  condition  of  change,  according  to  M.  Jules  Duval,
being  that  we  should  cultivate  it  in  suitable  mediums.  The
proofs  by  which  he  supports  his  conclusion  are  altogether
inadmissible,  and  a  simple  glance  at  his  experiments  enables
us  to  detect  innumerable  causes  of  error.  M.  Duval  believes
that  yeast  becomes  transformed  into  lactic  ferment  from
the  fact  that  he  obtained  a  fermentation  which  furnished
lactate  of  lime  and  lactic  ferment  from  some  sour  milk  to
which  he  had  added  some  glucose,  chalk,  and  phosphate
of  ammonia  before  impregnating  it  with  yeast ;  but  he  took
no  steps  to  secure  himself  against  introducing  into  his  medium
— which  was,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  well  adapted  to  lactic  fermen-
tation, inasmuch  as  it  was  a  little  alkaline — an  alcoholic
ferment  containing  impurities.  This  was  the  crucial  point  in
his  experiments.  M.  Duval  recognizes  this,  but  he  deceives
himself  when  he  says,  without  proof: — "My  alcoholic  ferment
is  pure,  for  I  have  grown  it  over  and  over  again  in  must,  pre-
served in  flasks  prepared  after  the  manner  of  those  which  M.
Pasteur  uses  in  his  experiments."  Here  we  have  merely  a
simple  assertion  ;  a  direct  experimental  test  might  have  proved
that  the  yeast  was  impure.

Yeast  cannot  transform  itself  into  lactic  ferment.  No  matter
what  the  medium  may  be  in  which  it  is  sown,  if  it  is  actually
pure  it  will  never  present  the  least  trace  of  lactic  ferment  or  of  any
other  ferments.  By  certain  changes  in  the  nature  of  the  medium,
the  temperature,  and  other  conditions,  the  cells  of  the  ferment
may  become  oval,  elongated,  spherical,  and  larger  or  smaller  in
size,  but  they  will  never  produce  the  most  minute  quantity  of


3'S  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

lactic  ferment  or  lactic  acid.  The  whole  theory  of  the  transmu-
tation of  ferments,  which  M.  Duval  has  published,  is  imaginary.*
We  have  asserted  that  the  source  from  which  we  obtain
our  supply  of  the  substances  that  we  expose  to  contact  with
the  air  may  likewise  furnish  a  reason  for  the  development
of  vegetable  or  animal  organisms  which  make  their  ap-
pearance in  our  infusions.  This  may  be  easily  under-
stood. If  we  expose  the  infusions  to  temperatures  more  or
less  high,  with  the  object  of  destroying  the  vitality  of  the
germs  which  they  may  contain,  we  completely  suppress
all  germs  originating  from  two  different  sources — those
which  the  infusions  maj^  have  acquired  directly  from  the
atmospheric  air,  or  from  the  dust  upon  our  utensils,  and  those
which  may  have  been  introduced  by  the  materials  used  in
manufacturing  our  infusions  or  decoctions,  which  materials  must
have  been  brought  from  some  distance.  An  infusion,  after
having  been  heated  to  a  sufficient  degree,  can  harbour  and
nourish  only  such  germs  as  are  conveyed  to  it  by  the  air  after
the  heating.  These  floating  germs  are  far  from  being  as  varied
in  their  nature  as  it  pleases  those  to  believe  who  are  tied  down
by  their  arbitrary  and  faulty  interpretation  of  the  knowledge
that  we  have  acquired,  and  the  discussions  in  which  we  have
taken  part,  during  the  last  fifteen  years.  Air,  unless  in  violent
agitation,  can  hold  only  the  most  minute  particles  in  suspen-
sion. The  observations  which  have  been  recorded  concerning
organisms  of  spontaneous  growth  found  in  infusions,  have
always  been  made  in  sheltered  places — in  rooms  or  laboratories,
the  atmosphere  of  which  is,  relatively  speaking,  verj'-  still.
For  this  reason,  in  liquids  that  have  been  subjected  to  heat,
the  flora  and  fauna — if  we  may  use  such  an  expression — are
very  poor,  and  all  the  more  so  because,  as  we  have  recently

•  Jules  Duval  (of  Versailles),  Nouveaux  fails  concernant  la  mutahiUte
des  germes  microscopiques.  Role  passif  des  etres  classes  sous  le  nom  de
ferments.  (See  the  Journal  d'Anatomie  et  de  Physiologie,  edited  by  C.
Robin,  Sept.  and  Oct.  1874,  and  Compte-rendus  de  V Acadrmie  des  Sciences,
Nov.  1874).     M.  Bechamps  had  previously  fallen  into  similar  errors.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  39

had  occasion  to  remark,  a  great  number  of  the  organisms  which
would  spring  into  existence  of  their  own  accord,  if  they  were
allowed  sufficient  time  for  germination,  are  kept  back  by  others
of  a  more  rapid  development.  The  truth  of  this  is  evident
from  the  fact  that  we  may  observe  greater  variations  in  the
nature  and  number  of  species  of  living  organisms,  if  we  divide
one  infusion  amongst  several  vessels  which  are  immediately
closed  up  again,  than  if  we  leave  our  infusion  in  contact  with  an
unlimited  volume  of  surrounding  air.  By  this  means  we  expose
each  portion  of  the  liquid  to  no  other  germs  than  those  existing
in  a  state  of  suspension  in  the  volume  of  air  introduced  into  the
vessels ;  and  it  so  frequently  happens  that  we  obtain  a  variety
of  germs  which,  coming  into  contact  with  a  liquid  adapted  to  their
nutrition,  without  having  mixed  with  others,  finally  multiply
there,  in  consequence  of  no  other  organisms  of  greater  activity
occurring  to  impede  their  slow  and  laborious  propagation.

The  nature  of  the  products  resulting  from  raw  infusions —
that  is,  those  obtained,  without  heating,  from  the  maceration
of  organic  substances,  such  as  leaves,  fruits,  grains,  or  the  organs
of  plants  or  animals — is  much  more  varied.  The  reason  of  this
is  that  such  substances  generally  carry  with  thera  not  only  the
particles  of  dust  existing  in  air  that  is  in  motion,  but  also  micro-
scopic parasites,  which  find  a  congenial  resting-place  on  their
surface  or  its  vicinity.  We  may  cite  a  few  accurate  observations
on  this  point,  for  the  subject  is  one  of  great  interest.

If  we  boil  an  infusion  of  hay,  and  then  expose  it  to  contact
with  the  air  in  a  room,  all  its  productions  will  be  derived  from
such  germs  as  a  comparatively  still  air  can  carry  about ;  thus,
we  shall  very  rarely  find  any  colpoda  in  our  infusion,  for  the
germs  of  these  infusoria,  consisting  of  rather  large  cells,  can
scarcely  exist  in  a  state  of  suspension  in  motionless  air,  in  spite
of  their  extraordinary  diffusion  in  nature.  On  the  other  hand,
we  almost  invariably  find  colpoda  in  macerations  of  raw  hay.
This  difference  is  easily  accounted  for ;  the  particles  of  dust
adhering  to  the  surface  of  hay,  especially  that  which  comes
from   marshy  districts,    contain    the    germ-cells  of  colpoda   in


40  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTAIIOX.

abundance.  The  reason  is  obvious  ;  rain  falls  on  a  meadow
and  forms  little  pools  of  water  about  the  roots  of  the  herbs  that
grow  there ;  this  water  remains  for  some  time,  and  very  soon
swarms  with  a  multitude  of  infusoria,  especially  colpoda.  Dry-
ness follows ;  the  colpoda  becomes  encysted,  and  forms  a  dust
that  is  wafted  by  the  winds  on  to  the  blades  of  grass,  so  that
the  mower  will  carry  away  not  only  his  hay,  but  also  myriads
of  colpoda,  as  well  as  spores  of  mucedines  and  other  organisms,*
The  maceration  of  pepper  will  give  us  some  infusoria  hardly
ever  found  in  other  infusions,  the  reason  of  this  being  that  such
infusoria  exist  where  the  pepper  grows — in  other  words,  their
germs  are  exotic.  That  the  infusion  of  a  special  plant  should
give  us  special  infusoria,  is  scarcely  more  surprising  than  the
discovery  of  a  particular  parasite  or  insect  existing  on  a
particular  plant,  and  not  on  others  of  a  different  species  that
grow  near  it.  Thus  it  happens  that  the  ferment-germs  of  must
exist  on  the  surface  of  grapes,  whether  detached  or  in  clusters.
It  is  only  natural  that  we  should  find  the  organ  or  the  plant
that  is  destined  later  on  to  become  the  food  of  a  parasite  serving
as  a  habitation  for  the  germs  of  that  parasite.

^  II. — Experiments    on   Blood   and   XJkine  taken  in  their
Normal   State,    and    Exposed    to    Contact   with  Air

THAT   HAS     BEEN    DEPRIVED     OF      THE     PaRTICLES   OF     DuST

"WHICH  IT  Generally  holds  in  Suspension.

Recourse  to  the  application  of  heat,  in  the  first  place,  is  an
excellent  means,  as  we  have  just  seen,  of  procuring  organic
liquids  free  from  all  disturbing  germs ;  but  there  is  a  still  more
remarkable  and  instructive,  wc  may  even  say  more  unlocked
for,  method  of  securing  this  result,  which  may  be  described  as
in  some  measure  borrowed  from  the  nature  of  things.  It  consists
in  seeking  purity  in  the  natural  liquids  of  animals  and  plants.
It  is  difficult  to  understand  how  the  liquids  circidating  in  the
organs  of  animal  bodies,  such  as  blood,  urine,  milk,  amniotic

•  On  this  subject  see  the  observations  of  M.  Coste  {Compte-rendus  de
'  Academie,  t.  lix.  pp.  149  and  308,  18G4).


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  41

fluid,  and  so  on,  can  possibly  secrete  the  germs  of  microscopic
organisms.  There  would  be  excellent  opportunities  for  these
germs  to  propagate  themselves  if  they  actually  did  exist  in  the
liquids  appertaining  to  the  animal  economy.  Life  in  all  pro-
bability would  become  impossible  in  the  presence  of  such  guests.
A  proof  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  multitude  of  diseases  which
many  of  the  greatest  minds  of  modern  times  attribute  to  parasitic
developments  of  this  nature.  Medical  men  of  high  authority
agree  in  thinking  that  the  questions  of  contagion  and  infection
will  find  solutions  from  the  obscurity  in  which  the}^  are  now
involved  in  a  careful  study  of  ferments,  and  that  hygieuists  and
physicians  should  labour  to  secure  by  every  possible  means  the
destruction  of  the  germs  of  ferments,  and  should  strive  to  check
their  development,  and  prevent  the  evils  which  they  cause  when
developed.  Great  progress  has  already  been  made  in  this
direction,  and  we  deem  it  a  signal  honour  that  our  researches
on  the  subject  have  been  considered,  even  by  those  by  whom
this  progress  has  been  accomplished,  as  the  source  from  which
they  derived  their  first  inspirations.  We  shall,  doubtless,  be
excused  by  our  readers  if  we  recall  this  fact  in  relating  certain
historical  details  which  are  especially  necessary  in  order  that
they  may  comprehend  the  principles  that  we  are  endeavouring
to  explain  in  these  "  studies."

It  is  a  matter  of  regret  to  us,  however,  that  the  facts  which
we  have  established  should  have  been  accredited  with  any
importance  beyond  that  which  is  their  due.  The  exaggeration
of  novel  ideas  invariably  leads  to  a  reaction,  which,  again,
overshooting  the  mark,  brings  into  disrepute  even  those  points
in  which  such  ideas  are  perfectly  j  ust,  or,  at  all  events,  worthy
of  serious  consideration.  There  are  certain  symptoms  of  such
a  reaction  in  the  case  of  our  theories :  they  are  evident  in  the
tendency  of  unreflecting  minds  to  give  a  total  denial  to  the
fact  that  certain  diseases  may  be  derived  from  certain  ferments
— organized  and  living  ferments — of  the  nature  of  those  which
have  been  discovered  in  the  course  of  the  last  twenty  years.
We  should   be  guided  by  facts,  whichever  side  of  the  question


42  STUDIES    ON    FERMKNTATION.

we  espouse,  and  by  facts  alone  we  should  test  the  truth  of
doubtful  discoveries.  We  are  but  on  the  threshold  of  the
exploration  of  our  subject,  and  we  should  strive  to  discover  new
facts  in  connection  with  it,  and  should  deduce  from  these,  what-
ever they  may  be,  only  such  conclusions  as  they  may  strictly
warrant.  Unfortunately,  there  is  amongst  physicians  a  tendency
to  generalize  by  anticipation.  Many  of  them  are  men  of  rare
natural  or  acquired  talent,  endowed  with  keen  powers  of  intellect,
and  the  art  of  expressing  themselves  fluently  and  persuasively ;
but  the  more  eminent  they  are,  the  more  they  are  occupied  by
the  duties  of  their  profession,  and  the  less  leisure  they  have  for
the  work  of  investigation.  Urged  on  by  that  thirst  for  know-
ledge which  belongs  to  superior  minds,  and  perhaps,  in  some
measure,  through  associating  with  the  upper  classes  of  society,
which  are  becoming  more  and  more  interested  in  science,  they
eagerly  seize  upon  easy  and  plausible  theories,  readily  adapted  for
statement  which  is  general  and  vague  just  in  proportion  to  the
unsoundness  of  the  facts  on  which  they  are  based.  When  we  see
beer  and  wine  undergo  radical  changes,  in  consequence  of  the
harbour  which  those  liquids  afford  to  microscopic  organisms  that
introduce  themselves  invisibly  and  unsought  into  it,  and  swarm
subsequently  therein,  how  can  we  help  imagining  that  similar
changes  may  and  do  take  place  in  the  case  of  man  and  animals  ?
Should  we,  however,  be  disposed  to  think  that  such  a  thing  must
hold  true,  because  it  seems  both  probable  and  possible,  we  must,
before  asserting  our  belief,  recall  to  mind  the  epigraph  of  this
work  :  the  greatest  aberration  of  the  mind  is  to  believe  a  tJtinrj
to  be,  because  we  desire  it.

One  of  the  most  distinguished  members  of  the  Academy  of
Medicine,  M.  Davainne,  who  was  the  first  to  give  his  attention
to  rigorous  experiments  on  the  influence  that  organic  ferments
exercise  on  the  production  and  propagation  of  infectious
diseases,  declares  that  the  idea  of  his  researches  on  splenic
fever  and  malignant  pustule  was  suggested  to  him  by  his
perusal  of  our  work  on  butyric  fermentation,  published  in  1861.
In  1850  this  gentleman  and  M.  Rayer  discovered  in  the  blood


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  43

of  animals  attacked  by  these  diseases  minute  filiform  bodies,  to
wbich  they  paid  little  attention,  and  which  M.  Davainne
recollected,  when  he  came  across  our  Memoir.  He  had  the  foi'e-
sight  to  conjecture — a  conjecture  that  was  soon  confirmed  most
decisively  by  his  researches — that  the  former  disease,  known
under  the  name  of  sang  cle  rate,  might  be  the  production  of  a
fermentation  analogous  to  the  butyric,  in  which  the  minute  fili-
form bodies  observed  by  Rayer  and  himself,  in  1850,  played  the
part  which  vibrios  fill  in  butyric  fermentation.  Within  two  years
of  this  the  first  works  of  Messrs.  Coze  and  Feltz  appeared.  These
clever  and  courageous  experimentalists  avowed  that  their  beau-
tiful researches  had  been  suggested  to  them  by  the  perusal  of
my  work  on  putrefaction,  published  in  1863.  We  might  also
quote  the  striking  and  admirably  conceived  experiments  of  Dr.
Chauveau,  on  castration.*  We  cannot,  however,  refrain  from
reproducing  here  a  letter  addressed  to  us  in  1874  by  the  cele-
brated Edinburgh  surgeon,  Mr.  Lister:  —

"  Edinburgh,  Feb.  10,  1874.
"  Dear  Sir, — Will  you  permit  me  to  beg  your  acceptance  of
a  pamphlet  which  I  forward  to  you  by  this  post,  and  which
describes  certain  inquiries  into  a  subject  upon  which  you  have
thrown  so  much  light — the  theory  of  germs  and  fermentation  ?
It  gives  me  pleasure  to  think  that  you  will  peruse  with  some
interest    what  I    have   written   about    an  organism    that   you

*  Chauveau' 8  experiments  were  directed  to  show  that  the  operation
listournage,  employed  by  veterinary  surgeons  for  castrating  animals  by
twisting  and  subcutaneous  rupture  of  the  spermatic  cord,  an  operation
which,  though  leading  to  the  mortification  and  subsequent  absorption  of
the  testicles,  is  commonly  attended  with  no  other  mischief  to  the  animal,
does,  nevertheless,  lead  to  septic  eflFects  of  a  serious  character,  provided
that  septic  germs — decomposing  serum  containing  vibrios,  for  example —
be  introduced  into  the  blood  current.  From  the  fact  that  the  operation
is  ordinarily  harmless,  M.  Chauveau  concludes  that  septic  organisms  are
not  produced  by  the  action  of  the  constituent  gases  of  the  atmosphere —
always  present  in  the  blood — upon  albuminous  matter  when  outside  vital
influences ;  whilst,  from  the  success  of  the  direct  experiment  of  intro-
ducing septic  germs,  he  concludes  that  the  phenomena  always  arise  from
the  actual  presence  of  such  genns. — D.  C.  B.


44  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

were  the  first  to  study  in  your  Memoir  on  lactic  fermentation.
I  do  not  know  if  you  ever  see  the  records  of  British  surgery.
If  you  have  perused  them  you  may  have  observed  from  time  to
time  notices  of  the  antiseptic  system  which  I  have  been
endeavouring  for  the  last  nine  years  to  bring  to  perfection.
Permit  me  to  take  this  opportunity  of  offering  you  my  most
hearty  thanks  for  having  demonstrated  by  your  brilliant
researches  the  truth  of  the  theory  of  putrefactive  germs,  and
for  having  afforded  me  in  this  manner  the  sole  means  of  per-
fecting the  antiseptic  system,

"  Should  you  ever  come  to  Edinburgh  I  am  sure  that  you
will  be  truly  gratified  to  see  in  our  hospital  the  extent  to  which
the  human  race  has  profited  by  your  work.  I  need  hardly  add,
that  I  should  have  great  satisfaction  in  showing  you  how
greatly  surgery  is  indebted  to  you.

"  Excuse  the  freedom  which  I  have  taken  in  addressing  you,
on  the  grounds  of  our  common  love  for  science,  and  believe  in
the  profound  esteem  of  yours,  very  sincerely,  Joseph  Lister."

The  wad  dressing  of  Dr.  Alphonse  Guerin,  surgeon  at  the
Hotel-Dieu,  Paris,  which  has  already  rendered  great  assistance
to  surgery,  and  has  been  the  subject  of  a  very  favourable  report
at  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  Paris,  was  invented  by  its  author
in  consequence  of  certain  reflections  suggested  to  him  by  the
perusal  of  our  researches.  The  commission  which  framed  the
report  made,  through  M.  Gosselin,  some  wise  reservations  in  the
case  of  certain  theoretical  ideas  which  M.  Guerin  had  not
sufficiently  proved  by  experiment.  We  have  no  doubt,  how-
ever, that  when  the  matter  is  thoroughly  examined,  facts  will
confirm  the  truth  of  the  wide  views  entertained  by  the  surgeon
of  the  Hotel-Dieu.

Dr.  Declat  has  founded  quite  a  new  system  for  the  treatment
of  infectious  diseases,  which  is  based  upon  the  use  of  one  of  the
best  known  antiseptics,  phenic  acid.  His  theory,  which  he
affirms  was  suggested  to  him  by  our  studies  on  fermentations,
is,   that  the   diseases   which   transmit  themselves  are,  each   of


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  45

them,  the  product  of  a  special  ferment,  and  that  both  medicid
and  surgical  professors  of  therapeutics  should  make  it  their
study  to  prevent  exterior  ferments  from  penetrating  into  the
liquids  of  our  economy,  or  in  the  event  of  these  ferments
having  found  their  way  into  the  system,  to  discover  antiferments
for  their  destruction,  without  effecting  any  change  in  the
vitality  of  the  histological  elements  of  the  liquid  or  tissues.

There  is  no  doubt  that  extreme  caution  must  be  exercised  in
dealing  with  questions  of  this  kind,  as  M.  Sedillot  has  autho-
ritatively remarked ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  cannot  be  denied
that  the  more  such  questions  are  discussed  with  exactness,  the
more  those  celebrated  practitioners  who  originated  them  are
confirmed  in  the  ideas  which  first  guided  them.  We  may  give
another  example  of  this.

In  1874,  in  consequence  of  a  communication  addressed  to  the
Academy  of  Sciences  by  Messrs  Gosselin  and  A.  Robin,  on  the
subject  of  ammoniacal  urine,  we  made  the  observation  that  we
should  endeavour  to  ascertain  if,  in  all  such  cases,  the  urinary
fluids  were  not  rendered  ammoniacal  by  the  presence  of  the
little  ferment  of  the  urea,  which  we  have  previously  noticed,*
and  which  has  since  then  been  discussed  with  remarkable  in-
telligence by  M.  Van  Tieghem,  in  the  thesis  which  he  main-
tained for  his  doctor's  degree.  The  suggestion  and  the
considerations  that  justified  it  led  to  a  discussion  before  the
Academy  of  Medicine,  in  which  contrary  opinions  were  main-
tained. We  lost  no  time  in  submitting  these  to  the  test  of  facts.
We  could  not  find  a  single  person  suffering  from  ammoniacal
urine,  in  whose  case  the  little  ferment  which  we  mentioned  was
not  to  be  detected.    Our  predictions  were  thus  completely  justified.

As  early  as  1864  the  Gazette  Hehdomadaire  de  Medecine  et  de
Chirurgie  published  an  account  of  urine  made  ammoniacal  in
the  bladder,  the  author  of  which,  Dr.  Traube,  makes  the  follow-
ing observations  : — "  It  was  believed  that,  in  consequence  of  the

*  See  Pasteur,  Me  moire  sur  Its  Generations  elites  Spontanees,  pp.  51  and
52,  1862.


46  STUDIES    ON    FEIIMENIATION.

retention  of  the  liquid,  and  the  resulting  distension  of  the
bladder,  that  organ  became  irritated  and  produced  a  larger
quantity  of  mucus,  and  that  this  mucus  was  the  ferment
which  caused  the  decomposition  of  the  urea,  by  virtue  of  a
chdmical  action  peculiar  to  itself.  This  belief  can  no  longer  be
held  in  presence  of  M.  Pasteur's  discoveries.  This  observer
has  demonstrated,  in  the  most  conclusive  manner,  that  ammo-
niacal  fermentation,  like  alcoholic  and  acetic,  is  produced  by
living  beings,  whose  pre-existence  in  the  fermentable  liquid  is
a  necessary  condition  of  the  process.  The  preceding  fact
offers  a  remarkable  proof  of  M.  Pasteur's  theory.  In  spite  of
the  long  duration  of  the  retention,  alkaline  fermentation  was
not  produced  by  an  excessive  secretion  of  the  vesical  mucus  or
of  pus  :  it  only  began  from  the  moment  when  the  germs  of
vibrios  passed  from  the  outside  into  the  bladder."*

Finally,  we  may  conclude  with  perfect  truth  that  the  liquids
of   our   economy,  blood  and  urine,  for  instance,  may  aiFord  a

*  Davainne,  Compte-rendus  de  VAcademie  des  Sciences,  t.  Ivii.  p.  220,
1863.

Coze  and  Feltz,  Recherches  cliniqnes  et  experimentaJes  siir  les  maladies
infect ie uses,  Paris,  J.  B.  Bailliere,  1872.  Summary  of  all  their  works
published  before  18fi5.

Dr.  Lister,  Medical  and  surgical  journals,  particularly  the  Lawet,
1865-67.

Dr.  GuEaiN,  Compte-rendus  de  VAcademie  dfs  Sciences,  March  23,
1874,  and  May  28,  1874,  also  the  Report  of  M.  Gosseliu,  December,
1854.

Dr.  Sedillot,  Compte-rendus  de  VAcademie  des  Sciences,  November,
1874,  t.  Ixxix.  p.  1108.

Pasteur,  Memoir e  sur  la  fermentation  appelee  lactique.  {Annales  de
Chimie  et  de  Physique,  t.  lii.  S"  serie,  1875.) — Animalcules  infusoires,
vivant  sans  gaz  oxygene  litre  et  determinant  des  fermentations.  {Compte-
rendus  de  VAcademie  des  Sciences,  t.  lii.  1861.) — Recherches  sur  la  putre-
faction.    {Compte-rendths  de  VAcademie  des  Sciences,  t,  Ivi.  1863.)

GossELiN,  Robin,  and  Pasteur,  Compte-rendus  de  VAcademie  des
Sciences,  January  5,  1874.      Urines  ammoniacnles.

Traube,  Gazette  hebdomadaire  de  medecine  et  de  chirurgie.  Sur  la
fermentation  alcaline  de  Vurine,  April  8,  1804.

Chauveau,  Putrefaction  dans  Vanimal  vivant.  {Compte-rendus  de
VAcademie  des  Sciences,  April  28th,  1873.)


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


47


harbour  to  different  ferments,  even  in  the  inmost  parts  of  the
organs,  when  external  causes  enable  such  ferments  to  find  their
way  into  those  liquids,  and  that  diseases  of  greater  or  less
gravity  result  from  this  cause.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be
admitted  that  the  bodies  of  animals  in  a  state  of  health  afford


Fig.  o.
no  means  of  entrance  to  these  external  germs.  At  the  same
time,  direct  experiment  alone  can  convince  the  mind  as  to  the
truth  of  this  latter  assertion.  Let  us  take  some  of  the  sub-
stances that  are  to  be  found  inside  living  animals  in  perfect
health,  and  expose  them,  in  the  same  condition  in  which  life
has  formed  them,  to  contact  with  pure  air.

For  this  purpose  we  must  provide  ourselves  with  a  glass  flask,
joined  to  a  copper  tap  by  means  of  an  india-rubber  tube,  as
shown  in  Fig.  5.     The  two  branches  of  the  tap  should  be  about


Fig.  6.


48


STUDIES    OX    FERMEXTATIOX.


twelve  centimetres  long  (about  i-in.),  the  one  which  is  free
tapering  off  like  the  end  of  a  pipe.  In  order  to  destroy  all  germs
which  may  exist  in  the  flask,  we  must  join  the  free  end  of  the
copper  tube  to  a  platinum  tube  kept  at  a  very  high  temperature,
after  having  carefully  introduced  into  the  flask  a  small  quantity
of  water,  and  expelled  all  the  air  by  converting  the  water  into
steam.  Then  as  we  allow  the  flask  to  cool,  the  air  which  re-
enters it  will  necessarily  pass  through  the  hot  tube  (Fig,  6).
We  may  cause  the  water  in  the  flask  to  boil  at  a  temperature


Fig.  7.

of  more  than  100°  C.  (212°  F.)  by  fitting  to  the  free  end  of  the
platinum  tube  a  glass  tube  bent  at  riglit  angles,  which  we  plunge
to  any  depth  in  a  deep  vessel  filled  with  mercury  (Fig.  7).
Whilst  the  water  is  boiling  under  pressure,  we  must  separate  the
tube  which  is  plunged  in  the  mercury ;  the  water  in  the  flask  will


STUDIKS    ON    FERMENTATION.  49

continue  to  boil  at  the  ordinary  pressure.  "We  must  then  leave
the  flask  to  cool.  It  will  gradually  become  filled  with  air  that
has  been  heated  to  a  high. temperature,  more  than  sufficient  to
burn  up  all  the  organic  particles  of  dust  which  that  air  could
have  contained.  When  the  flask  is  cold  we  must  close  the  tap
and  detach  it,  and  proceed  to  prepare  other  similar  flasks.  It
will  be  advisable  to  close  the  tap  when  the  temperature  of  the
flask  is  still  a  few  degrees  above  that  of  the  surrounding  atmo-
sphere :  this  precaution  will  cause  the  air  in  the  cooled  flask  to
have  a  lower  pressure  than  that  of  the  external  atmosphere.

During  the  interval  which  must  elapse  between  the  prepara-
tion and  the  use  of  a  flask,  it  is  a  good  thing  to  keep  the  free
branch  of  the  tap  inclined  towards  the  ground,  to  secure  the
inside  of  its  tube  from  the  deposit  of  external  particles  of  dust.
Whether  this  precaution  be  adopted  or  not,  we  must  take  care
to  heat  this  branch  in  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp  just  before  we
bring  our  flask  into  requisition.

If  we  have  to  study  blood,  we  must  take  it  from  a  living
animal — a  dog,  for  example.  We  must  expose  a  vein  or  an
artery  of  the  animal,  and  make  an  incision  into  which  the  end
of  the  free  tap-branch,  which  has  previously  been  heated  and
allowed  to  cool,  must  be  introduced  and  fixed  by  a  ligature  in
the  vein  or  artery.  On  opening  the  tap,  the  blood  will
rush  into  the  flask ;  it  must  then  be  closed,  and  the  flask  placed
in  an  oven  at  a  certain  temperature.  We  have  successfully
accomplished  these  manipulations,  thanks  to  the  kind  help  of
our  illustrious  colleague  and  friend,  M.  Claude  Bernard.

The  operation  is  nearly  the  same  in  the  case  of  urine.  The
end  of  the  free  branch  of  the  tap  is  introduced  into  the  passage
of  the  urethra  ;  the  tap  is  turned  at  the  moment  when  the
urine  is  emitted,  which  is  then  allowed  to  pass  into  the  flask,
until  it  is  a  third  or  half  filled.

The  following  were  the  results  of  our  experiments  : — Blood
underwent  no  putrefactive  change  even  at  the  highest  tempera-
tures of  the  atmosphere,  but  retained  the  odour  of  fresh  blood,
or  acquired  the  smoll  of  lye.     Contrary  to  what  we  might  have


50  STUDIES    ()>    FEllMENTATIOX.

expected,  the  direct  oxidation  of  the  constituents  of  blood  by
slow  combustion  was  rather  sluggish.  After  subjecting  our
flasks  to  a  temperature  of  25^  C.  or  30°  C.  (77°  F.  to  80°  F.)  in
an  oven  for  several  weeks,  we  observed  an  absorption  of  not
mora  than  2  or  3  per  cent,  of  oxygen,  which  was  replaced  by
a  volume  of  carbonic  acid  gas  of  about  an  equal  bulk.*

Nearly  the  same  results  were  obtained  in  the  case  of  urine ;
it  underwent  no  radical  change ;  its  colour  merely  assumed  a
reddish  brown  tint ;  it  formed  some  small  deposirs  of  crystals,
but  without  becoming  at  all  turbid  or  putrefying  in  any  way.
The  direct  oxidation  of  the  urinary  substances  was  likewise
very  sluggish.  An  analysis  of  the  air  in  one  of  the  flasks,
made ,  forty  days  after  the  commencement  of  the  experiment,
gave  the  following  results : —

Oxygen  . .  . .  . .  .  .     19-2

Carbonic  acid..  ..  .,  ..        0-8

Nitrogen         80-0


100-0


*  We  must  mention  one  curious  result,  which  relates  to  what  have
been  called  the  crystals  of  the  blood.  We  could  hardly  have  recourse  to  a
better  method  of  preparing  these  crystals,  at  least  in  the  case  of  dog's
blood,  which  seems  to  yield  them  with  the  greatest  facility  in  any  quan-
tity we  might  desire  to  procure.  Under  the  circumstances  just  recounted,
in  which  dog's  blood  exposed  to  contact  with  pure  air  underwent  no
putrefactive  change  whatever,  the  crystals  of  that  blood  formed  with  a
remarkable  rapidity.  From  the  first  day  that  it  was  placed  in  the  oven
and  exposed  to  an  ordinary  temperature,  the  serum  began  gradually  to
assume  a  dark  brown  hue.  In  proportion  as  this  effect  was  produced,
the  globules  of  blood  disappeared,  and  the  serum  and  the  coagulum
became  filled  with  very  distinct  crj^stals,  of  a  brown  or  red  colour.  In
the  course  of  a  few  weeks,  not  a  single  globule  of  blood  remained,  either
in  the  serum  or  coagulum  ;  every  drop  of  serum  contained  thousands  of
these  crystals,  and  the  smallest  particle  of  coagulum,  when  bruised  under
a  piece  of  glass,  presented  to  view  coloux-less  and  very  elastic  fibrine,
associated  with  masses  of  crj^stals,  without  the  slightest  trace  of  blood-
globules.  Where  our  observations  were  protracted,  it  sometimes  hap-
pened that  all  the  fibrine  collected  into  one  hyaline  mass,  which  gradually
expelled  every  crystal  from  its  interior.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  51

These  experiments  on  blood  and  urine  which  we  have  just
mentioned  date  from  1863.*  Ten  years  afterwards,  in  1873,
they  were  confirmed  in  an  important  and  striking  manner  by
the  results  of  a  very  able  series  of  experiments,  which  were
carried  out  in  our  laboratory,  by  M.  Gay  on,  who  was  formerly
a  pupil  in  the  Ecole  Normale  Super ienre.  M.  Gayon  proved  that
what  held  good  in  the  case  of  blood  and  urine,  also  held  good  in
the  case  of  the  substances  contained  in  eggs.  He  found  that
the  whites  of  eggs  might  be  exposed  for  any  length  of  time  to
contact  with  air,  as  also  might  the  yolks,  or  the  white  and  yolks
mixed,  without  any  putrefactive  change  or  fermentation  result-
ing, and  without  the  smallest  microscopic  germ  showing  itself,
the  sole  condition  being  that  the  air  must  be  freed  from  all
organic  particles  of  dust,  germs  of  mould,  bacteria,  vibrios,  and
other  organisms  which  it  holds  in  suspension.  This  was  only
a  part  of  the  important  facts  brought  to  light  by  M.  Gayon.
Amongst  other  things,  he  proved  that  spontaneous  putrefaction
in  eggs  is  invariably  caused  by  the  development  of  organized
ferments,  thereby  correcting  the  opposite  statements  an-
nounced by  M.  Donne  and  M.  Bechamp,  who  were  led  by
their  observations  to  believe  that  the  change  in  eggs  took
place  quite  independently  of  the  action  of  vibrios  and
niucedines.f

It  is  almost  superfluous  to  remark  how  greatly  the  results  of
these  experiments  on  blood,  urine,  and  the  components  of  the
egg  are  opposed  to  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation,  as
also  to  most  modern  theories  on  the  generation  of  ferments.
As  long  as  experiments  relating  to  the  question  of  so-called
spontaneous  generation  were  made  on  heated  substances,  the
advocates  of  heterogenesis  had  some  grounds  for  asserting  that
such  materials  could  not  satisfy  the  conditions  of  spontaneous
life,  and  that  we  should  obtain  different  results  by  using  natural
organic  liquids,  which,  if  exposed  to  contact  of  pure  air  would

*  Pastetje,  Comptes  rendus  de  V Acndemie  des  Sciences,  t.  Ivi.  p.  738,  1863.
f  Gayon,    Comptes   rendus    de    V Academic  des  Sciences,    and   AnnaJes
Scientifiques  de  I'Ecule  Nornmle  Suverieure,  1874-7o.

E  2


52  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

doubtless  serve  for  the  production  of  new  beings  which  did  not
issue  from  parents  which  resembled  them.  This  novel  enuncia-
tion of  the  hypothesis  of  spontaneous  generation,  the  only  one,
we  think,  that  could  be  defended  after  the  publication  of  our
Memoir,  in  1802,  is  condemned  by  the  preceding  facts.

The  same  facts  completely  upset  the  hypothesis  recently
maintained  by  Messrs.  Fremy  and  Trecul  on  the  subject  of  the
causes  of  fermentation.

"  Side  by  side  with  the  immediate,  definite  principles  which
may  be  formed  by  synthesis,"  saj-^s  M.  Fremy,  "  such  as
glucose,  oxalic  acid,  and  urea,  other  substances  of  greatly  in-
ferior stability  exist,  the  constitution  of  which  is  considerably
more  complicated,  containing  all  the  elements  of  living  organs,
such  as  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  and  even  phos-
phorus and  sulphur ;  and  often  salts  of  lime  and  of  the  alkalies
besides.  These  bodies  are  albumen,  fibrin,  casein,  the  congeners
of  vitellin  and  others.  Chemical  synthesis  cannot  reproduce
them.  It  is  impossible,  in  my  opinion,  to  regard  them  as  im-
mediate, definite  principles.  I  designate  them  by  the  general
name  of  semi- organized  bodies,  because  they  hold  an  intermediate
place  between  the  immediate  principle  and  the  organized  tissue.

"  These  semi-organized  bodies,  which  contain  all  the  elements
of  organs,  have  the  power,  like  a  dr}^  seed-grain,  of  existing
in  a  state  of  organic  immobility,  and  of  becoming  active  under
circumstances  which  favour  organic  development.  By  reason  of
the  vital  energy  that  they  possess  they  undergo  a  succession  of
decompositions,  giving  origin  to  new  derivatives,  and  to  the
advent  of  ferments,  not  by  any  process  oi  spontaneous  r/eneration,
but  by  a  vital  energy/,  which  pre-exists  in  the  semi-organized
bodies,  and  is  simpl}'-  carried  on,  when  this  energy  manifests
itself,  in  these  most  varied  organic  changes."

After  having  expressed  these  hypothetical  and  confused
opinions,  M.  Fremy  continues  : — "  I  do  not  consider,  then,
that  these  semi-organized  bodies  serve  merel}'  as  nourishment
for  certain  animal  and  vegetable  organisms,  which  may  be  the
sole  agents  of  fermentations,  but  I  give  them  a  direct  role  and


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  Oo

admit  that,  under  the  influences  which  I  have  already  cited*
they  may  assume  a  real  and  complete  organization,  and  produce
ferments  which  are  not  derived,  as  we  have  seen,  from  a  germ
or  an  ovum  but  from  a  semi-organized  body,  the  vital  energy  of
which  has  become  active. f  It  will  be  seen  that  these  opinions
are  quite  different  from  those  which  M.  Pasteur  has  maintained
in  his  works,  since  they  attribute  the  origin  of  alcoholic  and
lactic  ferments  to  an  albuminous  substance.  Taking  the  case
of  alcoholic  fermentation  alone,  I  assert  that,  in  the  production
of  wine,  it  is  the  juice  of  the  grape  itself  which,  in  contact  with
air,  produces  grains  of  yeast,  by  the  transformation  of  the  albu-
minous substances.  M.  Pasteur,  on  the  contrary,  maintains
that  the  grains  of  yeast  are  produced  by  certain  germs. "|

We  have  combated  these  propositions,  so  extraordinary  and
unsupported  by  any  rigorous  experiments,  before  the  Academy  of
Sciences,  where  they  were  first  enunciated.  On  that  occasion  we
related  the  facts  in  connection  with  blood  and  urine,  which  we
have  just  discussed.  Could  there  be  any  more  forcible  argument
against  the  theory  of  our  honourable  colleague  than  those
facts  ?  Here  we  had  natviral  albuminous  substances,  forming
part  of  matter  eminently  liable  to  putrefactive  change  and
fermentation,  which  produced  no  ferments  of  any  sort  whatso-
ever when  brought  into  contact  with  air  deprived  of  its  organic
particles  of  dust.

Under  no  known  circumstances  is  albuminous  matter  trans-
formed into  grains  of  yeast  or  any  other  organized  ferment,  and,
to  our  thinking,  nothing  can  be  more  chimerical  than  the
gratuitous  hypothesis  of  hemi-organism.

We  shall  proceed  to  new  proofs  of  this,  dealing  this  time
with  a  liquid  formed  by  the  life  of  a  vegetable.

*  Amongst  tliese  influences  one  of  the  most  important,  according  to
M.  Fremy,  is  "  organic  impulse" — another  gratuitous  assumption.

t  Fremy,  Comptes  rendus  de  V Academic  des  Sciences,  t.  Iviii.  p.  1167,
1864.

X  Fremy,  Gomptes  rendus  de  V Academie  des  Sciences,  t.  Ixxiii.  p.  1425,
1871.  M.  Trecul  shares  M.  Fremy's  opinions,  and  extends  them  to  the
development  of  diffei'ent  fungoid  growths.


54  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

^  III, — Experiments  on  the  Juice  contained  in  Grapes.

In  the  course  of  the  discussion  which  took  place,  at  the
Academy,  on  the  subject  of  the  generation  of  ferments,  properly
so  called,  much  was  said  about  the  oldest  known  fermentation,
that  of  wine.  We  at  once  resolved  to  demolish  M.  Fremy's
theory,  by  a  decisive  experiment  on  the  juice  of  grapes.

We  prepared  forty  flasks,  capable  of  holding  from  250  c.c.  to
300  c.c.  (from  9  to  11  fl.  oz.)  and  shaped  as  represented  in
Fio-.  8.     These  we  filled  with  filtered  must,  which  was  perfectly


J

Fig.  8.

bright,  and  which,  like  all  acid  liquids,  would  remain  sound,
after  having  been  boiled  for  a  few  seconds,  although  the  ends
of  the  long  curved  necks  of  the  flasks  containing  the  must
might  remain  constantly  open  for  months  or  years.

We  washed,  in  a  few  cubic  centimetres  of  water,  part  of  a
bunch  of  grapes,  washing  the  grapes  separately,  or  the  grapes
and  the  wood  together,  or  even  the  wood  of  the  bunch  alone.
This  washing  was  easily  accomplished  by  means  of  a  perfectly
clean  badger's-hair  brush,  the  water  receiving  all  the  particles
of  dust  adhering  to  the  surface  of  the  graj^es  and  the  wood  of
the  bunch.  By  means  of  a  microscope  we  easily  proved  that
this  water  held  in  suspension  an  infinite  number  of  organized
corpuscles,  some  of  them  bearing  a  very  close  resemblance  to
the  spores  of  fungoid  growths,  others  to  alcoholic  ferment,
others  to  mycoderma  vini,  and  so  on.*

•  This  observation  had  already  been  made  by  Anthon  and  II.
Hoffmann.  "If  we  scrape  the  surface  of  a  gooseberry  with  a  blunt
knife,"  saysH.  Hoffmann,  "and  put  under  the  microscope  the  scrapings,
which  ai'e  of  a  whitish  colour,  we  shall  recognize  amongst  many  varieties
of  shapeless  dirt,  earthj^  particles  and  other  things,  the  same  fungoid
spores  that  we  find  in  the  expressed  juice,  but  we  shall  see  them  there


studies!  on  fermentation.


We  next  pi'oceeded  to  put  on  one  side  ten  of  our  forty  flasks,
to  serve  for  subsequent  corroboration  ;  in  ten  others,  by  means
of  the  tube  which  is  represented  on  the  right  hand  side  of  the
flask  (Fig.  8),  we  put  a  few  drops  of  the  water  in  which  the
bunch  of  grapes  had  been  washed  ;  in  a  third  series  of  ten  flasks
we  put  a  few  drops  of  the  same  liquid,  after  having  previously
boiled  it.  Lastly,  we  introduced  into  the  ten  remaining  flasks
a  drop  of  grape-juice,  taken  from  the  inside  of  an  uninjured
grape.  To  do  this  we  had  to  bend  the  right-hand  tube  of
each  of  our  last  ten  flasks,  drawing  it  out  to  a  fine  point  and
closing   it   in   the   flame,  as  represented  in  Fig.  9   A.     This


^•>\


Fig.  9.
fine  closed  point  was  filed  round  near  its  extremity  and  then
thrust,  as  represented  in  Fig.  9  B,  into  a  grape  placed  on  a  hard
substance ;  when  the  point  b  was  felt  to  touch  the  substance
supporting  the  grape  it  was  broken  ofi"  by  a  slight  pressure
sideways  at  the  point  a,  where  the  file  marks  had  been  made.
We   had  taken  care   to  secure  a  slight  vacuum  in  the    flask

in  infinitely  larger  quantities.  Some  of  them  will  be  of  a  dusky  colour
{Stemphyliwn,  Glados^jorium),  and  others  will  be  colourless  ;  the  shape  of
these  latter  will  be  round  or  oval,  and  cylindrical.  Most  of  them  will
bear  resemblance  to  beads  of  the  chaplets  of  Oidium,  Monilia,  Torula
(that  is  to  say,  to  spores  of  certain  Hyphomycetes),  which  have  been
detached  and  carried  off  by  the  wind,  and  have  attached  themselves  to
the  fruit.  Some  of  these  spores  will  be  already  provided  with  short
germinating  filaments.  (Annales  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  Bataniqtie,  t.  xiii.
p.  21,  1860).


56  STUDIES   ON    FKRMENTATION.

beforelumd ;  this  now  caused  a  drop  of  the  juice  to  be  drawn
into  the  flask.  We  then  drew  out  the  fine  point,  and  closed  it
immediately  in  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp.  The  vacuum  was
produced  by  heating  the  flasks  in  our  hands,  or  over  the  flame
of  a  lamp,  thus  causing  a  little  air  to  be  forced  out  through  the
end  of  the  bent  tube,  which  we  then  closed  up  with  the  lamp.
When  the  flask  was  cool,  the  slight  difference  of  pressure  sufficed
to  force  into  it  some  of  the  juice  contained  in  the  grape,  as  we
have  just  described.  The  drop  of  juice  that  is  sucked  into  the
flask  generally  remains  in  the  curved  part  of  the  fine  tube ;  to
mix  it  with  the  must  we  must  incline  the  flask  so  as  to  bring
the  must  in  contact  with  the  drop ;  after  that  we  may  replace
the  flask  in  its  natural  position.

The  following  are  the  results  presented  by  our  four  series
of  comparative  experiments  in  the  different  cases.  The  first
ten  flasks — our  standard  flasks,  containing  must  boiled  in
contact  with  pure  air — showed  no  signs  of  organized  pro-
ducts ;  the  must  might  have  remained  in  them  for  any  number
of  years  without  change.  Our  second  series  of  flasks,  which
contained  the  water  in  which  the  grapes,  separately  and  in
bunch,  had  been  washed,  had  undergone  alcoholic  fermenta-
tion in  every  instance  ;  this  had  manifested  itself  in  all  the
flasks  in  the  course  of  about  forty-eight  hours,  the  tempera-
ture being  at  about  summer  heat.  At  the  same  time  that
the  yeast  made  its  appearance  in  the  form  of  little  white  lines,
which  gradually  joining  together  formed  a  deposit  on  the
sides  of  the  flask,  we  perceived  minute  flakes  of  mycelium
forming ;  sometimes  as  a  single  fungoid  growth,  sometimes
combined  with  another,  or  with  many  together — these  growths
being  quite  independent  otherwise  of  the  yeast  or  alcoholic
ferment.  In  several  cases,  too,  mycoderma  vini  showed  itself
on  the  surface  of  the  liquid  in  the  course  of  a  few  days,
,  Vibrios  and  lactic  ferments,  properly  so  called,  could  not  make
their  appearance,  on  account  of  the  nature  of  the  liquid.

The  flasks  of  our  third  series,  containing  the  water  in  which
the  bunch  of  grapes  had  been  washed,  and  which  we  boiled


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  57

before  our  experiment,  remained  as  free  from  change  as  the
flasks  of  our  first  series  had  done.

Lastly,  our  fourth  series  of  flasks,  containing  the  drops  of
juice  taken  from  inside  the  grapes,  remained  equally  free  from
change,  although  we  could  not  be  certain  of  having  removed,  in
every  case,  without  exception,  all  causes  of  error  which  must
inevitably  occur  sometimes  in  so  delicate  an  experiment.

These  experiments  cannot  leave  the  least  doubt  on  our  minds  :

That  must,  if  boiled,  will  never  ferment  when  in  contact  with
air  that  has  been  freed  from  the  germs  which  exist  in  it  in  a
state  of  suspension.

That  must  may  be  fermented,  after  boiling,  by  introducing
into  it  a  very  small  quantity  of  water,  in  which  a  bunch  of
grapes  has  been  washed.

That  must  will  not  ferment  if  we  introduce  into  it  some  of
this  same  water  which  has  been  boiled  and  afterwards  cooled.

That  must  will  not  ferment  if  we  introduce  into  it  a  small
quantity  of  the  juice  contained  in  a  grape.*

It  follows,  then,  that  the  ferment  which  causes  grapes  to
ferment  in  the  vintage  tub  must  come  from  the  exterior,  and
not  the  interior  of  the  grapes.  Thus,  the  hypothesis  of
MM.  Trecul  and  Fremy,  according  to  which  albuminous
substances  transform  themselves  into  grains  of  yeast  by  the
action  of  a  peculiar  vital  force,  is  annihilated ;  a  fortiori,  there
can  no  longer  be  a  question  concerning  Liebig's  theory,  on  the


*  The  experiments  that  we  have  described  give  rise  to  a  useful  remark.
All  the  organic  liquids,  boiled  or  not,  in  the  course  of  time  must  take  up
oxygen  from  the  air.  At  the  same  time,  and  certainly  under  this  influ-
ence, they  assume  an  amber  or  brownish  colour,  but  this  eflfect  is  only
produced  when  the  liquids  are  placed  under  conditions  of  unalterability.
Should  fermentation  or  the  development  of  fungoid  growths  be  possible,
scai'cely  any  change  of  colour  will  take  jDlace.  Doubtless  this  non-
coloration  may  be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  these  organisms  consume
the  oxygen  necessary  for  coloration.  In  these  experiments  on  must,  all
the  unchanged  flasks  assumed  a  pale  yellowish  brown  colour ;  those
which  fermented  or  contained  fungoid  growths  remained  colourless,  or
nearly'  so.


58  STUDIES    ON    FERMKNTATIOX.

transformation  of  albuminous  substances  into  ferments,  by
a  process  of  oxidation.

Our  readers  ma}^  be  curious  to  know  what  M.  Freray  has
been  able  to  oppose  to  such  crucial  experiments  ;  they  could
scarcely  have  imagined  the  following : —

"  In  my  experiments,  which  I  have  varied  in  every  possible
manner,"  says  that  gentleman,  "  I  have  found  that  it  is  almost
impossible  to  discover  alcoholic  fermentation,  appreciable  by  its
results,  in  a  single  drop  of  grape  juice,  and  I  may  add  that  this
fermentation  must  be  still  more  difficult  to  discover  when  this
drop  has  been  drowned  in  a  large  quantity  of  juice  that  has
been  previously  boiled/'*

It  will  be  admitted  that  we  were  justified  in  saying,  at  the
commencement  of  this  paragraph,  that  we  should  demolish  the
theory  which  was  opposed  to  ours,  and  which  its  advocates  have
been  constrained  to  defend  by  hypotheses  manifestly  false.

At  the  meeting  following  the  one  in  which  M.  Fremy  declared
that  minute  quantities  do  not  ferment,  we  had  the  malicious
satisfaction  of  showing  a  great  many  very  small  closed  flasks,
into  each  of  which  we  had  caused  a  single  drop  of  the  must  of
crushed  grapes  to  be  introduced  by  suction.  We  broke  the  thin
points  of  many  of  them,  in  the  presence  of  the  Academy,  and
every  one  of  them  showed  by  a  sharp  hissing,  which  was
audible  at  a  distance,  that  fermentation  was  proceeding  in  the
drop  of  liquid  they  contained.  M.  Fremy  was  there,  but  he
made  no  remark.

We  may  cite  some  very  curious  facts  on  the  subject  of  the
period  at  which  the  germs  that  develop  yeast  are  in  a  con-
dition to  be  able  to  cause  fermentation.

On  July  25th,  1875,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arbois  (Jura),
the  grapes  were  still  green  and  of  the  size  of  peas.  We  went
to  a  vine  that  was  far  from  paths  and  roads,  and  there,  with  a
pair  of  small  scissors,  cut  some  grapes  from  off  a  bunch  and
let  them  fall  with  their  short  stalks  into  tubes  half  filled  with

*   Comptes  rnuhts  de  V Academic,  sennce  da  28  Ocfohre,  1872.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATTOX,  59

gooseberry  must,  previously  rendered  unalterable  by  boiling.
These  tubes  we  closed  again  with  all  possible  precautions,  using
corks  which  had  been  passed  through  the  flame  of  a  spirit-lamp
and  carried  them  to  our  laboratory,  where  we  left  them  to
themselves.  Some  days  afterwards  we  saw  diverse  fungoid
growths  appear  in  most  of  the  tubes,  but  not  one  of  them  then,
or  subsequently^,  presented  the  least  appearance  of  fermentation.
The  germs  of  yeast  at  that  period  of  the  year  did  not  exist
either  upon  the  woody  part  of  the  bunch,  or  upon  the  grapes.
In  Chapter  V.  we  shall  return  to  observations  on  this  subject.


§  IV. — WoKT  AND  Must  Exposed  to  Common  Aik.

If  the  principles  which  we  have  laid  down  possess  all  the
value  that  we  attribute  to  them,  if  the  cause  of  change  in
natural  or  artificial  organic  liquids  does  not  exist  in  those
liquids  themselves,  if  change  considered  in  itself  depends  upon
the  nature  and  number  of  the  particles  of  dust  in  various  places,
if  it  is,  besides,  radically  affected  by  the  composition  of  the
liquids,  it  must  necessarily  follow  that  wort  or  must,  whilst,
under  certain  circumstances  of  exposure  to  air,  it  remains
absolutely  free  from  life  and  its  results,  will,  under  other
circumstances,  give  rise  to  a  variety  of  organisms  and  their
corresponding  fermentations.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  lesson  which
direct  proofs  will  teach  us.  Before  entering  upon  these  new
observations  in  detail,  we  must  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the
difficulty,  as  experience  has  shown,  of  interpreting  correctly  the
facts  connected  with  the  spontaneous  impregnations  of  organic
liquids.

Gay-Lussac  crushed  some  grapes  under  a  bell-jar  filled  with
mercury,  after  having  washed  them  in  hydrogen,  to  expel  the
air  adhering  to  the  grapes  and  the  sides  of  the  jar.  Having
waited  for  several  weeks  without  detecting  any  signs  of  fermen-
tation, he  introduced  some  bubbles  of  oxygen,  and  fermentation
showed  itself  the  following  day.     Gay-Lussac  concluded  that


60  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

the  fermentation  of  must  could  not  commence  without  the  help
of  oxygen.*

Under  the  conditions  of  his  experiment  nothing  could  be
truer,  and  we  must  admire  the  diffidence  with  which  this  great
natural  philosopher  interpreted  the  fact  that  he  had  observed.
Another  French  natural  philosopher,  however,  M.  Cagniard-
Latour,  observed  that  the  ferment  of  alcoholic  fermentation  was
a  little  cellular  plant.  What  was  its  origin  in  Gay-Lussac's
experiment?

The  advocates  of  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation  were
ready  with  their  explanation,  and  we  have  seen  how  MM.
Trecul  and  Fremy,  following  many  others,  did  not  hesitate  to
maintain  that  the  little  plant  with  all  its  particles  was  produced
by  the  action  of  oxygen  on  the  albuminous  substances  contained
in  the  juice  of  the  grapes.  The  experiments,  which  we  have
given  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  show  us  positively  that
germs  of  the  ferment  of  must  exist  on  the  surface  of  the  grape,
and  that,  consequently,  Gay-Lussac's  experiment  has  a  more
simple  and  natural  explanation.  The  germs  of  the  ferment
existing  on  the  surface  of  the  grape  become  mixed  with  the
juice  of  the  grape  when  the  latter  is  crushed  ;  these  germs
remain  inactive  in  the  presence  of  hydrogen  ;  they  vegetate  as
soon  as  oxygen  is  introduced  to  them.

Moreover,  the  results  of  our  labours  in  connection  with
spontaneous  generation,  in  1862,  teach  us  that  in  Gay-Lussac's
experiment  the  germ  of  the  ferment  might  also  have  had  its
origin  either  in  certain  particles  of  dust  adhering  to  the  sides  of
the  glass  bell,  or  upon  the  mercury ;  and,  in  a  laboratory
where  alcoholic  fermentation  is  studied,  dust  invariably
contains  dry  cells  of  ferment.  The  necessity  of  oxygen  for  the
success  of  the  experiment  is  surprising,  when  we  reflect  that

*  Gay-Lussac,  Annales  de  Cliimie,  t.  Ixxvi.  p.  245 ;  read  at  the
Institute,  December  3rd,  1810.  Tjong  before  Gay-Lussac,  it  had  been
remarked  that  atmospheric  air  had  a  great  iutluenco  on  fermentation.
See  M.  Chevroul's  articles  on  the  historj'  of  chemistry  in  the  Journal  des
Savants.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATIOX.  61

alcoliolic  fermentation  often  takes  place  in  liquids  that  are  not
exposed  to  contact  with  air ;  but  we  sliall  prove  by  experiment
that,  notwithstanding  what  may  happen  duinng  fermentation,
oxygen  has  the  greatest  influence  on  the  readiness  with  which
ferment  develops  itself,  and  that  this  gas  is  indispensable  to  the
revival  of  withered  cells,  and  still  more  so  to  the  germination  of
special  cells,  which  we  may  consider  to  be  the  true  germs  of  the
little  plant.

The  advocates  of  the  doctrine  of  spo7iianeous  generation
have  based  most  of  the  objections  which  they  vainly  urge
against  their  opponents  upon  erroneous  interpretations  of  certain
facts  relating  to  tlie  spontaneous  impregnation  of  organic
infusions.  Taking  a  very  wrong  view  of  the  essential  condi-
tions of  the  phenomena,  they  require  that  the  assertors  of  the
diffusion  of  the  germs  of  microscopic  organisms  should  be  com-
pelled to  place  at  any  one  point  of  space,  so  to  say,  all  the
germs  of  the  products  of  infusions ;  a  demand  which  really  borders
on  absurdity.  They  believe,  or  feign  to  believe,  that  we  are
bound  to  admit  the  existence  of  germs  of  must  in  all  places  and
at  all  times,  on  the  banks  of  rivers  and  on  the  loftiest  moun-
tains, and  so  on.  "  Fermentations,"  said  one  of  these  gentle-
men one  day,  before  the  Academy,  "  cannot  depend  upon  chance
particles  of  atmospheric  dust.  How  is  it  possible  that  germs  of
yeast  can  be  present  everywhere  throughout  the  universe,  ever
ready  to  fall  upon  must  ?  "  It  is  an  established  fact  that  grapes
crushed  in  any  part  of  the  globe  whatsoever,  even  on  a  glacier  or
at  the  highest  elevations,  can  set  up  a  fermentation.  The  expla-
nation of  this  pretended  impossibility  is  most  simple,  for  we
know,  from  the  facts  related  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  that
grapes  carry  on  their  skins  the  germs  of  their  own  ferments.

In  experiments  relating  to  the  kind  of  organisms  which  we  are
discussing  we  must  never  fail  to  take  into  account  the  action  of
the  particles  of  dust  spread  over  the  articles  that  are  used.  Very
often  an  effect  that  should  be  attributed  to  gferms  adhei'lng:  to
the  vessels  and  utensils  used  in  experiments,  the  origin  of  which
may  be  altogether  special,  is  erroneously  imputed  to  the  dust-


62  STUDIES    ON    FKRMENTATION.

forming  germs — that  is  to  say,  to  those  germs  which  exist  in  a
state  of  suspension  in  the  air.

In  our  Memoir  of  1862,  which  we  have  quoted  several  times,
we  have  explained  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  draw  any
serious  conclusions  from  experiments  made  in  a  basin  of
mercury,  because  of  the  organic  particles  of  dust  which  always
exifjt  in  that  metal,  and  which,  without  the  knowledge  of
the  operator,  pass  into  the  interior  of  the  vessel,  where  they
produce  certain  changes  which  one  is  tempted  to  impute  to
heterogenesis.

In  all  classical  works  an  experiment  of  Appert's,  reproduced
by  Gay-Lussac,  is  given.  This,  through  a  faulty  interpretation,
led  to  the  hypothesis  of  the  continuity  of  the  causes  of  fer-
mentation, if  we  may  use  such  a  term,  in  the  atmospheric
air.*

When  we  decant  bottles  of  must,  which  has  been  preserved
by  Appert's  method,  into  other  bottles,  all  the  latter  soon  set
up  a  fermentation  :  this  constitutes  the  experiment.  If  it  were
proved  that  the  must,  whilst  being  decanted,  came  in  contact
with  atmospheric  air  alone,  as  Gay-Lussac  believed,  we  should
be  compelled  to  admit,  according  to  the  theory  of  germs,  that
the  must  had  come  in  contact  with  some  particles  of  ferment
in  the  air  during  decanting.  And  again,  if  it  were  shown  that
the  experiment  could  succeed  in  any  place  whatsoever,  we  must
come  to  the  conclusion  that  germs  of  ferment  exist  everywhere
in  a  state  of  suspension  in  the  air.

"  I  have  taken,""  writes  Gay-Lussac,  "  a  bottle  of  must  that
had  been  preserved  for  a  year  and  was  perfectly  transparent,
and  have  decanted  the  must  into  another  bottle,  which  I  then
carefully  corked  and  exposed  to  a  temperature  of  15°  C.  to
30°  C.  (59°  F.  to  86°  F.).  Eight  days  afterwards  the  must  has
lost  its  transparency ;  fermentation  has  taken  place  in  it,  and
soon  my  must  has  become  transformed  into  a  vinous  liquor,
sparkling  like  the  best  champagne.  A  second  bottle  of  must
that  had  been  preserved    for  a   year,  like  the  preceding  one,

*  Gay-Lussac,  Annaks  deChimic,  t.  Ixxvi.  p.  247,  Mcmoire  citt',  1810.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


but  which  had  not  been  brought  into  contact  with  the  air,  has
presented  no  signs  of  fermentation,  although  placed  under
conditions  most  favourable  to  its  development."

The  result  of  this  experiment,  when  roughly  made,  is  cor-
rectly described  by  Gay-Lussac ;  in  other  words,  it  may  be
proved  that  if,  at  the  time  of  vintage,  we  prepare  some  bottles
of  must,  after  Appert's  process,  and,  in  the  course  of  time,  open
them  and  decant  their  contents  into  other  bottles,  we  shall
soon  see  the  must  ferment  and  deposit  yeast.  It  is,  neverthe-
less, equally  certain  that  the  inferences  which  have  been
drawn  from  this  celebrated  experiment  have  been  founded
on  error,  and  that  the  germs  of  yeast  are  very  rarely
derived  from  the  particles  of  dust  floating  in  the  air  with
which  the  must  comes  in  contact.  The  germs  in  question  are,
in  our  opinion,  generally  derived,  not  from  the  air,  but  from  the
sides  of  the  bottles,  from  corks,  from  the  string  employed  in
corking,  from  corkscrews,  and  from  a  variety  of  other  things.
The  reason  for  this  is  that  any  room,  vault,  cellar,  or  labora-
tory where  the  grapes,  or  must,  or  vintage,  are  handled —
unless  special  precautions,  of  which  Appert  and  Gay-Lussac
certainly  never  thought,  are  taken — all  the  utensils,  as  well  as
all  articles  of  clothing,  and  all  the  sides  of  the  bottles  which
the  hands  have  touched,  are  contaminated  by  cells  of  ferment
derived  from  must  that  has  fermented,  or  by  germs  from
the  surface  of  grapes  and  clusters.  Thus,  at  the  moment  of
decanting  the  must,  a  thousand  accidental  circumstances  may
lead  to  the  introduction  of  those  germs,  the  origin  of  which,
as  we  have  seen,  may  be  actually  traced  to  the  very  grapes
which  served  for  the  manufacture  of  the  must.  In  other  words,
we  believe  the  inference  that  the  germs  of  yeast  which  cause
the  experiment  to  succeed,  are  derived  from  particles  of  dust
floating  in  the  air  of  the  place  where  we  decant  the  contents
of  our  bottles,  to  be  altogether  an  erroneous  one.

Since  the  preceding  remarks  were  written,  we  have  endea-
voured to  repeat  this  experiment  of  Gay-Lussac's  in  such  a
manner  as  we  believed  would  confirm  our  views,  by  varying  the


64  STUDIES    OX    FERMENTATION.

conditions  in  such  a  way  as  would  cause  it  to  succeed  or  fail,
according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  manipulation  emplo3'ed.

On  December  7th,  1874,  we  took  two  bottles  of  must  which
we  had  preserved,  after  Appert's  process,  in  our  laboratory
from  the  beginning  of  October,  1873.  Both  of  these  were
covered  with  dust — the  dust  that  floated  about  in  our  labora-
tory. We  decanted  them  as  follows  : — One  bottle,  which  we
handled  without  special  precautions,  we  uncorked  by  means  of
an  ordinary  corkscrew,  and  decanted  into  another  bottle  that
had  been  well  waslied,  as  bottles  are  washed  when  they  are  to
be  used  subsequently.  This  bottle  was  taken  from  a  number
that  had  been  standing  upside  down  on  a  drainer  for  a  fortnight.
We  took  no  precaution  to  remove  the  dust  which  covered  the
exterior  of  the  bottle  of  must,  or  to  purify  the  washed  bottle.
The  second  bottle  of  must,  on  the  other  hand,  was  decanted
after  we  had  removed  the  dust  that  covered  it ;  its  cork  was
cut  off  close  to  the  string,  and  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp  was
passed  over  the  string  and  the  surface  of  the  cork  ;  and,  as  a
final  precaution,  the  corkscrew  was  passed  through  the  flame.
As  for  the  bottle  into  which  we  subsequently  decanted  the
must,  we  first  plunged  it  in  a  hot- water  bath  kept  at  100°  C.
(212°  F.),  then  took  it  into  a  garden  to  cool  upside  down  in  the
open  air.  After  these  precautions  we  removed  it,  and  imme-
diately decanted  into  it  the  must  from  the  second  bottle.

The  first  bottle  showed  signs  of  growths,  both  on  the  surface
and  at  the  bottom  of  the  must,  the  day  after  the  operation,  and
manifested  the  first  symptoms  of  alcoholic  fermentation  on
December  16th.  The  contents  of  the  second  bottle  remained
perfectly  unchanged  after  being  exposed  to  the  warmth  of  a
stove  for  several  months.

Can  anything  be  more  conclusive  than  these  facts  ?  They
are  in  perfect  keeping  with  the  views  that  wo  have  recently
expressed,  and  with  the  principles  that  we  have  maintained  for
nearly  twenty  3^cars,  on  the  subject  of  the  causes  of  change  in
organic  liquids.

It  is  by  no  means  our  intention  to  assert  that  in  the  atmo-


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATIOX.  65

Spheric  air  there  exist  no  germs  of  ferment  in  a  state  of  suspen-
sion, as  fine  dust.  Beyond  all  doubt  they  do  so  exist  in  that
state ;  but,  as  a  rule,  in  comparatively  small  number,  their
abundance  or  scarcity  being  dependent  upon  circumstances
which  control  their  multiplication,  favouring  or  restricting  it,  as
we  are  about  to  prove.

On  May  2nd,  1873,  we  uncorked  two  ordinary  bottles  filled  with
wort,  prepared  in  December,  1872,  after  Appert's  process.  To
avoid  the  causes  of  error  which  we  have  mentioned,  we  uncorked
the  bottles  in  the  following  manner : — The  cork  was  cut  oif  to
the  level  of  the  neck ;  the  cork  and  string  were  next  passed
through  flame,  regardless  of  burning  and  charring  them ;  we
then  gently  extracted  the  cork  by  means  of  a  corkscrew  which
also  had  been  passed  through  the  flame.

The  bottles  thus  prepared  were  placed  on  the  table  of  an
underground  room,  in  which  we  were  continually  making  ex-
periments on  alcoholic  fermentation.

Is^  bottle. — On  May  7th  we  observed  little  particles  of  fungoid
growth  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  and  at  the  bottom  were
large  flakes  of  mycelium.

On  May  11th  a  veil  of  mycoderma  vini  had  formed:  there
were  no  signs  of  fermentation.

On  May  13th  vigorous  fermentation  commenced;  it  lasted
until  May  23rd.  The  microscope  revealed  yeast  in  globules  of
two  sizes,  the  larger  of  which  were  considerably  less  numerous
than  the  others.  There  were  no  signs  of  lactic  or  butyric
ferment.

2ncl  bottle. — May  7th,  particles  of  fungoid  growth  on  the  surface
of  the  liquid,  and  also  a  veil  oi  mycoderma  vini.  On  May  11th,
13th,  and  up  to  the  23rd,  no  signs  of  fermentation  were  visible.
On  May  30th  fermentation  was  active.  The  microscope  showed
us  yeast  mixed  with  butyric  mbrios.

In  this  case,  alcoholic  ferments  had  come  into  existence,  anr^
from  the  precautions  taken  at  the  moment  when  the  liquid  was
brought  into  contact  with  the  external  air,  it  is  certain  that  the
advent   of  the  germs  of  those  ferments,    as  also  those  of  the

p


66  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

other  organisms  which  made  their  appearance — the  fungoid
growths,  mycodertna  vini  and  vibrios — could  only  be  accounted
for  by  the  fall  of  particles  of  dust  floating  about  in  the  room.  It
follows,  then,  that  under  certain  circumstances  germs  of  alcoho-
lic ferment  may  be  found  floating  in  the  air ;  but  we  can  readily
show  that  the  peculiar  conditions  of  the  place  had  a  large  share
in  bringing  about  the  results  obtained  by  the  foregoing  experi-
ment.

The  same  day.  May  2nd,  1873,  we  uncorked,  with  the  pre-
cautions that  we  have  already  described,  four  other  bottles  of
the  same  must.  These  were  placed  in  a  room  which  was  used
less  frequently  than  the  preceding  one,  and  in  which  experi-
ments relating  to  fermentation  were  seldom  conducted.

l.s'^  bottle. — On  May  8th  we  observed  on  the  surface  of  the
liquid  large,  frothy  pieces  of  mycelium  [mucor  mucedo  or  mucor
racemoms) .     The  liquid  was  perfectly  bright.*

May  30th. — No  signs  of  actual  fermentation  yet  visible.

2nd  bottle. — On  May  8th  we  noticed  a  thin,  greasy-looking
scum  on  our  liquid,  which  had  become  turbid  and  acquired  a
sour  smell.  The  microscope  showed  that  this  scum  was  formed
of  mycoderma  aceti.  On  May  30th  the  scum  had  assumed  a
whitish  appearance,  and  seemed  to  be  dead ;  there  was  a  green
spot  of  penicitlium  glaucitm  upon  it.       No  signs  of  fe7'mentation.

3rrf  bottle. — May  8th,  patches  of  fungoid  growth  on  the  sur-
face of  the  liquid.  May  30th,  thick  and  abundant  fungoid
growth,  but  no  fermentation.

Ath  bottle. — May  8th,  little  patches  of  fungoid  growth,  and  a
scum  of  mycoderma  vini.     May  30th,  still  no  fermentation.

Up  to  the  month  of  August,  1873,  not  one  of  these  bottles
gave  the  least  sign  of  alcoholic  or  other  fermentation.

On  December  16th,  1872,  we  uncorked  four  bottles  of  wort,
which  also  had  been  preserved  by  Appert's  process ;  these  we

*  It  is  well  to  notice  that  under  the  influence  of  fungoid  growths,
jiroperly  so  called,  the  wort  of  beer  speedily  becomes  bright.  We  may
say  that  fungoid  growths,  by  their  rapid  development,  clarify  the  must,
which  serves  to  nourish  them.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  67

placed  on  an  oven,  where  there  were  always  vessels  fermenting,
at  about  25°  C.  (77°  F.),  but  where  none  of  the  manipulations
required  for  the  starting  or  final  study  of  fermentations  were
practised.  The  next  day  a  fungoid  growth,  but  unaccompanied
by  any  signs  of  fermentation,  made  its  appearance,  and  this
state  of  things  lasted  for  five  months,  after  which  we  ceased
to  keep  these  bottles  under  observation.

On  May  26th,  1873,  we  uncorked,  with  all  the  necessary  pre-
cautions, ten  bottles  of  wort,  which  had  been  preserved  from
April  9th,  and  then  left  them  undisturbed  in  a  room  where  we
were  constantly  engaged  in  the  study  of  fermentation.

On  the  following  day,  some  patches  of  fungoid  growth  ap-
peared on  the  surface  of  the  liquids.

May  30th. — Fermentation  commenced  in  one  of  the  bottles.

May  31st. — A  second  bottle  likewise  began  to  ferment.

June  9th. — Four  bottles,  including  the  two  preceding  ones,
were  now  in  a  state  of  fermentation.  The  six  bottles  that  had
not  fermented  were  thereupon  covered  with  caps  of  paper,  taken
from  the  centre  of  a  ream  of  paper  and  passed  through  a  flame.
After  this,  and  up  to  August  1,  when  our  observations  were
discontinued,  these  six  bottles  underwent  no  fermentation.

From  these  examples,  which  are  confirmed  by  many  others
that  we  shall  have  occasion  to  mention  in  the  course  of  this
work,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  germs  of  alcoholic  ferment  are  not
present  in  every  little  point  of  space,  constantly  ready  to  fall
upon  any  object,  not  even  in  those  places  M^here  one  is  per-
petually dealing  with  that  kind  of  growth.*  If  we  conduct
our  experiments  with  exactness^  we  very  soon  learn  that  all
that  has  been  written  on  the  facility  with  which   saccharine


*  It  has  already  been  observed  in  our  Memoir  on  spontaneous  genera-
tion, that  alcoholic  fermentation  is  not  always  to  be  obtained  by  sowing
wads  of  cotton  or  asbestos,  charged  with  the  particles  of  dust  which  float
through  the  air,  in  saccharine  musts  that  are  in  contact  with  much  air.
The  air  which  furnished  the  particles  of  dust,  in  the  experiments  to
which  we  are  alluding,  was  taken  outside  the  laboratory,  in  a  neighbouring
street.

F    2


68  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

musts  may  be  made  to  ferment,  by  being  rapidly  brought
into  contact  with  the  surrounding  air,  is  greatly  exagge-
rated.

The  germs  of  ferments,  especially  of  alcoholic  ferments — the
yeast  of  beer  and  the  yeast  of  wine — are  not  nearly  as
abundant  in  atmospheric  air,  or  in  the  particles  of  dust  spread
over  the  surface  of  things,  as  are  the  spores  of  fungoid  growths.
It  is  easy  to  understand  this,  for  spores  are  generally  borne
by  aerial  organs  in  a  state  of  dryness,  so  that  the  least  breath
of  wind  catches  them  up  and  carries  them  away,  whilst
ferments  are  composed  of  moist  cellules  that  do  not  readily
become  dry.

The  vacuous  flasks,  partly  filled  witli  organic  liquids,  which
are  opened  and  closed  again  immediately,  frequently  give  us
fungoid  growths,  but  very  rarely  alcoholic  fermentation,  although
in  the  latter  respect  they  may  not  be  absolutely  sterile.  "We
may  cite  some  proofs  of  this.

On  June  19th,  1872,  we  prepared  seven  flasks  of  saccharine
liquid,  impregnated  with  yeast — our  flasks  were  of  300  c.c.
capacity  (about  10  fl.  oz.) — and  contained  100  c.c.  of  the
liquid  ;  we  then  drew  out  their  necks  to  a  small  opening,  which
was  sealed  during  boiling,  after  the  steam  had  expelled  all  the
air.

On  June  29th  we  opened  them  in  the  principal  room  of
our  laborator3\

On  July  9th,  two  of  the  seven  flasks  gave  no  sign  of  organized
products ;  the  others  were  swarming  with  mycelia,  submerged
or  fruiting  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  and  either  with  or
without  bacteria  entangled  in  their  flakes.  In  two  of  the  flasks
there  were  visible  at  the  bottom  of  the  liquid  some  white  streaks,
which  is  an  indication  sometimes  of  the  presence  of  alcoholic
ferment,  but  much  more  frequently  of  a  little  cellular  plant
resembling  it  in  appearance,  but  purely  aerial  in  its  growth,
that  is  to  say,  taking  no  part  in  fermentation.  Some  days
afterward,  we  saw  bubbles  of  gas  rising  from  the  bottom  of
one  of  these  flasks,  and  then  fermentation  proceeded  so  rapidly


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  69

that  we  were  obliged  to  open  the  neck  to  avoid  an  explosion.
We  append  a  sketch  of  its  ferment  (Fig.  10).

o  ^


Fig.  10.

The  other  flask  with  the  white  streaks  showed  no  signs  of
any  fermentation.

In  this  kind  of  observation  we  rarely  succeed  in  obtaining
active  ferments,  the  reason  being  that  we  deal  with  volumes  of
air  that  are  too  limited  for  the  few  germs  of  ferment  that  exist
in  a  state  of  suspension  in  it.

We  are  more  sure  of  success  if  we  expose  a  tolerably  large
surface  of  saccharine  liquid  to  the  open  air,  because,  under  such
circumstances,  even  if  the  exposure  is  of  short  duration,  a  con-
siderable volume  of  air  will  pass  over  the  surface  of  the  liquid.

On  May  29th,  1873,  at  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  placed
in  the  underground  room  previously  mentioned,  at  a  height  of
about  two  feet,  ten  porcelain  dishes  having  surfaces  of  from
thirty-five  to  forty  square  inches.  We  had  just  taken  them
from  boiling  water,  and  after  allowing  them  to  cool  we  placed
in  each  quantities  of  wort  to  about  one-third  of  an  inch  deep,
which  we  poured  from  bottles  uncorked  with  every  precaution
against  the  chance  of  the  wort  coming  into  contact  with  anything
besides  the  floating  particles  of  dust.  On  May  30th,  at  five  o'clock,
that  is  after  twenty-four  hours  of  exposure  to  the  air  of  the  room,
we  emptied  the  contents  of  the  basins  separately  into  glass
flasks  with  long  necks,  which  had  been  treated  with  boiling


70  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

Avater  and  then  cooled,  necks  downwards.  The  beak  of  the
basin,  b}'  means  of  which  the  liquid  vras  poured,  and  the
funnels — for  we  used  a  separate  funnel  for  each  flask — had  been
passed  through  the  flame.  The  whole  ten  flasks  were  then
placed  in  an  oven  at  a  temperature  of  25°  C.  (77°  F.).*

On  June  1st  six  of  the  flasks  gave  signs  of  fermentation,  and
next  day  all  the  flasks  were  fermenting.

The  following  are  some  of  the  numerous  microscopic  observa-
tions which  we  made  on  the  liquids  and  their  deposits.

On  June  ]  st  the  liquid  in  one  of  the  six  flasks  which  had
begun  to  ferment  was  covered  with  a  continuous  scum  of  nvjco-
dcrma  vim,  below  which  appeared  a  filamentous  network  belong-
ing to  a  mycelium,  or  other  fungoid  growth.  But  neither  in  the
liquid  itself  nor  in  the  deposit  could  we  perceive  any  cells  of  the
ferment  of  beer;  the  field,  however,  was  swarming  with  active
butyric  vibrios,  rather  thick  and  short,  their  length  being
about  twice  their  diameter.  This  fermentation  was  exclusively
butyric.

On  June  2nd  another  of  the  flasks  showed  no  vibrios,  but
alcoholic  ferment  in  small  quantity,  much  lactic  ferment,  con-
sisting of  little  particles  contracted  at  the  middle  and  non-
mobile,  and,  finally,  some  slender  filaments,  resembling  those
represented  in  Plate  I.,  Nos.  1  and  2.

On   June  3rd  we  examined  the  liquid  in  the  flask  which
showed  the  most   marked  fermentation.      In    addition    to  the
flakes  of  fungoid  growths,  checked  in  their  development  through
■want  of  air,  we  found  at  least  five  distinct  productions,  which
are  represented  in  the  accompanying  sketch  (Fig.  1]).
aaa. — Thick  cells  of  alcoholic  ferment,  the  size  of  which  is  given
in  our  sketch :  thus,  -^^-f-^  indicates  that  the  correspond-
ing figure  is  ^^'-V  millimetre  in  length  (rather  more  than
-oinr  inch).
hbb.  —Small  alcoholic  ferment,  such  as  we  generally  see  in  the

*  The  decanting  into  the  flasks  is  necessary,  because  of  the  possibility
of  the  fermentation  in  the  basins  being  masked .  See  further  on  the  note
on  p.  75.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  71

must  of  acid  and  sugared  fruits — especially  in  filtered
grape  raust.  Its  dimensions  varied  from  1  to  li,  or
2,  450tlis  of  a  millimetre.*


Fig.  11.

ccc. — "  Low  "  yeast,  of  a  type  resembling  that  existing  in  other
preparations  fermenting  in  tlie  room.

ddd. — Enlarged,  distended  spores  of  mucor  racemosns.  These
are  scarce,  and  have  an  old  appearance.  We  shall  come
to  them  again  in  a  subsequent  chapter,  where  we  shall
explain  their  real  significance.

eee. — Short  vibrios,  occurring  either  contracted  or  not  near
the  middle.  Some  were  motionless,  others  vibrating  to
and  fro  and  executing  other  movements.  These  forms
belong  to  the  butyric  and  lactic  ferments  shown  on
Plate  I.

*  This  small  ferment  is  very  curious,  although  it  scarcely  affects
industrial  fermentation.  It  was  first  described  in  1862.  (Pasteue,
Bulletin  de  la  SocietS  chimique,  1862,  page  67,  and  following  :  Quelques
faits  nouveaux  au  sujet  des  levures  alcooliques.)  It  has  since  been  described
by  Dr.  Eees  under  the  name  Saccharomyces  apiculatus.  (Dr.  Eees,
Leipzig,  1870  :  Sur  les  champignons  de  fermentation  alcooliques.  See  also
Dr.  Engel,  These  pour  le  Doctorat,  Paris,  1872.)  If  we  carefully  filter
some  grape  must  at  the  time  of  vintage,  we  may  be  sure  that  we  shall
see  it  appear  in  the  clear  liquid  at  the  bottom  of  our  vessel,  without
intermixture  with  any  other  ferment.

Should  we  not  filter  the  must  this  ferment  will  appear  all  the  same,
but  it  wiU  soon  become  associated  with  another,  thicker  in  appearance
and  more  elongated,  which  also  is  one  of  the  ferments  peculiar  to  the  fer-
mentation of  grape  must.


72  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

The  preceding  series  of  experiments  shows  us  that,  in  the
case  of  wort  exposed  to  the  air,  germs  of  divers  organisms,
amongst  which  various  ferments — butyric,  lactic,  and  alcoholic —
are  to  be  found,  fall  simultaneously  from  the  particles  of  dust
floating  in  the  air.  We  must  observe,  however,  that  we  were
dealing  with  the  air  of  a  laboratory  in  which  we  were  constantly
studying  analogous  fermentations,  and  that  a  different  atmo-
sphere would,  most  likely,  give  us  different  results.  We  shall
see  a  proof  of  this  in  the  following  paragraph,  where  we  shall
also  find  some  new  facts  tending  to  prove  that  the  germs  of
alcoholic  ferment  do  not  exist  amongst  the  particles  of  dust
floating  in  the  air,  in  anything  like  the  quantity  usually
supposed.

§  V. — New  Comparative  Studies  on  the  Germs  held  in
Suspension  by  the  Air  of  Different  Places  which
are  near  each  other,  but  Subjected  to  Different
Conditions  affecting  the  Production  and  Diffusion
OF  THE  Particles  of  Dust  found  in  them.

We  may  compare  the  character  and  the  greater  or  less  abun-
dance of  similar  germs  existing  in  neighbouring  localities,  by
studying  the  changes  which  take  place  in  similar  liquids  exposed
simultaneously  to  the  action  of  the  air  in  those  localities.  To
do  this,  we  must  prepare  a  large  number  of  flasks  of  the  same
size,  free  from  air,  and  containing  about  equal  quantities  of  a
particular  liquid^ — the  same  being  used  for  all.  We  must  open
the  same  number  of  these  flasks  in  each  of  the  localities  we
have  selected,  and  permit  the  air  with  all  its  particles  of  dust
.  to  rush  into  them  ;  then  we  must  close  our  flasks  again,  and
observe,  day  by  day,  the  appearances  they  present.  The
results  obtained  by  these  means  will  not  furnish  us  with  con-
clusions applicable  to  every  kind  of  germ  that  the  air  contains
at  any  given  moment,  but  only  with  conclusions  which  apply  to
those  germs  which  can  develop  in  the  particular  liquid  em-
ployed. Thus,  for  example,  we  could  draw  no  inference  as  to
the  nature  and  relative  number  of  bacteria  or  vibrios,  in  the


i?        ^«>


<x^       <^  <0


°q


.%.      ^


fei3       ^


<«5


-"C"  g»


^        ®  60


§  "0^.


4.


UJ  u


■<JP^


e#


0.  caqg*


§


©-


J


o
CO      ©.


^


©D


ct>


/j.OO


Deyrolle  del


Ficart  sc


ToRiM,.K  iM  Process  ok  Devei.oi'mknt.


/f7^  l'<iny  Crai .  /'or


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  /d

case  where  we  employ  an  acid  liquid  ;  for  organisms  of  that
kind  we  must  have  recourse  to  neutral  or  slightly  alkaline  in-
fusions. On  the  other  hand,  liquids  having  a  feeble  acid
reaction  would  favour  the  growth  of  tnucedines,  mycoderms,  and
certain  ferments,  as  for  example,  the  alcoholic.

On  November  26th,  1872,  we  opened  and  reclosed  thirty
flasks  containing  must  kept  from  the  last  vintage.

Ten  flasks  were  opened  at  the  bottom  of  the  garden  of  the
Ecole  Normale.

Ten  on  the  landing  of  the  second  floor.

Ten  in  the  principal  room  of  our  laboratory,  which  had  been
swept  out  shortly  before,  by  which  operation  the  dust  of  the
floor  had  been  raised  and  put  in  motion.

Difierent  objects  made  their  appearance  in  a  certain  number
of  the  thirty  flasks  on  the  following  days  ;  but  from  December
17th,  things  remained  stationary.  The  following  observations
were  made  at  that  date  : —

Of  the  ten  flasks  from  the  bottom  of  the  garden,  only  one  had
undergone  any  change.

Of  the  ten  flasks  from  the  interior  of  the  building,  four  had
undergone  change.

Of  the  ten  flasks  from  our  laboratory,  all  had  undergone
change.

The  difierence  in  the  number  of  germs  held  in  suspension  in
the  three  difierent  places  whence  we  had  taken  our  air  was,
therefore,  considerable.

The  difierence  in  the  nature  of  the  germs  was  equally  marked.
Those  flasks  of  our  first  two  series  which  had  undergone  change
presented  no  trace  of  tomlce,  or  anything  besides  fungoid
growths,  whilst  three  of  the  last  ten  contained  toruke  associated
with  fungoid  growths.*

*  We  may  remind  the  reader  that  in  1862,  in  our  Memoire  sur  les
Generations  dites  spontanees,  we  applied  the  expression  of  torula  to  all  the
little  cellular  plants  of  spontaneous  growth,  excepting  mycelium,  pro-
pagated by  budding,  after  the  manner  of  the  ferment  of  beer.  At  the
same  time,  stress  was  laid  upon  the  frequent  occurrence  of  their  germs,
especially  in  our  laboratory,  where  studies  on  fermentation  were,  even
then,  carried  on.     Plate  III.  represents  two  of  these  ferments.


74  stui)ip:s  on  fermentation.

On  May  29th,  1873,  eighteen  flasks,  free  from  air  and  with
necks  drawn  out  to  a  fine  point,  containing  must,  were  taken
into  one  of  our  rooms  at  the  Ecole  Normale.  A  jet  of  gas  from  an
ordinary  burner  was  passed  over  the  surface  of  the  glass  down  to
the  surface  of  the  liquid,  with  the  object  of  burning  any  particles
of  dust  that  might  have  been  deposited  from  the  atmosphere  of
the  laboratory  ;  the  points  of  the  flasks  were  then  broken  with
a  pair  of  ordinary  scissors  that  had  been  passed  through  the
flame  of  a  spirit  lamp  ;  and,  lastl}',  the  tops  of  the  flasks  were
taken  off",  just  above  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  and  the  eighteen
flasks  thus  became  transformed  into  eighteen  basins,  each  con-
taining about  100  c,c.  (about  3|  fluid  ounces)  of  grape  must.
These  eighteen  basins  were  placed  on  a  table  in  the  room,  and
left  there  for  five  daj'S,  precautions  being  taken  to  prevent  any
one  from  entering  the  room.

The  basins  were  examined  on  June  2nd :  they  all  contained
little  flakes  of  floating  mycelium,  but  none  of  them  had  any
white  streaks  on  their  sides — a  proof  that  they  were  destitute  of
torulce — the  liquid  had  remained  very  bright.  AYith  the  contents
of  nine  of  the  basins  we  filled  two  long-necked  flasks  that  we  had
prepared  for  our  purpose — that  is  to  say,  had  heated  to  a
certain  point,  just  before  using  them,  with  the  object  of  re-
moving from  their  sides  any  foreign  germs  which  they  might
have  picked  up  in  the  laboratory.  Up  to  July  10th,  when  we
deemed  it  useless  to  carry  our  observations  further,  these  flasks
presented  no  signs  of  fermentation  whatever.  With  the  con-
tents of  the  remaining  nine  basins,  we  filled  two  other  long-
necked  flasks,  but  before  doing  so,  we  kept  the  basins  for  twenty-
four  hours  (June  2nd  to  3rd)  in  the  basement  of  our  laboratory.
These  two  flasks  soon  set  up  an  active  fermentation,  and  de-
posited an  abundance  of  yeast — an  additional  proof  of  the  great
difference  in  character  of  the  germs  floating  about  the  room
and  those  floating  about  the  laboratory.

On  June  3rd  we  exposed,  simultaneously,  in  the  aforemen-
tioned room  and  also  in  our  laboratory,  seven  basins  prepared  as
just  described.     On  June  8th  all  the  basins  in  the  room  showed


STUDIES    ON    FERMEIs'TATION.  75

signs  of  fungoid  growths,  without  any  trace  oi  mycoderma  rini,  or
lines  indicative  of  the  presence  of  tonilce,  whilst  six  of  the  seven
in  our  laboratory  had  their  sides  covered  with  a  white  precipitate,
and  on  the  surface  of  the  liquids  a  layer  of  isolated  patches  of
fungoid  growth.  The  liquid  in  these  latter  basins  was  poured
into  a  long-necked  flask,  which  it  nearly  filled,  and  in  the
course  of  forty-eight  hours  it  began  to  show  signs  of  alcoholic
fermentation.*  This  is  another  striking  proof  of  the  difference
between  the  number  of  germs  of  ferment  and  iorulacece  in  the
air  of  our  laboratory  and  that  of  an  ordinary  room.

We  append  drawings  of  the  torulce  found  in  the  six  labora-
tory basins  (see  Sketches  I.,  II.,  III.,  IV.,  V.,  VI.  of  Fig.  12).  The
abundance  of  the  germs  of  these  organisms  in  our  laboratory
is  very  striking,  and  is  doubtless  due  to  the  nature  of  the  work

*  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  in  this  case,  as  in  the  case  recorded
§  IV.  p.  70,  in  order  to  detect  with  certainty  any  alcoholic  ferment,  the
contents  of  the  basins  were  transferred  to  a  long-necked  flask  ;  since
where,  as  in  the  basins,  a  liquid  has  a  large  surface  exposed  to  spon-
taneous impregnation,  the  strictly  alcoholic  fermentation  may  escape
observation.  The  reason  of  this  is  that,  when  a  liquid  of  large  surface
but  small  depth  is  exposed  to  the  air  it  affords  a  suitable  medium  for  the
active  development  of  moulds,  which,  by  absorbing  the  oxygen  which
would  dissolve  in  the  liquid,  checks  the  growth  of  the  ferment,  or  even
prevents  its  germination  altogether.  As  a  matter  of  fact  we  shall  see
that  for  their  growth  and  multiplication  ferment  cells,  and  still  more
ferment  germs  (the  difference  between  the  two  will  appear  in  Chap.  V.),
require  a  larger  supply  of  oxygen  just  in  proportion  to  their  age,  state  of
desiccation,  and  distance  from  the  budding  condition.  Now,  if  the  spores
of  moulds  be  present  and  effect  a  settlement  in  the  liquid,  the  increase  of
the  ferment,  or  even  its  actual  germination,  is  prevented.  But  by  collect-
ing the  liquid  in  a  deep  and  narrow  vessel,  such  as  a  long-necked  flask,
after  it  has  been  exposed  to  spontaneous  impregnation,  we  deprive  the
moulds  almost  completely  of  oxygen,  and  so  allow  the  feiTaent  to  exert
its  peculiar  energies.  The  mere  act  of  transferring  enables  the  liquid  to
take  up  a  sufficiency  of  oxygen,  and  a  liberation  of  gas  very  speedily
shows  that  fermentative  action  is  going  on.  We  must  add  further  that
sometimes  in  a  liquid  of  large  surface  and  shallow  depth,  in  which  but
little  ferment  is  formed,  the  evolution  of  carbonic  acid  gas  may  fail  to  be
detected,  by  reason  of  its  diffusing  itself  into  the  air  slowly  as  it  is
formed.


'6


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


carried  on  there,  as  well  as  to  the  power  of  endurance  peculiar
to  the  germs,  or  the  minute  vegetative  cells  of  these  micro-
scopic plants — a  tenacity  of  life  which  prevents  them  from  losing
their  reproductive  powers,  even  after  being  dried  up  into  dust.
But  varied  as  are  the  formations  represented  in  Fig.  12 — and
it  will  be  observed  that  in  IV.  and  VI.  we  have  shown  four


6-3^


Y


n


^„    4^


vr


]  \o  cP  ^


VI


Fig.  12.


distinct  forms,  marked  a,  a;  b,  b  ;  m,  m ;  n,  n  respectively — it
must  not  be  supposed  that  they  correspond  necessarily  to  dis-
tinct species.  From  the  ends  of  a  compound  organism  like
those  in  No.  Ill,  a  little  spherical  cell  may  detach  itself  and
then,  by  a  process  of  budding,  give  rise  to  a   series  of  other


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  77

rairiute  spherical  cells  reproducing  the  form  shown  in  Nos.  I.
and  II.

The  forms  figured  in  No.  III.  represent  one  of  the  types  of
mycoderma  vini,  which  is  often  found  in  this  branching  arbor-
escent state  ;  but  it  frequently  also  occurs  in  short  forms,  and  it  is
in  this  shape  that  it  is  generally  met  with  on  the  surface  of  wines.

It  is  true  that  the  nature  of  the  substratum  has  a  great
influence  on  the  changes  of  aspect  in  the  organisms  which  we
are  describing,  but  this  is  not  the  sole  cause  of  their  morpho-
logical modifications.  We  are  strongly  inclined  to  believe  that
each  of  the  cells,  or  vegetating  forms  so  represented,  difiering  so
greatly  as  they  do  in  aspect,  and  begotten,  all  of  them,  spon-
taneously in  certain  appropriate  liquids,  in  a  laboratory  where
researches  on  fermentation  are  pursued,  is  capable  of  furnishing
a  distinct  variety.  In  fact,  there  is  not  a  single  one  of  the
cells  in  the  six  varieties  in  Fig.  12,  which,  taken  alone,  has  not
its  own  peculiar  characteristics,  which,  by  hereditary  trans-
mission, it  can  impart,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  to  all  the
individuals  of  the  generations  that  succeed  it.

We  may  remark,  on  the  other  hand,  that  nothing  can  be
more  favourable  to  the  isolation  of  different  varieties  of  toruJa
or  mycoderma  vini  than  the  spontaneous  impregnations  to  which
we  submit  our  liquids.  For  when  suitable  liquids  contained  in
flasks  exhausted  of  air  are  impregnated  with  the  particles  of
atmospheric  dust,  by  opening  the  flasks  for  a  moment  and  then
immediately  re-sealing  them,  it  must  generally  happen  that  we
admit  only  one  species  of  reproductive  organism,  so  that  we
shall  have  a  vegetation  exclusively  of  one  kind,  as  being  derived
from  the  same  mother-cell.  If  we  could  take  from  a  crowd
composed  of  men  and  women  separate  couples,  and  forthwith
transport  each  couple  to  a  separate  isolated  and  unpeopled
island,  they  would,  in  the  course  of  time,  beyond  doubt  form  so
many  distinct  tribes.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  some  of  the  torulce  in  Fig.  12  are
not  ferments ;  they  do  not  cause  sugar  to  decompose  into
alcohol  and  carbonic  acid,  any  more  than  the  mycoderma  viioi


78  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

does  ;  but,  nevertheless,  there  may  be  an  absolute  similarity  in
aspect,  development,  shape,  and  size  between  the  alcoholic
ferment,  properly  so  called,  and  these  toru/acece.

We  must  here  cite  a  case  in  proof.  On  May  28th,  1872,  in
one  of  the  rooms  of  our  laboratory,  we  broke  the  fine  points  of
a  series  of  flasks,  similar  to  those  used  in  our  previous  experi-
ments, containing  must  of  grapes  and  deprived  of  air.  We
then  closed  up  the  ends  immediatel}'  after  the  sudden  entrance
of  the  exterior  air.  One  of  these  flasks  developed  only  one  kind
of  organism,  which  belonged  to  the  torulacece.  On  June  7th
this  was  sufliciently  abundant  to  cover  all  the  sides  with  a
white  deposit,  and  the  surface  of  the  liquid  appeared  quite  free
of  any  mycodenna  vini.  To  assure  ourselves  that  we  were
actually  dealing  with  one  kind  of  tnruhe,  unattended  by
fungoid  growths,  we  waited  until  June  14th,  but  the  aspect  of
things  remained  unchanged.  On  that  day  we  opened  the  flask ;
there  was  no  escape  of  gas  to  indicate  that  the  interior  pressure
was  greater  than  the  exterior.  AYe  then  subjected  the  plant
to  microscopic  examination.  It  was  quite  homogeneous,  and
formed  of  a  mass  of  cells,  absolutely  identical  in  aspect  and
bize  with  old  cells  of  ordinary  yeast  (Fig.  13).

&     ^  ©

Fig.  13.
We  distilled  all  the  liquid,  of  which  there  was  about  100  c.c,
(3 1  fl.  oz.)  without  obtaining  any  trace  of  alcohol  in  our  distillate;
we  collected  33  c.c.  (about  an  ounce)  of  the  distillate,  which  we
distilled  again,  and  we  submitted  the  distillate  a  third  time  to
distillation  ;  but  even  then  there  were  no  more  signs  of  the
presence  of  alcohol  than  there  had  been  in  our  first  distillate.*

*  Here  we  had  to  seek  for  a  most  minute  quantity  of  alcohol,  that  no
alcoholometer  could  have  indicated.  A  certain  sign  of  the  presence  of
alcohol  is  contained  in  the  first  few  drops  distilled ;  these  alwaj's  assume
the  form  of  little  drops  or  strice,  or,  better  still,  oily  tears,  when  alcohol
is  present  in  the  distillate.     The  distillation  should  bo  eirecteJ  with  a


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  79

"We  may  safely  conclude  that  our  torula,  in  the  course  of  its
development  in  must,  with  a  weight  that  would  have  been
very  appreciable,  did  not  produce,  by  its  action  of  multiplica-
tion io-{«o  of  1  c.c.  of  alcohol.

Under  the  following  conditions  we  obtained  a  slightly
different  result,  which,  nevertheless,  confirmed  the  preceding  one.

On  July  5th,  1872,  we  opened  and  closed  twelve  flasks  similar
to  those  we  had  used  before,  the  sole  difference  being  that  they
contained  yeast  water  *  sweetened  with  ten  per  cent,  of  sugar.
One  of  these  flasks  furnished  us  similarly  with  one  kind  of
torula,  which  bore  the  greatest  resemblance  to  the  ferment  of
beer.  When  this  torida  was  beginning  to  spread  all  over  the
bottom  of  our  flask,  we  shook  up  the  liquid,  and  turned  the
flask  upside  down,  with  the  object  of  submerging  the  torula  and
depriving  it  of  air,  at  least  at  the  bottom  of  the  neck.  For
some  days,  and  even  months,  there  were  no  signs  of  the  libera-
tion of  gas.  On  July  22nd,  1873,  after  the  interval  of  a  year,
we  opened  the  flask  (which  gave  no  indication  of  the  existence
of  an  interior  pressure)  and  endeavoured  to  discover  the  pres-
ence of  alcohol,  by  means  of  successive  distillations,  as  just
described.  In  the  two  first  distillates  there  seemed  to  be  no
alcohol,  but  in  the  third  we  detected  its  presence  in  ver}^  small
quantity.  We  shall  see,  later  on,  that  the  formation  of  such  a
small  quantity  of  alcohol  may  be  attributed  to  the  fact  of  the
plant  having  been  submerged  when  in  full  growth,  and  to  its
having  continued  to  live  for  some  time  after  its  submersion  quite
independently  of  the  oxygen  contained  in  the  air  of  the  flask.

small  long-necked  retort  and  a  Liebig's  condenser.  "We  must  carefully
watch  tlie  neck  of  the  retort  at  the  moment  of  boiling ;  should  the  liquid
contain  y^joo  P^^^  ^^  ^^^  volume  of  alcohol,  we  shall  observe  the  indica-
tions given  above  for  a  short,  but  appreciable  time,  -^j]^  of  alcohol  is
difficult  to  judge,  but  with  care  and  practice  we  may  do  it  without  fail-
ing. Collecting  a  third  of  each  distillate,  and  supposing  the  limit  of
appreciation  to  stop  at  thousandths,  in  three  distillations  we  may  easily
detect  the  presence  of  lo^ooo  of  1  c.c.  of  alcohol  in  a  total  volume  of  100  c.c.
*  Yeast  when  macerated  in  water  imparts  to  it  certain  soluble  nitro-
genous materials.  The  solution  so  obtained,  filtered  from  yeast  globules,
is  known  as  yeast  ivater. — D.  C.  R.


80  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

From  the  previous  facts  it  is  obvious  that  there  exist  certain
productions  of  various  aspects,  the  germs  of  which  are  parti-
cularly abundant  in  the  dust  of  a  laboratory  where  the  pheno-
mena of  fermentation  are  studied,  productions  essentially  aerial,
and  incapable  of  giving  rise  to  fermentation,  although  it  may
be  impossible  for  the  microscope  to  distinguish  their  forms  from
those  of  true  alcoholic  ferments.

The  idea  of  some  physiological  bond  between  these  plants  and
the  ferments  which  resemble  them  in  so  remarkable  a  manner,
is  one  that  impresses  itself  forcibly  and,  so  to  say,  instinctively
upon  the  mind.  This  remark  holds  good  also  in  the  case  of
mycoderma  vim,  properly  so  called,  when  compared  with
alcoholic  ferments.  There  appears  to  be  no  other  difference
between  the  mycoderma  vini  and  the  torulce  of  which  we  are
speaking,  than  that  afforded  by  peculiarities  of  physical  structure
and  a  certain  greasiness  in  the  cells  of  the  former  which  permits
it  to  exist,  in  the  form  of  a  scum,  upon  the  surface  of  liquids,
that  is  to  say  unsubmerged.

We  have  frequently,  but  without  success,  endeavoured  to
bring  about  the  conversion  of  these  unsubmerged  torn  Ice  and
mycoderma  vini  into  alcoholic  ferments  ;  in  other  words,  we
have  never  succeeded  in  imparting  to  these  torulm  or  to  myco-
derma vini,  which  bear  so  striking  a  resemblance  to  alcoholic
ferments,  the  permanent  fermentative  character  peculiar  to  the
latter.  At  one  period  of  our  researches,  in  1862,  and  more
recently,  in  1872,  we  thought  that  we  had  discovered  the  con-
ditions under  which  such  conversion  might  be  possible,  but,  as
we  shall  explain  in  a  subsequent  chapter,  our  experiments
were  affected  by  certain  errors  that  had  escaped  our  notice.

*  It  is  possible  that  this  greasiuess  in  the  cells  of  the  common  mycoderma
vini  arises  simply  from  the  composition  of  the  liquid  in  which  it  vegetates.
It  is  in  saccharine  liquids  that  the  submerged  toruJoi  are  found;  fer-
mented liquids  more  readily  give  birth  to  the  forms  of  toruJcc  and  myco-
derma vini  which  exist  as  a  scum.  In  all  probability,  however,  there  is
no  radical  diflference  between  these  two  kinds  of  little  cellular  plants  of
aerial  growth,  the  floating  torulw  and  mycoderma  vini.


STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATIOX.  "  81

^  VI, — Yeast   may  become  Dry  and  be  Reduced  to  Dust

WITHOUT    LOSING    ITS    FACULTY    OF    ReI'RODUCTION.

In  the  preceding  paragraphs  we  have  given  examples  of
liquids  becoming  impregnated  with  self-sown  alcoliolic  ferments.
We  shall  proceed  to  show  that  this  little  cellular  plant  may
actually  exist  in  the  form  of  dust,  floating  in  the  air,  after
the  manner  of  spores  of  fungoid  growth  and  the  encysted  forms
of  certain  infusoria,  without  losing  its  powers  of  reproduction.

On  December  16th,  1872,  we  collected  and  pressed  all  the
yeast  resulting  from  a  brewing  of  about  one  hectolitre  (about
22  gallons).  From  the  centre  of  the  cake  we  took  a  few
grammes  (50  or  60  grains)  of  yeast,  which  we  mixed  in  a
porcelain  mortar  with  five  times  its  weight  of  plaster — both
mortar  and  plaster  having  been  heated,  just  before,  in  an  oil  bath,
to  a  temperature  of  about  200°  0.  (392°  F.),  and  then  cooled
rapidly.  The  powder  thus  prepared  was  immediately  done  up
in  a  twist  of  paper,  which  had  been  passed  through  the  flame
of  a  spirit  lamp,  and  the  twist  and  its  contents  were  then
placed  in  an  oven  at  a  temperature  of  from  20°  C.  to  25°  0.
(about  75°  F.).  The  object  of  these  several  precautions  was
to  free  the  powder  composed  of  the  yeast  and  plaster,  if  not
from  the  germs  contained  in  floating  particles  of  dust,  at  all
events  from  those  contained  in  the  dust  existing  on  the  surface
of  the  articles  we  used — the  mortar,  plaster,  and  paper.

On  December  18th,  we  took  up  with  a    platinum    spatula.


Fig.  14.


previously  passed  through  the  flame,  a  pinch  of  the  j^cast-and-
plaster  powder,  and  sowed  it  in  a  two- necked  flask  (Fig.  14)


82  STUDIES    ON    FEUMENTATION.

containing  some  pure  wort.  We  then  placed  the  flask  in  an
oven,  at  20°  C.

On  December  21st,  three  days  after  we  had  sown  the  powder,
fermentation  began  to  manifest  itself  by  the  appearance  of
patches  of  froth  on  the  surface  of  the  wort.  On  December  10th
and  20th  the  yeaat  was  sensibly  developing,  although  there  was
no  liberation  of  gas  to  denote  the  presence  of  actual  fermentation.
The  yeast,  examined  under  the  microscope,  appeared  very  pure.

On  March  5th,  1873,  we  took  another  pinch  of  the  yeast-
and-plaster  powder  from  the  twist  of  paper,  and  placed  it  in
a  flask  of  pure  wort,  as  in  the  foregoing  experiment.

On  March  9th,  that  is,  after  having  been  subjected  to  a  heat
of  20°  C.  (68°  F.)  in  the  oven  for  four  days,  fermentation  began
to  manifest  itself  by  the  appearance  of  patches  of  froth  on  the
surface  of  the  wort.  From  this  it  was  evident  that  the  yeast
had  not  been  destroyed,  but  only  retarded  in  its  revival.

On  July  25th,  1873 — that  is,  after  a  lapse  of  seven  months
and  a  half — we  resumed  our  experiments,  and  sowed  some
more  of  the  yeast-and-plaster  powder  in  another  flask  of  wort.
On  August  2nd,  eight  days  from  the  time  of  our  sowing,  the
little  islets  of  froth  appeared  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid.
Observed  under  the  microscope,  the  yeast  still  seemed  pure,
and  resembled  the  original  yeast ;  we  append  a  sketch,  which
will  give  an  idea  of  its  shape  (Fig.   15).

:?  k

Fig.  15.

On  November  7th,  1873,  we  once  more  sowed  some  of  the
powder.  This  time  the  yeast  was  dead ;  we  observed  the
flask  whicli  contained  it,  day  by  day,  until  February  1st,  1874,
without  detecting  the  sHglitest  sign  of  fermentation  or  de-
velopment of  the  yeast  that  we  had  sown.  On  Februarj^  1st,
we  made  a  microscopical  examination  of  the  yeast,  and  found


STUDIES    ON    FERMEMATIOX.  83

it  mixed  with  the  plaster  and  absolutely  inert  at  the  bottom
of  the  saccharine  liquid  ;  its  cells  were  isolated,  very  old-looking
and  granulated,  without  any  appearance  that  might  denote  the
possibility  of  their  ever  budding  again.

Thus  we  determined  that  alcoholic  ferment  may  be  dried
at  the  ordinary  temperature  of  the  atmosphere,  and  preserved,
in  the  form  of  dust,  for  a  period  of  seven  months  or  longer,
without  losing  its  faculty  of  reproduction.  This  faculty  evi-
dently diminishes  in  the  course  of  time,  for  our  dried  yeast,
after  having  been  kept  for  seven  months  and  a  half — all  the
other  conditions  of  the  two  experiments  having  been  precisely
the  same — required  about  eight  days  to  develop  sufficiently
to  reveal  fermentation,  whilst,  immediately  after  the  drying,
it  only  required  three  or  four  days  to  accomplish  the  same  thing.

Side  by  side  with  these  experiments  on  alcoholic  ferment,
we  carried  on  exactly  similar  ones  with  yeast  obtained  from
"high  fermentation  "  breweries.  On  December  16th,  1872,  we
prepared  a  powder  of  this  yeast  and  plaster  as  before.  Our
last  sowing  took  place  on  July  25th,  1873,  in  a  flask  of  pure
wort,  which  showed  signs  of  fermentation  on  July  27th.  We
append  a  sketch  (Fig.  16)  which  gives  the  general  aspect  of

6


Pig.   1(J.


this  "  high  ferment,"  when  revived  after  such  a  lapse  of  time  ;
it  had  preserved  the  distinctive  features  of  the  cells  of  "high
ferment."

These  facts  can  leave  no  doubt  whatever  as  to  the  possi-
bility of  cells  of  yeast  existing,  in  a  state  of  suspension  in  the
air,  in  the  form  of  fine  dust,  particularly  in  a  laboratory
where  researches  on  alcoholic  fermentation  are  pursued.


84


CHAPTER   IV.

The  Growth  of  Different  Organis.ms  in  a  State  of
Purity  :    Their  Autonomy*

Our  observations  in  the  preceding  chapter  will  have  shown
that  organic  liquids,  natural  or  artificial — the  wort  of  beer
amongst  others — if  exposed  to  contact  with  the  air,  rapidly
develop  various  forms  of  life.  This  is  a  natural  consequence
of  the  mode  of  impregnation.  The  fertility  of  the  liquid
depends  on  the  various  microscopic  germs  which  are  deposited

*  In  the  course  of  this  work  we  shall  combat,  by  means  of  experi-
mental proofs  which  appear  to  us  irrefragable,  the  opinions  which  many
writers  entertain  on  the  subject  of  certain  transformations  of  organisms
— that  of  peniciUium  gJnuciim  into  ferment,  or  mycoderma ;  of  bacteria
into  lactic  ferment ;  of  ferment  into  vibrios  ;  of  mycoderma  aceti  into  fer-
ment, and  so  on.  Nevertheless,  we  shall  pronounce  no  a  priori  opinion
on  the  question  whether  the  inferior  organisms,  which  will  be  the  subject
of  this  chapter,  and  which  include  yeast  and  the  fei-ments  properly  so
called,  are  perfect  beings  in  their  habitual  form,  or  whether  they  are
susceptible  of  polymorphism.  It  is  with  this  reservation  that  we  employ
the  word  autonomy.  If  we  claim  polymorphism  for  any  species,  we  shall
not  do  so  without  furnishing  proofs.  Some  organs  detached  from  higher
organisms,  and  some  beings  in  a  certain  phase  of  their  existence,  may
reproduce  themselves  iinder  a  special  form,  with  special  j^roperties,  when
brought  into  media  and  under  conditions  that  are  unfit  for  the  production
of  the  plant  or  animal  under  its  other  shape  or  ordinary  mode  of  repro-
duction. Modern  Science  affords  many  examples  of  this,  and  certain
alcoholic  ferments  present  us  with  analogous  facts  ;  but  to  wish  to  stretch
these  facts  beyond  their  due  significance,  and  to  admit  a  polymorphism
that  cannot  bo  proved,  in  consequence  of  a  belief  that  it  is  possible,  or
on  the  faith  of  confused  observations,  is  to  indulge  in  gratuitous  assertion
from  a  mere  spirit  of  system.


STUDIES    ON    FER^IENTATION".  85

in  it  by  the  common  air,  and  these,  again,  as  regards  their
nature  and  number,  are  dependent  upon  the  situation  of  the
vessel  containing  them,  its  height  above  the  ground,  the
time  of  year,  the  disturbance  of  the  atmosphere,  and  other
causes.

The  fortuitous  association  of  other  forms,  in  growths  which
we  believe  to  be  uniform  and  independent,  constitutes  one  of
the  principal  difficulties  that  occur  in  the  study  of  the  lower
organisms,  particularly  that  of  fungoid  growths.  The  fact  that
the  germs  of  many  of  these  little  beings  exist  in  the  atmo-
sphere in  the  form  of  dust,  invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  or,
as  such,  spread  over  the  surface  of  the  diiferent  matei"ials  and
objects  used  in  experiments,  exposes  the  student  to  constant
risk  of  wrongly  interpreting  the  results  which,  come  under
his  notice.  He  has  sown  a  plant,  and  is  observing  the  course
of  its  development.  Without  his  knowledge,  spores  of  another
plant  have  got  mixed  with  his  growth,  and  germinated.  In
his  ignorance,  he  will  attribute  all  that  he  sees,  all  the  changes
Avhich  he  describes  and  which  he  sketches,  and  all  the  con-
clusions which  he  draws,  to  the  one  plant  which  engages  his
attention.  If  he  is  dealing  with  bacteria,  vibrios,  and,  generally
speaking,  the  infinite  variety  of  mobile  microscopic  organisms,
his  embarrasment  will  be  greater  still.  Again,  inasmuch  as
the  medium  which  serves  as  substratum  for  growths  has  a
considerable  influence  on  the  fertility  of  the  germs  in  contact
with  it,  as  well  as  on  their  ulterior  development,  it  often
happens  that  germs  deposited  fortuitously  by  the  particles  of
dust  which  fall  from  the  atmosphere  or  collect  on  objects  are
fertile  and  multijaly  with  rapidity,  whilst  those  which  have
been  directly  sown,  no  matter  in  what  number,  remain  sterile,
or  multiply  very  slowly.  If  we  place  in  a  young  wine  some
mycoderma  aceti,  we  shall  obtain  mycoderma  vini;  by  placing
some  mycoderma  mni  in  an  old  wine,  especially  if  it  is  a  little
acid,  we  shall  obtain  mycoderma  aceti*      It  is  from  facts  of

*  See,  on  this  subject,  the  author's  Etudes  sur  le  Vinaigre,  Paris,  1868,
p.  76,  note ;  and  esj)ecially  Etudes  sur  le  Vin,  2nd  Edition,  1873,  p.  19.


8G  STUDIES    ON    FKRMENTATTOX.

this  kind,  wrongly  interpreted,  that  many  errors  have  crept  into
our  knowledge  of  the  lower  organisms,  and  that  we  are  con-
stantly seeing  old  discussions  crop  up,  both  on  the  subject  of
so-called  spontaneous  generation  and  on  that  of  the  theory  of
fermentation.  At  every  step  in  the  course  of  this  work  we
shall  see  the  trace  of  these  complications,  as  well  as  the
influence  they  have  had  on  the  progress  of  our  knowledge.

In  opposition  to  these  results,  we  will  study  the  case  of  wort
sown  directly  with  germs  distinctly  of  one  kind,  unmixed  witli
any  other.


§  I. — Growth  of  Penicillium  Glaucum  and  Aspergillus
Glaucus  in  a  State  of  Purity — Proofs  that  these
Fungoid  Growths  do  not  become  Transformed  into
THE  Alcoholic  Ferments  of  Beer  or  Wine, — Pre-
liminary Enquiry  into  the  Cause  of  Fermentation.

Let  us  again  take  one  of  the  flasks  furnished  with  two  necks
such  as  we  have  already  described,  and  let  it  be  supposed  that
this  flask  contains  a  quantity  of  saccharine  wort,  brewed  some
considerable  time  ago,  which  has  undergone  no  change  what-
ever, except  in  colour,  the  slow  process  of  oxidation  having
gradually  darkened  the  original  colour  of  the  liquid.  What
we  have  to  do  is  to  drop  into  this  unchanged  and  fertile  liquid
some  grains  or  spores  of  penicilliiim  which  are  free  from  the
slightest  trace  of  the  spores  or  germs  of  other  microscopic
organisms.

One  means  of  effecting  this  consists  in  taking  up  with  a  pair  of
metallic  forceps,  previously  heated,  a  piece  of  platinum  wire,  one
or  two  centimetres  (about  J  in.)  in  length,  which  we  also  pass
through  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp,  and  with  which,  as  soon  as  it  is
cold,  we  touch  a  mass  of  sporanges  of  a  growth  of  penicUliam,
No  matter  how  few  spores  ma}-  be  taken  up  on  the  end  of  the
platinum  wire,  we  shall  liave  far  more  than  we  require  for  the
impregnation  of  the  liquid.     At  the  moment  of  charging  the


STUniKS    ON    FRiaiENTATION,  87

point  of  the  \\'iro  we  withdraw  the  glass  stopper  which  closes
the  india-rubber  tube  on  the  right-hand  neck  of  the  flask
(Fig.  14)  and  drop  the  wire  through  that  tube  ;  we  then  I'eplace
the  glass  stopper,  after  having,  by  way  of  additional  precaution,
passed  it  rapidly  through  the  flame  of  the  lamp.  There  is  no
doubt  that  we  expose  ourselves  to  error  in  consequence  of
having  to  convey  the  wire  through  the  surrounding  air,  and
also,  in  consequence  of  having  previously  to  open  the  flask ;
but,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  this  double  cause  of  error  has
never,  we  may  say,  interfered  with  the  exactness  of  our  experi-
ments, the  volume  of  air.  with  which  we  are  concerned  being
exceedingly  limited.  Moreover,  our  flask  being  in  free  com-
munication with  the  exterior  air,  by  means  of  the  opening  in
the  curved,  slender  tube,  there  is  no  inrush  of  air  when  we
withdraw  the  stopper.  The  chance  of  encountering  a  spore  or
fecund  germ  and  introducing  it  into  the  flask  on  the  wire  that
is  charged  with  the  others,  is  so  remote  that  we  have  considered
it  unnecessary  to  adopt  a  more  perfect  apparatus,  which  might
easily  have  been  devised  had  we  felt  that  it  was  necessary.

A  more  serious  cause  of  error  may  occur  in  the  preceding
method  ;  resulting  from  the  possible  impurity  of  the  spores
taken  from  a  field  of  peniciiliiim  which  has  developed  in  contact
with  common  air.  This  field  receives,  every  instant,  and  has
received  throughout  its  growth,  particles  of  dust  which  have
fallen  from  the  atmosphere  ;  thus,  it  may  not  be,  and,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  is  not,  free  from  the  germs  of  other  fungoid
growths.*

*  Some  observations  in  the  preceding  chapter  enable  us  to  account  for
the  vast  number  of  germs  which  are  constantly  falling  on  the  surface  of
everything.  We  may  here  allude  to  the  use  we  have  made  of  flasks,
shaped  as  in  Fig.  17,  and  holding  from  250  c.c.  to  300  c.c,  which  are  a
third  part  filled  with  an  organic  liquid,  and  are  closed  up  when  boiling.
They  contain  no  air  when  cool,  and  are  opened  in  series  of  10,  20,  &c.,
out  of  doors,  and  closed  up  again  immediately.  The  air  rushes  violently
into  the  vacuum,  and  thus  we  introduce  about  200  c.c.  of  air,  with  all
the  particles  of  dust  contained  in  that  air,  into  each  flask.  It  has  been
proved  that  a  certain  number  of  these  flasks  undergo  change  in  the


88  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

The  operator,  without  knowing  it,  may  frequently  sow,
besides  the  penicillium,  which  is  all  he  can  see,  spores  of  mucor
Diucedo  and  mycoclerma  vini,  in  short,  of  all  the  most  common
fungoid  growths.

This  process  of  impregnation,  therefore,  does  not  afford  us
sufficient  safeguards,  but  b3aneans  of  the  following  device  we  shall


Fig


render  it  more  satisfactor3^  Let  us  take  a  series  of  flasks  shaped  as
in  Fig.  17,  containing  an  organic  liquid  suitable  to  the  develop-
ment of  fungoid  growths,  that  is  to  say,  slightly  acid — yeast-
water,   plain   or   sugared,  the  wort  of  beer,  or  Raulin's  fluid*

course  of  time,  the  number  of  those  changing  and  the  nature  of  their
changes  being  in  close  proportion  to  the  probable  number  and  nature
of  the  floating  germs  able  to  develop  in  the  particular  nutritive
liquid  used.  If  we  work  at  great  elevations,  far  from  houses  and
the  dirt  of  towns  and  inhabited  plains,  as  we  did  at  Montanvert,
near  the  3fer  de  0/ace,  change  will  seldom  occur.  The  opposite  will  be
the  case  if  we  work  in  a  place  like  the  living-room  of  the  little,  dirty,  •
ill-kept  inn  at  Montanvert.  In  a  laboratory  where  fermentation  is
studied  we  obtain  certain  kinds  of  germs  which  often  differ  from  those
found  in  the  air  of  the  open  country.  If  we  desii'e  to  have  organisms  in
all  our  flasks,  we  have  only  to  stir  up  the  dust  on  the  ground  or  on  sur-
rounding objects  at  the  moment  when  we  open  the  flasks.  This  simple
and  easy  experiment  clearly  shows  us  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  field  of
sporanges  of  fungoid  growth,  existing  in  an  uncovered  vessel  or  on  the
surface  of  a  fruit,  to  escape  becoming  mixed  with  germs  that  are  foreign
to  the  little  plant ;  in  other  words,  the  student  who  sows  spores  of
penicilUam,  which  ho  has  collected  from  one  place  or  another  on  a  brush,
exposes  himself  to  serious  causes  of  error.

*  M.  Jules  Rauliu  has  published  a  well-known  and  remarkable  work
on  the  discovery  of  the  mineral  modium  best  adapted  bj'  its  composition


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  OV

will  answer  our  purpose  ;  let  us  boil  the  liquid,  and  having  pre-
viously drawn  out  the  necks,  let  us  close  the  ends  in  the  flame  of
a  lamp  whilst  the  steam  is  escaping,  as  soon  as  we  judge  that
the  air  has  been  nearh^  all  expelled.  Having  prepared  ten  or
twenty  of  these  flasks  in  this  manner,  when  tliey  are  cold  we
may  break  their  points  in  any  place  we  may  be  in.  The  air
will  rush  into  the  flasks,  and  we  must  then  seal  them  up  again
in  the  flame  of  the  lamp,  and  put  them  aside  for  future  obser-
vations. In  a  certain  number  of  these  flasks,  as  we  have
already  explained  in  our  experiments  carried  on  after  this
fashion,  we  shall  see  some  fungoid  growths  appear,  first  in  the
shape  of  flakes  of  mycelium  floating  in  the  liquid,  and  after-
wards coming  to  the  surface  to  fructify.  Now,  it  often  happens
that  penicillium  glaucum  appears  alone,  so  numerous  are  the
spores  of  this  fungus  floating  in  the  air.  Under  such  con-
ditions, M^e  shall  evidently  obtain  a  field  of  sporanges  quite  free
from  the  presence  of  other  organisms.  If  we  now  take  ofi"  the
neck  of  one  of  the  flasks  containing  the  pure  penicillium,
and  take  out  some  of  the  germs  with   our  platinum  wire,  *  we

to  tlie  life  of  certain  ordinary  fungoid  growths  ;  lie  has  given  a  formula
for  the  composition  of  such  a  medium.  It  is  this  that  we  call  here
*'  Raulin's  fluid  "  for  abbreviation.

Water    1,500      ]  Carbonate  of  Magnesia    . .       0-4

Sugar  Candy    70         Sulphate  of  Ammonia. .  .  .       0'25

Tartaric  Acid   4         Sulphate  of  Zinc 0*07

Nitrate  of  Ammonia 4         Sulphate  of  Iron 0'07

Phosphate  of  Ammonia  . .  0*6  Silicate  of  Potassium  ....  0-07
Carbonate  of  Potassium    .  .         0'6  |

J.  Eaulin.     Paris,  Victor  Masson,  1870.     These  pour  le  dodorat.

*  If  we  do  not  wish  to  take  the  chance  of  pi'ocuring  the  pure  penicillium
by  means  of  these  spontaneous  sowings,  effected  by  opening  and  then
closing  in  the  flame  a  certain  number  of  flasks  with  drawn-out  points,
we  may  utilize  one  of  the  flasks,  which,  having  been  opened  and  closed
again,  has  notwithstanding  developed  no  organized  forms,  as  follows  : —
We  impi'egnate  the  contained  liquid  directly,  by  dropping  into  it  from  a
metallic  wire  spores  taken  from  any  growth  of  penicillium  exposed  to  the
common  air ;  and  then  from  the  new  field  of  sporanges  formed  by  this
sowing  in  the  flask  that  has  been  re-closed,  we  must,  later  on,  take  the
pure  spores  that  we  require.     This  method  is  quicker  and  almost  as  safe.


90


STI Dir.S    ox    FERMENTATION.


shall  thus  obtain  with  most  certainty  spores  of  penicillium  free
from  impurities.

Our  readers  will  excuse  the  length  of  these  details  and  the
minutiae  of  our  precautions,  but  we  shall  again  and  again  see
that  to  neglect  them,  or  any  part  of  them,  is  to  expose  ourselves
to  hazard  in  drawing  sure  conclusions  from  facts  which  come
under  our  observation.


Fig.  18.


On  June  17th,  1872,  we  placed  some  pure  spores  of  pruicil/ium
in  a  series  of  three  flasks  containing  wort  (Fig.  18),  observing  all
the  precautions  that   we  have  indicated.     We  shall  designate

We  should  add  that,  if  we  wish  to  use  for  our  purpose  spores  oi  penicillium
from  a  closed  flask,  in  which  the  plant  has  fructified,  we  must  be  careful
not  to  leave  the  plant  too  long  closed  up.  A  few  daj-s  after  the  sowing
the  growth  of  the  fungus  is  arrested,  in  consequence  of  all  the  oxygen
being  absorbed,  and  its  place  being  sujiplied  by  a  mixture  of  carbonic
acid  and  nitrogen  ;  and  the  spores,  if  ki'pt  too  long  in  this  atmosphere,
will  all  perish.


STUDIES    ON    FERMRNTATTO.V.  91

these  flasks  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C.  On  the  following  day
the  spores  germinated,  and  the  liquid  became  full  of  flakes
of  mycelium,  some  of  which  came  to  the  surface  to  fructify.
The  temperature  varied  between  25°  C.  and  30°  C.  (77°  to
86°  F.).

On  June  22nd,  small  patches,  with  whitish  borders  and  green
centres,  developed  on  the  liquids.  "We  then  shook  up  the  flask
A,  in  order  to  submerge  the  plant  and  the  spores.*  We  also
shook  the  flask  B,  after  observing  the  precaution  of  sealing  up
the  slender  bent  tube.f  The  flask  C  was  attached  on  one  side
to  an  aspirator,  on  the  other  to  a  tube  filled  with  cotton,  and
every  day  we  renewed  the  air  in  it.

During  the  weeks  and  months  over  which  our  observations
extended,  there  was  not  the  least  formation  of  yeast  in  these
flasks ;  moreover,  we  have  frequently  repeated  this  and  other
experiments  of  a  similar  kind,  without  ever  detecting  the
appearance  of  either  ordinary  yeast  or  any  other  true  alcoholic
ferment.  The  experiments  may  be  made  with  saccharine  juices
that  are  highly  favourable  to  the  development  of  bacteria  and
lactic  ferment.  These  latter  appear  equally  incapable  of  trans-
formation into  yeast,  which  has  never  been  seen  to  develop  in
experiments  where  they  were  used,  if  proper  precautions  have
been  taken  to  secure  a  pure  growth.  Should  we  neglect  any  of
the  precautions  that  are  necessary  to  secure  the  purity  of  our
spores,  we  may  of  course  obtain  difierent  results.  If,  for
instance,  we  sow  spores  oi pmicillium  grown  in  free  contact  with

*  To  shake  tlie  liquid  witliout  danger  of  introducing  exterior  particles
of  dust,  we  apply  the  flame  of  the  spirit  lamp  to  the  drawn-out  neck  of
the  flask,  and  close  up  the  open  end ;  we  may  then  shake  our  flask  with-
out risk.  We  must  afterwards  reopen  the  end  of  the  drawn-out  neck  for
the  purpose  of  re-establishing  communication  with  the  exterior  air.

t  The  flask  B  was  closed  with  the  lamp  in  consequence  of  one  of  the
objects  of  these  experiments  being  to  test  M.  Trecul's  experiments  on  the
transformation  oi  penidlliwn  into  ferment.  Strangely  enough,  according
to  M.  Trecul,  as  we  shall  see  later  on,  the  spores  of  penicillium  refuse  to
change  into  ferment,  if  the  vessels  in  which  they  are  sown  are  not
"  perfectly  air-tight."


92  STUDIES    ON    FEltMENTATIOX.

the  atmospliere,  and  consequently  exposed  to  tlie  i)articles  of
dust  floating  therein,  we  shall  frequently  observe,  mixed  with
the  fruiting  hyphse  of  the  fungoid  growth,  5^east  and  mycoderma
vini  and  toruke,  or  even  bacteria  and  lactic  ferment.  Thus  we
shall  he  led  to  believe,  in  all  good  faith,  that  we  have  under  our
eyes  examples  of  the  changes  of  spores  of  fungoid  growth  into
cells  of  ferment,  or  proofs  of  the  conversion  of  bacteria  or  lactic
ferment  into  the  same  cells.

Causes  of  error  of  this  nature  have  induced  some  German
naturalists  to  believe  that  they  have  succeeded  in  proving,
beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt,  that  a  number  of  fungoid
growths  may  produce  alcoholic  ferment,  and  that  they  have
clearly  demonstrated  that  spores  of  these  fungi  maj''  become
transformed  into  yeast.  In  1856  M.  Bail,  and,  about  the  same
time,  Berkeley,  and,  later  on,  H.  Hoffmann  and  Hallier,  have
successively  entertained  these  views,  which  were  introduced  into
science  by  M.  Turpin.  We  have  combated  them  since  the  year
1861.*  Since  that  period  they  have  lost  rather  than  gained
ground  abroad,  in  spite  of  the  growing  favour  bestowed  on  the
Darwinian  system.  One  of  the  mycologists  who  enjoy  the  most
legitimate  authority  beyond  the  Rhine,  M.  de  Bary,  has  arrived,
as  we  have,  at  absolutely  negative  results.

A  simple  perusal  of  what  has  been  written  in  favour  of  the
transformations  which  we  are  discussing  causes  us  to  entertain
the  gravest  doubts  as  to  the  correctness  of  results  which  are
quoted  as  decisive.  We  need  only  give  one  example,  which  we
extract  from  a  paper  by  M.  11.  Hoffmann.

*'  In  some  cases,"  this  author  writes,  "  and  under  favourable
circumstances,  I  have  been  able  to  see  the  ferment  produce  fila-
ments, both  small  specimens  that  could  be  examined  immediately
under  the  microscope,  and  also  large  specimens,  and  I  have
recognized,  amongst  other  varieties,  pcniciUium  glaucum,  asco-
pliora  mucedo,  ascophora  elegans,  and  periconia  hyalina,  sometimes
isolated,  sometimes  intermixed.  This  result  is  most  easily  to  be
*   BuUdin  dc  la  Societc  PliilomatJrique.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  93

obtained  by  the  following  method  ; — Pour  a  small  quantity
of  water  into  a  test-tube,  which  should  then  be  placed  slant-
ingly :  introduce  some  fresh  yeast  into  the  middle  part  of  the
tube,  and  close  the  tube  with  a  wad  of  cotton,  to  prevent  the
entrance  of  exterior  particles  of  dust.  In  this  vapour-filled
receptacle  we  shall  sometimes  see  flakes  develop.  It  seems
that  Messrs.  Berkeley  and  G.  II.  Hoffmann  have  also  obtained
penicillium  from  ferment,  by  a  similar  process."*

Why,  however,  should  it  not  be  admitted  that  penicillium
found  under  such  conditions  may  be  derived  from  spores  of
that  growth,  adhering  to  the  sides  of  the  tube  before  it  is
closed  with  the  wad,  or  mixed  with  the  yeast  that  is  put  into
the  tube  ?

The  facts  alleged  during  the  last  few  years  by  M.  Bail,  who
persists  in  his  views,  in  spite  of  their  apparently  greater  exact-
ness, are  also  far  from  being  satisfactory.!

M.  Trecul,  who  is  almost  the  only  one  in  France,  besides
Messrs.  Ch.  Robin  and  Fremy,  to  participate  in  these  errors,
does  not  confine  himself  to  afiirming  the  change  of  the  spores
oi p)^nicilliiim  into  yeast,  and  vice  versa;  his  system  is  a  far  more
extensive  one.  "  According  to  my  observations,"  he  says,  "there
would  be  the  following  series  of  changes :  albuminous  matter
changed  into  bacteria,  or  directly  into  alcoholic  ferment,  or  into
tnycoderma ;  bacteria  into  lactic  ferment,  there  becoming  im-
moveable ;  lactic  ferment  into  alcoholic  ferment ;  alcoholic
ferment  into  mycoclerma  cerevisiw ;  finally,  mycoclenna  cerevisice
into  penicillium.  J

M.   Trecul  does  not  stop  here.     He  goes  on  to   explain  the

*  Hermann  Hoffmann,  Etudes  Mycologiqnes  sur  la  Fermentation.
Botanische  Zeitung  and  AnnaJes  des  Sciences  Naturelles,  ■4''  serie,  t.  xiii.
p.  24,   1860.

t  Communication  sur  VOrigine  et  le  Developpement  de  queJques  Cham-
pignons,    Dantzig,  1867.

X  Trecul,  Comptes  rendus  de  V Academic,  t.  Ixxiii.  p.  l-lo4  ;  Docember
28,  1871.


94


S'lUDIES    O.N    FERMENTA'IIOX.


principal  of  these  changes,  as  tliough  his  testimony  were  quite
beyond  refutation :

"If  we  use  a  perfectly  filtered  wort,  containing  no  granula-
tions, and  prepared  at  a  temperature  between  60°  C.  and  70°  C.
(140°  F.  and  1 60°  F.),  there  will  first  of  all  appear  a  multitude
of  fine  granules  that  will  develop  into  active  bacteria,  which,
losing  the  faculty  of  motion,  will  constitute  lactic  ferment,  as  I
have  repeatedly  pointed  out.  A  few  days  after  the  appear-
ance of  the  first  granules,  we  shall  perceive  others  rather  larger
in  size  and  isolated.  These  will  increase  in  size,  and,  in  the
course  of  time,  assume  the  form  of  little  globuloid,  or  elliptic
cells ;  they  will  not  commence  to  bud  before  they  have  attained
a  comparatively  large  size,  approaching  that  of  ordinary  j-east,
consequently,  there  will  be  a  considerable  interval  of  time,
during  which  the  young  cells  will  present  no  buds,  especially  if
we  work  at  a  low  temperature,  as  from  20°  C.  to  35°  C.  (68°  F.
to  95°  F.)

"As  for  the  transformation  of  the  spores  oi penicillium  into
alcoholic  ferment,  the  possibility  of  which  M.  Pasteur  also
denies,  I  have  very  often  obtained  it  by  using  liquids,  such  as
boiled  wort  and  sugared  barley  water,  which  had  stood  for  a
month  or  six  weeks  without  setting  up  an  alcoholic  fermentation.
These  liquids,  sown  with  spores  of  different  forms  of  pciiicilliuni,
chosen  when  young  and  in  full  growth,  fermented  after  a  vary-
ing number  of  days,  even  at  a  temperature  of  12°  C.  (54°  F.),
the  condition  of  fermentation  being  that  the  flasks  were  closed
with  very  elastic  corks,  which  had  been  boiled  for  a  quarter  or
half  an  hour ;  these  corks,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  it  is
best  to  keep  for  a  month  after  the  boiling,  to  make  sure,  bj'  dry-
ing them  thoroughly  again,  of  destroying  any  mycelia  adhering
to  them.  It  is  necessary  to  keep  the  flasks  stoppered  that  the
corks  may  be  always  moist,  and  it  is  also  advisable  to  shake  the
flasks  once  or  twice  a  day,  to  secure  the  submersion  of  the  spores.
If  these  conditions  are  carried  out,  we  shall  soon  see  the  spores
increase  in  size,  gradually  lose  their  green  colour  and  then  bud,
and  often  a  very  active  fermentation  will  manifest  itself.     All


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  95

the   spores    will   be   transformed,   if  the    flasks    are    perfectly
air-tight."*

Such  is  the  manner  in  which  M.  Trecul  regards  these  changes.
His  is  entirely  a  system  of  spontaneous  generation,  worked  out
into  minutest  detail,  from  the  transformation  of  the  albuminous
substances  to  the  formation  of  cells  of  the  higher  organisms,
passing  from  the  disintegration  of  the  original  substances  to  the
formation  of  very  fine  granules,  from  these  to  the  creation  of
active  bacteria,  which  last,  in  their  turn,  become  lactic  ferment
through  the  simple  cessation  of  their  faculty  of  moving  and  so
on.  We  regard  all  this  as  purely  imaginary.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  M.  Trecul's  argument  is  based  on  the  successive  phenomena
which  manifest  themselves  in  filtered  wort  "  containing  no
granulations."  As  M.  Trecul  reasons,  this  condition  is  a  neces-
sity, for  he  starts  with  the  assertion  that  the  albuminous  sub-
stances in  the  wort  become  changed  into  granulations  "  that  will
develop  into  active  bacteria."  This  is  another  of  M.  Trecul's
illusions.  No  doubt  we  may  filter  hopped  wort  to  almost  per-
fect clearness,  but  we  can  only  do  this  when  it  is  cold.  If  we
filter  it  warm,  it  will  be  bright  as  long  as  it  remains  warm,  but
as  soon  as  cold  it  will  appear  turbid,  in  consequence  of  the  great
number  of  minute  granules  floating  in  it.  Again,  cold  wort,
however  little  it  may  be  or  has  been  in  contact  with  air,  under-
goes a  process  of  oxidation,  and  this  oxidation,  which  acts
principally  on  the  colouring  or  resinous  matter,  causes  a  deposit
of  fine  granules,  the  number  of  which  is  constantly  increasing
as  oxidation  goes  on.  These  granules  form  an  absolutely  inert
precipitate  which,  under  no  possible  circumstances,  can  become


*  Teecul,  Comptes  rendus  deVAcademie,  t.  Ixxv.  p.  1169,  November  11,
1872.  A  proof  of  M.  Trecul's  carelessness  in  experiments  of  this  kind  is
the  fact  that  in  studying  the  fertility  of  an  impregnated  wort,  he  often
obtains  different  productions.  Our  experiments  give  opposite  results.
If  we  sow  nothing,  we  obtain  nothing.  If  we  sow  a  plant,  we  obtain  a
similar  plant ;  or,  should  there  be  any  difference,  the  change  may  be
traced,  bej'ond  question,  to  its  origin  in  the  plant  sown,  and  is  the  con-
sequence of  some  alteration  in  the  conditions  of  our  experiment.


06  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

transformed  into  active  bacteria.  Nothinj^  can  be  easier  than  to
prove  this  fact,  by  taking  some  of  our  two-necked  flasks  (Fig.
4)  and  preparing  pure  wort  in  them,  by  boiling,  and  then
leaving  it  to  cool  and  undergo  the  process  of  oxidation.  In
wort  thus  exposed  to  the  air — the  air  being  pure  and  free  from
germs — there  will  be  formed  a  granular  deposit,  which  will  never
become  active  or  transform  itself  into  any  kind  of  organism
whatever.

"We  may  also  remark  that  whilst  M.  Trecul  used  wort  in  his
experiments,  he  does  not  tell  us  if  it  was  hopped  or  not.  Had
M.  Trecul  informed  us  that  the  facts  which  he  described  applied
to  unhopped  wort,  we  should  reply  that  a  temperature  of  60°  C.
or  70°  C.  (140°  F.  or  160°  F.)  is  quite  insufficient  to  kill  the
germs  of  bacteria  existing  in  such  a  wort.  Hopped  wort
should  be  heated  to  70°  0.  or  75°  C.  (160°  F.  to  170°  F.),  that
it  may  remain  inert  after  having  cooled  down  in  contact
with  pure  air  ;  unhopped  wort  must  be  heated  to  about  90°  C.
(194°  F.).

In  short,  whatever  may  be  the  case,  it  must  be  evident  to
our  readers  that  the  active  bacteria  observed  by  M.  Trecul  existed
in  the  form  of  germs  in  the  wort  that  he  used,  and  that  what
he  observed  was  nothing  more  than  the  development  of  these
germs  when  brought  into  contact  with  the  air  held  in  solution
in  the  liquid.

As  for  the  success  of  M.  Trecul's  experiments  on  the
penicillimn,  we  have  no  doubt  that  that  gentleman  has  sown
germs  of  yeast  or  tonilce,  which  bear  so  striking  a  resemblance
to  yeast,  at  the  same  time  that  he  sowed  spores,  since  he  took
his  spores  from  sporangia  of  penicilUum  that  had  been  exposed
to  contact  with  ordinary  air.  The  conditions  under  which  M.
Trecul  conducted  his  experiment  rendered  it  difficult  for  the
spores — although,  relatively,  much  more  numerous  than  the
contaminating  germs  of  ferment  with  which  they  happened  to
be  associated — to  make  way  against  these  latter,  since  the  spores
were  unable  to  continue  their  development  in  a  medium  that
was   deprived   of  oxygen.     On  the  other   hand,  the   cells   of


S'JUDIES   ON    FliRMENTATlON.  97

ferment  might  easily  have  multiplied  to  such  an  extent  as  to
make  the  discovery  of  the  spores  that  had  been  sown  a  matter
of  some  difficulty,  since  those  spores  would  have  been  lost
amongst  the  great  number  of  cells  of  ferment.  This  was,  pro-
bably, one  of  the  causes  which  led  to  the  mistaken  notion  that
such  spores  underwent  conversion  into  cells  of  ferment.  Now
although  botanists  describe  several  varieties  of  i^eniciUiam
glaucum,  we  do  not  suppose  that  the  cause  of  the  difference
between  our  results  and  those  obtained  by  M.  Trecul  can  be
attributed  to  our  having  operated  upon  a  different  variety  of
penkilUuin  from  that  which  he  used.  Supposing  that  there
had  been  a  great  difference  between  our  two  varieties,  still
M.  Trecul  declares  that  he  has  realized  the  phenomenon  with
numerous  varieties  of  this  fungus.

M.  Trecul  expresses  himself  as  follows  :  "I  have  used  spores
oi peniciUium  of  several  varieties  in  these  experiments  :  Firstly,
thick,  green,  elliptic  spores  of  a  variety  of  penicilUum  that  grows
on  lemons  ;  secondly,  elliptic  spores  of  a  bluish  colour  and
smaller  than  the  preceding,  of  another  variety  oipenicillium  found
on  lemons  ;  thirdly,  spherical  spores  of  the  variety  ievrnQdi  penicil-
Uum crustaceum  ;  fourthly,  spores  of  the  2ienicillium  that  develops
on  the  yeast  of  beer.*

This  criticism  of  M.  Trecul's  opinions  was  written  on  the
occasion  of  a  discussion  at  the  Academy,  after  we  had  been
induced  to  read  over  again  the  remarks  which  he  had  published
on  the  subject.  We  were  so  impressed  by  the  positive  manner
in  which  his  conclusions  were  stated,  that  we  asked  ourselves,
once  more,  which  of  us  could  be  mistaken,  and  once  more,  also,
we  applied  ourselves  to  fresh  experiments,  which  we  conducted
with  every  possible  precaution,  following,  as  far  as  we  could
without  falling  into  the  errors  of  which  we  accuse  the  learned
botanist,  the  mode  of  procedure  that  he  adopted.  As  his  descrip-
tions struck  us  as  being  at  times  insufficient,  we  resolved  to  ask
him  for  certain  explanations  vim  voce  (November  3rd,  1873),
which  he  gave  us  with  the  greatest  willingness.

*  Comptes   rendus   des   Seances   de    VAcadeinie   des    Sciences,  t.   Ixxv   •
p.  1220;  Nov.  18,  1872.

H


98  1STUJ)IKS   ON    FERMENTATION.

"  Every  variety  of  pcnicillium"  said  M.  Trecul,  "  especially
when  young  and  vigorous,  is  amenable  to  transformation  into
ferment.  This  is  the  way  in  which  I  operated  :  I  had  some
little  flasks  of  30  c.c.  to  40  c.c.  (about  I5  fluid  ounces)
in  capacity,  filled  quite  full  with  wort,  or,  at  least,  con-
taining very  little  air,  closed  perfectly  air-tight  with  corks
which  I  had  kept  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  boiling  water.
These  flasks  when  corked  were  heated  to  60°  C.  or  70°  C.  (140°
to  158°  F.).  After  they  had  cooled  I  uncorked  them,  and  intro-
duced into  them  the  spores  which  had  been  prepared  as  follows  :
I  placed  on  a  piece  of  glass  some  spores  of  the  variety  of  peni-
cillium  that  I  wished  to  study,  taken  with  a  pair  of  forceps
from  a  mouldy  lemon,  and  I  mixed  these  spores  with  a  drop
of  wort  and  observed  them  under  the  microscope  to  assure
myself  that  they  contained  nothing  of  a  foreign  nature  ;  then
I  poured  my  drop  of  wort  from  the  piece  of  glass  into  one  of
the  flasks,  which  I  recorked  and  laid  down.  The  transforma-
tion into  ferment  took  place  next  day."

Provided  with  these  new  data  we  set  to  work  again  and  pre-
pared a  series  of  little  flasks  which  were  filled  quite  full  with
hopped  wort,  or  contained  but  very  little  air,  as  M.  Trecul  had
recommended.  These  we  heated  in  a  hot  water  bath  to  70°  C.
(158°  F.)  at  least ;  we  then  impregnated  them,  observing  the
necessary  precautions,  which  we  described  at  the  commencement
of  this  paragraph — not  working  in  the  evidently  defective
manner  in  which  M.  Trecul  had  done.  Taking  his  spore-seeds
from  a  field  of  sporanges  exposed  to  the  air,  and  afterwards
manipulating  them,  in  contact  with  the  air,  in  water  on  a
piece  of  glass,  before  he  made  his  microscopical  examination,  his
experiments  were  conducted  under  circumstances  in  every  way
conducive  to  the  introduction  of  causes  of  error.  One  of  the
most  serious  of  those  causes  is  that  which  results  from  the  sub-
stratum of  the  spores  as  taken  from  a  mouldy  lemon.  If  M.
Trecul  will  examine  under  the  microscope  the  water  in  which
any  lemon  has  been  washed — even  a  sound  lemon,  unattacked
by  any  fungoid  growth — he  will  immediately  see  the  cause  of
error  to  which  his  method  of  working  exposes  him.     Germs  of


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  99

microscopic   organisms  exist  abundantly  on  the  surface  of  all
fruits.

Having  impregnated  the  liquids  in  our  flasks  with  spores
from  a  quantity  of  pure  sporangia  grown  in  a  closed  vessel,
gathered  on  the  point  of  a  platinum  wire,  which  had  first  been
heated  and  then  allowed  to  cool,  we  found  that  in  each  ease,
without  exception,  germination  took  place,  then  a  mycelium  was
developed,  which  soon,  however,  ceased  to  grow  from  want  of
a  proper  supply  of  air ;  but  not  in  any  single  case  was  there  the
faintest  trace  of  fermentation,  formation  of  yeast,  or  appearance
of  bacteria  or  lactic  ferment.

We  repeated  these  experiments,  using  unhopped  wort  instead
and  obtained  similar  negative  results.  We  had  previousljr
determined  that  it  was  necessary  to  heat  flasks  of  hopped
wort  to  70°  C  (158°  F.),  at  least,  and  those  of  unhopped  wort  to
90°  C,  (194°  F.)  to  secure  them  from  further  change.

In  short,  contrary  to  the  assertions  of  M.  Trecul,  M.  H.
Hoflfmann,  and  other  naturalists,  it  is  not  true  that  the  spores  of
2)eniciUium  can  change  into  alcoholic  ferment.

Regarded  from  another  point  of  view,  growths  of  pure
penicillium  will  give  us  some  remarkable  results,  the  interpreta-
tion of  which  seems  to  us  to  be  intimately  connected  with  the
physiological  theory  of  fermentation  that  we  shall  discuss  in  a
subsequent  chapter.  It  is  a  question  as  to  the  production  of
alcohol  whilst  the  life  of  the  plant  is  carried  on  under  certain
conditions  of  growth.

If  we  distil  saccharine  liquids  on  the  surface  or  in  the  body
of  which  we  have  grown  penicillium,  and  repeat  the  distillation
in  the  manner  that  we  have  already  described  for  the  detection
of  the  minutest  quantities  of  alcohol,  we  shall  readily  find  that
those  liquids  frequently  do  contain  a  little  ordinary  alcohol.
Moreover,  if  we  regard  the  quantities  of  alcohol  produced,
which  are  always  very  minute,  seldom  exceeding  1  or  1'5
thousandth  of  the  total  volume  of  the  liquids,  we  shall  find
that  there  is  no  fixed  proportion  between  this  alcohol  and  the
weights  of  the  plants  formed.     It  is  possible,  for  instance,  that

H  2


100  STU])IKS    ON    FERMENTATION.

we  niny  obtain  more  alcohol  from  one  plant  than  from  another
weighing  a  hundred  times  as  much.  Often,  however,  when  the
vegetation  is  abundant  we  cannot  make  out  the  occurrence  of
alcohol  in  spite  of  the  sensitiveness  of  the  process  described
(p.  78).

What  can  be  the  cause  of  these  varying  results  relating  to
the  production  or  non -production  of  alcohol  in  the  vegetation
of  the  little  plant  ?  The  numerous  experiments  that  we  have
made  seem  to  demonstrate  positively  that  they  are  dependent
upon  variations  in  the  amount  of  air  or  oxygen  that  is  supplied
to  the  fungoid  growths,  whether,  that  is,  the  vegetating  my-
celium alone  be  submerged,  or  the  whole  plant  with  its  organs
of  fructification.  When  the  plant  has  at  its  disposal  an  excess
of  oxygen,  as  much  as  its  vitality  can  dispose  of,  there  is  no
alcohol,  or  very  little,  formed.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  plant
vegetates  with  difiiculty,  in  presence  of  an  insufficiency  of
oxj'gen,  the  proportion  of  alcohol  increases  ;  in  other  words,
the  plant  shows  a  certain  tendency  to  behave  after  the  manner
of  ferments.

Some  time  ago,  wishing  to  assure  ourselves  that  the  spores
of  penicillium  could  not  become  transformed  into  ferment,  we
sowed  some  pure  spores  in  small  flasks,  holding  from  50  c.c.  to
100  c.c.  (from  2  to  4  fl.  oz.),  which  contained  very  little  air,
and  which  were  sealed  hermetically  after  the  sowing.  Under
these  conditions,  the  germination  and  growth  of  the  spores
proceeded  with  great  difficulty,  and  soon  ceased  through
want  of  air.  The  total  weight  of  the  little  plant  was  too
small  to  be  determined.  In  cases  of  this  kind,  if  we  distil  the
whole  of  the  liquid  we  shall  often  see  the  alcohol  appear  in  the
second  distillation,  even  though  the  weight  of  the  plant  may
have  been  scarcely  appreciable.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  side  by
side  with  experiments  of  this  kind,  we  grow  ^xxxq  penicillium  in
flasks  containing  air  and  having  quantities  of  saccharine  liquids
equal  to  the  quantities  in  the  small  flasks  of  which  we  have  been
speaking,  the  plant,  in  consequence  of  the  large  volume  of  air
at  its  disposal,  will  develop  vigorously,  and  in  the  course  of  even


STUDIES    ON    FERMEiNTATION.


101


a  few  da5^s  will  have  become  perceptibly  heavier.  In  dis-
tilling the  subjacent  liquid,  however,  we  shall  generally  find
that  it  contains  no  alcohol  at  all,  even  though  the  weight  of  the
plant  be  half  a  gramme,  or  more  (6  or  7  grains).

These  results  apply  to  all  the  fungoid  growths  that  we  have
studied,  but  they  vary  considerably  with  the  nature  of  the
organisms.  Aspergillus  glaucus  is,  in  this  respect,  one  of  the
most  curious.

On  June  15th,  1873,  we  impregnated  three  flasks  of  wort,
A,  B,  C,  with  pure  spores  of  aspergillm  glaucus.  The  development
was  rapid  and  the  fructification  abundant.  On  June  20th,  we
shook  up  the  liquid  and  the  supernatant  fungoid  growths  in
the  three  flasks ;  the  flasks  A  and  B  were  then  treated  as
follows : —

"We  distilled  the  liquid  in  A  to  discover  the  presence  of
alcoholj  but  could  find  none.


HE:


'IIIIHlhllllilllll'lllillllllHliiihll.l'i

Fig.  19.


The  flask  B  was  connected  with  a  test  flask  (Fig.  19),  into
which  the  liquid,  together  with  its  fungoid  growth,  was  trans-
ferred from  B.     The  next  day,  June  21st,  the  mycelium  which


102  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

was  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  in  the  neck  of  the  flask,  was
studded  with  bubbles  of  gas  ;  these  we  dispersed  by  shaking.
On  June  22nd,  many  others  had  formed  again,  and  a  large  flake
of  mycelium  that  had  risen  from  the  bottom  of  the  test  flask
had  been  stopped  at  the  bottom  of  the  neck,  quite  distended  by
gas  bubbles.  We  liberated  the  gas  b}^  shaking,  but  the  bubbles
formed  again  by  the  next  day,  and  this  effect  continued  for
several  days ;  nevertheless  the  liberation  of  gas  was  not  con-
tinuous, as  is  the  case  in  an  ordinary  fermentation.

On  July  20th  we  drew  off  the  liquid  and  distilled  it ;  it  was
still  very  sweet,  but  though  it  contained  a  sensible  quantity  of
alcohol,  the  microscope  failed  to  detect  a  single  cell  of  ordinary
alcoholic  ferment.

These  results  show  that  the  aspergilliis  when  in  full  growth,
with  plenty  of  air  at  its  disposal,  does  not  yield  alcohol,  and  that
if  we  submerge  it,  so  as  to  prevent  the  oxygen  of  the  air  from
readily  coming  into  contact  with  its  various  parts,  it  decomposes
sugar,  after  the  manner  of  yeast,  forming  carbonic  acid  gas
and  alcohol.

These  effects  were  still  more  marked  in  the  case  of  the  flask
C,  the  liquid  in  which,  after  having  been  shaken  up,  was  not
decanted  to  any  great  depth  in  our  test  flask,  as  had  been  the
case  with  B.  From  June  21st,  there  was  mycelium  on  the  surface
of  the  liquid,  studded  with  large  bubbles  of  gas,  which  formed
again  after  having  been  liberated  by  shaking.  This  last  flask
was  examined  on  November  1st,  1873.  Its  aspect  was  un-
changed ;  the  liquid  was  covered  with  mycelium  loaded  with
sporanges  and  borne  up  by  large  old  bubbles  that  had  not
disappeared.     The  following  was  the  analj'sis  of  the  liquid  : —

Alcohol  1-2

Glucose  . .  ..  ..  ••        84"0

Dextrine  (?) 320

The  liquid  was  very  bright,  and  contained  an  amorphous
granular  deposit,  formed  by  the  wort  after  it  had  been  boiled,
at  the  time  when  we  prepared  our  flasks.     We  crushed  a  small


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


103


quantity  of  mycelium  that  had  risen  to  the  surface  of  the  liquid,
and  obtained  a  field  such  as  is  represented  iu  Fig.  20.    Amongst


Fig.  20.


the  ordinary  filaments  of  mycelium  belonging  to  the  plant,  which
are  not  represented  in  our  engraving,  and  which  were  not  moro


104  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

than  -jjyyj  of  a  millimetre  (nearly  y-VTr  i^O  i^  diameter,  we  per-
ceived much  larger  ones,  swollen  and  contorted  in  the
most  singular  manner,  and  measuring  as  much  as  -y'-^  of
a  millimetre  across  their  broadest  parts.  There  was  also  a
multitude  of  the  ordinary  spores  of  aspergilhis  mixed  with
others  of  larger  size,  and  big,  inflated  cells,  with  irregular  or
spherical  protuberances,  full  of  granular  matter.  As  there  are
all  the  stages  between  the  normal  spores  of  the  plant  and  the
big  cells,  and  between  these  latter  and  the  filaments,  it  must  be
admitted  that  the  whole  of  this  strange  vegetation  results  from
spores  which  change  their  structure  under  the  influence  of
special  conditions  to  which  they  are  exposed.*  Beyond  all
doubt  these  cells  and  irregularly  shaped  segments,  in  vegetating
with  difiiculty,  gave  rise  to  the  fermentation,  which,  although
insignificant,  was  sufficiently  marked  to  produce  more  than  a
gramme  (15  grains)  of  alcohol.  The  oxygen  of  the  air  failing,
or  existing  in  insufficient  quantity  for  the  regular  develop-
ment of  the  filaments  of  mycelium  belonging  to  the  plant,  and
for  the  germination  of  its  submerged  spores,  filaments  and  spores
vegetated  as  the  yeast  of  beer  might  have  done  if  deprived
of  oxygen.

If  we  study  the  vegetation  of  as^ycrgillus  glaucus  with  this
preconceived  idea,  we  shall  soon  recognize  the  fact  that  these
spherical  forms  of  mycelium  are  the  result  of  a  greater  or  less
deprivation  of  air.  The  filaments  of  this  mycelium  which
develop  freely  in  the  aerated  liquid  are  young  and  transparent,
small  in  diameter,  and  exhibit  the  ordinary  ramifications.
Those  which  are  situated  about  the  centre,  in  the  denser  or

*  Since  -writing  the  above  we  have  experienced  some  doubt  as  to
whether  the  forms  of  development  represented  in  Fig.  20  are  actually
those  of  the  aspergilhis  glaucus,  which  we  supposed  our  fungoid  growth
to  be.  In  some  of  the  later  sketches  of  our  observations  we  find  similar
forms,  which  belong  to  a  bluish  kind  of  peniciJHum,  with  rather  large
spores.  Fortunately,  this  doubt  affects  our  argument  in  no  essential
particular.  It  matters  very  little  what  variety  of  fungoid  growth  it  is
that  gives  rise  to  alcoholic  fermentation  attended  by  peculiarities  of  shape
that  only  occur  in  the  development  of  its  spores  when  air  fails  it.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


105


Aspergillus  glaucus.


Growth  with  abundant  air-supply
at  the  edge  of  the  mycelium  crust.


Growth  with  reduced  air-supply
in  the  central  and  deeper  parts  of
the  mycelium.


Mucor  racemosus.


Growth  with  abundant  air-supply
at  the  edge  of  the  mycelium  tuft.

Fig.


Growth  with  reduced  air-supply
in  the  central  and  deeper  parts.
21.


lOG


STUDIES    OX    FERMENTATItJN.


more  complicated  parts,  to  which  the  oxygen  cannot  penetrate
in  consequence  of  its  absorption  by  the  surrounding  parts,  are
more  granular  in  appearance  as  well  as  larger,  and  inclined
to  develop  swellings.  We  can  observe  no  conidia  *  on  these
filaments,  but  we  may  say  that  they  are  on  the  point  of  appear-
ing, for  the  spherical  segments  often  tend  to  assume  an  appear-
ance of  close  jointing,  as  when  they  take  the  form  of  those
rows  of  swelling,  or  cells,  which  has  given  rise  to  the  idea  of
the  cliaplets  of  the  conidia-cellules.  This  is  represented  in  the
accompanying  sketches  (Fig.  21),  which  we  have  purposely  con-
trasted with  tvro  similar  ones  which  relate  to  the  mucor,  of
which  we  shall  soon  speak.  The  conidia  of  these  latter  are  very
remarkable,  and  their  fermentative  character  becomes  apparent
as  soon  as  their  growths  are  deprived  of  air.

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  add  that  in  these  vegetations
of  aspergillus,  which  were  accompanied  by  a  corresponding
alcoholic  fermentation,  it  was  impossible  to  find  cells  of  yeast ;
and  that,  notwithstanding  this,  the  liquid  was  so  adapted  to
ordinary  alcoholic  fermentation,  that,  when  we  added  a  small
quantity  of  yeast  to  it,  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours,  a  most  active
alcoholic  fermentation  declared  itself.

We  may  give  some  other  facts  relating  to  a  crop  of
aspergillus  glaucus  which  was  also  grown  in  ordinary  hopped
wort,  and  which  was  left  to  itself  for  a  year.

A  two-necked  flask,  holding  800  c.c.  (rather  more  than  10
fl.  oz.)  was  prepared  and  impregnated  on  December  21st,
1873,  and  was  then  placed  in  an  oven  at  a  temperature  of
25°  C.  (77°  F.).  The  fungoid  growth  developed  in  isolated
tufts,  which  subsequently  united,  but  without  entirely  covering
the  surface  of  the  wort.  A  few  tufts  also  vegetated  at  the
bottom  of  the  liquid ;  those  on  the  surface  soon  became
surrounded  by  large  bubbles  of  gas.

On  December  12th,  1874,  we  examined  the  liquid  and  the  plant,
which  for  a  long  time  had  appeared  dead.     Its  mycelium  was

*  By  the  term  conidia  is  meant  certain  chains  of  colls,  which  are  in
reality  mycelial  spores.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  107

formed  of  aged,  granulated  filaments,  with  few  swellings.  The
weight  of  the  dry  fungoid  growth  was  050  gramme  (about  8
grains)  for  a  total  volume  of  liquid  of  122  c.c.  (4^  fluid  ounces).
"We  obtained  4*4  c.c.  of  alcohol  of  15°,  which  was  about  seven  times
the  weight  of  the  plant.  Finallj^,  we  determined  the  acidity  of
the  liquid,  and  found  2 '8  grammes,  in  equivalents  of  sulphuric
acid,  a  quantity  greatly  in  excess  of  the  total  acidity  of  an
equal  volume  of  wort,  a  fact  which  shows  us  that  fermentation
caused  by  aspergillus  glaucus  is  accompanied  by  the  forma-
tion of  an  organic  acid,  the  nature  of  which  it  would  be  interest-
ing to  determine.  M.  Gay  on  has  commenced  the  study  of
this  subject  in  our  laboratory.

In  concluding  our  observations  on  the  aspergillus  glaucus,
we  may  give  the  comparative  results  of  two  growths  that  were
obtained  under  precisely  similar  conditions,  in  flasks  of  exactly
the  same  size,  but  difiering  in  this  respect — that  one  of  them
was  constantly  subjected  to  a  current  of  pure  air  that  played  on
the  liquid.  In  the  course  of  a  few  days,  when  the  fungoid
growth  in  the  flask  that  had  been  aerated  had  attained  a  con-
siderable size,  in  comparison  with  the  other,  we  broke  the
flasks  in  order  that  we  might  take  out  the  two  growths  and
compare  their  weights.  After  drying  them  at  100°  C.  (212°  F.)
v>^e  found  : —

Growth  in  the  aerated  flask  .  .         0*92

Growth  in  the  closed  flask  . .  0"16

Ratio  of  weights,  f|  =  5-75.

Again,  although  we  had  taken  the  precaution  of  condensing
in  a  U  tube,  over  which  cold  water  played,  the  vapours  carried
away  by  the  current  of  air,  the  liquid  in  the  aerated  flask
save  no  evidence  of  alcohol.  That  in  the  other  flask  contained
a  very  appreciable  quantity,  although  the  weight  of  fungoid
growth  in  that  flask  was  scarcely  a  sixth  part  of  what  it
was  in  the  other.

The  preceding  facts  taken  altogether,  seem  to  us  to  demon-
strate once  more,  in  the  most  conclusive  manner  : —


108  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

Firstly,  That  neither  2)enicilliiini  nor  uspergillua  glaiicus  can
change  into  yeast,  even  under  conditions  that  are  most  favour-
able to  the  life  of  that  ferment.

Secondly,  That  a  fungoid  growth  which  vegetates  by  using
the  oxygen  of  the  air,  and  which  derives  from  the  oxidating
action  of  that  gas,  the  heat  that  it  requires  to  enable  it  to  per-
form the  acts  necessary  to  its  nutrition,  may  continue  to  live,
although  with  difficulty,  in  the  absence  of  oxygen  ;  that,  in  such
a  case,  the  forms  of  its  mycelian  or  sporic  vegetation  undergo  a
change,  the  plant,  at  the  same  time,  evincing  a  great  tendency
to  act  as  alcoholic  ferment,  that  is  to  say,  decomposing  sugar
and  forming  carbonic  acid  gas,  alcohol,  and  other  substances
which  we  have  not  determined,  and  which  probably  vary  with
different  growths.

Such,  at  least,  is  one  interpretation  of  the  facts  that  we  have
reviewed.  The  observations  in  the  following  paragraphs  and
chapters  may  the  more  incline  our  readers  to  accept  it  as  the
true  one.

§  II. — Growth  of  Mycoderma  Vini  in  a  state  of  Purity —
Confirmation  of  our  original  Conjectures  as  to  the
CAUSE  of  Fermentation — Mycoderma  Vini  does  not
Change  into  Yeast,  although  it  may  give  rise  to
Fermentation.

The  efflorescence  of  wine,  cider,  and  beer  is  pretty  generally
known.*  Fermented  liquors  cannot  be  exposed  to  the  air  with-
out soon  becoming  covered  with  a  white  film,  which  grows  thick
and  becomes  wrinkled  in  a  marked  manner  in  proportion  as  it  is
deprived  of  room  wherein  to  spread  horizontally,  in  accord  with
the  extraordinary  multiplication  of  the  cellules  that  compose  it.
The  rapidity  of  this  multiplication  is  sometimes  astounding.
During  the  heat  of  summer,  when  the  medium  is  well  adapted
to  the  life  of  the  plant,  we  maj^  count  the  number  of  cells  which
grow  in  the  course  of  a  few  hours  by  millions.     The  absorption

*  See  Pasteub,  Etudes  sur  h  Vin,  1st  Edition,  pp.  20  and  following.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  109

of  the  oxygen  necessary  to  the  activity  of  this  growth,  and  the
heat  developed  in  the  film,  as  well  as  the  liberation  of  carbonic
acid  gas,  that  result  from  it  are  considerable.  A  piece  of  glass
covering  the  mycoderma,  at  some  distance  above  it,  becomes  wet
with  moisture,  that  soon  accumulates  to  form  large  drops  of
water.  The  quantity  of  oxygen  absorbed  is  so  great  that  we
never  see  any  other  fungoid  growth  on  the  surface  of  this  film,
although  the  air  is  constantly  depositing  on  it,  as  dust,  spores  of
an  entirely  diflferent  character ;  for,  notwithstanding  that  the
warm  and  moist  surface  is  in  contact  with  an  atmosphere
that  is  being  continually  renewed,  yet  the  mycoderma  ap-
propriates to  itself  all  the  oxygen  contained  in  the  air.
When,  however,  the  vegetation  begins  to  languish,  we  often
find,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  plant  becomes  associated
with  other  species  of  mycoderma,  notably  mycoderma  aceti,
as  well  as  other  fungi,  amongst  which  2)eniciUium  glaucrim
generally  appears.  This  is  one  of  the  facts  which,  wrongly
interpreted,  have  led  to  the  belief  that  mycoderma  vini  or
ceremdce  may  possibly,  or  even  readily,  become  transformed  into
innicillium,  and   vice   versa*     As  the  study  of  the  growth  of

*  Since  writing  this  paragraph,  we  have  found  in  M.  Ch.  Eobin's
Journal  cTAnatomie.  et  de  Physiologie,  an  article  signed  by  that  gentleman,
and  entitled  Sur  la  Nature  cles  Fermentations,  &c.  (July-August,  1875),  in
which  the  learned  microscopist  says: — "The  torula  cerevisice  is  derived
from  the  mycoderma  cerevisice.  My  observations  leave  no  doubt  on  my
mind  that  penicilliuin  glaucum  is  one  of  the  forms  evolved  from  spores
or  ferments  that  have  preceded  it,  as  M.  Trecul  showed  a  long  time  ago,
and  that,  moreover,  the  spores  of  peniciUium,  germinating  in  suitable
media,  give  us  the  sporical  form  termed  mycoderma.'"

We  take  the  liberty  to  observe  that  these  assertions  of  M.  Eobin's  are
purely  gratuitous.  Up  to  the  present  time  it  has  been  impossible  to
discover  a  suitable  medium  for  the  proof  of  these  different  transforma-
tions or  polymorphisms.  From  the  time  of  Turpin,  who  firmly  believed
that  he  had  observed  these  changes,  to  our  own,  none  of  the  micro-
scopists  who  have  affirmed  these  transformations  have  succeeded  in
adducing  any  convincing  proof  of  them,  and  M.  Trecul's  latest  observa-
tions, especially  as  regards  penicillium  and  its  transformation  into
ferment  or  into  the  mycoderma  of  beer,  have  been  positively  disproved  by
ours,  supported,  as  they  are,  by  proofs  that  we  consider  irrefutable.


110


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


mycoderma  vini  on  the  surface  of  saccharine  liquids  and  in  their
depths,  unaccompanied  by  any  other  species,  has  the  most
important  bearing  on  the  theory  of  alcoholic  fermentation,  we
may  pursue  it  through  a  few  examples  with  all  the  detail  that
it  allows  of.

On  June  21st,  1872,  we  sowed  some  mycoderma  vini  in  three
flasks,  with  double  necks.  A,  B,  C  (Fig.  22),  containing  some


Fig.  22.


wort.  The  spores  employed  for  the  purpose  were  obtained  from
plants  growing  on  sweetened  yeast- water  in  an  ordinary  closed
flask.  This  had  been  impregnated  with  spores  from  plants
grown  on  wort,  which  in  turn  had  sprung  from  spores  taken
directly  from  mycoderma  vini  growing  on  wine.

The  several  impregnations  were  effected  by  means  of  a  plati-
num wire,  held  by  forceps,  both  having  been  first  cleaned  by
passing  through  flame,  and  then  smeared  with  the  fungoid
films.

By  this  series  of  growings  in  closed  vessels,  which  were  but
momentarily  open  at  the  time  when  we  dropped  the  spores  into
them,  we  secured  the  separation  of  the  mycoderma  from  all
foreign  organisms  ;  and  more  particularly  from  germs  of  myco-


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  Ill

derma  aceti,  which  is  generally  found  along  with  it,  but  which
propagates  with  difficulty  iu  neutral  saccharine  liquids.

On  the  following  days  films  of  mycoderma  vini  had  spread
over  the  surface  of  the  liquid  in  the  three  flasks.  To  all  appear-
ance they  were  very  pure ;  and  the  microscope  showed  the  com-
I')lete  absence  of  any  mixture  of  mycoderma  aceti,  lactic  ferment,
or  other  foreign  growths.*

On  June  26th  we  decanted  and  distilled  the  liquid  in  A
without  finding  any  trace  of  alcohol.  We  shook  up  the  liquids
in  B  and  C,  with  ail  due  precautions,  so  as  to  submerge  their
films  as  much  as  possible,  and  then  we  raised  the  temperature
of  the  flasks  to  26°  C.  or  28°  C.  (82°  F.).  For  some  days  after-
wards we  saw  a  constant  succession  of  minute  bubbles  of
carbonic  acid  gas  rising  through  the  liquid,  which  remained
bright  under  the  part  of  the  film  that  had  not  fallen  in.  It  had
all  the  appearance  of  a  slow  but  continuous  fermentation.

On  June  29th  we  decanted  and  distilled  the  liquid  in  B,  and
found  in  it  an  appreciable  quantity  of  alcohol,  which  showed
itself  in  the  first  distillation.  The  flask  C,  which  was  shaken
afresh,  continued  to  give  signs  of  fermentation,  but,  some  days
later,  the  evolution  of  the  bubbles  ceased.

On  July  15th,  1873,  we  examined  the  flask  with  its  film  and
its  deposit  of  mijcoderma  vini,  without  finding  a  trace  of  any
foreign  growths,  either  in  the  shape  of  penicilliiim  glaucum,  or
mucor  mucedo,  or  rhi/zopus  nigrans,  or  mijcoderma  aceti,  or,  in
short,  any  of  the  organisms  which  could  not  have  failed  to
appear  on  the  surface  of  a  substratum  so  peculiarly  adapted  to
their  development,  had  it  been  in  the  nature  of  mycoderma  vini

*  It  is  a  very  easy  matter  to  study  the  liquids  and  growths  in  our
flasks  during  the  course  of  a  single  experiment.  We  take  out  the  glass
stopper  that  closes  the  india-rubber  tube  on  the  straight-neck,  and,  by
means  of  a  long  rod  or  a  glass  tube  previously  passed  through  the
flame,  take  up  a  quantity,  which  we  draw  out  immediately  for  micro-
scopical examination.  "We  then  replace  the  glass  stopper,  taking  care
to  pass  it  through  the  flame  before  doing  so,  to  burn  up  any  organic
particles  of  dust  that  it  may  have  picked  up  from  the  table  on  which  we
laid  it.


112  STUDIES    0>;    FERMENTATION.

to  transform  itself  into  one  or  other  of  those  common  fungoid
growths.  The  liquid,  moreover,  still  remained  sweet,  and  did
not  contain  any  cells  of  actual  yeast.  We  may  conclude  then
that  when  one  or  more  of  these  fungi  occur,  after  an  interval  of
some  days,  in  a  growth  of  mycoderma  vini  conducted  in  contact
with  common  air,  it  does  so  in  consequence  of  that  air  having,
without  the  knowledge  of  the  observer,  impregnated  the  liquid
spontaneously  with  germs  of  these  foreign  organisms.

There  might  perhaps  be  room  for  some  fear  that  the  conditions
of  growth  in  our  flasks  were  not  favourable  to  the  simultaneous
appearance  of  these  common  fungoid  growths  along  with  the  mt/-
coderma  vini.  On  June  24th,  1872,  we  sowed,  in  three  flasks  of
sugared  yeast- water,  prepared  as  before — in  the  first,  mycoderma
vini,  together  with.  jJeniciUium  glaucum ;  inihQ&QConA,  mycoderma
vini,  together  with  mucor  mucedo  ;  in  the  third,  mycoderma  vini
alone.

We  efiected  this  by  plunging  the  platinum  wire,  which  we
used  for  impregnating  the  liquids,  into  the  pure  film  of
mycoderma  vini,  and  then  touching  with  the  wire  the  sporanges
of  the  other  fungus.  On  June  29th,  we  saw  on  the  surface
of  our  first  flask  some  green  patches  of  jx'nicillium,  along  with
some  spots  of  mycoderma  vini ;  in  the  second  flask  a  voluminous
mycelium  of  mucor  mucedo,  distended  by  large  bubbles,  had
risen  to  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  and  was  entirely  covered  by
a  film  of  mycoderma  vini.  As  for  the  liquid  in  the  third  flask,
there  were  only  a  few  spots  of  very  pure  mycoderma  vini.  This
last  flask,  after  being  kept  in  an  oven  at  25°  C.  (77°  F.)  for
several  months,  still  contained  nothing  but  mycoderma  vini,
unmixed  with  any  other  fungoid  growth  whatever.

We  may  therefore  be  sure  that  mycoderma  vini,  vegetating  on
the  surface  of  liquids  adapted  to  its  nutrition,  in  contact  with
air  deprived  of  its  germinating  dust,  will  not  present  the  least
sign  of  a  transformation  into  any  of  these  other  common  fungi,
or  into  yeast,  however  long  may  be  the  duration  of  its  exposure
to  contact  with  that  pure  air.

AYc  may  now  return  to  that  feeble  and  limited  production  of


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  113

carbonic  acid  gas  and  alcoliol,  the  formation  of  which  we  have
shown  experimentally  to  take  place  at  a  high  temperature,  after
submerging  the  film  of  mycoderma  vini*  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  we  have  here  a  phenomenon  similar  in  every  point
to  that  presented  by  penicillium  and  mpe)'gillus,  which  we
studied  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  When  the  germs  or  jointed
filaments  of  mycoderma  vini,  growing  on  a  saccharine  substratum
in  contact  with  the  air,  are  in  the  full  activity  of  life,  this
activit}^  is  carried  on  at  the  expense  of  the  sugar  and  other
materials  in  the  liquid,  in  the  same  way  that  animals  consume
the  oxygen  of  the  air  and  evolve  carbonic  acid.

The  consumption  of  the  different  materials  is  attended  with
a  proportionate  formation  of  new  materials,  development  of
structure,  and  reproduction  of  organisms.

Under  these  conditions,  not  only  does  the  mycoderma  vini  not
form  a  sufficiency  of  alcohol  for  analytical  determination,  but,
if  any  alcohol  exists  in  the  subjacent  liquid,  the  mycoderma  con-
sumes it,  converting  it  into  water  and  carbonic  acid  gas,  by

*  We  may  prove  the  occurrence  of  alcoliolic  fermentation  by  the  cells  of
submerged  mycoderma  vini  in  a  different  manner.  To  do  this,  after
having  made  all  our  preparations  as  before  and  shaken  up  the  film  of
mycoderma  vini  in  its  liquid,  we  must  attach  our  flask  to  a  test  flask
(Fig.  19),  and  pass  the  turbid  liquid  into  the  latter.  On  succeeding  days
we  shall  detect  a  very  protracted  fermentation  in  the  test  flask ;  there
will  be  a  succession  of  minute  bubbles  rising  from  the  bottom,  but  in
small  number  at  a  time.  The  fermentation  is  very  evident  whilst  it  lasts,
but  is  rather  sluggish,  and,  although  of  very  long  duration,  ceases  long
before  the  sugar  is  exhausted.

This  experiment  proves  better  than  any  other  the  non -transformation
oi mycoderma  vini  into  other  ordinary  fungoid  growths.  For  after  decanting
the  liquid  into  the  test  flasks,  the  sides  of  the  experimental  flask  remain
covered  with  streaks  of  mycoderma  vini  along  with  some  of  the  liquid.
Moreover,  the  flask  is  refilled  with  air,  and  this  air  is  being  constantly
renewed,  in  part,  by  variations  of  the  temperature  of  the  oven,  so  that
the  mycoderma  remaining  on  the  sides  is  thus  placed  under  the  most
favourable  conditions  for  transformation  into  other  fungoid  growths,  if
that  were  possible.  It  is  still  more  easy  to  detach  the  experimental
from  the  test  flask,  and  to  pass  pure  air  into  it,  once  or  twice  a  day,  or
constantly.  In  any  case,  we  shall  never  see  anything  besides  the
mycoderma  vini  spring  up  within  it.

I


114  STUDHi;?   ON    FERMENTATION.

fixation  of  the  oxygen  of  the  air.*  If,  however,  we  suddenly
submerge  the  mycodemia,  we  shall  obtain  a  different  result.  If,
on  the  one  hand,  the  conditions  of  life  of  this  fungus  are
incompatible  witli  the  altered  circumstances  in  which  it  is
placed,  the  plant  must  perish,  just  as  an  animal  does  when
deprived  of  oxygen.  But  if,  in  spite  of  these  changed  condi-
tions of  nutrition,  it  can  still  continue  in  life,  we  should  expect
to  see  marked  changes  in  its  organic  structure,  or  chemical
metamorphoses.  The  result  of  our  observations  points  to  the
continuance  of  life,  in  a  distinct  though  sluggish  and  fugacious
activity,  accompanied  by  the  pheoomena  of  alcoholic  fermenta-
tion, that  is,  the  evolution  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  and  the  pro-
duction of  alcohol.

If  we  take  a  drop  of  liquid  charged  with  disjointed  cells  of
mycoderma,  a  day  or  two  immediately  after  the  submersion  of
the  film,  we  shall  observe  changes,  small  but  appreciable,  in  the
aspect  of  a  great  number  of  these  cells  ;  they  will  show  increase
in  size,  their  protoplasm  will  be  in  process  of  modification,  and
many  of  them  will  have  put  forth  little  buds.  It  will  be  quite
evident,  however,  that  these  acts  of  interior  nutrition  and  the
changes  of  tissue  resulting  from  them,  proceed  with  difficulty  ;
the  buds  when  they  form  will  soon  wither,  and  there  will  be  no
multiplication  of  new  cells.  These  changes  will,  nevertheless,
be  accompanied  by  the  decomposition  of  sugar  into  alcohol  and
carbonic  acid.

In  comparing  these  facts  with  those  which  we  have  pointed
out  in  connection  with  the  cultivation  of  2^€nicillii(m  and  asper-
gillus,  we  are  compelled  to  admit  that  the  production  of  alcohol
and  carbonic  acid  gas  from  sugar — in  one  word,  alcoholic  fer-
mentation— is  a  chemical  action,  connected  with  the  vegetable  life
of  cells  which  may  difier  greatly  in  their  nature,  and  that  it
takes  place  at  the  moment  when  these  cells,  ceasing  to  have  the
power  of  freely  consuming  the  materials  of  their  nutrition  by
respiratory  processes — that  is,  by  the  absorption  of  free  oxygen

*  See  Pasteue,  Oo77i2Jics  rcndus  des  Seances  de  r  Academic  des  Scie7ices,
t.  liv.,  1SG2,  and  t.  Iv.,  18G2.     Etudes  sur  les  Mi/codennes,  &e.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  115

— continue  to  live  by  utilizing  oxygenated  matters  which,
like  sugar  or  such  unstable  substances,  produce  heat  by  their
decomposition.  The  character  of  ferment  thus  presents  itself
to  us,  not  as  being  peculiar  to  any  particular  being  or  to  any
particular  organ,  but  as  a  general  property  of  the  living  cell.
This  character  is  always  ready  to  manifest  itself,  and,  in  reality,
does  manifest  itself  as  soon  as  life  ceases  to  perform  its  functions
under  the  influence  of  free  0x3^ gen,  or  without  a  quantity  of  that
gas  sufficient  for  all  the  acts  of  nutrition.  Thus  we  should
see  it  appear  and  disappear  concomitantly  with  that  mode  of
life ;  feeble  and  fugacious  in  its  action  when  the  conditions  of
this  vitality  are  of  a  similarly  restricted  character ;  intense,  on
the  other  hand,  and  of  long  duration  and  productive  of  large
quantities  of  carbonic  acid  gas  and  alcohol,  when  the  con-
ditions are  such  that  the  plant  or  cell  can  multiply  with  facility
in  this  novel  manner.  To  this  we  may  attribute  all  possible
degrees  of  activity  in  fermentation,  as  well  as  the  existence  of
ferments  of  every  variety  of  form  and  of  very  different  species.
It  may  readily  be  imagined  that  sugar  may  undergo  decompo-
sition in  a  quite  different  manner  from  that  of  which  we  have
spoken,  that  instead  of  alcohol,  carbonic  acid  gas,  glycerine,  and
similar  substances,  it  may  yield  lactic,  butyric,  acetic,  and  other
acids.  It  would  be  only  one  definite  class  of  cellular  organisms,
the  members  of  which  resembled  each  other  more  or  less,  that
decomposed  sugar  into  alcohol  and  carbonic  acid  ;  others,  speci-
fically different,  would  act  in  a  different  manner.  In  short,  we
may  say  that  the  number  of  these  living  organisms  is  a  measure
of  the  number  of  different  ferments.

Plate  IV.  represents  in  its  two  halves  the  condition  of  the
mycoderma  inni  at  two  different  and  unequal  periods  after  its
submersion.  In  the  left-hand  semi-circle,  it  is  evident  that
many  of  the  figures  are  swollen,  that  modification  of  their
protoplasm  has  taken  place,  and  incipient  budding  is  going  on
in  several  of  them.  A  budding  of  this  kind  would  not  wither ;
the  buds  would  grow  and,  detaching  themselves,  would  form
new  cells  capable   of  budding  in  their  turn.     We  should  have

I  2


116  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

under  our  eyes  all  the  characteristics  of  a  yeast,  which,  beyond
doubt,  would  give  rise  to  a  very  active  fermentation,  inasmuch
as  it  would  belong  to  the  order  of  phenomena  of  nutrition  and
vital  energy  of  which  we  are  speaking.  Instead,  however,  of
insisting  upon  the  acceptance  of  our  interpretations,  based  on  a
few  facts  merely,  let  us  go  on  to  accumulate  facts,  varying  the
conditions  as  much  as  possible.  Our  examples,  taken  singly,
may  seem  insufficient  to  establish  the  theory  that  it  will  be  our
endeavour  to  substantiate,  but  taken  together  we  trust  that  they
will  secure  our  readers'  confidence.

We  may  now,  perhaps  with  advantage,  introduce  two  new
expressions  to  embody  the  preceding  facts,  by  the  help  of  which
we  may  often  shorten  our  subsequent  explanations.  Since  life
can  continue,  under  certain  conditions,  away  from  contact  with
the  oxygen  of  the  air,  and  since  the  altered  nutrition  is  accom-
panied by  a  phenomenon  which  is  of  great  scientific  as  well  as
industrial  importance,  we  may  divide  living  beings  into  two
classes,  aerobian,  that  is  those  which  cannot  live  without  air,
and  anaerobian,  which,  strictly  speaking,  and  for  a  time,  can  do
without  it ;  these  latter  would  be  ferments,  properly  so  called.
Again,  since  we  can  conceive,  in  an  entire  organism,  some  organ
or  even  a  cell  capable  of  existing,  at  least  momentarily,  apart  from
the  influence  of  the  air,  and  endowed  at  a  given  moment  with  the
character  of  a  ferment,  we  may,  in  like  manner,  make  use  of  the
expression  anaerobian  cell,  in  opposition  to  a  cell  that  is  aerobian.

As  long  ago  as  1863,  in  our  work  on  putrefaction,  we  pro-
posed to  adopt  the  preceding  expressions,  and  since  then  we
have  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  them  used  by  different  authors
in  France  and  other  countries.

One  of  the  principal  assertions  in  this  paragraph  relates  to
the  non -transformation  of  mycoclerma  vini  into  other  moulds  or
into  yeast.*

For  a  long  time,  like  Turpin  and  many  other  observers,  although
we  had  no  belief  in  the  transformation  oi mycoclerma  vini  mio  any

*  In  a  subsequent  chapter  we  shall  prove  that  j'east  is  likewise  in-
capable uf  trausformatiou  into  mycodernui  vini.


^


,jt>'


o  ^     ®,


/


,«5^


:J^


d


I   /     ©'


at


4oo


Deyrolle  del


MVCODERMA   ViNI    FUNCTIONING   AS   AN   ALCOHOLIC    FeRMENT. — RiGHT    HaLF,    SHOWING   Api'EAKA.NCE

OF  Spores  just  Sown  ;  Left  Half,  their  Appearance  after  an
Interval  of  Submerged  Life.


^


@


^


Pic  art  sc


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  117

one  of  the  common  moulds,  yet  we  did  believe  in  its  transforma-
tion into  alcoholic  ferment.  In  the  course  of  more  elaborate
researches,  however,  we  at  last  discovered  that  our  previous
experiments  had  been  vitiated  from  the  same  source  of  error
which  we  have  so  often  had  occasion  to  point  out  as  affecting
the  observations  of  our  opponents,  namely,  the  fortuitous  and
spontaneous  introduction,  unknown  to  the  experimentalist,  of
germs  of  the  very  plant  for  whose  appearance  by  way  of
transformation  he  is  seeking.

When  we  consider  that  every  fermented  vinous  liquor,  when
put  on  draught,  is  liable  to  efflorescence,  it  is  difficult  to  avoid
the  supposition  that  this  efflorescence  is  primarily  due  to  cells
of  the  yeast  that  has  caused  the  liquid  to  ferment,  from  which
cells  the  liquid  could  not  be  completely  freed,  no  matter  how
bright  it  might  have  been,  and  which  come  to  the  surface  of
the  liquid  to  live  after  the  manner  of  fungoid  growths.  "We
wished  to  test  this  supposition  by  means  of  experiments.  So
great,  however,  was  the  resemblance  between  tlie  forms  possible
to  yeast  and  mycoderma,  of  which  latter  efflorescence  is  really
composed,  that  we  quite  despaired  of  being  able  to  solve  the
question  by  microscopical  examination,  that  is,  by  observing  the
actual  conversion  of  a  cell  of  yeast  into  a  cell  of  mycoderma.
In  order,  then,  to  overcome  that  difficultj'^,  we  endeavoured  to
produce  an  inverse  transformation — that  of  mycoderma  into
yeast.  We  imagined  that  we  should  doubtless  obtain  this
result  by  submerging  some  of  the  efflorescence  of  wine  or  beer
in  a  saccharine  liquid  well  adapted  to  alcoholic  fermentation.
By  submerging  the  mycoderma  we  would  do  away  with  the
ordinary  conditions  of  life  in  this  kind  of  fungoid  growth  ;  for
we  would  thus  prevent  the  supply  of  oxygen  from  the  air,  since
that  oxygen  would  always  be  excluded,  in  the  most  effectual
manner  possible,  by  the  portion  of  mycoderma  that  would
remain  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  even  after  the  submersion
process ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  we  would  be  subjecting  our
growth  to  the  ordinary  conditions  of  ferment  life,  which  acts  at
the  bottom  or  in  the  bulk  of  liquids  fermenting.


118  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

Our  experiments  were  conducted  in  the  following  manner  : —
In  some  flat  porcelain  basins,  we  grew  some  pure  mycoderma
rini  *  on  fermented  liquids,  such  as  wine  or  beer,  or  on  arti-
ficially vinous  liquids,  such  as  alcoholized  yeast-water,  taking
care  to  boil  these  liquids  previously  to  kill  any  germs  of  yeast
or  other  organism  that  they  might  contain.  The  basins  them-
selves, as  well  as  the  plates  of  glass  with  which  they  were  to  be
covered,  were  plunged  into  boiling  water  just  before  they  were
wanted  for  use.  As  soon  as  the  film  of  mycoderma  had  become
well  developed  and  thick,  and  even  wrinkled — a  process  requir-
ing not  more  than  two  or  three  days  during  summer  heat — we
decanted  the  subjacent  liquid,  by  means  of  a  siphon,  so  as  to
leave  the  film  on  the  bottom  of  the  basin.  We  then  diffused
the  whole  mass  of  efflorescence  in  a  saccharine  liquid  that  had
been  boiled  and  afterwards  cooled  down  in  a  closed  vessel ;
generally,  we  used  wort  or  must  preserved  by  Appert's  process.
After  that,  we  emptied  the  mixture  of  saccharine  liquid  and
efflorescence  into  long-necked  flasks  that  had  likewise  been
previously  heated,  as  also  had  the  funnels  used  in  the  process  of
transference.

It  seemed  to  us  that  experiments  conducted  with  all  these
precautions  must  be  free  from  causes  of  error.  It  was  true  that
we  were  working  more  or  less  in  contact  with  atmospheric  air,
but  all  that  we  had  to  fear  for  the  soundness  of  the  conclusions
which  we  might  draw  was  the  presence  of  germs  of  alcoholic
ferment,  and  we  considered  how  few  of  these  there  are  amongst
floating  particles  of  dust.  Consequentl}^  if  we  succeeded  in
observing  the  advent  of  yeast  in  each  of  the  long-necked  flasks,
accompanied  by  an  active  alcoholic  fermentation,  we  thought
that  we  might,  without  danger  of  error,  admit  as  a  fact  the
transformation  of  cells  of  mj^coderma  into  cells  of  yeast.
Again,  we  thought  that  we  should  probably  find  in  the  forms  of
the  cells  of  yeast  which  were  directly  derived  from  the  cells  of

*  We  secured  the  purity  of  our  mycoderma  by  the  same  means  that  we
have  already  described  for  the  procuring  of  spores  oi peniciUium  or  other
fungoid  growths  in  a  state  of  purity.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  119

mycoderma,  a  more  or  less  elongated  structure,  which  would  be
a  convincing  proof  of  the  transformation  that  we  were  seeking,
if,  indeed,  such  transformation  were  possible.

Strange  to  say,  everything  happened  in  a  manner  that  seemed
to  realize  our  expectations.  The  saccharine  worts  in  the  flasks
in  which  we  had  mixed  and  submerged  the  mycoderma,  fer-
mented in  the  course  of  a  few  days  ;  the  yeast  first  appeared  in
elongated  shapes  ;  lastly,  we  could  see  under  the  microscope  that
many  of  the  cells  or  jointed  filaments  of  mycoderma  were  inflated
and  presented  the  appearance  of  undoubted  gradations  between
their  natural  state  and  that  of  the  cells  of  yeast  which  soon
formed  part  of  the  deposit  in  the  vessels.  In  spite  of  all  this,
however,  we  were  the  victims  of  an  illusion.

In  experiments  conducted  as  we  have  just  described,  the
yeast  which  appears,  and  which  soon  sets  up  an  active  alcoholic
fermentation,  is  introduced  in  the  first  place  by  atmospheric  air,
from  which  germs  are  constantly  falling  either  upon  the  film
of  mycoderma  or  upon  the  objects  that  are  employed  in  the
successive  manipulations.  Two  peculiarities  in  these  experiments
first  opened  our  eyes  to  the  existence  of  this  cause  of  error.  We
sometimes  found  at  the  bottom  of  the  flasks  in  which  we  had
submerged  the  efflorescence,  along  with  the  cells  of  mycoderma,
large,  spherical  cells  of  mucor  nmcedo  or  racemosus,  ferment-cells
that  we  shall  soon  learn  to  recognize  in  studying  this  curious
fungoid  growth.  The  existence  of  mucor  nmcedo  or  racemosus,
where  we  had  only  sown  mycoderma  mni,  was  to  us  a  proof  that  one
or  more  spores  of  that  mucor  had  been  introduced  by  the  surround-
ing air.  If  then,  we  reasoned,  the  air  can  introduce  spores  of
mucor  into  our  field  of  operations,  why  should  it  not  introduce
cells  of  yeast,  especially  in  our  laboratory  ?  Again,  it  sometimes
happened  that  a  negative  result  was  obtained.  Harassed  by
doubts  about  the  reality  of  this  transformation,  which  accorded
so  well  with  the  physiological  theory  of  fermentation  we  had
been  led  to  adopt,  we  repeated  the  experiments  many  times,
and  in  some  cases  we  failed  to  detect  any  appearance  whatever  of
a  transformation  of  mycoderma  into  yeast  cells,  although  the


120


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


conditions  under  which  each  of  the  experiments  was  conducted
had  been  as  similar  as  could  be.

We  were  at  a  loss  to  account  for  this  inactivity  in  the  cells
of  the  mycoderma.  Even  in  the  most  favourable  cases  of  the  sup-
posed fermentation,  it  was  evident  that  a  host  of  cells  of
mycoderma  vini  did  not  become  cells  of  yeast ;  but  how  could  it
possibly  be  admitted  that  amongst  the  millions  of  submerged
cells,  none  were  adapted  for  transformation,  if  that  transforma-
tion were  at  all  possible  ?

Thereupon,  to  find  a  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  we  resolved  to
modify  completely  the  conditions  of  our  experiments,  and  to
apply  to  the  research  that  we  had  in  view  a  mode  of  cultivation
that  might  completely,  or  nearly  so,  obviate  the  sole  cause  of  error
that  WG  suspected,  namely,  the  possible  fall  of  cells  or  germs  of
yeast  during  the  manipulations.  We  secured  this  by  the  use
of  flasks  with  two  tubes,  the  right  hand  one  of  which  was  closed
by  means  of  a  piece  of  india-rubber  tubing  with  a  glass  stopper,
the  other  one  being  drawn  out  in  the  shape  of  a  swan's  neck.
The  use  of  these  flasks,  which  was  then  new  to  us,  permitted  us  to
grow  mycoderma  and  to  study  it  under  the  microscope  without
fear  of  disturbance  from  exterior  particles  of  dust.  This  time  we
obtained  the  results  given  in  the  first  part  of  this  paragraph.
We  no  longer  observed  yeast  or  alcoholic  fermentation  following
the  submersion  of  the  efilorescence,  either  in  the  flasks  them-
selves, or  in  the  test-flasks  attached  to  them,  as  represented  in
Fig.  19.  We  observed,  however,  that  kind  of  alcoholic  fer-
mentation of  which  we  have  already  spoken  and  which  is  due
to  the  raj'coderma  itself,  a  fermentative  action  that  is  still  more
instructive  than  the  one  which  we  thought  we  had  determined,
and  certainly  not  less  calculated  to  support  the  theory  of
fermentation  which  we  have  already  briefly  sketched.

In  an  age  when  ideas  involving  transformation  of  species  are
so  readily  accepted,  perhaps  in  consequence  of  their  requiring
no  rigorous  experimental  work,  it  is  not  without  interest  to
consider  that,  in  the  course  of  our  researches  upon  the  growths
of   microscopic  plants    in    a    state   of  purity,    we    once    were


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  121

inclined  to  believe  in  tlie  transformation  of  one  organism  into
another — the  transformation  of  mycodernia  vini  or  cerevisuv.  into
yeast,  and  that,  on  that  occasion,  we  were  altogether  wrong,
through  having  ovirselves  fallen  a  victim  to  the  identical  source
of  error  which  confidence  in  our  theory  of  germs  had  led  us  so
frequently  to  detect  as  affecting  the  observations  of  others.

§  III. — Growth  of  Mycoderma  Aceti  in  a  State  of  Purity.

The  study  of  mycoderma  aceti  has  not  escaped  the  numerous
causes  of  error  which  are  apt  to  attend  all  observations  made  on
microscopic  organisms.  This  little  fungus  is  still  believed  by
many  authors  to  be  one  of  those  polymorphous  species  capable
of  great  modifications,  according  to  the  conditions  of  their  culti-
vation— it  could  be,  in  turns,  bacterium,  vibrio,  yeast,  &c.
Respecting  it,  we  have  seen  resuscitated  under  a  modern  name,
in  the  course  of  the  last  few  years,  the  old  hypothesis  of  Buffon
concerning  organic  molecules,  that  of  Turpin  concerning  the
punctiform  globulines  of  barley,  milk,  and  albumen,  and  the
theory  maintained  by  Dr.  Pineau,  of  Nancy,  and  by  Pouchet
concerning  proliferous  pellicles*

M.  Bechamp,  Professor  in  the  Faculty  of  Medicine  at  Mont-
pellier,  disdaining  to  adopt  the  expressions  which  we  have  just
used,  has  'substituted  for  them  that  of  microzyma,  whilst
adhering  to  the  opinions  and  errors  represented  by  the  other
expressions.  This  savant  designates  under  the  name  of
microzyma  all  those  punctiform  globulines  thit  are  met  with  in
most  organic  liquids  when  submitted  to  the  microscope ;  and
attributes  to  them,  with  Turpin,  the  faculty  of  playing  the  part
of  ferments,  as  well  as  of  transforming  themselves  into  yeast

*  Buffon,  Histoire  de  V Homme,  i.  viii.,  edition  12uio,  1778;  Turpin,
Ilemoires  de  VAcademie  des  Sciences,  t.  xvii.  ;  Dr.  PiNEAU,  Annahs  des
Sciences  Naturelles,  t.  iii.,  1845 ;  Pouchet,  Traite  de  la  Oeneration  dite
Spontanee,  p.  335,  1859.  See  also  our  Memoire  sur  les  Oenerations  dites
Sponianees,  1862,  pp.  100  and  following,  in  which,  we  give  a  restime  of
some  of  these  theories.


122  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

and  various  other  organisms.  They  are  contained  in  milk,
blood,  eggs,  the  infusion  of  barley,  and  such  like  ;  nay,  we  may
even  find  them  in  chalk,  and  so  we  have  the  fine  discovery  of
Microzyma  cretae  as  a  distinct  species  !

Those  who,  like  ourselves,  cannot  see  in  these  granulations  of
organic  liquids  ought  besides  things  whose  nature  is  still
undetermined,  term  them  molecidav  granules,  or,  in  reference  to
their  Brownian  movements,  mobile  granules.  Indefinite  expression
is  the  best  exponent  of  imperfect  knowledge  ;  when  a  precise
terminology  is  invented,  without  any  basis  of  precise  ideas
derived  from  a  rigid  observation  of  facts,  sooner  or  later  the
hypothetical  facts  disappear,  but  the  terminology  prematurely
created  to  explain  them,  hangs  about  the  Science,  and,  bearing
an  erroneous  interpretation,  retards  rather  than  promotes  real
progress.

We  may  here  introduce  a  summary  of  Turpin's  system,  as
given  by  himself.  It  forms  a  complete  biogenesis,  which  leaves
far  behind  it  M.  Bechamp's  theory  oi  microzymata,  M.  Fremy^s
descriptions  of  hemi-organism,  and  M.  Trecul's  account  of  the
genesis  of  bacteria  and  lactic  ferment : —

"  When  a  mucous  substance  presents  nothing  visible  through
the  microscope,  as,  for  example,  gelatinous  matter,  dissolved
gum,  the  white  of  eggs,  or  plant-sap,  simply  thickened  on  its
way  to  cambmni,  we  call  it  organic  matter  or  organizahle  matter.
We  attribute  to  it  the  fecundating  power  of  organic  life  in  the
simplest  degree  ;  we  consider  it  as  material  still  isolated  from
organization.  We  suppose  that  the  invisible  molecules,  of  which
this  organizable  matter  is  composed,  come  together,  combine  and
serve  through  this  association  in  the  construction  of  the  different
elementary  forms  of  future  tissues.

"  May  we  not  with  greater  truth  believe  that  organizable
matter  is  of  varied  origin,  formed  of  innumerable  globulines,
too  minute  and  transparent  as  yet  to  be  observed  by  our  present
microscopical  means,  and  that  these  globulines  which  are
always  endowed  with  motion  and  a  special  vital  centre,  are  all
capable,  although  many  of  them  do  abort,  of  separate  develop-


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


123


ment  either  into  a  formative  element  of  tissue  or  into  a
mucedinous  plant  ?

"  Organizable  matter  may,  according  to  its  successive  states  of
development  or  age,  and  according  to  the  different  forms  it
takes  in  the  tissues,  be  distinguished  by  special  names  : —

"1. — We  may  term  matter  organizable  as  long  as  the  globulines
composing  it  are  not  yet  visible  to  microscopes  of  existing  power.

"  2. — We  may  speak  of  amorphous  or  (jlohuline  tissue  when  even
the  globulines,  previously  invisible,  have  increased  so  as  to  be
seen  under  the  microscope,  the  term  amorphous,  or  shapeless,
being  here  applied  to  the  association  of  globulines,  and  not  to
the  globulines  themselves.

"  3. — Then  we  have  'vesicular  tissue,  when  the  globulines,  con-
tinuing to  increase,  have  developed  in  such  a  manner  as  to
present  a  mass  of  continuous  vesicles,  still  empty  or  already
containing  a  new  generation  of  globulines,

"4. — ljdi%t\y  y^ehdiYB  filamentous  or  tubular  tissue,  when  the
globulines,  instead  of  vesiculating,  form  threads  or  tubes."*

*  The  following  is  Turpin's  application  of  his  theory  to  the  formation
of  the  ferments  of  fruits  {Memoires  de  V Academie,  t.  xyii.,  1840,  p.  loo),
where  also,  on  p.  171  the  above  quotation  will  be  found: — Ferments
Produced  by  the  Filtered  Juice  of  the  Pulp  of  Different  Fruits — "  By  the
word  pulp  we  mean  the  soft  and  juicy  cellular  tissue  of  the  fleshy  part,
mesocarp  or  middle  layer  of  the  pericarp  of  certain  ripe  fruits.  This
cellular  tissue,  which  is  very  abundant  in  the  peach  and  all  stone-fi'uit,
in  the  apple  and  pear,  in  the  orange  and  grape,  and  similar  fruits,  is  the
same  as  that  which  forms  the  body  of  a  leaf.  Being  in  every  case  com-
posed of  a  simple  agglomeration  of  contiguous  mother- vesicles,  which
are  always  filled  with  globulines  that  are  more  or  less  developed,  more  or
less  coloured,  and  individually  endowed  with  a  special  vital  centre,  it  is
not  surprising  that  its  globulines  when  free  and  detached  from  the  com-
pound organisms  to  which  they  belong,  and  from  association  with  its
vegetable  life,  should,  when  placed  in  a  suitable  medium,  themselves
vegetate  and  become  transformed,  under  these  new  influences,  into  a
mucedine,  with  filaments  and  articulations.  Such  are  the  very  fine,  and,
consequently,  very  transparent  globulines,  which,  when  left  to  them-
selves in  sweetened  water,  grow  and  become  vesicular,  producing  other
globuUnes  in  their  interior,  then  bud,  vegetate  into  mucedinous  fila-
ments, decompose  sugar,  and  produce  all  the  efi'ects  that  constitute  what
we  term  alcoholic  fermentation."


124


STXTDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


Such  are  the  purely  hypothetical  and  exploded  ideas  which
MM.  Freray,  Trecul,  Bechamp,  H.  Hoffmann,  Hallier,  and
others  would  revive  in  our  own  day,  in  opposition  to  a  theory  so
clear  and  so  well  supported  by  facts  as  that  of  germs  floating  in
the  air,  or  spread  over  the  surface  of  objects,  as  fruits,  dry  or
green  wood,  and  so  on.

M.  Bechamp  believes  that  he  has  discovered  that  another  of
vinegar,  introduced  into  various  saccharine  liquids,  in  the  pre-
sence of  carbonate  of  lime,  generates  bacteria,  which,  with  the
sugar  or  dregs,  produce  butyric,  lactic,  and  acetic  acids,  and  that
this  same  mother  of  vinegar,  without  the  addition  of  the  carbon-
ate of  lime,  "  generates,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fine  cells,  which
produce  the  normal  alcoholic  fermentation  of  cane  sugar."
Further,  M.  Bechamp  advances  the  hypothesis  that  mother  of
vinegar  is  a  conglomeration  of  microzymata,  and,  as  he  fails  to
see  in  the  experiments  on  which  he  bases  the  conclusions  which
we  have  just  given,  that  bacteria  and  ferment  cells  are  the
result  of  spontaneous  impregnation,  having  no  connection  with
the  presence  of  mother  of  vinegar,  on  which  he  experimented,
he  arrives  at  this  conclusion :  "In  the  experiments  which  I
have  just  described,  things  happened  as  though  the  microzyma,
under  some  peculiarly  favourable  conditions,  had  been  the
parent  both  of  the  bacteria  and  the  cells."  *     .     .     .     .

The  object  of  the  following  experiments  was  the  study  of
these  assumed  transformations  of  the  mycoderma  aceti  in  sac-
charine liquids,  in  the  presence  and  in  the  absence  of  carbonate
of  lime.

We  prepared  some  two-necked  flasks,  containing  as  a  growing
medium  a  liquid  composed  of  one- third  of  Orleans  vinegar,  and
two-thirds  of  a  white  wine  used  by  vinegar-makers  in  Orleans.
This  liquid  is  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  development  of  ?>iycoc?erw(7
aceti.

On  December  13th,  1872,  we  sowed  the  little  plant  in  a  state

*  3360HAMP,  Recherches  sur  la  Nature  et  VOrigine  des  Ferments  [Annales
de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  4"  serie,  t.  xxiii.,  and  Oomptes  rendus  de
VAcademie  des  Sciences,  Oct.  23,  1871).


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  125

of  purity,  by  means  of  a  piece  of  platinum  wire,  in  the  manner
already  explained  in  connection  with  propagation  of  other
fungoid  growths  On  December  19th  a  young  and  thin  film  of
mycoclenna  aceti  covered  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  AVe  then
poured  out  the  liquid  through  the  right-hand  tube,  at  the  same
time  heating  the  end  of  the  bent  tube,  to  purify  the  air  that
passed  into  the  flask.  The  whole  film  of  mycoderma  aceti  re-
mained adhering  to  the  interior  sides  of  the  flask  during  this
decanting.  The  question  then  was  how  to  conve}^'  this  film  of
the  little  plant  into  a  saccharine  liquid  of  a  particular  kind.
We  effected  this  easily  by  the  following  means  :  After  having
emjDtied  the  flask,  as  just  described,  instead  of  re-closing  the
india-rubber  nozzle  on  the  end  of  the  right-hand  tube,  we
attached  it  to  a  test-flask  containing  the  saccharine  liquid  on
which  we  wished  to  operate.  This  had  been  previously  boiled
in  the  test-flask,  and  when  we  attached  the  neck  of  the
test-flask,  previously  slightly  drawn  out  and  curved,  to  the
india-rubber  tube,  the  liquid  was  still  very  warm.  We  per-
mitted the  liquid  in  the  test-flask  to  cool  down,  and,  then,
taking  up  the  test-flask,  we  decanted  its  contents  into  the  other
flask,  in  which,  as  we  have  already  said,  the  film  of  mycodenna
aceti  had  been  left.  In  this  way  the  film  became  partly  sub-
merged, partly  spread  over  the  surface  of  the  new  liquid.  Ex-
periments were  made  with  two  saccharine  liquids,  must  and  wort.
In  the  case  of  the  latter,  from  December  22nd  the  whole  surface
of  the  liquid  was  covered  by  a  film  of  mycoderma  aceti,  which
even  spread  up  the  moist  sides  of  the  flask  above  the  level  of  the
liquid.  In  the  case  of  the  must,  on  the  other  hand,  the  plant
for  some  time  did  not  seem  to  be  developing  ;  on  December  24th,
however,  it  was  visibly  spreading  over  the  surface  of  the  must.
The  following  days  we  frequently  shook  up  the  films  to  separate
them,  and  spread  them  over  the  subjacent  liquid.  There  were
no  signs  of  alcoholic  fermentation.

On  December  30th  we  introduced  several  grammes  (50  or  60
grains)  of  carbonate  of  lime  into  each  of  the  flasks,  an  opera-
tion of  little  difficultv,  which  we  effected  in  a  manner  similar  to


126  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

that  just  described.  We  substituted  for  the  test-flask  another
flask — or,  better  still,  a  simple  glass  tube — containing  carbonate
of  lime  that  had  been  subjected  to  great  heat  in  the  flask  or
tube,  and  there  left  to  cool  down.  When  cold,  we  poured  the
powdered  carbonate  of  lime  into  the  liquid  in  the  flask,  in  this
way  avoiding  the  possibility  of  any  error  from  the  introduction
with  the  carbonate  of  lime  of  any  foreign  germ.

In  neither  case  did  we  obtain  alcoholic  fermentation,  nor  was
there  any  appearance  of  lactic  fermentation,  or  bacteria,  or
vibrios,  properly  so  called.  The  flasks  remained  in  the  oven,  at
a  temperature  of  about  25°  C.  (77°  F.),  until  the  end  of  January,
1873,  when  we  made  a  microscopical  examination  of  their
deposits,  exercising  greater  care  and  precaution  than  we  had
adopted  in  the  case  of  those  examinations  which  we  had  made
from  time  to  time  in  the  course  of  the  experiment  to  assure  our-
selves of  the  nature  of  the  organisms  present.*  The  result  was
that  we  never  found  anything  besides  the  mycoderma  aceti,
which  had  developed,  although  with  great  difficulty,  on  the  sur-
face of  the  liquids  neutralized  with  carbonate  of  lime.  The
beaded  filaments  had,  under  these  circumstances,  only  become
a  little  larger  than  they  had  been  in  the  unsweetened  acid
liquids.

Mycoderma  aceti,  then,  grown  on  sweetened  acid  or  neutral
liquids,  grown  in  the  absence  or  in  the  presence  of  carbonate  of
lime,  undergoes  no  transformation  into  bacteria  or  vibrios  or
yeast,  if  only  we  operate  with  pure  germs,  free  from  the  dust
floating  in  the  air,  and  from  that  which,  unknown  to  the
operator,  may  be  introduced  by  means  of  the  vessels  and
materials  employed.  It  may  be  asked,  do  we,  therefore,  abso-
lutely, reject  the  theory  of  the  polymorphism  o^ mycoderma  aceti  ?

*  We  need  scarcely  here  observe,  having  done  so  on  previous  occasions,
that  whenever  we  opened  our  flasks  to  obtain  specimens,  we  made  use  of
a  fine  tube,  previously  passed  through  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp,  and
that  we  also  passed  this  flame  over  the  surface  of  the  india-rubber,  glass
stopper,  &c.,  to  consume  the  organic  particles  of  dust  which  floating
about  might  introduce  themselves  at  the  moment  when  we  opened  the
riirht-hand  tube  of  the  flask.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  127

On  the  contrary,  we  have  endeavoured  to  prove  the  existence  of
this  polymorphism  again  and  again  in  a  variety  of  ways.  We
have  been  mostly  concerned  with  physiological  polymorphism ;
that  is,  our  eflforts  have  been  directed  to  ascertain  if  mijcoder))ia
aceti  might  be,  for  example,  the  aerobian  form  of  a  ferment  from
which  it  differed  physiologically,  as,  for  instance,  lactic  ferment,
which,  in  shape,  sometimes  bears  a  striking  resemblance  to
mycoderma  aceti.  "We  have  not  succeeded  in  discovering  any-
thing of  the  kind  up  to  the  present  time.

What,  in  view  of  the  positive  proofs  to  the  contrary,  we  do
absolutely  reject  in  the  matter  of  this  mycoderma,  is  the  theory
of  polymorphisms,  advocated  by  M.  Bechamp  and  other  authors,
which,  in  our  judgment,  can  only  be  founded  on  incomplete  and
erroneous  observations,

§  IV. — Growth  of  Mucor  Racemosus  in  a  state  of  Purity
— Example  of  Life  more  active  and  lasting  when
removed  from  the  influence  of  Air.

Side  by  side  with  the  facts  explained  in  the  last  para-
graph, the  study  of  varieties  of  the  genus  mucor,  grown  in
natural  or  artificial  saccharine  liquids,  is  of  great  importance  to
the  establishment  of  the  physiological  theory  of  fermentation,
which  we  shall  explain  later  on.  There  is  a  ver}^  remarkable
work  on  the  subject  of  this  mucedinous  fungus  by  a  German
botanist,  M.  Bail,  who,  in  1857,  declared  that  mucor  mucedo
caused  alcoholic  fermentation,  and  could  change  into  ordinary
yeast.  The  first  assertion,  relating  to  the  alcoholic  fermentation
that  this  fungoid  growth  which  is  everywhere  so  abundant  may
cause,  is  quite  correct ;  the  second  which  relates  to  its  faculty  of
changing  into  yeast  is  erroneous.*

*  Ever  since  the  year  1861  (see  p.  92),  this  question  of  the  possible
transformation  of  the  ordinary  fungi,  especially  peniciUium  and  mucor
mucedo,  into  yeast  has  engaged  our  attention.  The  results  attained  have
been  entirely  negative ;  but  hitherto  only  the  conclusions  of  our  work
have  been  published,  some  account  of  which  was  given  at  the  meeting  of
the  Societe  PMlomatliique  of  March  30th,  1861.     The  following  extract  is


128  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

On  June  13th,  1872,  we  sowed  by  the  help  of  a  platinum
wire  in  some  wort,  contained  in  two-necked  flasks,  A,  B,  and  C,
several  of  the  minute  sporange-bearing  filaments  of  mncor  along
with  the  heads  containing  the  spores.

On  June  14thj  there  was  no  mycelium  visible  to  the  naked
eye  in  the  liquids.

from  the  Bulletin  of  the  society:—"  Meeting  of  March  30th,  1861.  At
this  meeting  a  paper  was  read  by  M.  Pasteur  '  On  the  supposed  changes  in
the  form  and  vegetation  of  yeast-cells,  depending  on  the  external  con-
dition of  their  development.'  It  is  well-known  that  Leuwenhoeck  was
the  first  to  describe  the  globules  of  yeast,  and  that  M.  Cagnard-Latour
discovered  their  faculty  of  multiplying  by  budding.  This  interesting
vegetable  organism  has  been  the  subject  of  a  host  of  researches  by
chemists  and  botanists.  The  latter,  from  the  days  of  Turpin  and
Kutziug,  have  almost  unanimously  regarded  yeast  as  a  form  of  develop-
ment of  various  inferior  vegetable  tyjDes,  especially  peniciUium.  The
studies  of  this  subject  which  seem  to  have  won  most  favour  during  the
last  few  years  are  those  of  MM.  Wagner,  Bail,  Berkeley,  and  H.
Hoffmann.  The  researches  of  these  botanists  seem  to  strengthen  and
confirm  the  original  observations  of  Turpin  and  Kutzing.  M.  Pouchet
has,  quite  recently,  expressed  the  same  ideas,  and  has  determined  certain
points  in  connection  with  them  with  much  precision  of  detail.  M.
Pasteur  has  long  studied  this  important  question,  which  is  so  intimately
connected  with  the  essential  nature  of  yeast  and  with  those  phenomena
of  the  polymorphism  of  the  inferior  tjqies  of  vegetable  life,  to  which
most  of  the  remarkable  works  of  M.  Tulasne  relate ;  he  has,  however,
arrived  at  results  that  are  altogether  negative,  and  he  declares  that  he
was  unable  to  detect  the  transformation  of  yeast  into  any  of  the
mucedines  whatsoever,  and,  inversely,  that  he  could  never  succeed  in
producing  the  smallest  quantity  of  yeast  from  ordinary  mucedines."
These  same  results  we  communicated  to  the  Societe  Chimique  of  Paris,  at
a  meeting  held  April  12th,  1861.  Throughout  the  investigation  of  which
we  have  just  indicated  the  conclusions,  we  insisted  en  the  necessity  of
cultivating  the  separate  organisms  in  a  state  of  purity  in  all  researches
relating  to  these  inferior  forms  of  life,  if  we  desire  to  attain  to  sure
inferences  about  them  ;  and  the  method  of  working,  which  we  recom-
mended, did  not  differ  essentially  from  that  adopted  in  the  i>resent  work.
Since  then  the  study  of  these  growths  has  been  conducted  with  the
utmost  precautions  ;  and  other  apparatus,  perhaps  as  safe  as  those  which
we  employ  and  better  adapted  than  ours  for  the  study  of  j^olymorphism
of  species,  have  been  invented  by  botanists  of  great  skill — M.  de  ISary,
in  Germany,  and  M.  Van  Tieyhem,  in  France.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  129

On  June  15tli  ra3'celium  was  very  abundant,  and  was  borne  up
by  bubbles  of  gas.  In  addition  to  this  there  were  a  few  scattered
patches  of  bubbles  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  showing  that
fermentation  had  commenced.

On  June  16th  fermentation  continued  to  show  itself  by  the
frothy  state  of  the  crusts  of  mycelium  buoyed  up  by  the
bubbles  of  gas.

On  June  17th  we  attached  B  and  C  separately,  as  indicated
in  Fig.  19  (p.  101)  to  test-flasks,  into  which  we  transferred
nearly  all  their  contents.  Some  clusters  of  entangled  filaments  of
mycelium  remained  on  the  surface  of  the  liquids  in  the  test-flasks.

On  June  18th  a  very  slow  fermentation  commenced  in  the
test-flasks;  it  continued  for  some  days  without  becoming  more
active.  A  little  bubble  would  slowly  rise  from  the  bottom  of
the  vessel,  succeeded  after  a  short  interval  by  another,  and  so
on.  The  temperature  of  the  oven  was  24°  C.  (75°  F.).  On
June  22nd  we  raised  it  to  28°  C.  (82°  F.).  The  fermentation
became  more  rapid,  a  constant  succession  of  bubbles  rose
quickly  from  the  bottom  of  the  test-flasks  ;  still  there  was  none
of  the  vivacity  of  an  alcoholic  fermentation  produced  by  yeast.

On  June  25th  the  fermentation  was  in  much  the  same  con-
dition, if  anything  rather  less  active.

On  June  28th  temperature  25°  C.  (77°  F.)  ;  fermentation
had  stopped.

On  June  29th  we  raised  the  temperature  to  27°  C.  (81°  F.)
again,  and  some  slight  revival  of  fermentation  manifested  itself.

The  increase  in  temperature,  therefore,  as  might  have  been
expected,  exercises  a  considerable  influence  on  this  kind  of
fermentation.

The  vessels  were  then  left  to  themselves,  and  during  the
course  of  three  months  they  did  not  show  the  least  sign  of
fermentation  ;  moreover,  we  did  not  observe,  either  on  the
interior  walls  of  the  empty  flasks,  or  on  the  surface  or  through-
out the  body  of  the  liquid  in  the  test-glasses,  any  fungoid  pro-
duction or  organism  whatever  different  from  mucor  itself.

The  same  observations  apply  to  the  vessel  A  ;  in  this  case  the

K


130  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

liquid  that  remained  in  the  flask  was  covered  with  a  gelatinous
and  frothy  mycelium.

On  October  20th,  1872,  after  a  lapse  of  three  months  and  a
half,  we  poured  the  liquid  from  the  test-flask  attached  to  flask
C  back  again  to  that  flask.  The  test-flask  connected  with  flask
B  we  left  untouched  alongside  the  other  flasks  to  serve  as  a
means  of  comparison.

On  October  21st,  22nd,  23rd,  we  observed  nothing;  on  succeed-
ing days,  however,  some  patches  of  bubbles  appeared  on  the  surface
of  the  liquid  in  flask  C,  and  clusters  of  mycelium  buoyed  up  by
the  bubbles  of  gas  which  they  imprisoned.  Life  had  resumed
its  course,  and  with  life  fermentation  had  recommenced.
What  had  been  the  cause  of  this  change  in  the  condition  of  the
liquid,  after  an  absolute  quiescence  of  three  months  ?  There
can  be  but  one  answer  to  this  question  :  for  in  the  other  vessels
there  was  no  corresponding  movement,  or  sign  of  life  to  be
detected.  In  this  vessel,  however,  an  aeration  of  the  plant  had  evi-
dently taken  place,  consequent  on  the  decautation  and  contact  with
the  atmosphere  of  the  flask,  which  communicated  with  the  exterior
air  through  the  curved  tube.  This  aeration  had  been  absent  or
ineffective  before  decantation,  in  consequence  of  the  great  depth
of  liquid  in  the  test-flask,  the  surface  of  which,  too,  was  covered
by  a  mass  of  mycelium  filaments,  itself  effectually  opposing  any
aeration  of  the  liquid.  Moreover,  the  surface  of  the  liquid  in
the  narrow  neck  of  the  test-flask  had  necessarily  been  covered  by  a
layer  of  carbonic  acid  gas.  We  may  investigate  more  thoroughly
the  influence  of  aeration,  and  its  relation  to  the  resumption  of
life  in  the  mycelium  of  mucor,  by  restoring  the  liquid  to  its
previous  condition  of  depth  and  so  cutting  off"  again  contact
with  the  air.

For  this  purpose,  on  October  31st  we  decanted  Once  more  the
liquid  and  its  deposit  from  the  flask  into  the  test-glass.  The
same  evening  a  slight  but  continuous  fermentation,  with  forma-
tion of  froth,  appeared  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid  in  the  neck
of  the  test-glass.  Fermentation  although  never  vigorous,  con-
tinued the  following  davs,  and  until  December  20th.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  131

Between  December  20th  and  23rd,  it  ceased  altogether  to  mani-
fest itself  by  liberation  of  gas.  As  for  the  flask  B,  during  all  this
time  it  had  remained  quite  inactive  and  in  the  same  state  in
which  it  had  existed  since  June  29th,  although  the  oven  had  on
several  days  been  heated  to  28°  C.  (82°  F.).

On  December  23rd,  1872,  wishing  to  assure  ourselves  of  the
state  of  the  plant  in  flask  B,  we  subjected  it  to  the  same  opera-
tion to  which  the  flask  C  had  been  subjected  on  October  20th  :
that  is  to  say,  we  poured  the  contents  of  the  test-glass  back  into
the  connected  flask,  with  the  object  of  supplying  the  plant  with
oxygen.

On  December  24th,  25th,  26th,  27th,  there  was  no  apparent
change.

On  December  28th  bubbles  of  gas  began  to  be  evolved  carrying
up  clusters  of  mycelium  to  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  It  was
evident,  therefore,  that  the  quiescence  in  the  test-glass  attached
to  flask  B,  was  solely  due  to  deprivation  of  air,  as  had  happened
in  the  case  of  the  test-glass  attached  to  flask  C,  up  to  the  date  of
October  31st.

On  this  day,  December  28th,  we  re- decanted  the  contents  of
the  flask  into  the  test- glass,  and  the  following  day  a  continuous
but  feeble  fermentation  proceeded.  This  lasted  until  January
22nd,  although  very  sluggish  in  character  ;  it  is  evident  that
these  efiects  were  exactly  the  same  as  those  which  took  place  in
flask  C*

We  should  observe  before  we  proceed  farther,  that  we  took

*  We  found,  after  the  lapse  of  another  year,  in  December,  1873,  that
the  ferment  of  the  mucor  in  the  test  glass  might  still  be  easily  revived  ;
that  it  was  able  to  jDropagate,  both  in  the  mycelium  and  in  the  cellular
form,  in  wort,  and  that  it  might  produce  a  fermentation,  m.ore  or  less
active,  according  to  the  condition  of  aeration ;  in  short,  that  it  was
capable  of  producing  all  the  characteristic  phenomena  described.  By
means  of  the  method  of  cultivation  that  we  employ,  our  study,  which  was
continued  for  years,  was  pursued  without  the  least  fear  of  any  foreign
fungoid  growths  being  introduced  into  the  vessels,  although  they  remained
constantly  open,  and  the  air  in  them  was  being  perpetually  renewed  by
the  action  of  diffusion  and  variations  of  temperature.  In  1875  nothing
remained  alive  in  our  flask,  and  further  revival  became  impossible.

K    2


132  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

specimens  from  the  flasks  A,  B,  C,  at  difierent  times  between
June  and  January,  and  that  the  microscope  never  revealed  the
least  trace  of  yeast  in  them.  We  may  note  besides  that,  during
this  interval,  we  impregnated  fresh  flasks  of  wort  with
specimens  taken  from  the  deposits  in  the  flasks  A,  B,  C,  and
that  we  always  obtained  reproduction  of  the  mucor  and  its
peculiar  fermentation  without  the  least  appearance  of  ordinary
ferment.

The  inferences  from  the  results  that  we  have  just  detailed  folio w
readily,  and  are  besides  of  great  interest.  In  the  first  place,  it  is
evident  that  even  if  the  mucor  mucedo  may  be  able  to  produce
alcoholic  fermentation,  it  is  totally  incapable  of  changing  into
yeast.  The  two  plants  are  necessarily  and  radically  distinct,
and,  if  difierent  authors  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  them  mixed
one  with  another  in  growths  of  mucor,  this  intermixture  was
doubtless  the  result  of  a  spontaneous  sowing  of  the  j^east,  the
germs  of  which  abound,  particularly  in  the  particles  of  dust
existing  in  the  atmosphere  of  any  laboratory  in  which  studies
relating  to  fermentation  are  pursued.

This,  however,  is  not  the  most  striking  inference  from  the
facts  which  the  cultivation  of  these  organisms  revealed.  The
mucor  is  evidently  a  plant,  at  the  same  time  aerobian  and
anaerobian.  If  we  had  sown  the  spore-bearing  filaments  of
mucor  on  slices  of  pear,  lemon,  or  similar  fruit,  we  should
have  seen  the  spores  germinate,  tubes  of  mycelium  ramifying
on  the  surface  of  the  substratum,  and  reproducing  sporiferous
aerial  hyphae.  In  this  case  the  plant  would  have  eflected  all
its  phenomena  of  nutrition  by  absorbing  oxygen  and  emitting
carbonic  acid,  after  the  manner  of  animals,  as,  in  our  essay  on
the  organic  corpuscles  which  exist  in  a  state  of  suspension  in
the  atmosphere,  we  have  shown  to  be  the  case  generally  with
fungoid  growths.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  only  sugar
decomposed  would  have  been  a  quantity  equivalent  to  that
assimilated  in  forming  the  cellulose  of  the  young  tissues  of
the  fungus,  or  in  entering  into  combination,  either  with  the
elements  of  ammonia  or  with  the  sulphur  of  the  sulphates,  or


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  133

tlie  phosphorus  of  the  phosphates,  to  form  the  albuminous  sub-
stances of  the  interior  of  the  cells.*  In  this  case  the  sugar
used  up  would  furnish  no  alcohol,  or  at  least,  if  alcohol  were
formed,  it  would  be  decomposed  immediately.  All  aerial
growths  take  place  in  the  same  manner  ;  and  such  is  the  nature
of  nutrition  and  life  in  all  the  larger  forms.

In  our  flasks,  on  the  other  hand,  the  life  of  the  little  plant
functions  quite  differently.  Deprived  of  oxygen,  or  having  at
its  disposal  but  an  insufficient  quantity  of  that  gas,  after  a  life
of  activity  in  contact  with  air,  it  can,  nevertheless,  live  apart
from  the  direct  action  of  that  element,  and  the  combinations  to
which  it  gives  rise.  On  the  other  hand,  we  see  all  the  signs  of
alcoholic  fermentation  appear ;  that  is,  a  notable  proportion  of
sugar,  in  comparison  with  the  weight  of  solid  matter  assimi-
lated and  fixed  by  the  plant,  is  decomposed  into  alcohol  and
carbonic  acid  gas  ;  and  this  decomposition  continues  as  long  as
life  itself  continues  in  the  cells,  and  they  remain  submerged,
this  last  condition  being  effected  by  the  decantation  of  the
liquid  and  its  deposit  into  the  test-glass.  Along  with  the
disappearance  of  the  phenomena  of  vital  activity  in  the  cells,
the  fermentation  ceases  absolutely,  or  at  least  is  no  longer
visible  externally,  by  reason  of  its  extreme  feebleness.  The
cells  then  assume  an  old,  shrivelled,  worn-out  appearance,  with
irregular  outlines  and  granular  markings.  Their  life  is  merely
suspended,  however,  not  extinct ;  for  if  they  be  supplied  once
more  with  oxygen,  and  suffered  to  exist  under  the  influence  of
that  gas,  they  will  vegetate  again,  and  become  capable  of  pro-
ducing fermentation  afresh,  even  after  having  been  excluded
from  the  air  for  a  considerable  time.

Oxygen  then  presents  itself  to  us  as  being  endowed  with  a
certain  determining  stimulus  in  the  matter  of  nutritive  action
enabling  this  action  to  be  prolonged  beyond  the  point  where

*  AVe  do  not  here  take  into  account  certain  phenomena  of  oxidation  of
■which  the  fungoid  growths  are  the  seat,  and  which  remind  us  of  those
that  are  presented  m  so  remarkable  a  degree  by  mycoderma  vini  and
mycoderma  aceti.


134  STUDIES    ON   FERMEKTATION.

the  direct  influence  of  oxygen  ceases.  In  time  the  energy  that
has  been  imparted  to  the  cells  will  die  away,  and  then  also
fermentation  will  cease,  to  be  resumed,  however,  when  the
plant  is  once  more  submitted  to  the  revivifying  action  of  the
gas.  It  seems  as  though  the  vital  energy  derived  from  the
influence  of  gaseous  oxygen  were  capable  of  effecting  an
assimilation  of  oxygen,  not  in  the  gaseous  state,  but  existing
in  some  state  of  combination,  and  hence  its  power  of  causing  the
decomposition  of  sugar.  Looking  at  the  matter  in  this  light,
it  seems  to  us  that  we  may  discover  in  it  a  fact  of  general
occurrence,  that  this  peculiar  action  of  the  oxygen  and  the  cells
is  to  be  seen  in  all  living  beings.  For  indeed  is  there  any  cell
which,  if  suddenly  and  completely  deprived  of  air,  would  perish
forthwith,  and  absolutely  ?  Probably  there  is  not  a  single  one
that  would  do  so.  With  certain  modifications  of  greater  or
less  amount  the  assimilative  and  excretive  acts  which  have
taken  place  during  life  must  be  carried  on  after  the  suppression
of  oxygen,  resulting  in  fermentations  ordinarily  obscure  and
feeble,  but  in  the  case  of  the  cells  of  ferments,  properly  so
called,  manifesting  an  activity  both  greater  in  amount  and
more  enduring.

Let  us  now  proceed  to  compare  the  weight  of  alcohol  formed
by  the  mucor  during  fermentation  with  the  weight  of  the  plant
itself.

Mrst  experiment. — One  of  the  double-necked  flasks  contained
at  starting  120  c.c.  (about  4  fl.  oz.)  of  wort.

On  January  2nd,  1873,  we  attached  this  flask  to  a  test-glass,
containing  a  deposit  of  mucor  ferment  (Fig.  19,  p.  101),  a
few  drops  of  which  we  poured  into  the  wort  in  the  flask,  to
impregnate  it.  On  January  3rd  we  decanted  the  wort  from
the  flask  into  the  test-glass  ;  under  these  conditions  we  have
seen  that  the  wort  must  ferment.

On  January  18th  the  fermentation  in  the  test-glass  ceased.  On
July  31st,  1873,  we  transferred  the  liquid  from  the  test-glass
back  to  the  flask.  On  August  4th,  1873,  we  again  decanted
this  same  liquid  from  the  flask  into  the  test-  glass.  On  December


STUDIES    OX    FERMENTATION.  135

25th,  1873,  we  once  more  removed  the  liquid  from  the  test-
glass  to  the  flask,  and  allowed  it  to  remain  so  until  Decem-
ber 23rd,  1874,  on  which  day  we  submitted  it  to  examination.
It  was  found  to  contain  per  100  c.c.  (3|  fl.  oz.)

Grains.     Grammes.*
Total  weight  of  the  fundus       ..  ..     5  7   ..   0'37

Absolute  alcohol  . .  . .  . .    50-9   . .   3*3

Acidity,  estimated  in  its   equivalent  of

sulphuric  acid  ..  ..  ..      1'7   ..    0*11

Sugar,  determined  by  cupric  solution . .   82'2   ..   5*2
Dextrine  (?) 24-6   .  .  1-6

The  total  weight  of  fungoid  growth  being  037  gramme,
and  the  total  weight  of  absolute  alcohol  for  the  120  c.c.  of
fermented  liquid  being  4  grammes,  we  had,  consequently,
from  ten  to  eleven  times  by  weight  more  alcohol  than
fungus.

Second  experiment. — On  June  13th,  1872,  we  sowed  two  or
three  sporiferous  heads  of  nmcor  in  some  wort  contained  in  one.
of  the  double-necked  flasks.  The  temperature  of  our  oven
varied  between  23°  C.  and  25°  C.  (73°  F.  to  77°  F.)  The  total
volume  of  liquid  was  120  c.c,  as  before.

June  15th,  mycelium  had  developed,  buoyed  up  on  bubbles  of
gas.

June  16th,  patches  of  bubbles,  due  to  fermeatation,,  covered
the  surface  of  the  liquid.

June  17th,  we  transferred  the  liquid  to  the  test-glass..

June  28th,  fermentation  in  the  test-flask  had  ceased.

June  28th^  fermentation  recommenced,  the  temperature  of
the  oven  being  raised  to  27°  C.  (80°  F.).

October  20th,  the  liquid  was  transferred  back  from  the  test-
glass  to  the  flask.

October  24th,  mycelium  had  developed,  supported  by  big
bubbles  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid  in  the  flask.

October  31st,.  we  retransferred  the  liquid  to  the  test-glass.

[*  There  are  15-43  grains  in  the  gramme.]


136


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


November  1st,  a  feeble,  but  contiimous  fermentation  com-
menced. This  was  kept  up  until  Januar}'  2nd,  1873,  on  which
day  we  transferred  the  liquid,  with  its  deposit  from  the  test-
glass  to  the  flask,  when  it  now  seemed  to  be  quite  inert.  We
left  it  in  this  flask  until  December  24th,  1874,  without  its  mani-
festing during  this  long  interval  any  sign  of  fermentation  ;  nor
did  the  fungus  appear  to  grow  at  all.

We  then  submitted  the  liquid  to  analysis,  and  found  in  it,

per  100  CO. —

Grammes.*

Total  weight  of  fungoid  growth  . .  . .     0'25

Absolute  alcohol. .  . .  . .  .  .  . .      3"4

Acidity,  estimated  in  its  equivalent  of  sulphuric

acid      . .  .,  . .  . .  . .  .  .     0'12

Siigar,  determined  by  copper  solution  . .  . .      62

Sugar,  determined  after  treatment  by  boiling

with    sulphuric    acid,    and     deduction     of

amount  of  sugar  already  obtained  (dextrine)  ?    1"0

The  total  weight  of  absolute  alcohol  for  the  120  c.c.  of
fermented  liquid  was  4"1  grammes — that  is,  the  weight  of  the
alcohol  was  sixteen  or  seventeen  times  that  of  the  plant.

The  structure  of  the  plant  differs  considerably  when  it  lives
surrounded  by  air,  and  when  it  is  more  or  less  completely
deprived  of  that  fluid.  If  it  has  an  abundance  of  air  at  its
disposal,  if  it  vegetates  on  the  surface  of  a  moist  substance  or
in  a  liquid  in  which  the  air  held  in  solution  may  be  renewe<l
without  being  incessantly  displaced  by  carbonic  acid  gas,  we
shall  see  it  develop  as  an  ordinary  fungoid  growth,  with  a
mycelium  consisting  of  filaments  more  or  less  slender,  branching,
and  entangled,  sending  up  from  the  surface  of  the  liquid  aerial
organs  of  fructification.  This  is  the  well-known  form  of  \cge-
tation  of  the  common  mucor.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  compel
the  mucor  to  live  in  a  saccharine  liquid  with  insufl&ciency  of  air,  at
least  for  some  of  its  parts,  the  mode  of  vegetation  will  change
completely,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  case  oi penicilUum,  asperyilluSy

[*  For  English  equivalent  see  Experiment  I,  p.  135.]


PI  V


4oo


Larkertauer  del


Picart  sc


MucoR,  Ve(;etating  Submerged,  in  Deficit  of  Air.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  137

and  mycoderma  tini  when  submerged,  but  with  this  difference,
that  in  the  case  of  the  mucor  the  changes  in  question,  and  the
activity  of  nutrition  under  these  new  conditions,  are  much  more
marked  than  in  the  case  of  those  other  organisms.  The  spores
grow  larger  and  the  filaments  of  mycelium  which  do  develop
are  much  stronger  than  those  in  the  normal  plant.  These  fila-
ments put  forth,  here  and  there,  other  filaments  which  detach
themselves  and  vegetate  at  the  side  of  the  others,  being  ter-
minated or  interrupted  by  chains  of  large  cells,  species  of
spores  which  can  live  by  budding  and  reproducing  cells  similar
to  themselves  or  by  elongating  into  filaments.

Plate  V.  represents  the  living  plant  submerged  at  a  little
depth,  and  having,  consequently,  still  at  its  disposal  a  certain
quantity  of  air,  insufficient,  however,  to  supply  the  oxygen
needed  for  all  the  acts  of  nutrition.  In  this  case  the  mucor
appears  very  difierent,  morphologically,  from  what  it  is  when
in  free  contact  with  air.  Here  it  forms  short  filaments,  having
a  diameter  double  or  triple  that  of  the  filaments  of  the  ordi-
nary mycelium  with  branches  and  buds  all  over,  and  what  is
especially  characteristic,  forming  a  network  of  chains  of  cells,
sometimes  spherical,  sometimes  oval  or  pear-shaped,  which  are
the  actual  spores.  These,  as  soon  as  they  are  detached,  bud  in
their  turn,  and  reproduce  either  cells  or  branching  tubes ;  these
cells  or  the  chaplets  which  they  form  being  known  under  the
name  mycelian  spores  or  conidia.  Our  plate  gives  these  different
aspects  very  correctly,  and  affords  us  a  good  idea  of  the
luxuriant  state  of  this  remarkable  vegetation.

Plate  YI.  represents  the  plant  living  at  a  greater  depth  with
less  air,  expending,  by  means  of  sugar  as  source  of  heat,  the
energy  which  it  acquired  in  vegetating  under  the  influence  of
the  oxygen  of  the  air.  The  filaments  are  fewer  and  older  in
aspect,  and  the  number  of  cellular  forms  is  proportionately
larger  than  in  the  former  case,  the  budding  giving  rise  by
preference  to  spherical  or  oval  cells.  On  a  single  cell  we  often
see  two,  three,  four,  five,  six,  and  even  more  buds.


138


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


When  the  buds  of  the  oval  or  spherical  cells  detach  them-
selves whilst  young,  they  often  resemble  in  form  and  size  cells
of  ordinary  j^east,  nor  can  even  considerable  experience  in  this
kind  of  observation  always  enable  us  to  distinguish  them.
Hence  we  may  easily  understand  how  many  have  come  to
believe,  with  so  skilful  a  botanist  as  Dr.  Bail,  in  the  transforma-
tion of  mucor  into  yeast.

With  the  forms  represented  in  Plates  V.  and  VI.,  the  plant  is
more  of  a  ferment  than  of  a  fungoid  growth.  In  such  cases
the  weight  of  sugar  decomposed  in  comparison  with  the  weight
of  new  cell -globules  formed  is  very  considerable,  an  effect
which  is  more  marked  the  less  air  the  plant  has  at  its  disposal.
Under  the  latter  conditions,  however,  vegetation  is  slow  and
laborious,  and  the  ferment  very  soon  assumes  an  aspect  of  age,
and  we  must  constantly  rejuvenate  the  cells  by  bringing  them
into  contact  with  oxygen,  and  subjecting  them  to  the  action  of
limited  quantities  of  that  gas,  and  so  promote  their  vegetation
and  prolong  their  fermentative  activity.  This  effect  we  brought
about  when  we  retransferred  the  liquid  and  its  deposit  of  mucor
from  the  test-glass  to  the  flask,  thus  bringing  them  into  contact
with  fresh  air.  We  saw  cells  that  appeared  old,  dark,  and
highly  granulated,  become  inflated,  grow  more  transparent,  and
fill  with  a  gelatinous  protoplasm,  the  few  granulations  which
they  still  exhibited  assuming  a  brilliant  appearance  when  we
succeeded  in  distinguishing  them ;  and  finally,  a  very  active
budding  was  set  up.  Under  this  reviving  influence  life  could
continue  once  more  away  from  the  air,  although  with  difficulty,
so  that  fermentation  would  be  most  intense  if  the  large  fila-
ments and  their  conidia  were  constantly  being  removed  from
and  to  the  action  of  air.

The  preceding  plates  show  several  instances  of  this  rejuvenes-
cence of  the  old  cells  of  mucor  ferment.

We  have  omitted  to  represent  amongst  the  old  cells  some
cells  which  have  their  granulations  collected  about  the  centre,
with  an  empty  space  between  the  granulations  and  the  exterior


4oo


Lacl<cpbcvuer  del


Picart  sc


Ferment  of  Mlcok,


STUniES   ON    FERMENTATION.  139

borders.*  In  this  state,  cells  are  generally  dead  and  incapable
of  any  revival.  It  is  impossible  to  avoid  being  impressed  by
the  striking  analogies  which  exist  between  all  these  facts  and
those  presented  by  cells  of  yeast.

In  concluding  our  study  of  the  vegetation  of  mucor  as  a
mould  and  mucor  as  a  ferment,  we  may  again  remark  that
the  most  striking  analogies  also  exist  between  the  preceding
observations  and  those  we  have  seen  in  the  case  of  penicillkun
as})ergillus,  and  mycoderma  vini.  These  latter  plants  do  not
furnish  alcohol  or  carbonic  acid  gas  by  direct  fermentation
of  the  sugar,  as  long  as  we  let  them  vegetate  with  plenty
of  air  at  their  disposal.  Once  submerged,  however,  their  vital
aspect  changes ;  on  the  one  hand  the  cells  or  filaments  of
the  mycelia  evince  a  tendency  to  become  larger  ;  on  the  other
hand  there  is  a  tendency  to  greater  closeness  in  these  latter,
and,  consequently,  a  transition  to  the  state  of  conidia.  Lastly,
there   is    a   correlative   budding   of    cells,    accompanied   by  a

*  The  figure  given  below  supplies  this  omission.  The  cells  that  are
isolated  or  are  in  chains,  b.b.b.,  show  this  state  of  the  old  cells.  The
cells  a.a.a.  are  younger,  and  may  be  more  easily  revived.  We  may  see
by  the  dimensions  of  some  of  these  how  greatly,  in  certain  cases,  the
cells  of  mucor  resemble  cells  of  yeast ;  nevertheless,  in  the  state  of  the
contents  and  the  aspect  of  the  outlines,  there  are  always  some  differences
sufficiently  appreciable  to  strike  the  practised  observer.


4(3

Fig.  23.


The  figures  adjoining  the  cells  indicate  fractions  of  a  millimetre.     (A
millimetre  may  be  taken  as  gV'iiiO


140  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION'.

formation  of  alcoliol  and  liberation  of  carbonic  acid  gas;  in
short,  all  the  ordinary  signs  of  alcoholic  fermentation.

The  principal  difference  in  the  case  of  mucor  consists  in  this,
that  the  vegetation  of  this  latter,  under  the  conditions  of
insufficient  aeration  or  none  at  all,  is  more  decided,  both  as  to
extent  and  duration.

It  may  be  thought  that  all  the  varieties  of  mucor  are  capable
of  yielding  the  kind  of  ferment  that  we  have  just  mentioned.
But  this  is  not  the  case ;  and  here  we  have  another  striking
proof  of  the  great  physiological  differences  presented  by  forms
of  vegetation  so  intimately  connected  with  each  other  that,  in
botanical  classifications,  they  must  be  put  as  closel}'  as  possible
together.  Of  this  fact  we  have  the  most  striking  example  in
mycoderma  vhn  and  the  alcoholic  ferments,  properly  so  called,
which  so  closely  resemble  each  other  in  form  and  development
that  they  might  be  supposed  to  be  identical,  at  least,  according
to  our  present  knowledge,  but  which  differ  so  widely  in  their
physiological  aspects.

On  November  17th,  1873,  we  found  a  very  beautiful  specimen
oi  mucor  muceclo  on  a  pear,  under  a  glass  bell  jar.  It  was  a  mass
of  perfectly  straight  filaments,  simple  and  isolated,  very  large
in  comparison  with  those  ordinarily  met  with,  each  terminating
in  a  sporange,  identical  to  that  of  mucor  mucedo,  and  proportion-
ately well  developed.  We  are  able  to  distinguish  mucor
racemosns  from  mucor  mucedo  only  by  the  circumstance  of  its
having  on  its  sporange-bearing  hypha)  lateral  branches  which
also  terminate  in  sporanges.

We  sowed  only  one  of  the  terminal  heads  of  the  large  erect
hyphae  in  some  wort,  in  which  it  soon  produced  an  abundant
mycelium,  but  without  the  least  appearance  of  gas.  For  a  very
long  time,  up  to  January  7th,  1875,  we  studied  the  developments
of  this  organism,  which  remained  all  the  time  perfect!}'  pure,  in
consequence  of  our  having  cultivated  it  in  one  of  our  two-necked
flasks  on  pure  wort.

The  total  volume  of  liquid,  which  was  130  c.c,  (4"57  fl.  oz.)
contained  2"3  grammes   (35-3  grains)  of  alcohol.    In  spite  of


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


141


this  rather  large  proportion  of  alcohol,  a  clear  sign  of  undoubted
fermentation,  the  plant  had  jdelded  no  conidla  at  all,  nor  any
cell-globules  of  ferment.  Some  of  the  filaments,  however,  were
larger  than  the  rest,  and  exhibited  irregularly-shaped  swellings,
which  in  some  cases  were  of  enormous  size.  Whilst  the  natural
mycelial  filaments,  by  which  wx  mean  the  vegetating  part  of
mucor,  which  were  supplied  with  abundance  of  air,  only  measured
-5^  of  a  millimetre*  in  diameter,  the  filaments  that  had  grown
probably  with  an  insufficiency  of  oxygen,  and  performed  the
functions  of  ferment,  measured  ^-f^,,,  and  the  swellings  as  much
as  ^-f^  of  a  millimetre  in  diameter,  as  represented  in  Fig.  24.


Fig.  24.


In  concluding  this  paragraph,  we  ma}'-  mention  a  very  able
research  on  fermentation   which  we  have  lately  studied,   the

*  [0-000089  in.,  0-00026  in.  and  0  00089  in.  respectively.]


142  pTtTDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

author  of  wliich,  Dr.  Fitz,  communicated  it  to  the  Chemical
Society  of  Berlin  in  1873.  In  section  II.,  page  48,  this  author
explains  his  observations  in  a  manner  conformable  to  our
own  views,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  following  passage  of  the
memoir : —

"  In  the  presence  of  oxygen,  the  ferment  of  miicor  develops
into  a  mycelium  and  consumes  the  sugar ;  in  the  absence  of
oxygen,  on  the  other  hand,  the  spores  develop  into  ferment  of
miicor,  that  buds  and  decomposes  the  sugar  into  the  products  of
fermentation.

"  The  properties  of  7nncor  mucedo  in  a  fermentable  liquid,  in
the  presence  or  in  the  absence  of  oxygen,  accord  perfectly  with
the  theory  of  fermentation  established  by  Pasteur  in  1861
(Compfes  rendus  de  I'Academie  des  Sciences,  t.  Hi.,  p.  1260).
According  to  this  theory  a  fermentative  fungus  needs  oxygen
for  its  development ;  if  it  finds  any  free  oxygen  it  utilizes  the
whole  of  it,  assimilating  one  part  of  the  sugar  and  burning
the  other ;  whilst  in  the  absence  of  free  oxygen,  the  fungus
appropriates  what  it  requires  from  the  sugar."


143


CHAPTER  V.

The  Alcoholic  Ferments.

§  I. — On  the  Origin  of  Ferment.

Amongst  the  productions  that  appear  spontaneously,  or,  we
should  rather  say,  without  direct  impregnation,  in  organic
liquids  exposed  to  contact  with  the  air,  there  is  one  that  more
particularly  claims  our  study.  It  is  that  one  which,  by  reason
of  its  active  energy  as  an  agent  of  decomposition,  has  been  dis-
tinguished and  utilized  from  the  earliest  times,  and  is  considered
as  the  type  of  ferments  in  general ;  we  mean  the  ferment  of
wine,  beer,  and  more  generally,  of  all  fermented  beverages.

Yeast  is  that  viscous  sort  of  deposit  which  takes  place  in  the
vats  or  barrels  of  must  or  wort  that  is  undergoing  fermentation.
This  kind  of  ferment  presents  for  consideration  a  ph3^sical  fact
of  the  most  extraordinary  character.  Take  a  morsel  of  the
substance  and  put  it  in  sweetened  water,  in  must,  or  in  dough,
which  always  contains  a  little  sugar ;  after  a  time,  the  length
of  which  varies,  a  few  minutes  often  sufficing,  we  see  these
liquids  or  the  dough  rise,  so  to  speak.  This  inflation  of  the
mass,  which  is  due  to  a  liberation  of  carbonic  acid  gas,
may  cause  it  to  overflow  the  vessels  containing  it,  if  their
capacity  is  not  considerably  greater  than  the  volume  of  the
matters  fermenting.  It  is  equally  remarkable  that  these  pheno-
mena are  natural  and  spontaneous ;  that  is  to  say  that  the  must,
the  wort,  and  the  dough  are  able  to  rise,  as  we  have  termed  it,
when  left  to  themselves,  without  the  least  addition  of  foreign


144  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

substances.  The  only  difference  that  may  occur  in  these  pheno-
mena is  a  certain  amount  of  retardation,  in  cases  where  the
yeast  does  not  reach  the  saccharine  matters  in  a  perfectly
natural  form,  inasmuch  as  it  then  requires  a  certain  time  to  get
itself  together  before  it  can  begin  to  act.

It  is  necessary,  indeed,  that  sugar  should  be  present ;  for  if
we  abstracted  by  some  means  or  other  from  the  must  or  dough
all  the  sugar  contained  in  it,  without  touching  the  other
constituents,  the  addition  of  yeast  would  produce  no  gas.  Every-
thing would  remain  quiet  until  the  moment  when  signs  of  a
more  or  less  advanced  putrefaction  showed  themselves.  Yeast
is  one  of  the  most  putrescible  of  substances,  and  it  is  worthy  of
notice  that  its  alteration  is  also  the  consequence  of  the  formation
of  one  or  more  ferments,  very  different,  however,  from  that  of
which  we  are  speaking.  As  for  the  nature  of  yeast,  the  micro-
scope has  taught  us  what  it  is.  That  marvellous  instrument,
although  still  in  its  infancy,  enabled  Leuwenhoeck,  towards  the
close  of  the  17th  century,  to  discover  that  yeast  is  composed  of
a  mass  of  cells.  In  1835  Cagnard-Latour  and  Schwann  took
up  Leuwenhoeck's  observations,  and  by  employing  a  more  per-
fect microscope,  discovered  that  these  same  cells  vegetate  and
multiply  by  a  process  of  gemmation.  Since  then  the  physical
and  chemical  phenomena  already  mentioned,  such  as  the  raising
of  the  mass,  the  liberation  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  and  the  forma-
tion of  alcohol,  have  been  announced  as  acts  probably  connected
with  the  living  processes  of  a  little  cellular  plant,  and  subsequent
researches  have  confirmed  these  views.

In  introducing  a  quantity  of  yeast  into  a  saccharine  wort,  it
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  we  are  sowing  a  multitude  of
minute  living  cells,  representing  so  many  centres  of  life,  capable
of  vegetating  with  extraordinary  rapidity  in  a  medium  adapted
to  their  nutrition.  This  phenomenon  can  occur  at  an}'  tempera-
ture betweeen  zero  and  55°  C.  (131°  F.),  although  a  temperature
between  15°  C.  and  30°  C.  (59°  F.  and  86°  F.)  is  the  most
favourable  to  its  occurrence.

As  regards  the  rapidity  of  the  budding,  the  following  observa-


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  145

tlons  will  give  some  idea  of  what  it  is  in  the  case  of  one  of  the
ferments  of  natural  must.  The  temperature  was  between  12°  C.
and  13°  C.  (55°  F.).

"On  October  12,  1861,  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we
crushed  some  grapes,  without  filtering  the  juice  that  ran  from
them;  afterwards,  at  different  times  during  the  day,  we  examined
the  juice  under  the  microscope,  until  at  last,  although  not  before
seven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  we  detected  a  couple  of  cells,  as
represented  in  Fig.  25,  a.

I  t   ^  t  %  \

a
Fig.  25.

From  that  time  we  kept  these  contiguous  cells  constanth^  in
view.  At  7.10  we  saw  them  separate  and  remove  to  some  little
distance  from  each  other  (Fig,  25,  h).  Between  7  and  7.30  we
saw,  on  each  of  these  cells,  a  very  minute  bud  originate  and
grow  little  by  little.  These  buds  developed  very  near  the  point
of  contact,  where  the  disjunction  had  just  taken  place.  By
7.45  the  buds  had  increased  greatly  in  size  (Fig.  25,  c).  By
8  they  had  attained  the  size  of  the  mother-cells.  By  9  each
cell  of  each  couple  had  put  forth  a  new  bud  (Fig.  25,  d).  We  did
not  follow  the  multiplication  of  the  cells  any  farther,  having
seen  that  in  the  course  of  two  hours  two  cellules  had  furnished
eight,  including  the  two  mother-cells. '^'  *

An  increase  like  this,  which  would  have  been  more  rapid  at  a
temperature  between  15°  and  25°  (59°  and  77°  F.),  and  still
more  so  between  25°  and  30°  (77°  and  86°  F.),  may  indeed  seem
surprising.  It  is  really,  however,  nothing  to  what  sometimes
occurs.  In  choosing  proper  conditions  of  temperature  and
medium,  of  state  and  nature  of  yeast,  it  has  sometimes  happened
that  the  bottom  of  a  vessel  has  become  covered  with  a  white  de-
posit of  yeast  cells,  in  the  course  of  not  more  than  five  or  six  hours

*  Extract  from  a  Note  which  I  inserted  in  1862  in  the  Bulletin  de  la
Societe  chimique  of  Paris.

L


146  STUDIES   ON   FERMENTATION.

after  we  had  sown  a  quantity  of  yeast  so  small  as  to  effect  no
change  at  all  in  the  transparency  of  the  liquid  contained  in  the
vessel  after  it  had  been  shaken  up.  Such  a  rapidity  of  vegeta-
tion reminded  us  of  those  exotic  plants  which  are  said  to  grow
several  feet  in  height  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours.

Budding  commences  in  the  form  of  a  simple  protuberance  on
the  cell — a  kind  of  little  boss,  as  represented  in  Fig.  26^  No.  1.

0888

12  3  4-

EiG.  26.
This  protuberance  goes  on  increasing,  and  assumes  a  spherical
or  oval  form.  At  the  same  time,  there  is  a  tendency  in  the
points  of  attachment  in  the  young  cell  to  meet — a  kind  of  stran-
gulation occurs  (Fig.  26,  No.  2).  The  junction  takes  place  a
little  sooner  or  later,  according  to  the  species  (Fig.  26,  No.  3)  ;
the  two  individuals  then  separate  (Fig.  26,  No.  4).  In  certain
cases  a  single  cell  may  give  rise  to  several  protuberances,  and,
consequently,  to  several  daughter-cells.  Where  there  is  only
one  protuberance  or  bud  we  generally  see  it  originate  at  the
thick  end  and  a  little  on  one  side  of  the  apex  of  the  oval  outline,
which,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  characterizes  the  cells  of  the
majority  of  ferments.

Certain  authors  have  maintained  that  the  method  of  budding
which  we  have  just  described,  and  which  we  think  was  first
j)romulgated  by  Mitscherlich,  is  merely  an  illusion,  and  that  the
cells  of  yeast  break  up  and  scatter  their  granular  contents,  and
that  these  scattered  granules  eventually  attach  themselves  to
the  cells,  growing  there,  and  so  giving  the  appearance  of  buds
or  daughter-cells.  This  error  has  been  revived  quite  recently.*
Nothing  can  be  less  admissible.     We  could  count  the  number

*  Schiitzenberger,  in  his  work  on  "  Fermentation,"  following  Dr.  de
Yaureal.  Pans,  1875,  p.  278.  [See  pp.  61,  62  English  version  in
International  Scientific  Series  (H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  London,  1876).
This  appears  to  be  the  only  reference  to  this  subject  in  the  English
copy.— D.  C.  E.]


STUDIES   OlS    FERMENTATION.      •  147

of  yeast  cells  which  we  have  seen  undergo  this  process  of
rupture  in  the  course  of  some  ten  years  of  ohservation,  every
day  of  which,  we  may  say,  thousands  of  these  cells  have  passed
under  our  eyes.  This  breaking  up  of  the  cells  is  really  of  the
most  rare  occurrence,  and  may  always  be  explained  by  some
abnormal  circumstance  affecting  the  yeast ;  being  indeed  a
mechanical  accident,  not  a  physiological  fact.  We  may  easily
convince  ourselves  of  this  by  growing  some  yeast  in  a  saccharine
wort,  filtered  perfectly  clear,  and,  consequently,  deprived  of  all
granular  amorphous  deposit  that  might  deceive  the  observer.
The  cells  will  be  observed  to  bud  and  multiply  without  exhibit-
ing the  most  minute  appearance  of  granulation,  or  disruption  ;
moreover,  there  will  always  be  cells  of  all  sizes,  ranging  from
the  smallest  visible  up  to  the  largest.  This  very  simple  piece  of
observation  may  be  made  in  all  the  alcoholic  ferments,  and  with
any  wort  capable  of  fermenting,  and  in  its  presence  the
hypothesis,  which  we  have  been  repudiating,  cannot  hold  its
own.

In  Plate  VII.  (left  side)  there  is  represented  a  field  of  yeast,
magnified  400  times.  We  see  a  mass  of  disjointed  cells,  such  as
appear  after  fermentations  without  sufficient  aliment ;  of  the
kind  represented  some  are  nearly  spherical,  others  oval  or
cylindrical,  more  or  less  elongated.  If  we  mix  a  little  of  this
yeast,  of  about  the  size  of  a  pin's  head,  with  wort,  and  put  the
wort  into  a  small,  shallow,  flat-bottomed  basin,  having  a  surface
of  about  1  square  decimetre  (10  sq.  ins.)  exposing  it  to  the
surrounding  temperature,  we  shall  find  next  day  the  bottom  of
the  basin  covered  with  a  fine  white  deposit,  of  the  forms  of
which  we  give  a  sketch  in  the  right  half  of  the  plate.  In  this
it  will  at  once  be  observed  that  the  cells  sown  have  lost  their
interior  granulations,  having  become  more  transparent  and
filled  with  a  gelatinous  protoplasm.  The  principal  difi'erence
between  the  two  halves  of  the  plate  consists  in  this,  that
whereas  the  cells  in  the  left  half  are  isolated  and  granular,  those
in  the  right  half  are  more  inflated,  more  transparent,  and  pro-
vided with  budS;  which  may  be  seen  in  every  stage  of  development,

L  2


148  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

from  their  first  appearance  till  they  become  as  large  as  the  parent
cells.  They  continue  to  grow  until  they  detach  themselves  ;
then  they  bud  in  their  turn,  so  that  the  same  figure  may  furnish
examples  of  cells  of  the  first,  second,  and  third  generations.  In  the
right  hdlf,  the  protoplasm  contained  in  the  cells  exhibits  circular
spots  or  vacuoles,  which  may  be  made  to  appear  lighter  or  darker
than  the  rest  of  the  cell  by  slight  movements  of  the  object-glass
of  the  microscope.  These  spots  are  due  to  a  migration  of  the
protoplasm  towards  the  sides ;  they  commonly  occur  in  yeast
cells  the  vitality  of  which,  from  deficient  nourishment,  has
become  suppressed — the  shrivelled  appearance  which  they  then
assume  being  due  to  their  being  forced  to  live  upon  themselves,
so  to  speak.  However,  by  introducing  such  cells  into  a  nutritive
and  aerated  liquid  the  vacuoles  quickly  disappear.

In  the  ordinary  yeast,  as  met  with  in  breweries,  the
majority  of  cells  show  one  or  more  of  these  vacuoles  ;  if,
however,  we  place  a  little  of  this  yeast  in  an  aerated  wort,  and
watch  under  the  microscope  the  changes  that  occur  in  the
cells,  we  shall  witness,  often  in  the  course  of  a  few  seconds,
a  kind  of  turgescence,  a  greater  tension  of  the  cell- walls,  which
seem  to  grow  thinner,  and  a  complete  disappearance  of  the
vacuoles.  At  the  same  time  the  interior  gelatinous  matter
will  become  filled  with  fine  granulations  that  are  scarcely
visible,  but  which  at  a  certain  distance  appear  brilliant.  At
the  same  time  protuberances  begin  to  show  themselves,  and
next  day  the  budding  will  have  already  become  very  active.
The  newly-formed  cells  will  have  such  a  delicacy  of  aspect  and
contour  as  to  be  scarcely  discernible  in  the  field  of  the  micro-
scope. There  will  also  be  a  tendency  to  ramification  in  the
budding,  which  appearance  will  be  more  or  less  marked  accord-
ing to  the  kind  of  alcoholic  ferments  present,  as  we  shall  see
presently,  attaining  its  maximum  in  each  case  when  the  cells
have  been  revived  after  exhaustion  by  rest  and  want  of  food.
In  the  latter  case,  the  process  of  rejuvenescence  may  be  pro-
tracted ;  but  this  is  not  the  case  with  cells  of  commercial  yeast,
which   is   always   used   within  a   few  days  of   its    formation.


PI  VH


^233^^


^


1F«  ^"^t


@


^^


%?'


?5   0Q,    @®^    ^     ^


^^^


@    o,     (^L^^


^3=-


^©^^


>


^


^r.


^


=^^-


s


(^  9


Q,

%:..


4oo


Bcypolle  del


Picart  sc


Yeast-cem.s — Worn  out  and  Dissociated  (i,ei-t),  after  Revival  in  a  Sweet  Wort  (right).


/tn/J  t^rntf  Oroj  Pijrt


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  119

And  thus,  as  I  said  a  little  ago,  speaking  of  these  cells,  they
often  manifest  the  first  signs  of  their  budding  in  a  few
seconds.

In  our  preceding  remarks  we  have  expressly  assumed  that
there  are  many  kinds  of  alcoholic  ferment.  This  is,  beyond
doubt,  the  case,  as  we  have  given  incontestable  proofs,  first  in
1862,  in  the  BaUetin  de  la  Societe  chimiqne  of  Paris,  and  later
on,  in  1864  and  1866,  in  a  Note  in  the  Comptes  rendus,  on
the  diseases  of  wines,  as  well  as  in  our  "  Studies  on  Wine."
Moreover,  we  know  that  brewers  have  long  recognized  two
distinct  methods  of  fermentation — "  high  "  fermentation  and
"  low  "  fermentation — and  two  corresponding  yeasts.  It  is
true  that  the  differences  presented  by  these  fermentations  were
believed  to  be  caused  by  the  different  conditions  under  which
they  took  place,  and  that  it  was  supposed  that  we  might  change
"  high  "  yeast  into  "  low  "  3'east,  or  inversely,  by  subjecting  the
first  to  a  low  temperature,  or  the  second  to  a  high  one.  In  our
observations  of  1862,  which  we  have  just  mentioned,  we  dis-
covered that  must  gives  rise  to  several  yeasts ;  that  the  ferment
of  "  high  "  beer  cannot  develop  except  with  great  difficulty  in
must,  whilst  one  of  the  ferments  of  the  grape  grows  rapidly
and  luxuriantly  in  wort ;  that  it  is  easy  to  isolate  the  smallest
of  the  ferments  of  the  grape  from  its  congeners,  by  subjecting
filtered  must  to  fermentation  ;  and  finally,  that  the  secondary
fermentations  of  wines  which  remain  sweet  furnish  a  remark-
able ferment,  very  diS'erent  in  aspect  to  the  ferment  of  beer.

We  have  not  given  specific  names  to  these  different  fer-
ments, any  more  than  we  have  to  the  other  microscopic
organisms  which  we  have  had  occasion  to  study.  This  was
not  from  any  disregard  for  names,  but  from  a  constant  fear
that,  since  the  physiological  functions  of  these  minute  forms
was  the  exclusive  object  of  our  study,  we  might  be  led  to
attach  too  much  importance  to  exterior  characters.  We  have
often  found  that  forms,  having  nothing  apparently  in  common,
belong  to  one  and  the  same  species,  whilst  similarity  of  form
may  associate   species  far  apart.     We  shall   give  some   fresh


150  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

examples  of  this  fact  in  the  present  paragraph.  A  German
naturalist,  Dr.  Rees,  who  has  discovered  new  proofs  of  the
diversity  of  alcoholic  ferments,  putting  aside,  perhaps  rightly,
such  scruples,  has  attached  specific  names  to  the  different  kinds
of  ferments,  in  his  brochure  published  in  1870,  which  we  have
already  cited  (p.  71).  Indeed,  we  have  often  ourselves,  for
brevity's  sake,  made  use  of  the  names  proposed  by  Dr.  Rees.*

In  a  Note  inserted  in  the  Bulletin  de  la  SociefS  chimique  de
Paris,  in  1862,  we  figured  a  ferment  of  small  dimensions,
which  develops  spontaneously  in  must,  filtered  or  unfiltered,
and  which  is  very  different  from  the  ordinary  ferment  of  wine.
It  is  the  first  to  make  its  appearance  in  the  fermentation  of  the
grape,  and  may  even  appear  alone  if  the  must  has  been  pre-
viously well  filtered,  doubtless  because  its  germs,  being  smaller
than  those  of  other  ferments,  pass  through  the  filter  more
easily  and  in  greater  number.     Fig.  27,   extracted  from    our

o


Fig.  27.

Note  of  1862,  represents  this  ferment,  together  with  some
spherical  cells  of  high  yeast,  with  the  object  of  giving  a  more
exact  idea  of  the  relative  dimensions  of  these  two  ferments
and  their  dissimilarities.  Dr.  Rees  has  named  it  saccharomyces
apiculatus.

*  The  principal  result  of  Dr.  Eees'  labours  consists  in  the  discovery  of
a  sponilation  peculiar  to  yeast  cells,  that  is  to  say,  to  a  formation  in  the
interior  of  these  cells,  and  under  particular  conditions — such  as  when
the  growth  occurs  on  slices  of  cooked  potatoes,  carrots,  &c. — of  two,
three,  or  four  smaller  cells,  which,  when  placed  in  fermentable  liquids,
act  like  the  germinating  spores  of  ferments.  The  mother-cell  may  be
regarded  as  an  ascus,  and  the  daughter-cells  as  ascospores,  and  so  the
genus  sncchnromyces  may  be  classified  among  the  group  of  fungi  termed
ascomycetes.      These  facts  have  been  frequently  confirmed,   notably  by


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


151


The  same  savant  has  given  the  name  of  saccharomyces
pastoriamis  to  the  yeast  of  the  secondary  fermentations  of  sweet
liquids,  such  as  wine  that  has  remained  sweet  after  its  prin-
cipal fermentation.  We  have  described  this  yeast  in  a  Note
published  in  1864,  on  the  diseases  of  wine,  from  which  we
give  the  following  extract : — *


Fig.  28.

"  Fig.  6  (Fig.  28  in  this  work)  represents  a  very  interesting

Dr.  Engel,  professor  of  the  Faculty  of  Medicine,  at  Nancy.  Previously
to  Dr.  Rees'  discovery,  M.  de  Seynes  {Comptes  rendus,  t.  Ixvii.,  1868)
had  described  an  endogenous  formation  of  spores  in  mycoderma  vini,
particularly  in  the  elongated  cells,  followed  by  the  rupture  of  tho
mother-cell,  and  subsequent  absorption  of  cell-walls  and  other  contents
after  the  issue  of  the  endospores,  which  we  have  just  termed  ascospores.
We  ourselves  had  also  previously  called  attention  to  those  refractive
corpuscles  which  appear  amongst  vibrios  as  probably  being  reproductive
corpuscles,  and  we  had  hkewise  witnessed  the  reabsorption  of  the  parts
surrounding  them.  The  plate  on  page  228  of  our  "  Studies  on  the  Silk-
worm Disease  "  represents  the  phenomena  in  question.

*  See  Comptes  rendus  de  VAcademie  des  Sciences,  vol.  Iviii.  p.  144.


152  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

variety  of  alcoholic  ferment.  It  happens  pretty  often,  espe-
cially in  the  Jura,  where  the  vintage  takes  place  about  October
15th,  when  the  season  is  already  cold  and  little  favourable  to
fermentation,  that  the  wine  is  still  sweet  at  the  moment  when
it  is  put  into  casks.  This  is  especially  the  case  in  good  years,
when  the  sugar  is  abundant  and  the  proportion  of  alcohol
high,  a  circumstance  which  prevents  the  completion  of  fei*-
mentation  when  effected  at  a  low  temperature.  The  wine
remains  sweet  in  cask  sometimes  for  several  years,  undergoing
a  continuous  but  feeble  alcoholic  fermentation.  In  such  wines
we  have  always  observed  the  presence  of  this  peculiar  ferment.
In  form  it  consists  of  a  principal  stem,  forming  nodes  at  various
points,  from  which  short  branches  arise,  ending  in  spherical
or  ovoid  cells.  These  cells  readily  detach  themselves,  and  act
as  spores  of  the  plant.  It  is  rarely,  however,  that  we  see  so
perfect  a  vegetation  as  we  have  represented,  because  the
different  parts  fall  to  pieces,  as  we  have  shown  in  the  left
half  of  the  figure."

What  is  the  origin  of  cellular  plants  of  this  remarkable
type  ?  Where  and  how  are  the  ferments  of  the  grape  gene-
rated ?

In  Chapter  III.  §  3  we  were  on  our  way  to  a  solution  of  this
question.  It  has  been  shown  that  fermentation  cannot  take
place  in  the  juice  of  crushed  grapes  if  the  must  has  not  come
into  contact  and  been  mixed  with  particles  of  dust  on  the
surface  of  the  grapes,  or  of  the  woody  part  of  the  bunch.  It
would,  however,  be  sufficient  that  a  vintage  vat,  of  any  capacity
whatsoever,  should  receive  the  particles  of  dust  existing  on
a  single  bunch  in  some  cases,  on  even  a  single  grape,  for  the
whole  mass  to  enter  into  fermentation.

What,  then,  we  must  ask  ourselves,  is  the  nature  of  these
particles  of  dust  ?  On  September  27th,  1872,  we  picked  from  a
vine,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Arbois,  a  bunch  of  grapes,  of  the
variety  called  le  noirin.  The  bunch  selected,  without  any
injury  to  a  single  grape,  was  brought  to  our  laboratory  in  a
sheet  of  paper  that  had  been  previously  scorched  in  the  flame  of


Picart  sc


Fektile  Mould-cells  from  the  Outek  Surface  of  Grapes.


STUDIES    ON    FKKMENTATION.  153

a  spirit  lamp,  and  the  grapes  were  cut  off  with  a  pair  of  fine
scissors,  which  had  also  been  passed  through  the  flame.  By-
means  of  a  badger-hair  brush,  thoroughly  purified  in  water,  each
grape  to  which  a  portion  of  its  peduncle  remained  attached,  was
washed  in  a  little  pure  water.  The  successive  washing  of  a
dozen  grapes  in  3  c.c,  of  water  was  sufficient  to  make  the  water
turbid ;  we  then  examined  it  under  the  microscope.  Each
field  contained  many  little  organized  bodies,  accidentally
associated,  now  and  again,  with  some  very  scarce  crystalline
spicules.  As  a  rule,  the  organisms  consisted  of  simple,  trans-
parent, colourless  cells ;  some,  indeed,  of  larger  size  had  a
yellowish  brown  colour,  and  were  detached  or  united  in
irregular  masses ;  and,  lastly,  there  were  club-shaped  or  bottle-
shaped  vessels,  full  of  spores  ready  to  germinate.  We  repeated
this  experiment  with  bunches  of  other  varieties  of  grape,  and
also  submitted  to  examination  water  in  which  the  outer  sur-
faces of  gooseberries,  plums,  and  pears  had  been  washed ;  the
result  was  in  each  case  the  same,  that  is,  we  found  a  great
number  of  the  same  colourless  cells,  and  the  same  irregular
masses  of  darker  cells,  which  latter,  however,  we  must  not  con-
found with  the  masses  of  dead  cells  sometimes  found  covering:
parts  of  the  epidermis  of  certain  fruits.

As  we  had  purposely  left  each  fruit  attached  to  part  of  its
peduncle,  we  wished  to  ascertain  if  these  corpuscles  proceeded
from  the  grapes  or  from  the  wood  of  the  peduncle.  For  this
purpose  we  washed  separately  the  surface  of  the  grapes  and  the
woody  part  of  the  bunch.  The  water  in  which  the  latter  was
washed  was  visibly  more  charged  with  the  minute  organisms
than  that  in  which  the  grapes  was  washed,  although  the  latter
was  by  no  means  free  from  them.

Plate  VIII.  represents  these  corpuscles  as  they  exist  on  the
surface  of  fruits,  magnified  500  times.  The  groups,  b,  h,  h,
...  ,  c,  c,  ...  are  of  a  brown  colour,  more  or  less  dark,
or  of  a  reddish  yellow ;  the  cells  a,  a,  ...  are  transparent.
Amongst  them  are  some  spores  of  ordinary  fungoid  growths,
and  several  cells  which  are  probably  the  issue  of  a  germination


154  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

that  had  commenced  in  certain  groups  which  have  a  hard,
yellowish  appearance,  and  which  are  provided  with  what  seems
to  be  a  double  case — b,  b,  b,  ...,  c,c,  ...,  a  result  of  the  moisture
of  the  woody  part  of  the  bunch,  or  of  rain  that  fell  just  before
the  commencement  of  our  observations.

It  is  an  easy  matter  to  trace  the  germination  of  these  diflPerent
varieties  of  cells  with  the  microscope.  We  put  a  drop  of  the
water  in  which  the  woody  part  of  a  bunch  of  grapes  has  been
washed  into  a  small  quantity  of  wort,  previously  boiled  and
filtered  bright.  Plate  IX.  presents  a  series  of  developments
observed  in  the  case  of  simple  or  grouped  cells.  A,  D,  G,  and  J.
The  process  is  as  follows :  The  yellowish-brown  cells  soften  and
grow  larger  in  the  nutritive  medium,  and  gradually  become
almost  transparent  and  colourless.  At  the  same  time  we  see
some  very  young  buds  appear  on  their  margins ;  these  rapidly
increase  in  size,  and  detaching  themselves  to  make  room  for
others,  move  off  as  young  cells  that  after  a  time  bud  in  their
turn.  The  rapidity  with  which  these  cells  bud  and  multiply  is
often  extraordinary.  The  group  A  and  the  cell  D  produced  the
groups  C  and  F  within  twenty-four  hours,  passing  through  the
intermediate  stages  represented  in  groups  B,  E.  The  cells  A
and  D  did  not  give  rise  to  any  filamentous  growths,  at  least
whilst  under  our  observation.  Some  groups  of  cells,  however,
put  forth,  from  the  first,  long  filaments,  having  cross-partitions
and  resembling  the  mycelium  in  ordinary  fungoid  growths.
Together  with  these,  and  along  their  whole  length,  was  an
abundance  of  cells,  often  in  clusters,  as  represented  by  Fig.  G,
the  whole  of  which  growth  took  place  in  less  than  twenty-four
hours.*  But  apart  from  contact  with  the  air,  there  was  a
complete  absence  of  life.

The  figures  H,  I,  J,  K,  represent  other  aspects  of  developing
cells  and  filaments.  The  cells  II  are  spherical ;  the  cells  I
have  numerous  buds,  as  also  have  those  marked   K.     These

*  The  plates  referred  to  in  this  paragraph  were  exhibited  at  a  meeting
of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  November  18,  1872,  and  commented  npon
by  the  perpetual  secretary,  M.  Dumas.


A  C?/}/


B    /


^^^


r^


■^


.<y^


^4


0


/y


c/


^■^6^°


o        -.  G     "        -J


C^Q


Q    O-


?  OgP  ?5^


v>


^^J"^  ^

^§^9%^


ToUe  del


5oo


Various  Examples  of  the  Mode  of  Growth  of  Mould-cei.ls  from  the
Outer  Surface  of  Gkai'ES.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  155

different  forms  were  all  produced  in  the  course  of  twenty- four
hours  by  the  cell  which  may  be  observed  in  the  centre  of  the
group  J.  In  connection  with  this  same  group,  J,  we  may
remark  that  on  September  30,  1872,  at  10  a.m.,  we  witnessed
the  detachment  of  three  oval  cells  at  the  points  a,  h,  c ;  by  10.45
other  buds  of  the  size  represented  in  our  engraving  had  formed
in  their  place ;  b}'  about  five  o'clock  that  same  afternoon  these
buds,  a,  b,  c,  having  become  transformed  into  cells,  fell  off  in
their  turn.*

*  For  these  observations,  we  employed  small  glass  cells,  whicli  we
made  out  of  some  St.  Gobain  glass  by  punching  holes  through  it,  and
then  cementing  on  one  side  one  of  the  little  glasses  used  for  covering
objects  in  microscopical  examinations.  In  this  manner  we  made  small
troughs,  in  which  we  placed  some  wort  that  had  been  boiled,  and  a  drop
of  the  water  in  which  grapes  had  been  washed.  To  prevent  evaporation
we  covered  the  cells  with  a  sheet  of  glass.  We  examined  the  liquid  in
these  cells  by  inclining  our  microscope  to  the  angle  required,  (a)


Fig.  29.

We  also  made  use  of  cells  similar  to  those  employed  by  MM.  Van
Tieghem  and  Lemonnier  {h)  in  their  researches  on  mucorines  (Fig.  30).

B aIK  TF" B

Fig.  30.

An  apparatus  similar  to  that  employed  by  M.  Duclaux  in  1853  (c)  would
do  equally  well.  We  should  be  able  to  work  with  even  greater  facility
if  we  employed  bulbs  like  some  which  we  ordered  in  Germany,  some
twelve  years  ago,  of  the  well-known  glass-blower,  Geissler.  We  have
heard  that  these  bulbs  now  sold  by  that  maker  are  much  used  by
German  microscopists.     They  consist  of  a   tube  blown  out  into  a  flat

(a)  In  our  essay  on  acetic  fermentation,  published  in  1864,  -we  have  already  described  this
apparatus,  -which  we  employed  to  foUow  the  multiplication  of  the  jointed  filaments  of  myco-
derma  aceti.     See  Pasteur,  Etudes  sur  le  vinaigre,  p.  64,  Paris,  1868.

(ft)  Van  Tieghem  and  Lemonnier,  Annales  des  Sciences  naturelles,  5th  series,  Botanique,
t.  xvii.  1873.

(c)  Duclaux,  Comptts  rendus  des  stances  de  I'Academie  des  Sciencts,  t.  Ivi.  p.  122i.


156


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


It  may  be  asked,  wliat  proof  have  we  that  amongst  the
filamentous  and  cellular  growths  which  spring  from  the  small,
dark  bodies  existing  in  the  particles  of  dust  adhering  to  the  sur-
face of  fruits,  and  which  we  here  see  bud  and  multiply  with
such  marvellous  rapidity,  the  ferment  or  ferments  of  vintage  do
actually  exist  ?  A  very  simple  experiment  will  prove  conclu-
sivel}'  that  this  is  the  case.  When  in  the  course  of  twenty-four
or  forty-eight  hours,  by  contact  with  saccharine  must,  and  in
presence  of  excess  of  air,  the  revival  and  development  of  the
cells  has  taken  place  on  the  bottom  of  the  little  troughs
employed  in  our  observations ;  if  then  we  fill  up  the  trough  with
the  same  must,  so  that  there  remains  no  free  air  under  the
cover-glass,  within  a  very  short  time — an  hour,  half-an-hour,  or
often  less — we  shall  see  bubbles  of  gas  rise  from  the  bottom,
accompanied  by  an  increase  in  the  deposit  of  cells.    This  will  be

bulb,  the  sides  of  which,  in  the  centre,  come  sufficiently  close  together
to  enclose  but  a  verj^  thin  layer  of  liquid,  and  to  admit  of  microscopical


Fig.  31.


examination.     We  may  fill  these  tubo-bulbs  completely  with  liquid,  to
the  exclusion  of  air  or  we  may  surround  the  central  drop  with  air.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  157

the  must  fermenting  after  the  submersion  of  the  cellular  plants.
It  follows  that  the  cells,  or  groups  of  cells,  of  a  dark  colour
which  cover  the  grapes,  or  the  woody  part  of  the  clusters,  are
actual  germs  of  the  cells  of  yeast ;  more  correctly  speaking,  that
germs  of  yeast-cells  exist  amongst  these  groups,  for  it  would  not
be  consistent  with  truth  to  say  that  the  various  germinating
forms  present  in  the  dust  on  the  surface  of  grapes  must  all
of  them  give  rise  to  actual  corresponding  ferments.  Thus  the
flask-shaped  spores  c,  c,  ...  in  Plate  VIII.,  are  reproductive
organs  of  alternaria  tenuis,  which  have  probably  nothing
in  common  with  alcoholic  ferment  or  ferments,  properly  so
called,  except  their  outward  form.  "VVe  may  repeat,  however,
and  it  is  a  point  of  great  importance  to  bear  in  mind,  that  the
cells  of  yeast  originate  from  some  or  other  of  the  little,  brownish,
organized  bodies,  which  the  microscope  reveals  in  such  numbers
amongst  the  particles  of  dust  existing  on  the  surface  of  fruits.

The  impossibility,  which  we  have  already  demonstrated
(Chapter  III.,  §  3),  of  making  grape  juice  ferment  apart  from
the  action  of  external  particles  of  dust,  and  the  knowledge
which  we  have  just  acquired,  that  the  particles  of  dust  on  the
surface  of  the  grapes  and  woody  peduncles,  at  the  moment  when
the  grapes  have  attained  maturity,  contain  certain  reproductive
cells  which  give  rise  to  certain  ferments,  naturally  lead  us  to  the
investigation  of  another  point,  which  concerns  the  period  at
which  these  germs  make  their  appearance  on  the  difierent  parts
of  the  vine  plant.  The  two  following  experiments  tend  to  prove
that  the  ferment  can  only  appear  about  the  time  when  the
grapes  attain  maturity,  and  that  it  disappears  during  the  winter,
not  to  reappear  before  the  end  of  the  following  summer.

I.  In  the  month  of  October,  1873,  we  procured  from  a  vine-
yard in  the  canton  of  Arbois  some  of  the  woody  parts  of  very
ripe  clusters  of  grapes,  taking  the  precaution  to  cut  off  all  the
grapes,  one  by  one,  with  a  very  clean  pair  of  scissors,  whilst
still  on  the  vine  ;  we  then  wrapped  up  the  woody  parts  of  the
clusters,  thus  deprived  of  their  grapes,  in  thin  paper,  to  convey
.them  to  Paris.     Our  only  object  at  that  time  was  to  secure  for


158  STUDIES  OX   FERMENTATION.

use  in  our  subsequent  studies  the  ferment-bearing  dust  found
in  October  on  the  woody  part  of  the  vine,  and,  more  particularly,
on  the  clusters  themselves,  as  already  stated.  After  our  return
to  Paris,  and  during  the  course  of  our  experiments  in  October
and  November,  it  sufficed  to  wash  a  few  scraps  of  the  bunches
in  a  little  pure  water,  in  order  to  obtain  the  grape-ferment  in
abundance ;  but  later  on  in  the  winter  we  were  astonished  to
find  that  the  same  procedure  yielded  no  ferment,  only  some
moulds.  The  bunches  which,  when  put  into  boiled  and  filtered
must,  in  October,  very  readily  caused  that  must  to  ferment,  at
the  end  of  winter  could  no  longer  produce  the  same  effect,
however  favourable  might  be  the  temperature  to  which  we
raised  the  must.  The  particles  of  dust  on  the  bunches  had,
therefore,  become  sterile,  as  sources  of  alcoholic  ferments.

II.  On  February  17th,  1875,  we  purchased  of  Chevet,  a
dealer  in  provisions,  two  bunches  of  white  grapes,  which  were
perfectly'  sound,  presenting  not  the  slightest  trace  of  injury  or
bruise.  We  took  an  iron  pot  full  of  mercury,  which  had  been
heated  to  200°  C.  (392°  F.),  and  then  covered  over  its  surface
with  a  sheet  of  paper  that  had  also  been  subjected  to  flame.
When  the  mercury  had  cooled  down  we  placed  several  of
Chevet's  grapes,  singly  and  in  small  bunches,  on  the  surface
of  the  metal,  and,  after  having  enclosed  them  in  a  glass
cylinder  that  had  been  previously  heated  with  and  by  means
of  the  mercury,  we  crushed  them  in  this  vessel,  in  contact
with  air,  by  means  of  a  strong,  crooked  iron  wire  that  had
been  passed  through  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp.  The  object  of
all  these  precautions  was  to  prevent  any  cause  of  error,  such  as
might  have  resulted  from  the  accession  of  particles  of  dust
associated  with  the  mercury,  or  floating  about  our  laboratory.
We  then  placed  our  cylindrical  jar  in  an  oven,  at  a  temperature
of  25°  C.  (77°  F.)  ;  but  though  the  experiment  was  continued
for  several  days  following,  no  fermentation  manifested  itself.
At  last,  to  assure  ourselves  that  the  pulp  and  liquid  were,
notwithstanding  tliis,  well  adapted  to  fermentation,  we  intro-
duced   into   the    test-flask    an   almost    imperceptible   quantity


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  159

of  yeast.  This  readily  developed,  and  promptly  produced
fermentation.*

It  seems  possible,  therefore,  that  the  germs  of  ferment  may
not  exist  on  bunches  of  sound  grapes  during  winter,  and  that
the  well-known  experiment  of  Gay-Lussac  on  the  influence
of  air  on  the  fermentation  of  the  must  of  crushed  grapes
cannot  succeed  at  all  times.

The  following  observations  will  aSbrd  more  than  sufiicient
proof  of  this  statement,  being,  after  all,  but  an  easy  method
of  carrying  out  Gay-Lussac's  experiment,  without  having
recourse  to  the  use  of  mercury.

It  may  already  be  inferred  from  the  preceding  facts  that
there  must  be,  in  the  course  of  the  year,  between  the  end  of
winter  and  autumn,  a  period  when  the  vegetation  of  the  cellules
from  which  yeast  proceeds  undergoes  a  revival.  When  does
this  period  occur  ?  In  other  words,  how  long  after  winter  does
sterility  of  the  plant  continue,  until  it  is  again  capable  of  yield-
ing ferment?  To  ascertain  this,  we  conducted  numerous  experi-
ments during  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1875  and  the  winter
of  1876.  Having  to  conduct  them  in  a  vine-growing  country
— in  the  vineyards  of  Arbois,  Franche-Comte — at  a  distance
from  our  laboratory,  we  were  compelled  to  adopt  a  simple  form

*  In  experiments  of  this  kind  there  is  always  a  slight  increase  in  the
volume  of  air  in  the  jar.  This  increase  may  be  very  perceptible  even
when  the  experiment  made  with  fresh  grapes,  in  August,  for  instance,
causes  no  fermentation  due  to  the  action  of  yeast.  After  the  oxygen
of  the  air  has  been  absorbed  and  replaced  by  carbonic  acid  gas,  either  by
direct  oxidation  or  by  the  action  of  moulds,  the  grapes,  although  crushed,
act  like  fruits  plunged  into  carbonic  acid  gas  {a),  and  this  effect  is  even  more
marked  in  the  case  of  imperfectly  crushed  grapes.  The  reason  is,  that  the
crushing  is  never  so  perfect  as  to  injure  all  the  cells  of  the  parenchyma.
We  may  easily  convince  ourselves  that  the  experiment  on  the  liberation  of
carbonic  acid  gas  and  the  formation  of  alcohol  by  grapes  and  fi-uits  in
general  when  plunged  into  carbonic  acid  succeeds  very  well  in  the  case  of
fragments  of  fruits  or  grapes,  and  succeeds  better  the  less  the  parts  are
crushed.

(a)  Spe  paragraph :  Fermentation  in  saccharin?   fruits  immersed  in  carbonic  acid  gas,
Chap,  vi  ,  §  2,  p.  266.


160


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


of  apparatus  for  our  experiments,  which,  besides  being  very
convenient,  was  at  the  same  time  sufficiently  exact  for  the
object  we  had  in  view.

Into  common  test-tubes  we  poured  some  preserved  must ;
we  then  boiled  it,  with  the  object  of  destroying  all  the  germs
that  it  might  contain,  and  then,  having  passed  the  flame  of  a
spirit  lamp  over  the  upper  sides  of  the  tubes,  we  closed  them
with  corks  which  had  been  held  in  the  flame  until  they  began
to  carbonize  (Fig.  32).      Having  provided   ourselves   with  a


ilMMl

ii'i  illllliiHl


rgi


Fig.  32.

series  of  tubes  prepared  in  this  manner,  we  carried  them  to  a
vine,  and  there  dropped  into  some  of  them  grapes,  into  others
bunches,  from  which  we  had  taken  all  the  grapes,  by  cutting
their  peduncles  ;  into  others,  fragments  of  leaves  or  the  wood
of  the  branches.  The  corks  were  again  passed  through  the
flame  and  replaced  successively  in  each  tube.  Some  of  the
grapes  we  dropped  in  whole,  some  we  crushed  at  the  bottom
of  the  tubes  with  an  iron  rod  that  had  previously  been  passed
through  the  flame ;  others,  again,  at  the  same  moment  that  we
introduced  them  into  the  tubes,  were  cut  open  with  scissors,
likewise  passed  previously  through  the  flame,  so  that  a  portion
of  their  interior  juice  might  mix  with  the  must  in  the  tube.
Our  experiments  gave  the  following  results : — As  long  as
the  grapes  were  green,  about  the  end  of  July  and  during  the
first  fortnight  of  August,  we  obtained  no  fermentation  in  our
must.  Between  the  20th  and  25th  of  August  a  few  tubes
underwent  fermentation,  by  the  action  of  the  little  apiculated


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  161

ferment ;  and  in  the  course  of  September  the  number  of  tubes
that  fermented  increased  progressively.  In  each  series  of
tubes,  however,  we  always  found  a  few  in  which  there  was  a
complete  absence  of  fermentation.

Here  are  a  few  actual  examples.  In  the  beginning  of
September  we  placed  grapes  in  thirteen  tubes,  into  some  whole,
into  others  crushed  ones,  taken  from  bunches  of  the  variety
known  as  the  ploussard,  the  fruit  being  already  sufficiently  ripe
to  be  very  pleasant  to  the  taste.  All  the  tubes  of  this  series
failing  to  give  us  any  trace  of  fermentation,  or  anything  besides
ordinary  moulds — which  indeed  appeared  in  all  our  experiments,
whether  there  was  or  was  not  fermentation — we  began  a  new
series  of  experiments,  under  similar  conditions,  on  September
28th,  as  follows  : —

Nos.  1,  2,  3  and  4  tubes  containing  one  uncrushed  grape.

!No.  5  tube  containing  two  uncrushed  grapes.

No.  6  tube  containing  two  crushed  grapes.

No.  7  tube  containing  two  crushed  grapes,  in  2  c.c.  of  water
previously  boiled.

No.  8  tube  with  a  fragment  of  a  bunch  from  which  grapes
had  been  cut,  and  occupying  the  entire  depth  of  liquid.

No.  9  tube  with  a  fragment  of  wood  from  a  branch.

Nos.  10,  11,  and  12  tubes  with  a  fragment  of  leaf.

On  September  29th  and  30th  there  was  no  appearance  of
fermentation  in  any  of  the  flasks,  but  all  contained  flakes  of
fungoid  mycelium.  On  the  1st  of  October  fermentation  more
or  less  marked  and  active  occurred  in  2,  3,  4,  and  5,  in  which
uncrushed  grapes  were,  accompanied  by  a  general  turbidity  of
the  liquid,  and  a  suspension  of  the  development  of  the  fungoid
growths.  It  was  still  absent  in  1,  6,  and  7,  of  which  the
first  contained  an  entire,  the  latter  crushed  grapes.  No.  8,
containing  the  woody  part  of  the  bunch,  was  in  active  fer-
mentation. Nos.  9,  10,  11,  and  12,  with  fragments  of  branch  or
leaves,  showed  no  signs  of  fermentation.  The  following  day
No.  1  was  fermenting ;  but  from  October  5th  onwards  there
was  no  alteration  in  the  number  of  fermenting  tubes.

M


162  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION'.

In  this  series  we  determined  the  presence  of  the  small
apiculated  form  of  yeast  (S.  apicnlatus)  in  the  tubes  that  fer-
mented, only  once  finding  it  associated  with  saccharomyces
pastorianus.

We  need  hardly  say  that  the  grapes  which  we  employed  were
perfectly  ripe,  the  vintage  having  already  commenced  in  some
of  the  Jura  cantons.

This  experiment  shows  that,  even  when  the  grapes  are  per-
fectly matured,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  each  individual
grape  must  carry  germs  of  ferment,  and  that  some  grapes  may
be  crushed,  in  some  instances  several  together  may  be  crushed,
without  being  able  to  set  up  a  fermentation.  In  the  presence
of  these  novel  facts,  those  who  support  the  hypothesis  of  the  trans-
formation of  the  albuminous  matter  contained  in  the  juice  of
grapes  into  yeast  will  no  doubt  admit  the  untenabiKty  of  their
opinions,  since  their  hypothesis  requires  that  every  grape  or
number  of  grapes,  when  crushed,  should  ferment,  in  contact
with  air.

On  the  same  day  we  prepared  another  series  of  tubes,  using
grapes  of  a  variety  called  the  trousseau.

Nos.  1,  2,  3,  and  4  tubes  containing  one  whole  grape.

Nos.  5  and  6  tubes  containing  some  of  the  wood  of  a  branch.

No.  7  tube  containing  some  of  the  wood  of  a  branch  from
which  the  grapes  had  been  detached.

In  the  course  of  the  following  days  fermentation  took  place
in  4,  5,  and  7.

In  this  case  three  out  of  four  of  the  uncrushed  grapes  did  not
cause  the  must  in  which  they  were  placed  to  ferment ;  whilst
the  same  must  fermented  in  one  of  the  two  tubes  containing
wood  of  the  branch,  and  in  the  other  remained  unchanged  ;  and,
lastly,  the  tube  containing  the  woody  peduncles  of  the  bunch
fermented.

We  have  already  remarked  that  it  was  more  particularly  the
wood  of  the  bunch  that  was  charged  with  germs  of  ferment.
The  truth  of  this  assertion  was  proved  by  the  following  series
of  experiments.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  163

On  October  2nd,  1875,  we  charged  at  the  vineyard  twenty-
four  tubes,  all  of  which  were  about  a  third  filled  with  pure  must
that  had  been  previously  boiled.

Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  5,  and  6  tubes  containing  one  crushed  grape.

No.  7  tube  containing  two  crushed  grapes.

No.  8  tube  containing  one  crushed  grape.

Nos  9,  10,  11,  and  12  tubes  containing  some  wood  of  a
branch  of  the  vine.

Nos.  13,  14,  15,  16,  17,  18,  19,  20,  21,  22,  23,  and  24  tubes
containing  a  fragment  of  the  wood  of  a  bunch  from  which  the
grapes  had  all  been  detached  and  removed.

In  the  course  of  the  following  days  some  of  these  tubes
began  to  ferment ;  but  in  others  only  fungoid  mycelia  were
visible.

On  October  7th  the  following  tubes  were  fermenting  :  the
second  of  the  first  eight  containing  whole  or  crushed  grapes;
not  one  of  the  four  that  contained  wood  of  the  branches  ;  whilst,
on  the  other  hand,  of  the  tubes  containing  wood  of  the  bunches,
15,  17,  20,  21,  22,  23,  and  24  were  all  in  full  fermentation.
In  short,  fermentation,  and  therefore  germs  of  yeast,  were
present  in  one  single  tube  out  of  eight  containing  grapes ;  in
none  of  the  four  tubes  containing  wood  of  the  vine  branch  ;  but
in  seven  out  of  the  dozen  containing  wood  of  the  bunches.  There
was  no  subsequent  change  in  the  number  of  tubes  that  fer-
mented.

The  same  day  that  we  arranged  this  series  of  tubes  we
prepared  twenty-four  other  similar  ones,  using  the  wood  of
bunches  preserved  from  the  vintage  of  the  preceding  year.  Not
one  of  these  twenty-four  tubes  showed  the  least  sign  of  fer-
mentation, although  they  contained  grape  juice  in  presence  of
the  wood  of  the  bunches ;  this  was  a  further  confirmation  of
the  sterility  of  the  germs  of  ferment  in  the  case  of  bunches  of
grapes  preserved  for  a  sufiicient  time.

The  next  question  to  be  considered  was,  what  length  of  time
after  the  vintage  do  the  germs  on  the  surface  of  the  woody
part  of  bunches  of  grapes  preserve  the   faculty  of  producing

M   2


16 1  STllHES   ON    FERMEXTATIOX,

yeast  ?  The  following  experiments  were  undertaken  to
dotermme  this  point.

We  have  just  seen  that  on  October  2  fragments  of  the  woody
peduncles  introduced  with  must,  on  the  spot,  caused  that  must
to  ferment  in  seven  cases  out  of  twelve.  In  order  that  we
misrht  test  the  wood  of  these  same  bunches  durino'  winter  we
took  care  to  wrap  some  fragments  up  in  paper  previously  passed
through  the  flame.  We  afterwards  took  occasion  to  test
portions  of  these  fragments  as  follows : —

On  December  21st,  1875,  we  conducted  an  experiment  with
twelve.  On  the  following  days  all  began  to  show  flakes  of
mycelium,  or  numerous  multiplying  cells  of  mycoderms,
tornlcB,  and  dematium ;  and  only  four  subsequently  produced
yeast  and  alcoholic  fermentation.  From  this  we  may  con-
clude that,  three  months  after  the  vintage,  a  large  number  of
the  germs  of  yeast  spread  over  the  woody  part  of  the  bunches
lose  their  vitality,  through  desiccation  by  the  surrounding  air,
since  two-thirds  of  the  examples  taken  had  become  sterile
by  that  time.

On  January  21st  we  conducted  a  similar  experiment  with
twelve  other  tubes.  A.t  a  temperature  between  20°  and  25°  C.
(68°  to  77°  I'.)  fermentation  occurred  in  only  two  of  them.
On  March  2nd  we  undertook  another  experiment,  again
using  twelve  tubes,  and  again  fermentation  occurred  in  two
tubes.

By  the  beginning  of  April  the  sterility  was  absolute.  At
that  period  of  the  year  (April  and  May)  we  made  numerous
experiments  of  this  kind,  using  the  woody  parts  of  fresh
bunches  of  grapes  and  white  grapes  preserved  from  the  last
Ajutage,  plenty  of  which  were  still  to  be  had  in  a  state  of
freshness  at  the  provision  store.  We  also  operated  on  some
wood  obtained  from  a  vinej'ard  at  Meudon.  In  a  great  number
of  cases  no  fermentation  occurred  ;  it  even  happened  that  a
whole  bunch  of  fresh  black  grapes,  very  ripe,  which  were  bought
at  Chevet's  on  April  16th,  and  which  had  been  grown  in  a  hot-
house, after  having  been  crushed,  did  not  ferment  at  all.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION,  165

Up  tp  March  not  one  of  the  tubes  containing  the  wood  of
dry  bunches  brought  from  the  Jura,  which  had  fermented,
showed  any  signs  of  apiculahis  or  of  pastorianuSj  or  anything
besides  the  ordinary  low  yeast  of  wine,  saccharomyceH
eliipsoideus*

It  would  be  a  study  of  much  interest  to  determine  if  yeast  exists
on  other  species  of  plants  besides  the  vine.  During  the  winter
we  could  discover  it  on  no  others.  Once  during  the  winter,
experimenting  on  box,  we  obtained  fermentation  in  one  of  our
tubes  which  contained  must  In  a  great  number  of  other
experiments  we  obtained  nothing  besides  moulds  and  growths
of  dematium,  alternaria,  and  torulacc(e.

Our  observations  in  Chap.  Ill  §  6,  taken  in  connection  with
those  which  we  have  just  made,  prove  that  the  yeasts  of
fermentation,  after  being  dried,  preserve  the  faculty  of
germination  longer  than  the  germ-cells  which  are  scattered
over   the  dead  wood  of  the   vine.

As  might  be  expected,  a  microscopical  examination  of  the
particles  of  dust  scattered  over  the  surface  of  the  fruit  and
woody  peduncles  of  grapes,  reveals  great  differences  in  the
number  of  these  fertile  particles  at  different  periods  of  the  vege-
tation of  the  grapes.  As  long  as  the  grapes  are  green  and  the  vine
in  full  activity  we  find  scarcely  an}-,  or,  at  all  events,  very  few
spores  which  seem  to  belong  to  ordinary  fungoid  growths.
Towards  autumn,  however,  when  the  grape  is  ripening  and  the
leaves  becoming  yellow,  fungoid  growths  and  numerous  pro-
ductions of  great  fertility  accumulate  on  the  vine,  on  the
leaves,  the  branches,  and  the  bunches.  At  this  period  we
find  the  water  in  which  the  grapes  and  the  woody  parts  of  the
bunches  are  washed  swarming  with  difierent  kinds  of  organ-
ized corpuscles ;  it  is  at  this  period,  too,   that    the    ferment-

*  Dr.  Eees  has  given  the  name  saccharomyres  elUpsoideus  to  the  ferment
of  wine  represented  in  Plates  VIII.  to  XI.  of  our  "  Studies  on  Wine,"
which  we  have  termed  the  ordinary  ferment  of  wine,  from  its  being  the
most  abundant  of  the  ferments  found  at  the  end  of  the  fermentation  that
produces  the  wine.


166  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATIOX.

yielding  moulds  attain  that  phase  of  their  vegetation  in  wliieh,
when  mixed  with  the  juice  of  grapes,  they  produce  fermenta-
tion.

In  the  Jura  district  a  peculiar  kind  of  wine,  called  straw
wine  {vin  de  imUlc),  is  manufactured,  which  seems  to  contra-
dict what  we  have  said  as  to  the  advent  of  sterility  towards
the  end  of  winter  in  the  5'east-germs  formed  on  the  surface
of  preserved  bunches  of  grapes.  This  sti'aw  wine  is  made
of  grapes  preserved  for  long  after  the  vintage  on  straw.  Fromi
what  we  have  said  it  might  be  supposed  that  fermentation
could  not  occur  under  these  circumstances.  We  have,  in  fact,
no  doubt  that  it  is  often  really  produced  by  quite  different
yeast-germs  from  those  which  cause  fermentation  in  the
vintage  gathered  in  autumn.  Fermentation  as  effected  in
the  manufacture  of  straw  wine  is  probably  due  to  yeast-dust
spread  over  the  utensils  of  the  vine-grower,  and  derived  from
the  preceding  vintage.  We  have  seen  (Chap.  III.  §  6)  that
yeast  may  be  dried  and  reduced  to  powder,  and  yet  preserve
its  faculty  of  germination  for  several  months.  It  would  be
useful,  however,  to  submit  this  surmise  to  the  test  of  experi-
ment, and  it  would  be  easy  to  do  so  provided  we  took  care  to
crush  the  grapes  so  preserved  in  very  clean  vessels,  previously
heated  to  a  temperature  of  100°  C.  (212°  F.),  having  first
rejected  every  bunch  containing  injured  grapes,  which  might
have  fermented  or  given  occasion  to  the  development  of  yeast.
Fermentation,  we  believe,  would  not  then  take  place.

Another  consequence  results  from  the  various  facts  that  we
have  brought  out  in  relation  to  the  origin  of  the  wine-ferments,
which  is,  that  it  would  be  easy  to  cultivate  one  or  more  vine-
stocks  so  that  the  grapes  gathered  from  them,  and  crushed
to  extract  their  juice,  would  be  unable  to  ferment  spontaneously
emn  in  autumn.  For  this  purpose  it  would  be  sufficient  to
keep  the  bunches  out  of  contact  with  particles  of  dust  during
the  vegetation  of  the  bunches  and  the  ripening  of  the  grapes,
and  then  to  effect  the  crushing  in  vessels  thoroughly  freed
from  germs  of  alcoholic  ferments.     Moreover,  every  fruit  and


PI  X


ioo


Deypolle  del


Picart  sc


■-•E  OF   THE    FeKMEXTS   OF    AciD    FrUITS    AT    THE   COMMENCEMENT    OF    FERMENTATION

IN  ITS  Natural  Medium.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  167

every  vegetable  might  be  submitted  to  important  investiga-
tions of  this  kind,  the  results  of  which,  in  our  opinion,  could
hardly  be  doubtful.

The  following  observations,  which  relate  to  the  polymor-
phism of  saccharomyces  pasto nanus,  seem  to  me  to  have  an
important  bearing  on  the  history  of  alcoholic  ferments,  as
presenting  a  close  analogy  between  the  species  of  ferment
and  fungoid  growths  of  a  higher  order,  for  example,  such  fungi
as  demaiium,  which  are  generally  found  on  dead  wood ;  and  we
would  say  that  between  the  vine  and  other  shrubs  there  is
only  this  difference,  that  amongst  the  dematium  forms  of  the
vine  there  occur  one  or  more  which  are  anaerobian,  at  a
certain  period  of  the  year,  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the
dematia,  alfernaria,  &c.,  of  other  shrubs  are  more  generally
aerobian.  There  would  be  nothing  surprising  in  this  result,
considering  that  amongst  the  mucors,  for  instance,  we  find
both  aerobian  and  anaerobian  forms,  and  that  there  are  like-
wise torulae-ferments  or  anaerobian  forms,  as  well  as  torulae-
forms  exclusively  aerobian.

When  mccliaromyces  pastoriamis  begins  to  develop  from  its
natural  germs,  such  as  are  scattered  over  the  surface  of  acid
fruits,  it  takes  the  form  of  elongated  jointed  filaments,  branch-
ing, often  pear-shaped,  and  more  or  less  voluminous.  In
proportion  as  the  oxygen  held  in  solution  in  the  liquid  dis-
appears and  the  buddings  are  repeated,  the  length  and  diameter
of  the  filaments  and  cells  diminish,  and  such  is  the  transforma-
tion that  we  might,  at  last,  suppose  that  we  were  dealing  with
a  difiierent  ferment  of  smaller  dimensions.

Plate  X.  represents  this  ferment,  at  the  commencement  of
fermentation  in  cherry  juice.  In  the  course  of  a  short  time
there  is  nothing  to  be  seen  but  cells  of  comparatively  small
size,  disjointed  and  round  or  oval,  and  filaments  comparatively
short  and  slender.  This  appearance  is  indicated  in  our  drawing
by  the  cells  a,  a,  a.  As  these  latter  forms  multiply  with  great
rapidity,  we  soon  have  to  search  widely  over  the  microscopic
field  before  we  find  any  of  the  long  forms  from  which  they


168  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.

spring.  Instead  of  the  forms  given  in  Plate  X.,  we  have  only
those  represented  in  Plate  XL  In  other  words,  the  aspect  of
these  ferments  changes  daily,  from  the  very  commencement  of
fermentation.  Thus  the  yeast  would  appear  to  grow  smaller,
coincidently  with  the  progress  of  fermentation  passing  from  a
condition  in  which  it  consists  of  large  cells  and  long  ramified
filaments,  to  a  condition  in  which  the  cells  are  small  and  the
filaments  short.  These  changes  are  principally  due  to  an
alteration  in  the  method  of  budding  and  in  the  life-processes  of
the  yeast,  which  speedily  exhibits  itself  when  the  air  supply  is
reduced,  and  not  through  any  intermixture  of  foreign  ferments.
So,  at  least,  all  our  observations  up  to  the  present  time  lead
us  to  believe.  As  soon  as  the  oxygen  has  been  absorbed  the
cells  which  form  are  oval  or  globular,  and  the  filaments  do
not  lengthen  or   become  so  plump.

This  is,  however,  not  the  only  cause  of  these  changes  in  form
and  aspect,  although  the  presence  of  air,  in  greater  or  less
quantity,  has  a  marked  influence  on  the  earlier  developments  of
yeast ;  there  is  another  circumstance  to  be  taken  into  account,
difficult  indeed  to  state  shortly,  but  which  is  demonstrated
clearly  by  the  microscope,  and  is  connected  with  the  actual
state  of  the  germ  cells.  As  a  general  rule  the  budding  of  a
cell  is  not  an  identical  process  when  the  cell  is  quite  young,  and
when  it  has  become  exhausted  from  want  of  nourishment.
Between  these  two  conditions  there  is  a  difierence  which  may
be  compared  with  that  which  exists,  for  example,  between  a
newly- formed  grain  which  would  not  germinate,  and  the  same
grain  matured  by  rest,  if  we  may  use  the  expression,  that  is,
which  has  been  kept  long  enough  for  its  germination  to  be
possible.  In  other  words,  and  as  far  as  our  subject  is  concerned,
we  are  not  to  expect  that,  by  reviving  our  old  yeast  cells  and
putting  them  to  grow  with  abundance  of  air,  in  a  saccharine
nutritive  medium,  we  shall  obtain  the  appearance  of  the  earlier
developments  of  the  germ-cells  on  the  surface  of  sweet  and  acid
fruits.  We  see  this  clearly  in  Plate  VII.,  the  right-hand  half
of  which  represents  the  recruited  budding  of  cells,  such  as  those


«<:^=s.


.■^^'


■s^.


^


OnB


O'


QV


^


Cb


w

£/


.>^^.


,eO


ii?


(5[


K^


^^


■^   fi       ^r-Cr-,


CSE^  v/      Ccaai^


,(?         !^/?


400


E.Helle  sc


Saccharomyces  Pastorianus,  in  course  ok  Regular  Growth.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATIOl'f.  1C9

represented  in  the  left-hand  half,  in  a  medium  peculiarly
adapted  to  their  vitality,  and  in  the  presence  of  much  air.  As
regards  the  length  and  size  of  filaments  and  cells,  there  is
little  appreciable  difference  between  the  two  sides.  The
principal  difference  consists  in  the  relative  freshness  and  the
budding  going  on  in  individuals  in  the  right-hand  half.

There  is  a  simple  means  of  transforming  the  small,  disjointed
forms  of  the  yeast  as  it  occurs  in  a  deposit,  at  the  end  of  a
fermentation,  back  into  the  long,  tubular,  pear-shaped  forms
peculiar  to  the  germination  of  the  germ-cells,  which  exist
amongst  the  particles  of  dust  spread  over  the  surface  of  fruits.
Plate  X.  illustrates  the  result  of  the  process.  For  this  purpose
we  must  eflfect  as  complete  an  exhaustion  as  possible  of  the
ferment  saccharomyces  pastorianus,  by  leaving  it  to  itself  for  a
very  long  time,  without  aliment,  in  contact  with  pure  air,  in  a
damp  state  ;  or,  better  still,  in  presence  of  sweetened  water.
We  cultivate  some  yeast  in  wort,  in  one  of  our  two-necked
flasks,  and  then  carefully  decanting  the  fermented  liquid
through  the  right-hand  neck,  leave  the  deposit  of  yeast  on  the
sides  of  the  flask.  The  glass  stopper  which  closes  the  india-
rubber  tube  must  be  replaced,  and  the  moist  yeast  be  left  thus,
in  contact  with  pure  air.  The  cells  will  steadily  continue  their
activity,  and  so  gradually  age,  without  meanwhile  losing  their
vitality.  We  use  the  word  age,  as  we  have  already  observed,
because  the  period  of  rejuvenescence  in  the  case  of  such  a  yeast
is  so  much  the  slower  the  longer  the  plant  has  remained  in
that  state.

Under  these  conditions  the  yeast  rarely  dies.  It  becomes
attenuated  and  shrivelled  but  still  preserves  its  vitality,  that
is,  the  power  of  reproducing  itself  after  a  lapse  of  several
months  or  even  several  years.  In  the  end,  however,  it  dies,
a  fact  which  is  proved  by  the  cells,  when  sown  in  a  nutri-
tive medium,  remaining  inert.

To  exhaust  yeast,  without  destroying  it,  sweetened  water  is
preferable.  Having  decanted  the  beer,  we  substitute  in  its
place  water  sweetened  with  10  per  cent,  of  pure  sugar.     By


170  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

effecting  tlie  substitution  in  the  following  manner,  we  escape  the
risk  of  introducing  germs  from  floating  particles  of  dust,  which
would  nullify  all  experiments  of  this  kind.  We  prepare,  then,  a
flask  containing  sweetened  water,  free  from  all  foreign  germs,
which  we  attach  to  the  other  flask  \_i.e.,  two  of  M.  Pasteur's  flasks
with  two  necks,  one  straight  and  wide,  the  other  bent  and  narrow
(Fig.  8)].  This  is  done  by  taking  the  india-rubber  tube  off  the
flask  containing  j'east,  and  removing  the  glass  stopper  from  the
other  india-rubber  tube  attached  to  the  flask  containing  the
sweetened  water  ;  then,  introducing  the  right-hand  neck  of  the
yeast  flask  into  the  india-rubber  tube  connected  with  the
other,  we  raise  the  latter  flask  so  as  to  pour  the  sweetened
water  on  to  the  yeast.  At  the  same  time  an  assistant  passes
the  flame  of  a  spirit-lamp  over  the  bent  part  of  the  curved  tube
attached  to  the  water  flask,  with  the  object  of  destroying  the
vitality"  of  the  germs  in  the  floating  particles  of  dust,  which
enter  the  flask  in  proportion  as  it  is  emptied  into  the  other.

The  sweetened  water,  which  is  thus  brought  into  contact
with  yeast  of  greater  or  less  freshness,  soon  begins  to  ferment.
Fermentation  accomplished,  the  vinous  liquid  is  decanted  and
replaced  by  fresh  sweetened  water,  which  ferments  in  its  turn,
although  even  at  this  stage  with  greater  difficulty  than  the
first ;  this  second  dose  is  again  decanted,  and  again  replaced  by
fresh  sweetened  water,  and  this  process  is  repeated  three  or  four
times.  The  yeast  becomes  weaker  and  weaker,  and  eventually
is  unable  to  cause  any  fermentation  in  sweetened  water  poured
on  it.

This  exhaustion  of  yeast  in  sweetened  water  may  be  produced
more  quickly  by  the  following  means  : — It  is  sufficient  to  sow  a
mere  trace  of  pure  yeast  in  a  large  quantity  of  sweetened  water,
say  100  c.c.  (nearly  four  fluid  ounces),  that  is,  instead  of  pour-
ing the  contents  of  a  bottle  of  sweetened  water  upon  the  whole
deposit  of  yeast  in  the  flask  which  contained  the  fermented
wort,  we  simply  take  a  little  yeast,  by  means  of  a  fine  tube,
from  the  deposit  at  the  bottom  of  the  flask,  and  introduce  it
into  the  flask  of  sweetened  water.     This  large  proportion  of


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  171

liquid  is  itself  sufficient  to  exhaust  the  small  quantity  of
yeast,  quickly  checking  the  feeble  fermentation  which  it  had
induced,  so  feeble  indeed  as  frequently  not  to  be  detected  by
the  eye,  from  the  fact  that  the  amount  of  liquid  present  is
more  than  sufficient  to  dissolve  any  bubbles  of  carbonic  acid  gas
that  might  otherwise  have  been  liberated.

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  the  yeast,  which  during  its  pro-
tracted stay  in  the  sweetened  water  becomes  enfeebled  to  such  a
degree  that  it  can  no  longer  excite  the  least  fermentation  in
that  water,  but  will  remain  in  its  presence  for  an  indefinite
time  in  a  state  of  inert  dust,  does  not  die.  In  some  of  my
experiments  the  yeast  has  remained  alive  in  the  sweetened
water  for  more  than  two  years.*  It  is  almost  unnecessary  to
point  out  that  these  results  are  altogether  out  of  keeping  with
the  various  properties  that  are  usuallj^  attributed  to  j^east.f

In  these  experiments  we  may  use  yeast-water  J  instead  of
water  sweetened  with  sugar.  Into  some  flasks  of  pure  yeast-
water  we  put  a  little  yeast,  taking  all  precautions  to  prevent  the
introduction  of  foreign  germs.  No  fermentation  results,  there
being  no  sugar  present ;  the  yeast,  however,  begins  to  bud,  and
this  budding  is  more  or  less  marked  according  to  the  quantity

*  The  alcoliolic  ferments  in  general,  subjected  to  these  weakening
influences,  have  not  all  the  same  power  of  resistance.  That  one  which
seems  to  possess  this  power  in  the  highest  degree  is  the  saccharomyces
pastorianus,  which  ferment  we  had  in  view  in  writing  the  above.

t  The  term  exhaustion  {epuisement),  which  we  have  just  used,  was,
perhaps,  not  altogether  felicitously  chosen.  No  doubt  wo  exhaust  the
cells  of  yeast  when  we  sow  an  imponderable  weight  of  them  in  a  large
quantity  of  sweetened  water  ;  it  might,  however,  be  better  to  say  that  in
such  a  case  we  adopt  a  particular  method  of  preserving  the  vitality  of
the  cells,  without  suffering  them  to  die  of  exhaustion,  or  to  multiply  by
budding.  We  may  remark  that  the  yeast,  in  this  case,  exists  in  a  state
of  latent  life,  which  resembles  that  of  cells  on  the  surface  of  fruit.  The
cells  on  the  surface  of  fruits,  bunches,  or  barks,  can  no  more  find  around
them  sufficient  aliment  for  their  propagation  than  can  our  yeast-cells  in
a  great  excess  of  sweetened  water.  We  would  not,  however,  say  of  the
spores  on  the  surface  of  fruits,  or  their  woods,  that  they  are  in  a  state  of
exhaustion  ;  the  term  would  be  misapplied.

X  See  foot  note  p.  79.— D.  C.  R.


172  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

of  carbohydrate  food  which  we  introduce  along  with  the
specimen.  An  interior  chemical  action  also  goes  on,  causing  a
gradual  change  in  the  aspect  of  the  yeast.  The  plasma  of  the
cells  collects  about  the  centres,  assuming  a  yellowish-brown
colour,  becoming  granular,  and  forming  within  the  cells  masses
more  or  less  irregular  in  shape,  very  rarely  spherical.

We  may  observe  here  that  these  conditions  seem  to  be
peculiarly  adapted  to  show  the  character  of  the  interior  sporula-
tion  of  the  cells  discovered  by  Dr.  Rees.  Notwithstanding  this
we  have  never  succeeded  in  finding  it  distinctly,  under  these
circumstances.

The  fact  which  should  claim  all  our  attention,  we  repeat,  is,
that  this  exhausted,  shrivelled-up,  aged-looking  yeast  preserves
its  faculty  of  germination  for  several  years  ;  that,  moreover,
this  faculty  may  be  aroused  by  placing  it  in  aerated  nutritive
media,  in  which  case  it  will  exhibit  all  the  peculiarities  which,
under  similar  conditions,  characterize  some  of  the  germ-cells
found  on  the  surface  of  our  sweet  domestic  fruits.  In  other
words,  this  yeast,  instead  of  multiplying,  as  it  always  does
in  the  course  of  several  growths  in  saccharine  musts,  in  the
form  of  cells  which  detach  themselves  readily  as  soon  as  they
have  nearly  attained  the  form  and  size  of  the  mother-cells,  begins
to  shoot  out  into  such  beautiful  forms  as  those  of  dematiain
pullulans,  producing  like  that  ferment  long,  well-grown,  branch-
ing filaments,  as  well  as  plump  and  frequently  pyriform  cells,
as  represented  in  Plate  X.

The  following  figures  (33  to  37)  and  descriptions  of  the  ob-
servations to  which  they  relate  will  furnish  fresh  proofs  of  our
assertions.  In  these  figures  we  see  saccharomyces  jmstorianus,
which  has  been  exhausted  in  sweetened  water  or  in  yeast-water,
undergo  revival  in  saccharine  musts,  give  rise  to  elongated,
branching,  pear-shaped  forms,  such  as  belong  to  the  original
ferments  of  fruits,  and  afterwards  assume  the  most  minute
forms  that  we  find  in  fermentations  progressing  or  completed.

Let  us  examine  Fig.  33.  The  history  of  this  growth  is  as
follows  : —


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


173


Some  spontaneous  yeast  which,  after  repeated  cultivation,  had
acquired  the  aspect  represented  in  Plate  XI. — which  aspect  the
saccharomyces  pastorianus  generally  assumes  under  these  circum-
stances— was  exhausted  in  sweetened  water,  and  subsequently
revived  in  must  at  10°  C.  to  11°  C.  (51°  F.).  At  this  tempera-
ture germination  was  not  very  marked  before  the  end  of  eight
days ;  at  a  temperature  of  20°  C.  (68°  F.),  it  only  took  three
days,  under  similar  conditions.     The  sketch  includes  but  one


EiG.  33.
of  the  long  branches  from  which  the  ferment  cells  and  the
budding  joints  took  rise,  but  there  were  a  great  number  more.
Some  of  the  forms  represented  in  the  figure  bear  a  striking
resemblance,  it  appears  to  us,  to  some  of  those  of  dematium,  in
Plate  IX.  ;  and  even  we  may  trace  out  the  several  peculiarities
of  form  which  distinguish  the  figures  in  the  latter  plate.

The  next  figure   (34)   represents  the   earliest  forms  of  ger-
mination  of  another  speciuien  of  saccharomyces  jjastorianus  in


174


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


wort,  after  it  hud  been  exhausted  by  four  successive  growths
in  sweetened  water.  We  here  see  the  large  ferment-form
which  appears  at  the  commencement  of  fermentation,  in  acid
fruits,  such  as  cherries  and  gooseberries  (Plate  IX.),  associated
with  smaller  forms,  which  follow  it  and  emanate  from  it,  in
proportion  as  the  process  of  budding  is  repeated.  The  field
was  covered  with  this  minute  form,  and  we  had  to  search
about  considerably  before  we  could  find  any  of  the  large  cells
and  the  long,  branching,  jointed  filaments  which  we  have
sketched.     The  reason  of  this  was,  that  these  large,  extended


0.     ^.^^Q     -%


Fig.  34.

filaments  only  appear  at  the  beginning,  when  there  is  still
an  abundance  of  air,  giving  place,  after  repeated  budding,  to
minute  cells  or  short  filaments,  the  ever-increasing  number  of
which  soon  hides  the  others  from   sight.


\%


0


a


i
^


Fig.  35.
Fig.    35   represents   saccharomyces  pastoriamis   again,   as   it
appears   after  having  been  exhausted  by  two  years  preserva-


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  175

tion  in  yeast-water,  in  contact  with  pure  air.  Strange  to  say,
it  has  lost  its  elongated  appearance,  and  would  appear  to
have  originated  from  a  round  ferment.  The  cells  are  much
exhausted,  and  most  of  them  seem  to  have  a  double  border ;
their  interior  is  very  granular  and  of  a  yellowish  colour.
One  might  readily  take  the  specimen  to  be  a  dead  old
ferment,  which,  however,  it  by  no  means  is.

Fig.  36  represents  the  germination  of  this  ferment,  which
had  previously  been  revived  in  a  flask  of  wort,  at  the  tempera-
ture of  the  air,  in  May,  1875.  The  following  are  the  details  of
our  observation  : —

We  sowed  a  trace  of  the  exhausted  yeast  (Fig.  35)  in  a
flask  of  wort  on  May  16th.  The  sketch  (Fig.  36)  was  made
on  May  19th,  but  on  the  18th  there  was  a  sensible  revival.  It
will  be  seen  how  much  the  little  ferment  had  developed  in
the  course  of  three  days  from  the  time  when  the  process  com-
menced. If  we  had  waited  a  few  days  longer  before  taking
our  sample,  we  should  probably  have  had  difiiculty  in  finding
any  cells  or  filaments  of  the  large  ferment  form,  as  there  would
have  been  so  few  of  them  in  comparison  with  the  others.


Co

Fig.  36.

In  the  above  figure  we  should  remark  the  chain  of  large
cells  and  long-jointed  processes,  a,  h,  c,  d :  d  is  one  of  the  cells
that  we  sowed  ;  it  has  become  transparent,  and  its  contents,
which  are  slightly  granular,  have  lost  their  brownish  tint ;  c  is
a  large  cell  which  sprang  from  the  preceding  one  ;  its  outline


176  STUDIES   ON   FERMENTATION.

is  clear,  and  it  is  full  of  fine,  yellowish  granules,  which  present
a  perfect  resemblance  to  the  large  ferment-cells  of  fruits,  pro-
ceeding from  the  germ-cells  on  the  surface  of  those  fruits,
when  it  begins  to  appear  in  sweet  juices ;  6  is  a  long  filament,
sprung  from  the  preceding  cell ;  and,  last  of  all,  a  is  a  joint
and  its  hud,  in  which  the  border  is  not  yet  very  clearly  defined ;
it  has  scarcely  any  granules,  and  is  finer  than  the  others,  be-
longing, in  short,  to  the  small  ferment  form  represented  in
Plate  XI.  Here,  then,  we  see  the  transition  of  the  large  ferment
to  the  small,  on  the  same  branch,  after  two  generations  from
the  germination  of  the  germ-cell  d.  This  observation  cor-
roborates the  opinion  maintained  by  us,  that  in  Figs.  33,  31,
36,  as  in  Plate  X.,  we  have  not  a  mixture  of  two  ferments,  the
one  consisting  of  large,  elongated  filaments,  the  other  of  small
cells,  but  one  and  the  same  ferment,  the  difierences  in  the
form  and  size  of  which  depend  on  particular  conditions.  The
smallest  ferment-form  very  soon  becomes  the  only  one  visible,
and  it  preserves  its  peculiar  appearance  in  successive  growths
from  inability  to  return  to  the  full,  elongated,  filamentous
forms  before  undergoing  a  prolonged  exhaustion.  The  ferment
of  miicor  would  probably  afibrd  similar  indications :  it  would
be  very  interesting  to  find  out.

The  following  is  one  of  the  most  curious  of  the  forms  pre-
sented by  saccharomijces  pastorianus,  occurring  after  exhaustion
in  a  sweet  mineral  liquid.  The  ferment,  taken  from  a  closed
vat,  in  which  it  had  been  used  for  beer,  was  sown  in  the
mineral  liquid  on  July  4th,  1873.  The  following  days  the
ferment  developed  feebly,  but  perceptibly,  and  gradually^  in-
creased in  bulk.  The  flask  was  left  to  itself  in  an  oven  at
25°  C,  (77°  F.)  until  December  3rd,  when  we  ascertained  that
all  the  sugar  had  fermented.  We  then  sowed  a  trace  of  the
deposit,  which  had  become  abundant,  in  a  flask  of  pure  wort.
On  December  4th  there  was  no  perceptible  change.  On
December  5th,  however,  fermentation  was  in  active  progress ;
a  large  quantity  of  froth  covered  the  surface  of  the  liquid,
and   a   considerable   deposit    of    ferment    had    already    taken


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  177

place  at  the  bottom.  We  made  a  microscopical  exarainatioii
of  this  deposit,  a  sketch  of  which  we  append  (Fig.  37).  The
dark,  double-bordered  cells  are  those  which  were  sown  but
did  not  rejuvenesce.     We  may  notice  in  different  places  several


1  Div.  =  iio^li  of  millimetre  (tT'jTo*^  of  in.).
Fig.  37.

of  these  same  cells,  recognizable  by  their  granular  contents,
which  they  are  beginning  to  lose^  to  make  room  for  ger-
minating cells  and  joints,  often  numerous.  For  instance,  in
the  group  at  the  bottom  of  our  figure  one  of  the  cells  is  in
course  of  rejuvenescence  and  germination,  and  has  given  rise
to  no  fewer  than  six  cells,  filaments,  or  groups  of  filaments.
In  different  fields  of  our  microscope  we  met  with  a  crowd  of
branches,  more  or  less  ramified,  and  chains  of  cells,  of  greater
or  less  length,  of  which  we  have  sketched  a  few.  In  propor-
tion as  the  budding  of  these  branches  is  repeated,  the  cells
and  joints  become  more  readily  disunited,  grow  small,  and
assume  the  appearance  of  saccharomyces  pastorianus  in  ordinary

N


178


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


growths,  almost  as  represented  in  Plate  XI.  At  first,  when  the
old,  exhausted  cells  begin  to  germinate,  their  appearance  rather
resembles  that  of  dcmatiumj)uUulanH,  as  seen  in  the  germination
of  many  of  the  corpuscles  on  the  surface  of  clusters  of  grapes  or
fruits,  or  their  woody  parts,  some  specimens  of  which  are  to
be  found  in  Plate  IX.

We  may  briefly  summarize  the  leading  facts  demonstrated  in
the  above  paragraph.  We  have  seen  that  there  are  different
alcoholic  ferments.  In  the  fermentation  of  natural  saccharine
juices,  which,  especially  when  acid,  so  readily  undergo  a
decided  alcoholic  fermentation,  the  ferments  originate  in  certain
germ-cells,  which  are  spread  in  the  form  of  minute  spherical
bodies  of  a  yellow  or  brown  colour,  isolated  or  in  groups,
over  the  exterior  surface  of  the  epidermis  of  the  plant,  and
which  are  gifted  with  an  extraordinary  power  of  budding
with  ease  and  rapidity  in  fermentable  liquids.  The  presence
of  atmospheric  oxygen  is  indispensable  to  the  germination  of
these  germ-cells,  a  fact  which  explains  Gay-Lussac's  obser-
vation that  atmospheric  oxygen  is  necessary  for  the  com-
mencement of  spontaneous  fermentation   in  must.*     Of   these

*  M.  Bechatnp  {Comptes  rendus,  November  IStli,  1872)  asserts  that  the
air  has  no  direct  influence  on  the  piroduction  of  ferment  or  on  the  process  of
alcoholic  fermentation.  That  experienced  chemist  deduces  this  erroneous
assertion  from  experiments  on  sweetened  water,  to  which  bunches  of
grapes,  petals  of  corn-poppies  and  petals  of  rohinia  pseudo-acacia  had
been  added.  As  may  be  seen  in  our  "  Studies  on  Wine  "  (p.  7,  1st  edition,
18G6),  these  experiments  conducted  by  M.  Bechamp  in  1872  were  merely
a  reproduction  of  those  made  long  before  with  vine  leaves,  petals  of
elder-flowers,  leaves  of  sorrel,  &c.,  by  the  Marquis  de  Bullion,  Fabroni,
and  other  experimentalists.  M.  Bechamp  has  modified  his  later  experi-
ments by  not  adding  the  bunches  of  grapes,  leaves,  &c.,  to  the  sweetened
water  before  having  introduced  carbonic  acid  gas  into  the  liquid.  Fer-
mentation having  still  taken  place  in  spite  of  this  change,  M.  Bechamp
wrongly  concluded  that  air  has  no  direct  influence  on  the  prod nction  of  yeast
on  an  alcoholic  fermentation.  The  introduction  of  the  carbonic  acid  gas
could  not  remove  all  the  air  imparted  to  the  sweetened  water  by  the
objects  placed  in  it,  and  it  was  this  air  which  remained  adhering  to  these
objects  that  permitted  the  production  of  fermentation.  We  may  avail
ourselves  of  the  opportunity  here  presented  to  add  that,  in  this  same


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIO>f.  179

various  ferments  one  deserves  special  mention — namely,  the
variety  termed  saccharomi/ces pastorianus.  As  is  the  case  with
all  ferments,  when  we  gather  it  from  the  deposits  produced
in  must  that  has  been  fermented  by  its  action,  it  is  composed
entirely  of  oval  or  spherical  cells  or  of  short  joints.  When  again
placed  in  a  similar  must  it  buds,  like  all  the  ordinary  ferments,  and
the  buds  detach  themselves  from  the  joints  or  mother-cells  as  soon
as  they  have  attained  the  size  of  these  latter,  from  which  time
in  the  new  deposit  is  reproduced  the  original  ferment-form
from  which  it  sprung,  and  so  on.  Under  certain  conditions
of  exhaustion,  however,  which  may  be  easily  obtained,  and
which  we  have  already  accurately  described,  the  cells  undergo
an  absolute  change  as  regards  their  capabilities  of  budding
and  germinating.  Each  cell,  modified  in  its  structure  by  the
conditions  we  have  mentioned,  shows  a  tendency  to  shoot  out
all  around  its  surface,  with  astonishing  rapidity,  into  a  mul-
titude of  buds,  from  many  of  which  spring  branching  chains,
covered  in  parts,  and  more  especially  at  the  internodes,  with
cells  and  jointed  filaments,  which  fall  off  and  bud  in  their
turn,  soon  to  present  the  forms  of  the  yeast  deposit.  In  this
way  saccharomyces  pastorianus  seems  to  afford  a  kind  of  bond
of  union  between  the  race  of  ferments  on  the  one  hand,
and  certain  kinds  of  ordinary  fungoid  growths  on  the  other.
Of  these  latter  the  plant  which  De  Bary  has  named  dematium,
and  which  is  generally  found  on  the  surface  of  leaves  or
dead  wood,  more  especially,  however,  on  the  wood  of  the
vine  at  the  end  of  autumn,  the  time  of  the  vintage,  presents
a  striking  example.

There  seems  every  reason  to  believe  that  at  this  period  of
the  year  one  or  more  of  the  varieties  of  dematium  furnish
cells  of  yeast,  or  even  that  the  ordinary  aerobian  varieties  of

Note  of  November,  1872,  M.  Bechamp  commences  by  making  various
assertions  concerning  the  forms  assumed  by  cells  of  the  alcoholic  ferment
of  the  grape  when  in  process  of  fermentation.  This  question  was  dis-
cussed by  us  ten  years  before,  and  our  conclusions  supported  by  sketches,
in  a  Note  which  appeared  in  the  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  chimique  de  Paris,
for  1862.

N   2


180  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

dematium  produce  at  a  certain  stage  of  their  vegetation,  in
addition  to  aerobian  cells  and  torulae,  other  cells  and  torulae
which  are  anatirobian,  that  is,  alcoholic  ferments.

In  this  manner  we  arrive  at  the  confirmation  of  an  idea
entertained  by  most  authors  who  have  studied  yeast  closely —
namely,  that  it  must  be  an  organ  detached  from  some  more
complex  vegetable  form.  We  may  also  add  that  in  the  case
of  saccharomyces  the  chains  of  filaments,  both  tubular  and
fusiform,  and  septate  cells  more  or  less  pyriform  originating
in  them,  when  attentively  observed,  remind  us  forcibly  of
the  filamentous  chains  and  spoi-e-balls,  or  conidia  of  mucor
racemosus  when  submerged,  so  that  one  might  suppose  that
the  spore-ferment  of  our  dematium  is  itself  an  organ  detached
from  some  still  more  complex  vegetable  form,  in  the  same
way  that  conidia-ferment  of  mucor  racemosus  belongs  to  that
more  complex  fungoid  growth.

In  the  following  passage  De  Bary  uses,  for  the  first  time,
the  words  dematium  puUulans  (Hofmeister,  vol.  ii.  p.  182,
1866).  The  German  naturalist  begins  by  citing  the  opinions
of  Bail,  Berkeley,  and  H.  Hofimann,  the  first  of  whom  main-
tains that  mucor  mucedo  becomes  transformed  into  the  yeast
of  beer,  the  second  that  yeast  is  a  peculiar  state  of  penicillium,
and  the  third  that  it  may  be  generated  by  fungi  of  ver}-
difierent  nature,  and  especially  by  pcjiicil/ium  glaucum  and
mucor  mucedo.  He  goes  on  to  say  :  "  I  have  taken  great  pains
to  repeat  the  experiments  of  Bail,  Berkeley,  and  II.  Ilofi'mann,
but  I  have  never  been  able  to  confirm  the  results  which
they  have  stated,  either  in  the  case  of  growths  in  micro-
scopic cells  or  in  experiments  performed  in  test-tubes  with
the  pxirest  possible  substances — specially  prepared  solutions
or  must  of  wine  and  spores  of  penicillium,  mucor  mucedo,
hotrylis  cinerca,  &c."  On  this  point  M.  De  Bary  arrives  at
exactly  the  same  results  which  we  communicated  to  the
Societe  Philomathique  and  the  Socieie  Chimique  of  Paris,  as
already  given  in  Chap.  IV.  §  4,  p.  128,  note.

M.  De  Bary  goes  on  to  say  :  ''  In  researches  of  this  kind


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.  181

it  is  difficult  to  eliminate  two  sources  of  error.  On  the  one
hand,  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  cells  of  ferment  are  actually
scattered  over  everything,  and  that,  consequently,  they  may
easily  get  into  the  experimental  liquid  along  with  the  spores
that  we  sow,  and  so  occasion  mistakes.*  On  the  other  hand,
there  are  a  great  many  fungi  which  develop  budding  pro-
cesses similar  to  yeast,  but  incapable  of  producing  fermen-
tation, which  yet  in  some  cases  spring  directly  from  spores
as  well  as  from  mycelium,  especially  -we  may  instance  exo-
ascus.  This  last  observation  is  especially  applicable  to  the
extraordinarily  numerous  variety  of  fungi  which  rank  under
the  Dematiei  and  Sphaeriacei,  and  which  I  shall  term,  for
convenience  of  naming,  dematium  pullulatn.

We  shall  conclude  this  paragraph  with  a  remark  that  has
doubtless  presented  itself  to  the  minds  of  our  readers,  which
is,  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  carry  out  the  experiments
we  have  described  if  we  could  not  make  sure  of  dealing:  with
pure  ferments,  or,  at  least,  with  mixtures  the  components
of  which  are  sufficiently  well  known  for  us  to  assign  to  each
the  effect  produced  by  it  in  the  total  phenomena  observed.
It  would  be  extremely  difficult  to  continue  growths  of  yeast-
deposit  in  sweetened  water  or  in  a  moist  atmosphere  if  the
little  plant  were  mixed  with  spores  of  other  fungoid  growths,
a  variety  of  ferment-forms,  and  germs  of  bacteria,  vibrios,  or

*  The  gei-ms  of  ferments  are  less  widely  diffused  thau  M.  de  Bary  sup-
poses, as  may  be  seen  from  our  observations  in  Chap.  III.  See,  too,  our
Memoir  of  1862,  8ur  Its  Oenerations  dites  Spontanees,  p.  49.  It  is  only  iu  a
laboratory  devoted  to  researches  on  fermentation,  or  places  such  as  vaults,
cellars,  and  breweries,  that  the  air  holds  appreciably  in  suspension  cells  of
ferments,  ready  to  germinate  in  saccharine  media.  If  we  except  these
particular  circumstances,  ferment  is  not  very  largely  diffused,  save  on  the
surface  of  fruits  and  the  wood  of  the  trees  which  bear  them,  and  perhaps,
also,  on  some  other  plants.  The  particles  of  dust  held  in  suspension  in
any  atmosphere  whatever  rarely  produce  fermentation  in  pure  must
even  when  we  take  all  possible  precautions,  so  that  the  action  be  not
overlooked ;  for  true  fermentation  may  be  hidden  by  fungoid  growths,
when  there  is  much  air  and  but  a  small  quantity  of  saccharine  liquid
present.


182  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

infusoria  in  general.  All  these  foreign  organisms  would  tend
to  develop  just  in  proportion  as  the  conditions  of  the  media
were  more  or  less  favourable  to  their  growth,  and,  in  a  very
few  days,  our  flasks  would  be  filled  with  swarms  of  beings
which,  in  most  cases,  would  entirely  conceal  the  facts  relating
to  those  forms,  the  separate  study  of  which  it  was  our  object
to  follow  out.  We  shall  have  occasion,  therefore,  to  examine,
in  a  subsequent  paragraph,  the  preparation  of  ferments  in  a
state  of  purity.  At  present  we  may  state  that  yeast,  which
in  its  ordinary  condition  is  a  mass  of  cells  so  liable  to
change  that  its  preservation  in  a  moist  state  is  impossible,
manifesting  in  the  course  of  a  few  days  during  the  winter,
and  in  twenty-four  hours  during  the  heat  of  summer,  all
the  signs  of  incipient  putrefaction,  thereby  losing  its  distinc-
tive characteristics,  is  nevertheless  capable,  when  pure,  of
enduring  the  highest  atmospheric  temperatures  for  whole
years  without  showing  the  least  signs  of  putrid  change  or  con-
tamination with  any  other  microscopic  organisms,  and  without
the  Cells  losing  their  power  of  reproduction.  In  the  pre-
sence of  facts  like  these,  the  theory  of  spontaneous  generation
must  seem  chimerical.  The  hypothesis  of  the  possible  trans-
formation of  yeast  into  penicilliiim  g/nucum,  bacteria,  and
vibrios,  or  conversely,  which  the  theories  of  Turpin,  H.
Hoffmann,  Berkeley,  Trecul,  Hallier,  and  Bechamp  involve,
is  equally  refuted  by  these  facts.

^  II. — On  "  Spontaneous  "  Ferment.

The  expression  spontaneous  ferment  may  be  applied  to  any
ferment  that  appears  in  a  fermentable  liquid  without  having
been  purposely  sown  in  it.  In  this  respect  the  ferments  men-
tioned in  the  preceding  paragraph,  those  of  all  saccharine
juices  of  fruit  which  ferment  when  left  to  themselves — the
ferments  of  wine,  for  example — are  spontaneous.  The  term,
however,  is  not  altogether  appropriate,  because,  after  all,  the
process  is  the  same  as  if  an  actual  sowing  had  been  made,  since,


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  183

as  we  have  showu,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  juice  to
come  into  contact  with  the  surfaces  of  the  fruit,  so  that  the
ferment  may  be  mixed  with  it,  and  so  produce  subsequent
fermentation.  Therefore,  although  we  may  apply  the  term
spontaneous  ferment  to  the  ferments  of  fruits,  we  intend  that
expression  to  apply  in  this  paragraph  solely  to  those  ferments
that  are  generated  in  a  saccharine  liquid,  in  which,  by  previous
boiling,  we  have  destroyed  all  ferment  germs,  and  which,
nevertheless,  enters  into  fermentation  after  being  exposed  in
free  contact  with  air.  In  such  a  case  it  is  entirely  from  the
particles  of  dust  floating  in  the  air  that  the  ferment  germs  that
appear  in  the  liquid  are  derived.  Such  are  typical  spontaneous
fermentations,  and  it  is  of  the  ferment  so  obtained  that  we  are
about  to  speak.

In  the  course  of  the  researches  which  we  undertook  in  order
to  ascertain  whether  mycodei'nia  vini,  or  vinous  efflorescence,
became  transformed,  in  the  case  of  beer,  into  actual  alcoholic  fer-
ment— researches  which  were  the  more  protracted  and  varied  in
consequence  of  their  leading  to  the  condemnation  as  erroneous,
on  the  faith  of  new  and  more  precise  experiments,  such  as
those  given  in  Chap.  IV.  §  2,  of  that  transformation,  in  which
we  had  for  long  believed — we  had  occasion  to  observe  several
spontaneous  fermentations  of  this  kind  in  various  saccharine
liquids.  We  then  proceeded  to  describe  our  method  of  con-
ducting the  experiments.  Having  brought  about  the  develop-
ment of  a  film  of  mycoderma  vini  or  cerevisicB  on  the  surface  of
a  liquid,  fermented  or  not,  we  submerged  that  film  in  wort,
which  we  afterwards  put  into  long-necked  flasks,  in  which
alcoholic  fermentation  generally  took  place  in  the  course  of  a
few  days.  This  fermentation  in  no  way  resulted  from  the  trans-
formation of  the  cells  constituting  the  efflorescence  into  ferment.
The  mycodermic  film  merely  acted  as  a  receptacle  of  true  ferment
germs,  wafted  thither  with  the  particles  of  dust  floating  in  the
air  of  the  laboratory,  which  germs  developed  in  the  liquid  into
actual  alcoholic  ferments  amongst  the  cells  of  the  submerged
mycoderma.     By  conducting  experiments  in  this  manner  we


184  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

brought  about  several  spontaneous  fermentations,  the  germs  of
which  could  have  been  introduced  by  notliing  but  the  particles
of  dust  in  the  air.  These  fermentations,  which  we  were
obliged  to  follow  very  carefully  with  the  microscope  from  the
time  when  they  first  manifested  themselves,  on  account  of  the
transformation  that  we  were  seeking,  which  transformation  we
thought  might  possibly  be  that  of  the  cells  of  mycoderma  vini
into  cells  of  ferment,  generally  gave  us  during  the  first  days
of  fermentation  the  large,  elongated,  branch}'-  ferment  repre-
sented in  Plate  X.,  which  was  succeeded  by  the  small  ferment
represented  in  Plate  XI.*

Here  let  me  describe  one  of  these  experiments.  In  the  begin-
ning of  March,  1872,  we  grew  some  mycoderma  vini,  obtained  from
wine,  on  some  wort  contained  in  a  shallow  basin.  On  March  6th
we  submerged  the  efilorescence  and  put  it  all  together,  liquid  and
film,  into  a  long-necked  flask.  On  March  9th  we  detected  in-
cipient fermentation,  and  on  March  12th  we  took  a  sketch  of  the
yeast  of  the  deposit,  as  given  in  Plate  XII.  This  is  the  large
and  long  branching,  more  or  less  pear-shaped  form,  which
occurs  at  the  beginning  of  fermentation  in  thj  sweet  and  acid
musts  of  our  domestic  fruits.  On  March  16th  we  made  another
sketch  of  the  deposit,  in  which  the  proportion  of  cells,  in  the
form  of  elongated  segments  and  filaments,  reminded  us,  in
some  measure,  of  the  filamentous  mycelium  of  typical  fungoid
growths  much  diminished.  In  this  case,  however,  the  majority
of  cells  were  oval,  round,  and  in  short  segments.  On  this
day,  March  16th,  we  added  some  fresh  wort  to  that  whicii
had  fermented,  with  the  object  of  prolonging  the  duration  of

*  In  these  experiments  the  apiculated  ferment  appeared  sometimes,
but  much  less  frequently  than  aaccharomyces  pastorianus.  We  also  met
with  the  ellipsoidal  ferment.  We  should  probably  have  a  greater  variety
of  ferments  if  our  experiments  could  be  conducted  in  the  open  air,  but
insects  and  particles  of  dust  of  all  kinds  brought  by  the  wind  render
experiments  under  such  conditions  difficult  and  untrustworthy.  In  a
laboratory  we  have  not  these  difficulties  to  contend  against,  but,  unfor-
tunately, the  operations  ordinarily  carried  on  there  cause  the  results  of
our  experiments  to  bo  of  a  less  general  character  than  they  would  be  if
obtained  in  free  contact  with  country  air.


PI .  XII


Ferment-cells  from  a  Spontaneous  Ferment


ATION   JUST    starting.


Imp  Geny'Cr0j,Par.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


185


fermentation  and  increasing  the  proportion  of  yeast.  On  March
19th  we  made  a  fresh  sketch,  which  it  is  not  necessary  either
to  reproduce  ;  suffice  it  to  say,  that  the  yeast  was  now  consider-
ably more  regular  and  uniform  in  appearance.

Spontaneous  ferment,  therefore,  very  often  occurs  in  this  large
ferment-form,  which,  by  repeated  developments  in  the  act  of  fer-
mentation, becomes  reduced  by  degrees  after  successive  genera-
tions to  the  ferment  which,  following  Dr,  Rees,  we  have  named


Fig.  38.

saccharomyces  j^d^^orianus,  a  polymorphous  ferment  which  must
be  studied  closely  that  it  may  not  be  confounded  with  others,
inasmuch  as  it  is  so  universally  diflPused  that  we  very  seldom
fail  to  find  it  in  any  ferment  which  has  been  exposed  in  contact
with  ordinary  air,  at  least,  we  may  repeat,  in  a  laboratory
devoted  to  researches  on  fermentation.  We  have  found  tbe
same  thing  occur  in  a  brewery,  being  there  mixed  with  the
ferments  used  in  brewing.

There  are,  no  doubt,  several  varieties  of  this  saccharomyces.
We  sometimes  find  amongst  the  spontaneous  ferments  which
repeated  growths  have  brought  to  a  more  or  less  uniform  state,
the  forms  represented  in  Plate  XI.,  but  the  cells  and  segments
much  smaller.  Amongst  others,  Dr.  E,ees  has  distinguished  a
saccharomyces  exiguus.

Fig.  38  represents  another  spontaneous  ferment,  which
appeared  in  a  boiled  saccharine  wort,  which  entered  into  fer-
mentation after  being  exposed  to  the  air  of  the   laboratory.


186  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

The  sketch  was  made  directly  after  the  fermentation  had
commenced.  Probably  this  is  simply  one  of  the  earlier  forms
assumed  by  the  saccharomyces,  or  by  one  of  its  varieties.  It
will  be  seen  that  the  alcoholic  ferment  is  associated  with  another
little  filiform  ferment,  probably  the  lactic.  The  spontaneous
ferments  are  almost  always  impure,  a  circumstance  that  may  be
readily  understood  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  results  described  in
Chapters  III.  and  IV.

§  III.— On  "High"  and  "Low"  Fekments.

The  ferments  mentioned  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  do  not
belong,  properly  speaking,  to  industrial  products  ;  that  is  to  say,
in  actual  practice  there  are  no  operations  in  which  the  ferments
of  fruits  and  spontaneous  ferments  are  employed  for  the  pur-
pose. It  is  quite  true  that  these  ferments  are  the  cause  of  the
fermentations  from  which  wine,  cider,  gin,  rum,  gentiana,  mead,
&c.,  are  derived,  but  these  fermentations  are  spontaneous,  they
take  place  without  the  intervention  of  man,  and  without  man's
directing  their  production,  or  taking  any  notice  of  the  agent
whicb  starts  them.

In  the  manufacture  of  beer,  on  the  other  hand,  the  practice  is
quite  different.  We  may  say  that  the  wort  is  never  left  to
ferment  spontaneously,  the  fermentation  being  invariably  pro-
duced by  the  addition  of  yeast  formed  on  the  spot  in  a  preced-
ing operation,  or  procured  from  some  other  working  brewery,
which,  again,  had  at  some  time  been  supplied  from  a  third
brewery,  which  itself  had  derived  it  from  another,  and  so  on,  as
far  back  as  the  oldest  brewery  that  can  be  imagined.  A  brewer
never  prepares  his  own  yeast.  We  have  already  had  occasion
to  remark  that  the  interchange  of  yeasts  amongst  breweries  is  a
time-honoured  custom,  which  has  been  observed  in  all  countries
at  all  periods,  as  far  back  as  we  can  trace  the  history  of  brewing.
The  yeasts  which  in  the  present  day  produce  beer  in  the
brewery  of  Tourtel,  near  Nancy,  in  that  of  Griiber,  at  Stras-
burg,  that  of  Dreher,  at  Vienna,  and  others,  came  originally


STUDIES    OX    FERMENTATION.  187

from  breweries,  where  and  when  it  would  be  hard  to  say.  In
the  case  of  the  first  working  brewery,  the  yeast  was,  no  doubt,
derived  from  some  spontaneous  fermentation,  which  took
place  in  an  infusion  of  barley  that  had  been  left  to  itself,  or,
from  some  natural  spontaneous  ferment,  and  nothing  could  be
easier  than  to  realize  this  fact  again.  In  the  brewing  industry
there  are  two  distinct  modes  of  fermentation  : — "  high  "  fermen-
tation and  "  low  "  fermentation,  some  of  the  distinctive  charac-
teristics of  which  we  have  pointed  out  in  Chapter  I.  It  may
be  questioned  whether  the  spontaneous  yeast  employed  in  the
first  brewery,  or  that  which  a  wort  left  to  itself  in  the  present
day  would  yield,  would  be  of  the  "  high  "  or  "  low  "  type.  It
may  be  concluded  from  what  we  have  said  on  the  subject  of
spontaneous  fermentations  in  wort,  that  wort,  left  to  itself,
would  furnish  ferments  more  or  less  resembling  those  of  wine.
We  have  never  obtained  in  spontaneous  fermentations  of  wort
either  a  distinctly  "  high  "  ferment,  or  a  distinctl}^  "  low  "  one,
properly  so  called  ;  nor,  further,  have  we  ever  obtained  either
one  of  these  distinct  kinds,  with  its  industrial  characteristics,
in  experiments  on  the  ferments  of  fruits.  What,  then,  was
the  origin  of  the  "  high  "  and  "  low  '•*  ferments  now  used  by
brewers  ?  What  was  the  nature  of  their  original  germs  ?
These  are  questions  which  we  are  unable  to  answer,  but  we  are
very  much  inclined  to  think  that  we  have  here  another  example
of  the  modifications  which  plants  as  well  as  races  of  animals
undergo,  and  which  become  hereditary  in  the  course  of  pro-
longed domestication.  We  know  nothing  of  corn  in  its  wild
state,  we  cannot  tell  what  its  first  grain  was  like.  We  know
nothing  of  the  silk-worm  in  its  original  state,  and  we  are
ignorant  of  the  characters  of  the  race  that  furnished  the  first

These  reflections  may  seem  to  favour  the  supposition  that
there  is  a  real  difierence  between  "high"  yeast  and  "low"
yeast,  and  that  both  of  these  differ  from  spontaneous  ferments
and  the  ferments  of  domestic  fruits.  These  are  propositions
demanding  most  careful  consideration,  for  it  is  generally  admitted


188  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

that  these  ferments  become  intermixed,  that  their  morphological
differences  are  merely  a  question  of  medium,  and  that  the
transition  of  one  to  the  other  is  a  simple  matter.  The  follow-
ing facts  seem  to  contradict  such  statements.

"  High"  Ferment. — Fig.  e39  represents  some  "high  "  yeast

^^§@©#

450

Fig.  39.

taken  from  a  deposit  after  fermentation,  and  Fig.  40  the  same
yeast  in  course  of  propagation  in  some  aerated  wort.  In  com-
paring "  high  "  yeast  with  other  alcoholic  ferments  at  the  same
stage  of  development,  there  are  three  points  which  are  especially
striking :  the  diameter  of  its  cells  is  relatively  large,  their
general  aspect  is  rounder,  and  when  they  are  undergoing  pro-
pagation their  mode  of  budding  produces  a  markedly  ramified
appearance,  so  that  the  cells  always  occur  in  clusters  and
branches.  Fig.  40  gives  a  very  exact  idea  of  these  characters.
To  investigate  satisfactorily  the  branching  habit  of  growth
peculiar  to  this  ferment  we  should  examine  it  during  the  first
few  hours  of  its  propagation,  when,  under  the  influence  of  the
oxygen  dissolved  in  the  fermentable  liquid,  its  vital  activity  is
greatest.  Later  on,  often  on  the  day  following  the  sowing,
the  groups  become  disconnected,  and  at  the  end  of  the  fermen-
tation the  cells  have  quite  separated  from  each  other,  not
more  than  2  or  3  per  cent,  remaining  united,  and  even  these
in  groups  of  not  more  than  two  cells  together.  This  is
represented  in  Fig.  39.

To  give  an  idea  of  the  rapidity  with  which  this  ferment
multiplies,  we  may  state  that  our  sketch  (Fig.  40)  was  made
under  the  following  conditions  : — On  April  28th,  1874,  we
caused  a  flask  of  wort  to  ferment  by  means  of  a  trace  of
"  high "   yeast.      On  the    morning  of  the  next  day,    that    is


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


189


fourteen  hours  afterwards,  an  appreciable  deposit  of  yeast  had
formed,  and  some  frothy  patches  appeared  on  the  surface  of
the  liquid,  showing  that  fermentation  had  set  in.      On  May


Tig.  40.

1st  we  decanted  the  beer,  substituting  for  it  water  sweetened
with  10  per  cent,  of  sugar.  On  May  2nd  we  decanted  the
sweetened  water,  and  substituted  a  fresh  quantity  containing
the  same  percentage  of  sugar.  On  May  3rd,  at  mid-day,  we
took  some  of  the  fermenting  liquid  from  this  flask  and  put  it
into  a  flask  of  wort ;  five  hours  after  the  introduction  of  the
ferment  we  made  the  sketch  in  question.  The  field  is  covered
with  branching  clusters,  the  groups  being  sketched  exactly  as
they  occurred  in  the  field.  Their  activity  was  due  to  the
condition  of  the  ferment,  and  to  the  perfect  fitness  of  the
nutritive  medium  for  its  vegetation.  In  sweetened  water
the  budding  of  the  cells  was  considerably  less  active  ;  no  branch-
ing groups  of  cells  are  to  be  found.  Budding,  nevertheless,
occurs  to  a  considerable  extent,  but  it  is  limited  to  one  bud,
or  two  at  the  most,  to  each  cell.  Fermentation  in  pure
sweetened  water  is  mostly  correlative  with  the  duration  of
vital  activity  in  the  globules  already  formed.

Let  us  next  sufier  our  yeast  to  exhaust  itself  by  keeping
it  in  a  great  excess  of  sweetened  water  for  a  very  long  time  ;
we  shall  then  be  able  to  observe  its  process   of  revival,  and


190  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX,

see  if  we  can  find  any  facts  analogous  to  those  presented  by
saccharomyces  padorianus  (Chapter  V.  §  1).

"With  this  object  in  view,  on  May  6th,  1874,  we  impregnated
two  fresh  flasks  of  sweetened  water  with  some  of  the  contents  of
the  before-mentioned  flask,  which  we  had  refilled  with  sweetened
water  on  May  2nd.  On  May  13th  we  decanted  the  liquid,  which
was  still  very  sweet,  from  one  of  these  two  fresh  flasks,  which
could  hardly  be  said  to  have  fermented  at  all — the  quantity  of
yeast  in  them  being  so  small — and  replaced  it  with  some  wort.
Strange  to  say,  on  the  morning  of  the  14th  we  found  an
appreciable  growth  of  yeast,  and  a  froth  of  carbonic  acid  gas
on  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  The  yeast  therefore  was  not  dead,
although  its  fermentative  powers  had  been  exhausted.  There
was,  however,  no  remarkable  feature  in  connection  with  its  re-
vival, nor  did  we  find  the  slightest  trace  of  any  of  the  elongated
ferment-form.  What  we  got  was  simply  the  ramified  groups
of  "  high  "  yeast  again,  in  round  cells,  but  nothing  more.

Fearing  that  our  yeast  might  not  have  remained  for  a
sufficient  time  in  the  sweetened  water  for  exhaustion,  we  set
aside,  for  a  whole  year,  the  other  flask  which  we  had  prepared
on  May  6th.  On  May  16th,  1875,  we  decanted  the  sweetened
liquid  and  replaced  it  with  wort.  This  time,  however,  there
was  no  revival  of  the  yeast ;  it  had  perished.  Fortunately,  we
had  also  saved  the  flask  of  yeast  and  sweetened  water  which
was  prepared  on  May  2nd,  1874,  as  already  mentioned,  and  in
this  case,  as  will  be  seen,  the  vitality  of  the  3'east  had  not  been
extinguished,  doubtless,  in  consequence  of  the  formation  of
what  we  shall  presently  designate  by  the  name  of  aerobian  fer-
ment. On  May  16th,  1875,  we  decanted  the  liquid  from  this
last  flask,  and  replaced  it  with  wort.  On  the  next  day  the
surface  of  the  wort  was  covered  with  a  thin  froth,  indicating
the  commencement  of  fermentation.  The  microscope  revealed
nothing  extraordinary,  or  indicative  of  the  fermentation  of  any
special  ferment.  To  assure  ourselves  that  our  ferment  had
remained  "high,"  we  sowed  some  of  it  in  a  fresh  flask  of
wort  on  May  19th,  and  then,  seven  hours  after  impregnation,


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  191

submitting  it  to  examination,  we  could  find  nothing  but  rami-
fied gi'oups  in  fine  condition,  witbout  a  single  elongated  cell,
indeed,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  find  a  more  beautiful
specimen  of  "  higli  "  yeast,  or  one  of  a  more  decided  character.
It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  "  high  "  yeast  cannot,  under  any
circumstances,  assume  the  form  and  character  of  the  ferment
mccharomycei<.  padorianus,  or  of  other  known  ferments.  We  are
justified,  therefore,  in  regarding  it  as  a  distinct  species  of
ferment,  an  opinion  which  is  supported  by  other  circumstances.

1.  In  equal  quantities  of  saccharine  wort  a  considerably
greater  growth  of  "  high "  yeast  is  obtained  than  of  other
3-easts.  We  need  no  very  rigorous  proofs  to  convince  our-
selves of  this  fact :  for  by  simply  causing  equal  volumes  of
the  same  wort  to  ferment,  the  one  being  pitched  with  saccha-
romyces  padorianus,  for  example,  the  other  with  "  high  "  yeast,  we
shall  obtain  a  perceptibly  greater  volume  of  "  high  "  yeast  than
of  the  other,  in  certain  cases  even  five  or  six  times  as  much.

2.  "  High  "  yeast  is  of  a  tougher  texture  than  the  others,
separating,  when  the  fermented  liquor  and  its  deposit  is  shaken
up,  into  lumps  which  refuse  to  disappear ;  whereas  saccharo-
inyccs  pastorianus  difiuses  through  the  whole  liquid  with  the
greatest  ease.

3.  "  High  "  yeast  produces  a  special  beer,  with  a  peculiar
flavour,  well  known  to  consumers,  but  little  esteemed  at  the
present  day.  Hence  the  gradual  displacement  of  breweries
worked  on  the  old  "  high "  i'ermentation  system  by  others
in  which  "  low  "  yeast  (of  which  more  anon)  alone  is  employed.

4.  Lastly,  one  characteristic  of  "  high "  yeast,  which  it
shares  in  common  with  some  other  ferments,  although  not
with  all,  and  which,  from  a  practical  point  of  view,  deserves
special  mention,  is  that  as  fermentation  proceeds  the  yeast
rises  to  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  Whilst  the  process  of  the
manufacture  of  beer  by  this  ferment  is  going  on,  the  yeast
is  seen  to  work  out  of  the  bung-holes,  flowing  over  in  con-
siderable quantit3\  The  ferment  named  after  the  author,  as
well  as  "  low  ■"  yeast,  does  not  possess  this  property  :  it  remains


192  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

at  the  bottom  of  the  vessels.  When  "  high "  fermentation
takes  place  in  vessels  that  are  not  filled,  the  ferment  forms  a
thick  layer,  a  kind  of  cap  on  the  surface  of  the  beer.  This
characteristic  may  be  witnessed  even  in  the  fermentation  of
very  small  quantities  of  liquid.  In  our  flasks,  in  which  the
volume  of  fermenting  wort  does  not  exceed  100  c.c.  or  150  c.c.
(about  4  or  5  fluid  ounces),  we  may  perceive,  as  the  violence
of  fermentation  subsides,  and  the  head  falls,  the  sides  of  the
vessel  covered  to  a  height  of  from  1  cm.  to  2  cm.  (about
|-in.)  above  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  with  particles  of  yeasty
matter,  in  little  masses,  or  in  a  thin  film,  raised  to  that  height
by  the  head,  and  left  behind  when  that  fell.

"Low"  Ferment. — Whilst  high  yeast  performs  its  func-
tions in  the  breweries  in  which  it  is  used  at  somewhat  high
temperatures — namely,  between  16°  C.  and  20°  C.  (60°  F.  to
68°  F.) — "  low "  yeast  is  never  employed  at  a  higher  tem-
perature than  10°  C.  (50°  F.),  and  it  is  even  thought  preferable
that  it  should  not  be  subjected  to  more  than  6°  C,  7°  C,  or
8°  C.  (43°  F.  to  46°  F.).  At  these  comparatively  low  tem-
peratures "high"  yeast  would  have  no  perceptible  action,
whereas  it  is  at  such  temperatures  that  "  low "  yeast  best
performs  its  functions.

In  our  Memoir  on  alcoholic  fermentation,  published  in  1860,
in  the  Annales  de  Chiviie  et  de  Physique,  the  idea  of  the  identity
of  the  two  yeasts  was  accepted ;  but  we  had  at  that  time
made  no  special  observations  of  our  own  on  the  subject.

Upon  closer  investigation  we  are  inclined  to  believe  that
the  two  yeasts  are  quite  distinct.  We  might  keep  our  "  high  "
yeast  at  the  lowest  temperatures  that  it  can  bear,  and  repeat
our  growths  under  these  conditions ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,
we  might  subject  the  "low"  yeast  to  temperatures  higher
than  those  at  which  it  ordinarily  grows,  without  ever  suc-
ceeding in  changing  the  first  into  the  second  or  the  second
into  the  first,  supposing,  of  course,  that  each  of  our  yeasts
was  pure  to  begin  with.  If  they  were  intermixed  the  change
in   the   conditions   of  development   would   cause    one   or   the


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  193

other  to  preponderate,  and  incline  us  to  believe  that  a  trans-
formation had  really  occurred.

It  is  true  that  brewers  generally  are  of  a  different  opinion.
Most  of  them  assert  that  '*  low  "  yeast  cultivated  at  a  high
temperature  becomes  "  high "  yeast ;  and  conversely^  that
"  high "  yeast  becomes  "  low "  by  repeated  growths  at  a
low  temperature.  Many  have  told  us  that  they  have  proved
this.  Nevertheless  it  is  our  belief  that  the  success  of  such
transformation  lias  been  but  apparent,  attributable  in  each  case
to  the  fact,  as  we  have  just  stated,  of  their  having  operated
on  a  mixture  of  the  two  yeasts.

Mitscherlich,  and  various  authors  after  him,  have  asserted
that  "high"  yeast  propagates  by  budding,  and  "low"  yeast,
on  the  contrary,  by  spores,  formed  by  the  endogenous  division  of
the  protoplasm  of  the  cells,  and  set  free  by  the  rupture  of  the
cell- wall,  which  then,  increasing  in  size,  assume  the  character
of  ordinary  cells.  But  we  have  never  been  able  to  confirm  this.
Fig.  41  represents  a  field  of  low  yeast,  taken  from  the
deposit  in  a  vat  after  the  fermentation  of  the  beer  was  finished.
The  granular  matter  mixed  with  the  cells  is  altogether  amor-

Fig.  41.

phous,  although  in  many  cases  perfectly  spherical.  It  is  a
product  in  no  way  related  to  this  yeast  (see  Plate  I.,  No.  7).*
"  High "  yeast  and  all  the  ferments  of  beer   have   this    kind

*  [A  rather  serious  clerical  error  appears  to  have  here  crept  into  the
origiual,  for  on  referring  to  Plate  I.  and  the  letterpress  descriptive  of  No.  7
(p.  5),  we  find  it  applies  to  a  very  formidable  species  of  diseased  fer-
ment, whereas  the  author  is  here  speaking  of  an  amorphous  deposit,
harmless  in  character,  and  more  or  less  associated  with  all  yeasts.
Doubtless  No.  7  should  stand  No.  6,  see  p.  6. — D.  C.  E.]

o


194  STUDIES   OX    FERMENTATION.

of  deposit  associated  with  them.  There  is  no  doubt  that
confused  observations  as  regards  these  minute  bodies  have
been  the  cause  of  the  error  which  we  had  to  deal  with  in  con-
nection with  a  particular  mode  of  reproduction  of  low  yeast,
as  to  which  we  have  already  full}^  expressed  our  views
(Chap.  V.  §  1,  p.  146).

Comparing  Fig.  41  with  Fig.  40  (p.  189),  it  ma}'  be  seen
that  the  general  aspect  of  low  yeast  is  distinguished,  in  its
early  stages,  although  in  no  very  decided  manner,  from  that
of  "  high "  yeast,  by  being  slightly  smaller  and  less  round
or  spherical  in  its  cells  than  the  latter.*  These  differences,
however,  would  escape  an  unpractised  eye.

As  to  the  case  of  "  high  "  yeast,  the  deposits  of  "  low  ''  yeast
after  fermentation  appear  as  scattered,  isolated  cells  ;  we  do  not
find  more  than  two  or  three  per  cent,  of  united  cells.  Never-
theless the  two  3'easts  present,  as  we  shall  see,  quite  marked
differences  in  the  character  of  their  budding  and  multiplication.

On  May  28th,  1875,  we  put  a  trace  of  pure,  unicellular,
"  low  "  5'east,  taken  at  the  end  of  a  fermentation,  into  a  flask  of
wort.  On  May  29th,  sixteen  hours  after  impregnation,  the  tem-
perature during  the  night  having  been  15°  C.  (59°  F.),  we  made
a  sketch  of  the  yeast  before  its  development  had  become  apparent
to  the  naked  eye.  No  perceptible  development,  that  is  to  say,
no  visible  deposit  at  the  bottom  of  the  liquid  and  forma-
tion of  patches  of  froth  on  the  surface,  took  place  before
May  30th.  A  mere  glance  at  Fig.  42  wall  be  sufficient  to  enable
us  to  detect  a  considerable  difference  between  it  and  Fig.  40,
which    represents  the  multiplication  of  the  cells  of   "  high "

*  [We  would  here  call  the  reader's  attention  to  the  following  extract
from  Dr.  Graham's  appreciative  review  of  this  work  in  "Nature,"
January  11th,  1877.  He  says:  "  M.  Pasteur  seems  to  be  in  error  in
stating  (p.  190,  Fr.  ed.)  that  the  bottom  yeast  may  be  distinguished  by
being  less  spherical  than  top  yeast.  It  is  true  that  in  London  and
Edinburgh  yeast,  the  cells  will  be  found  usually  round;  hard  water,
however,  such  as  that  at  Burton,  or  artificially  made  so,  yields  yeast  in
which  the  cells  are  distinctly  ovoid  in  appearance,  resembling  very  closely
Bavarian  bottom  yeast." — D.  C.  E.]


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  195

yeast.  The  cells  of  the  "  low  "  yeast  are  slightly  smaller  and
rather  more  OA^al,  as  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  notice,
and  the  budding  processes  are  considerably  less  ramified,
in    consequence    of  which    there  is  a  comparative  absence  of


globular  clusters  which  are  so  striking  a  feature  in  the  develop-
ment of  "  high  "  yeast,  when  examined  early  enough.  More-
over, if  we  cause  our  "low  "  yeast  to  age,  by  leaving  it  for  a  longer
or  shorter  time  in  the  beer  which  it  has  formed,  or  if  we
exhaust  it  in  sweetened  water  by  leaving  it  for  whole  months
in  a  volume  of  sweetened  water  considerably  larger  than  what
it  is  capable  of  fermenting,  and  then  proceed  to  revive  it
and  cause  it  to  propagate  in  an  aerated  saccharine  wort  capable
of  nourishing  it,  this  yeast  will  resume  its  original  aspect,
as  sketched  and  described.  At  most  we  shall  observe  certain
minute  differences  in  the  size  of  the  cells  in  successive  growths.
A  very  remarkable  industrial  characteristic  of  this  yeast  is
the  fact  that  it  never  rises  to  the  surface,  no  matter  at  what.
temperature  it  may  be  working,  whether  between  6°  C.  and
8°  C.  or  15°  C.  and  20°  C.;*  in  other  words,  it  is  not  buoyed
up  by  the  carbonic  acid  gas  when  the  fermentation  is  at  its
height.  At  the  end  of  the  fermentation,  the  surface  of  the
liquid  and  the  sides  of  the  vessel  above  the  level  of  the  liquid
are  clean  and  not  covered  with  the  yeast,  which  remains
altogether  at  the  bottom  of  the  fermented  liquid.     Moreover,

*  [43°  F.  to  46°  F.  or  59°  F.  to  68'  F.]

o  2


196  STUDIES    ON    FEIIMENTATIOX.

the  weight  of  new  yeast  which,  it  yields  is  always  less  than
that  yielded  by  "  high "  yeast,  for  the  same  quantity  of
fermentable  liquid,  although  greater  than  that  which  saccha-
romi/ces  pasioriaiins  would  give.  Lastly,  the  beer  possesses
a  flavour  and  delicacy  which  cause  it  to  be  held  in  higher
esteem  bj  consumers  than  beers  produced  by  means  of  other
ferments.*

§  IV. — On  the  Existence  and  Production  of  Other  Species

OF  Ferment.

Our  present  knowledge  of  the  alcoholic  ferments  embraces  the
following,  without  taking  into  account  the  ferment-form  of
niucor  : —

The  ferment  named  after  the  author,  which  is  found  associated,
with  the  ferments  of  the  grape  and  other  domestic  fruits,  and-
with  spontaneous  ferments  in  general.

The  ferment  of  "  high  "  beer.

The  ferment  of  "  low  "  beer.

To  these  must  be  added  the  ordinary  ferment  of  wine,  and
that  called  (qjiculatiis,  although,  indeed,  these  last  are  of  little
practical  importance,  since,  in  general,  they  soon  become  lost
amongst  others  of  greater  vitality,  in  the  spontaneous  fermenta-
tion of  fruits.  These  are  not  the  only  alcoholic  ferments ;  a
study  of  the  germ-cells  diffused  over  the  surface  of  fruits,
grains,  and  stalks  of  all  vegetables  in  different  countries,  would
doubtless  lead  to  the  discovery  of  many  new  ones.  We  are  even
inclined  to  believe  that  one  ferment  might  give  rise  to  a  multi-
tude of  others.  The  investigations  which  we  have  undertaken
in  this  direction  are  as  yet  not  far  advanced ;  we  may,  however,
be  allowed  merely  to  state  the  principle  which  governs  them.
A  ferment  is  a  combination  of  cells,  the  individuals  of  which
must  differ  more  or  less  from  each  other.     Each  of  these  cells

*  [On  this  point  again  Dr.  Graliam  expresses  some  dissent  ("  Nature,"
loc.  cit.) :  "  Here  surely  M.  Pasteur  must  be  thinking  rather  of  the  inferior
products  of  the  surface  fermentation  in  France  and  Germany,  than  of
those  of  England  and  Scotland." — D.  C.  E.]


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  197

has  certain  generic  and  specific  peculiarities  which  it  shares  with
the  neighbouring  cells  ;  but  over  and  above  this,  certain  peculiar
characteristics  which  distinguish  it,  and  which  it  is  capable  of
transmitting  to  succeeding  generations.  If,  therefore,  we  could
manage  with  some  species  of  ferment  to  isolate  the  different
cells  that  compose  it,  and  could  cultivate  each  of  these  separatel}',
we  should  obtain  as  many  specimens  of  ferments,  which  would,
probabl}^,  be  distinct  from  one  another,  inasmuch  as  each  of
them  would  inherit  the  individual  peculiarities  of  the  cell  from
which  it  originated.  Our  endeavours  are  directed  to  realizing
this  result  practically,  by  first  thoroughly  drying  a  ferment  and
reducing  it  to  fine  powder.  We  have  seen  (Chap.  III.  §  6)  that
this  mode  of  experiment  is  practicable,  that  in  a  powder  com-
posed of  yeast  and  plaster  the  ferment  preserves  its  faculty  of
reproduction  for  a  very  long  time.  If  we  now  drop  a  small
quantity  of  this  powder  from  a  sufficient  height,  and  then,  at  a
certain  distance  below  the  cloud  of  dust  so  formed,  open  several
flasks  previously  deprived  of  air  and  containing  a  fermentable
liquid  that  has  been  boiled,  immediately  closing  them  all  up
again,  under  such  circumstances  it  is  conceivable  that  some  of
the  cells  of  yeast  diffused  in  the  cloud  of  dust,  and  separated
widely  in  the  act  of  falling,  will  enter  some  of  our  flasks  singly,
and  there  develop  an  appreciable  weight  of  ferment,  all  the
cells  of  which  will  have  sprung  from  the  same  mother-cell.
We  have  proved  that  flasks  may  be  easily  impregnated  under
these  conditions,  and  our  preliminary  observations,  although
incomplete,  seem  to  favour  the  idea  that  numerous  varieties  of
ferment  are  to  be  obtained  by  these  means.

Spontaneous  ferments,  properly  so  called,  of  which  we  have
already  spoken,  are,  after  all,  the  result  of  sowings  of  this  kind.
Originating  in  liquids  which  have  been  boiled,  and  then  left  to
themselves  in  contact  with  the  air  in  a  place  where  cells  or
germs  must  have  existed,  these  ferments  must  necessarily  often
spring  from  single  germs  or  from  a  limited  few,  and  this  also
would  probably  be  a  means  of  developing  distinct  varieties  of
ferments.


198  STUDIES   ON    FERME>'TATIOX.

Without  dwelling-  longer  on  the  practical  consequences  likely
to  result  from  the  ideas  which  we  have  just  expressed,  we  shall
proceed  to  describe  two  new  alcoholic  ferments,  which  differ
widely  from  those  already  mentioned.

New  "  Iliijh  "  Ferment. — We  met  with  this  ferment  acci-
dentalh%  under  the  following  circumstances : — On  February
12th,  1873,  we  had  brewed  in  the  laboratory  about  2\  hectolitres
(rather  over  50  gallons)  of  wort,  10  litres  (about  two
gallons)  of  which  were  set  aside  to  cool  in  a  white-iron  trough,
and  left  during  the  night  exposed  to  free  contact  with  air  in  the
underground  part  of  the  laboratory,  where  we  have  a  small
experimental  brewery.  Next  day  we  put  some  of  this  latter  into
a  bottle  ;  the  wort  soon  began  to  show  evidence  of  change,  various
productions  made  their  appearance  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid,
and  a  deposit  of  yeast  settled  at  the  bottom.  On  May  23rd,
Ijerceiving  bubbles  of  gas  and  a  steady  fermentation  set  up  in
the  wort,  which  remained  all  the  time  corked  up,  and  fearing
that  the  bottle  might  burst  by  the  increasing  internal  pressure,
we  drew  the  cork.  A  considerable  liberation  of  gas  at  once
took  place,  accompanied  by  a  voluminous  foam  w^iich  half
emptied  the  bottle.  A  microscopical  examination  of  the  deposit
from  the  disturbed  liquid  led  to  the  discovery  of  a  very
homogeneous  yeast,  associated  with  various  other  organisms ;  it
was  clearly  a  yeast  which  we  had  not  hitherto  met  with
amongst  the  spontaneous  ferments  which  we  had  had  occasion
to  study.  Thinking  that  this  might  be  a  new  species  of  fer-
ment which  would  probably  produce  a  beer  that  was  also
unknown,  we  set  to  work  to  purify  it  by  cultivation  in  flasks  of
pure  wort,  during  the  months  of  May,  June,  and  July.  Our
last  growths,  of  August  4th,  1873,  were  preserved,  in  order
that  we  might  assure  ourselves  of  the  purity  of  the  beer,  and,
consequently,  of  the  ferment.  On  November  loth  its  purity
was  established.  On  that  date  we  made  some  beer  with  this
ferment,  which  had  now  been  left  to  itself  for  several  months
in  contact  with  pure  air.  The  beer  which  we  obtained
resembled  no  known  variety ;  consequently  the  ferment  must


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  199

itself  have  been  a  distinct  one,  differing  from  others,  especially
those  which  we  have  been  considering  in  this  chapter.
Fig.  43  represents  the  rejuvenescence  of  this  ferment.


Fig.  43.

Comparing  this  figure  with  Fig.  42,  we  see  that  this  ferment
presents  a  considerable  resemblance  to  "  low  "  yeast  in  dimen-
sions, method  of  budding,  and  oval  shape ;  but  the  feature
which  distinguishes  it  essentially  from  "  low  "  yeast  is  that  it
rises  to  the  surface,  like  "  high  "  yeast.  Buoyed  up  by  the
gas  during  fermentation,  it  forms  a  layer  of  yeast  on  the
surface  of  the  fermenting  liquid,  where  it  remains  after  the
head  has  fallen.  Some  of  this  head  of  yeast  likewise  adheres  to
the  sides  of  the  vessel  above  the  level  of  the  liquid.

In  short,  by  the  greater  regularity  of  its  forms  and  the
uniform  dimensions  of  its  cells,  this  ferment  is  to  be  easily
distinguished  from  saccharoiuyces  pastorianus ;  its  aspect,  which
is  oval  instead  of  spherical,  and  the  ramified  form  of  its  chains
of  cells,  which  is  less  marked  than  in  the  case  of  "  high "
yeast,  also  prevent  our  confounding  it  with  the  latter  ferment ;
in  its  rising  character  it  differs  absolutely  from  "  low  "  yeast ;
lastly,  it  may  be  distinguished  from  all  other  ferments  by  the
flavour  of  the  beer  that  it  produces.

The  ferment  which  we  discovered  in  this  accidental  way  may
be  utilized.  Indeed,  we  may  ask,  is  it  not  to  be  found  already
in  our  beer  ?  We  are  inclined  to  believe  that  it  is.  After  the
war  of  1870,  some  Viennese  traders  established  at  Maisons-
AUort,  near  Paris,  a  manufactory  of  yeast  for  bakers.  They
saccharified  by  means  of  malt  a  mixture  of  the  meals  of  rye,


200  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.

maize,  and  barley,  which  they  then  caused  to  ferment.  One
day  we  had  occasion  to  study  the  yeast  produced  in  this  estab-
lishment, and  although  we  did  not  submit  it  to  a  sufficient
number  of  consecutive  experiments  to  enable  us  to  speak
positively,  we  are  under  the  impression  that  the  yeast  produced
at  Maisons-Alfort  is  a  "  high  "  one,  differing  from  what  may
be  properly  termed  the  "  high  "  yeast  of  breweries  in  which
"  high "  fermentation  is  practised,  but  presenting  a  great
resemblance  to  the  "high"  yeast  of  which  we  have  been
speaking.  It  would  be  interesting  to  confirm  the  opinion  of
their  possible  identity  by  fresh  studies,  and  the  best  way  of
doing  this  would  be  to  compare  the  qualities  of  beer  which  the
two  yeasts  could  produce.

Caseous  Ferment. — We  give  the  title  caseous  for  a  reason  that
will  presently  appear,  to  a  ferment  which  we  came  across  also
accidentally.  We  were  trying  different  methods  of  purifying
yeasts,  and  for  this  purpose  had  composed  a  liquid  formed  of :

Ordinary  wort       . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . .      150  c.c*

Water  saturated  with  bi-tartrate  of  potash        . .        50  c.c.
Alcohol  of  90° 25  c.c.

Quantities  of  this  liquid  were  placed  in  several  of  our  double-
necked  flasks,  submitted  to  boiling,  then,  after  cooling,  impreg-
nated with  different  ferments,  and  kept  in  a  water-bath  at
50°  C.  (122°  F.)  for  one  hour.

In  operating  under  these  conditions  with  brewers'  "  high  "
yeast,  say,  for  instance,  with  what  is  called  Dutch  yeast,  a  kind
well  known  in  distilleries,  fermentation  shows  itself  in  the
course  of  a  few  days,  in  spite  of  the  increased  temperature  to
which  our  liquid,  which  is  hopped  and  slightly  acid  and
alcoholic,  has  been  subjected.  The  time  required  for  the
resumption  of  fermentation  depends  both  upon  the  degree  of
temperature  to  which  the  yeast  has  been  exposed  and  upon  the
duration  of  its  exposure.     These,  however,  are  not  the  points

*  [28'4  c.c,  =  1  fl.  oz.  approximately.]


STUDIES    ON    FEUMENTATIOX.


201


upon  which  we  now  wish  to  dwell.  It  is  of  greater  importance
to  notice  that  the  new  yeast  has  none  of  the  characteristics  of
"  high  "  ferment,  of  which  Dutch  yeast  seems  to  be  exclusively
composed,  if  we  do  not  take  into  account  impurities  which
cannot  be  avoided  in  a  commercial  product  of  this  nature.
Other  specimens  of  Dutch  yeasts  would  give  the  same  results.

Figs.  44  and  45   represent  this  new  ferment  magnified  to
the  same  extent  as  the  other  ferments  have  generally  been,  that


Fig.  44.


Fig.  45.


is  ^^  ;  it  will  readily  be  seen  how  different  its  form  is  from
that  of  "  high  "  yeast,  how  far  it  is  from  having  the  spherical
aspect  and  mode  of  budding  characteristic  of  that  ferment.  In
Fig.  45  the  ferment  is  represented  in  a  mass ;  in  Fig.  44  we  see
the  ramified  groups,  the  cells  and  segments  of  which  form,
after  separation,  the  yeast  of  the  deposit.  It  thus  appears  to
be  composed  of  jointed  branches  of  greater  or  less  length,
which,  at  the  junctions  of  the  segments,  put  forth  similar  cells
or  segments  of  a  round,  oval,  pyriform,  cylindrical,  or  other
shape ;  in  all  its  characters  recalling  the  description  of
demaUum.  Moreover,  the  cells  and  segments  exhibit  a  greater
sharpness  of  outline,  as  well  as  a  more  marked  transparency
and  refractive  power  than  are  found  in  the  majority  of  fer-
ments ;  but  the  most  curious  physical  characteristic  of  this
ferment  is  its  plasticity  and  elasticity,  if  we  may  use  those
terms.  It  can  only  be  made  to  diffuse  through  water  with  great
difficulty ;  when  shaken  up  in  it,  it  sinks  to  the  bottom  quickly


202  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

as  a  clotted  sediment,  and  the  supernatant  liquid  appears
scarcely  at  all  charged  with  globules  in  suspension.  Again,
when  placed  on  a  microscope  slide  and  compressed  by  the
cover-glass,  it  returns  to  its  original  form  on  removal  of  the
pressure.  It  is  from  these  considerations  that  we  have  given
to  it  the  name  of  caseous  ferment*  Lastly,  this  ferment  pro-
duces a  beer  of  a  peculiar  kind,  which  cannot  be  confounded
with  other  kinds  of  beer  known  in  the  present  day.  We  should
add  that  it  preserves  its  characteristics  in  repeated  growths,  and
that  we  have  never  found  it  reproduce  ordinary  "high  "  yeast.
When  caseous  ferment  is  sown  in  a  saccharine  medium
charged  with  mineral  salts,  its  aspect,  form,  and  mode  of
budding  differ  completely  from  what  they  are  when  the  ferment
exists  in  a  natural  medium,  such  as  wort  or  other  liquid  adapted
to  the  nutrition  and  life  of  ferments.


^


%      §^


^8  : 4

8  ^
8   ^


9    S5^

O     0

Fig.  46.

Fig.  46  represents  this  ferment  in  course  of  development,
forty-eight  hours  after  it  had  been  sown  in  a  saline  medium
(we  employed   Raulin's   fluid,  substituting  bi-tartrate  for  the

*  [M.  Pasteur  has  evidently  employed  the  word  "  caseous  "  to  express
the  curdy  nature  of  the  ferment  ho  is  describing,  its  plasticity  and  other
peculiarities  of  physical  character;  but  we  are,  nevertheless,  tempted  to
suggest  that  he  may  have  had  in  mind  also  the  peculiar  "  cheesy  "  odour
given  off  by  these  very  yeasts,  which  he  refers  to  in  the  text  as  containing
a  cousidoruble  intermixture  of  "  caseous  ferment." — F.  F.]


STUDIKS    ON    FERMENTATION.  203

nitrate  of  ammonia).  It  will  be  seen  how  different  its  aspect
is  from  that  of  the  preceding-  figures ;  it  is  still  capable,
however,  of  resuming  the  forms  of  the  latter  if  cultivated  afresh
in  natural  saccharine  worts.

"  High  '^  yeast  from  a  "  high  "  fermentation  brewery  in  the
Ardennes,  after  having  been  exposed  to  heat  under  the  con-
ditions given  above,  likewise  produced  caseous  ferment,  without
a  trace  of  "  high  '^  ferment,  just  as  happened  in  the  case  of  the
Dutch  yeast.  All  the  "high"  yeasts  used  in  brewing  seem  to
behave  in  the  same  manner.

What  conclusion  are  we  to  draw  from  these  facts  ?  Ap-
parently that  "  high  "  yeast  is  modified  by  heat  in  an  acid  and
alcoholic  medium,  giving  rise  to  caseous  ferment.  On  the
other  hand,  it  might  be  conceived  that  the  "  high "  yeasts
on  which  we  experimented  were  not  pure,  but  contained,  in
a  state  of  intermixture,  some  caseous  ferment,  and  that  by  the
application  of  a  temperature  of  50°  C,  (122°  F.)  to  our  alcoholic
medium,  the  high  ferment  was  all  killed  and  the  caseous
ferment  alone  survived.  It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  this  latter
hypothesis,  improbable  as  it  seems,  inasmuch  as  the  microscope
revealed  no  intermixture  of  ferments,  seems,  nevertheless,  to
be  a  true  one.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  we  subject  to  a  tempera-
ture of  50°  C.  for  one  hour  in  the  medium  in  which  it  acts,
not  the  "  high  "  yeast  of  commerce  but  "high"  yeast  that  is
ahsolutely  pure,  this  will  perish  utterl}'-,  and  the  wort  after
cooling  may  remain  for  years  in  an  oven  without  either  under-
going fermentation  or  developing  any  growth  whatever  of
"  high  "  ferment  or  "  caseous  "  ferment.

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  impregnate  this  same  alcoholic
liquid  with  some  of  the  caseous  ferment  and  then  heat  the
vessel  to  50°  C.  for  one  hour,  the  caseous  ferment  will  go  on
reproducing  itself  after  the  liquid  has  cooled  down.*

*  The  caseous  ferment,  however,  must  not  be  exposed  to  heat,  under
the  afore-mentioned  conditions,  when  it  is  too  yoang.  At  the  commence-
ment of  its  development,  for  instance,  within  a  few  days  of  having  been
sown.     In  such  case,  it  would  be  in  danger  of  perishing,  probablj'  in  con-


204


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


It  seems,  therefore,  impossible  to  admit  that  caseous  ferment
results  from  a  modification  of  "  high  "  ferment,  and  we  are
led  to  believe  that  in  the  preceding  experiments  it  must  have
been  the  progeny  of  cells  of  caseous  ferment  present  in  the
"  high  "  yeasts  of  commerce,  which  cells,  probably  in  con-
sequence of  their  scarcity,  the  microscope  was  unable  to  reveal,
but  which,  nevertheless,  did  exist,  and  went  on  reproducing
themselves  alone  after  the  heating.

This  conclusion  is  supported  by  the  following  fact,  which  also
tends  to  prove  that  in  the  case  of  the  "  high  "  English  pale  aks,
caseous  ferment  plays  a  most  important  part.  In  the  medium
already  described,  we  sowed  the  deposit  from  a  bottle  of  good
English  pale  ale.  After  having  been  heated  the  yeast  went
on  growing,  and  we  obtained  the  very  beautiful  specimen  of
caseous  ferment  represented  in  Fig.  47.     The  two  dark  globules


Fig.  47.

are  dead  cells  which  had  been  killed.  Two  minute  segments
of  lactic  ferment  are  also  visible  in  the  sketch — the  yeast
which    we  sowed  was,  of  course,  impure — and  their  presence

sequence  of  the  tenderness  of  its  tissues.  At  the  end  of  a  fermentation,
and  even  several  months  afterwards,  it  might  be  safely  heated  to  50  C.
(122°  Fahr.)  without  anj'  harm  to  it.  "  Low  "  yeast  also  can  withstand  a
temperature  of  50"  C.  in  the  medium  in  question.


STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATIOX.  205

proves,  we  may  observe,  by  the  way,  that  lactic  ferment  also
can  withstand  a  temperature  of  50°  C.  (122°  F.)  in  the  medium
which  we  here  employed.  The  yeast  as  sowed  is  represented
in  Fig.  48  ;  it  reminds  us  forcibly  of  certain  forms  of  the
caseous  ferment.  Amongst  the  globules,  which  for  the  most
part  were  transparent  and  very  young,  there  were  some  which
appeared  aged  and  of  a  yellowish  colour  and  granular.     These


Fig.  48.

latter  probably  belonged  to  the  yeast  of  manufacture.  Their
shape  distinguishes  them  from  "high"  yeast,  properly  so
called,  as  on  the  other  hand  it  causes  them  to  appear  more
like  cells  of  a  recent  growth  to  which,  there  is  no  doubt,  beer,
after  it  is  put  in  bottle,  owes  its  effervescence  and  head.  These
various  circumstances  incline  us  to  believe  that  the  caseous
ferment  forms  part  of  certain  commercial  yeasts,  especially
those  used  in  the  celebrated  breweries  of  Bass  and  Allsopp,
at  Burton-on-Trent,  in  the  manufacture  of  pale  ale.  Caseous
yeast  is,  moreover,  a  "  high  "  ferment,  that  is  to  say,  it  rises
to  the  surface.

§  Y.—  On  a  New  Race  of  Alcoholic  Ferments  :    AiiROBiAN

Ferments.

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  certain  researches  which
we  undertook  with  the  object  of  ascertaining  whether  myco-
derma  vini,  or  efflorescence  of  wine,  and  mycodenna  cereviske,
or  efflorescence  of  beer,  which   grow  equally  well  in  all  fer-


206  STUDIES    ox    FERMEXTATIOX.

mented  liquids,  have  tlie  power  of  becoming  transformed  into
actual  alcoholic  ferment.  The  result  of  those  researches  was
stated  to  be  that  these  raycodermata  do  not  become  transformed
into  ferment,  properly  so  called,  and  that  whenever  any  such
transformation  has  been  supposed  to  have  taken  place,  the
ferment  produced  was  derived  from  germs  introduced  by  the
air  or  by  the  utensils  employed.  What  we  did  ascertain  of
the  ferment-producing  power  of  mycodernia  vini,  was  merely
that  this  plant,  when  submerged,  is  capable  of  causing  sugar
to  ferment,  in  consequence  of  a  certain  continuous  life  possible
to  its  cells,  apart  from  the  oxidations  resulting  from  the
presence  of  free  oxygen,  but  without  any  generation  of  new
cells  taking  place.

Whilst  engaged  in  these  researches,  we  were  pursuing  others
in  relation  to  the  converse  of  the  proposition  just  discussed,  ■
that  is  to  say,  respecting  the  possibility  of  ferment  becoming
transformed  into  mycoderma  viiii  or  mycodenna  cereimice.  Our
experiments  in  connection  with  this  subject  chiefly  consisted
in  various  endeavours  by  way  of  exhausting  the  yeast  and
subsequent  revival  of  its  growth.  This  exhaustion  was  eifected
by  growing  the  yeast  in  excess  of  sweetened  water,  and  at
other  times  in  unsweetened  yeast- water,  our  eiforts  being  directed
to  deprive  it  of  all  power  of  fermenting.  We  afterwards
caused  it  to  develop  afresh  in  highh^  aerated,  nutritious  liquids,
in  order  that  we  might  see  how  it  reproduced  itself,  and  if
its  new  form  were  that  of  a  mycoderma.  The  yeast  after
having  lost  its  power  as  a  ferment,  and  being  no  longer  able
to  act  in  pure  sweetened  water,  nevertheless  reproduced  itself
when  placed  in  fermentable  media,  holding  in  solution  materials
adapted  to  its  nutrition ;  yet  we  never  succeeded  in  obtaining
any  organism  besides  the  ferment,  and,  indeed,  the  identical
variety  of  ferment  on  which  we  had  operated.  In  no  case
was  mycoderma  vini  or  cerevisice  produced,  and  we  concluded  that
we  were  justified  in  stating  that  whenever  the  mycoderma  rini
appeared  on  the  surface  of  a  fermented  or  fermentable  liquid,
its  germ  must  have  been  introduced  by  the  surrounding  air,


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  207

or  have  previously  existed  in  the  liquid,  and  that  the  reason  why
this  germ  multiplied  so  abundantly  was  because  the  liquid  in
question  had  been  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  vitality  of  the  plant.

In  a  laboratory  where  alcoholic  fermentations  are  studied,
these  germs  of  my  coder  ma  vini  exist  in  great  abundance  on  the
surfaces  of  different  objects.  This  fact  admits  of  easy  proof;
we  have  merely  to  open  in  such  a  laboratory  some  flasks  con-
taining yeast- water  deprived  of  air,  or  yeast- water  sweetened,
or  any  natural  saccharine  medium,  or  any  fermented  liquid,
which  till  the  moment  when  our  flasks  were  closed  had  been
kept  boiling  (Chap.  IV.)  ;  it  would  be  a  ver}^  rare  thing,
indeed,  if  mycoderma  vini  did  not  develop  in  most  of  these
flasks  after  the  air  was  readmitted,  especially  if,  shortly  before
this  operation,  the  dust  lying  on  the  surface  of  the  tables  or  floor
of  the  laboratory  had  been  stirred  up  by  dusting  or  sweeping.

This  series  of  experiments,  the  salient  points  of  which  we
have  just  given,  conducted  with  a  view  to  ascertain  whether
yeast  could  be  transformed  into  mycoderma,  has  led  the  way
to  certain  results  of  special  interest,  results  which  concern
all  alcoholic  ferments,  and  which  in  all  probability  will  be
found  in  the  long  run  to  apply  to  all  aerobian  ferments.

It  being  necessary  for  the  conduct  of  our  experiments  to
preserve  our  yeast  in  a  state  of  purity  for  an  indefinite  period,
often  for  a  great  length  of  time,  in  contact  with  pure  air,
we  discovered  that  yeast  was  possessed  of  extraordinary
vitality,  and  that  it  rarely  perished  completely  throughout,
inasmuch  as  we  could  almost  invariably  cause  it  to  revive  by
bringing  it  into  contact  with  fresh,  fermentable  liquid.  This
revival  of  the  yeast — and  it  is  to  this  point  that  we  are
most  anxious  to  direct  the  attention  of  our  readers — is  effected
from  two  distinct  sources  : —

1.  By  those  cells  of  yeast  which  have  not  perished.

2.  By  cells  of  new  formation.

We  may  give  an  example  to  explain  this  more  clearly.
In  one  of  our  two-necked  flasks  we  cause  some  pure  wort  to
ferment  by  employing  yeast  also  in  a  state  of  purity.     Fer-


208  STUDIES    ON    FERMEN'TATIOIS'.

mentation  completed,  we  leave  the  liquid  to  itself,  not  touching
the  flask  again.  The  fermented  liquor  covers  a  deposit  of
yeast,  apparently  inert,  and  no  trace  of  mycodenna  vini  makes
its  appearance  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  Let  us  suppose
that  we  gc  on  daily  for  a  considerable  time  introducing  a  little
of  the  yeast  from  this  flask  to  a  difiierent  flask  of  wort :  the
fresh  flasks  will  begin  to  ferment.  The  only  appreciable  dif-
ference which  these  successive  flasks  will  present,  their  impreg-
nation having  been  effected  at  intervals  of  twenty-four  hours,
will  be  that,  ceteris  joanbus,  fermentation  in  them  will  be  more
and  more  slow  in  making  its  appearance.  This  difterence,  as
we  have  already  explained,  will  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the
yeast  in  the  first  flask  will,  in  the  course  of  time,  undergo,
in  each  of  its  cells,  a  process  which  we  cannot  better  describe
than  as  a  progressive  senescence.  The  cells  gradually  become
filled  with  amorphous  granulations,  their  interior  becomes
yellow,  and  the  protoplasm  collects,  either  at  the  centre  or
near  the  borders  ;  in  short,  the  vitality  of  the  yeast  becomes
feeble.  When,  however,  it  is  taken  out  of  the  liquid  in  which
it  has  fermented  and  introduced  into  a  fresh  saccharine  wort,
it  gradually  resumes  its  transparency,  and  then  begins  to
germinate.  These  effects  are  the  less  rapidly  brought  about
the  longer  the  cells  remain  exhausting  themselves  in  the  first
fermented  liquid.  They  might  be  left  in  that  liquid  for  such
a  length  of  time  that  they  would  eventually  perish,  a  fact
which  would  manifest  itself  in  their  absolute  sterility  and
quiescence  when  sown  in  a  fresh  medium.  In  general,  however,
matters  are  not  carried  far  enough  for  this  to  take  place,  and
the  yeast,  preserved  in  a  state  of  purit}^  in  its  fermented
liquid,  retains  the  capacity  of  revival,  which  ma}-  then  go  on
indefinitely.  As  a  matter  of  observation,  the  cells  of  yeast,
after  causing  the  liquid  to  ferment,  instead  of  remaining
inactive,  and  so  by  living  at  their  own  expense  gradually
passing  into  a  state  of  exhaustion,  begin  to  bud  again  ;  at  least
this  is  true  of  many  of  them.  Multiplying  afresh  in  the
fermented  medium,  under  the  influence  of  the  air,  they  form


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  209

a  kind  of  mycodermic  film  on  tlie  liquid  surface,  or  a  ring
round  the  sides  of  the  flask,  on  a  level  with  the  liquid.  This
development  might  often  be  mistaken  for  mycoderma  vini  or
cerevmm ;  in  reality  there  is  not  a  single  cell  of  nujcodcrma
formed.  If  we  sow  a  trace  of  the  new  growth  in  a  saccharine
medium  it  will  behave  exactly  as  yeast  would,  budding  and
multiplying,  and  setting  up  fermentation  in  the  liquid.  And
thus,  in  spite  of  its  mycodermic  aspect,  this  growth  is  nothing
but  yeast,  since  it  gives  rise  to  true  alcoholic  fermentation  ;  but
it  is  a  kind  of  yeast  which,  under  the  foregoing  conditions,
lives  after  the  manner  of  fungoid  growths,  absorbing  the
oxygen  of  the  air  and  emitting  carbonic  acid  gas.  It  appears
on  the  surface  of  all  fermented  liquids,  especially  those  which,
like  beer,  contain  carbohydrates,  and  its  quantity  is  the  greater,
and  its  action  the  more  rapid,  in  proportion  as  it  has  more
perfect  access  to  the  air.  We  have  termed  this  yeast  aerobian
ferment  or  fungoid  ferment.

It  may  easily  be  understood  how  this  kind  of  production  has
escaped  notice  up  to  the  present  time.  The  conditions  of  our
experiment  were,  in  many  respects,  novel ;  a  saccharine  liquid
had  never  before  been  caused  to  ferment  by  means  of  pure
yeast,  absolutely  free  from  foreign  germs  ;  a  fermented  liquid
had  not  previously  been  exposed  to  contact  with  pure  air
for  an  indefinite  time.  On  the  other  hand,  all  ordinary  fer-
mented liquids,  when  left  to  themselves  in  contact  with  air,  are
a  ready  prey  to  mycoderma  vini  or  aceti  at  their  surface,  and
then  give  rise  to  true  fungoid  growths.  The  appearance  of
these  organisms,  which  always  takes  place  soon,  has  thus  con-
stantly concealed  or  prevented  the  development  of  the  true
aerobian  ferments.  In  repeating  the  experiment  described
any  alcoholic  ferment  may  be  used,  and  each  one  will  be  found
to  produce  its  own  peculiar  fungoid  form  of  ferment.  Another
point  worthy  of  notice  is  that  these  aerobian  ferments,  when  they
put  forth  buds  in  the  act  of  fermentation,  reproduce  the  forms
of  the  original  ferment,  at  least  apparently  so.  In  this  respect
they  cannot  be  distinguished,   notwithstanding  the  fact,  sur-

p


210  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

prising  as  it  seems,  that  the  two  kinds  of  ferments  are  not
identical.  If  we  operate  on  a  "  low  "  yeast  its  aerobian  fer-
ment will  differ  physiologically  from  the  ferment  from  which  it
sprung,  presenting  various  special  peculiarities  which  are  not
to  be  found  in  the  original  "low"  yeast.  In  most  of  our
experiments  we  have  found  the  new  aerobian  ferment  to  be
similar  in  its  action  to  "  high  "  yeast,  rising  to  the  surface,  and
producing  a  beer  which  possesses  a  greater  fragrance  than  beer
brewed  with  the  identical  "  low "  yeast  from  which  it  was
derived.  Lastly,  the  properties  of  an  aerobious  ferment  are  not
peculiar  to  first  growth,  but  are  hereditary  ;  by  repeating  the
growth  of  the  first  aerobian  ferment  we  do  not  cause  them  to
disappear,  we  find  them  again  in  succeeding  generations.

Notwithstanding  these  facts,  it  would  be  difficult  to  discover
any  very  appreciable  differences  between  the  forms  of  the  cells
of  any  particular  yeast  and  those  of  its  aerobian  ferment  in
course  of  development.  So  true  is  this,  that  the  aerobian
ferment  of  saccharomyces  pastorianus  might  even  be  caused  to
put  on  the  forms  of  demntmm  pulluJans,  which  we  have  had
occasion  to  observe  specially  characterize  this  ferment  after  the
cells  have  been  subjected  to  a  prolonged  process  of  senescence.*
This  is  evident  from  the  following  example,  which  will  once

*  Although  we  believe  that  the  aerobian  ferment  of  a  particular  yeast
may  be  produced  by  a  kind  of  transformation  of  the  cells  of  the  latter,
yet  we  admit  that  this  question  is  open  to  some  doubt.  The  facts  which
we  unexpectedly  discovered  in  connection  with  the  caseous  ferment
should  make  us  extremely  careful,  and  disposed  to  inquire  whether
aerobian  ferments  do  not  originally,  in  a  state  of  intermixture,  form  part
of  the  ferments  from  which  they  spring.  One  reason  which  might  incUne
us  to  believe  this,  is  the  fact  that  a  ferment  sometimes  perishes  without
the  appearance  of  aerobian  ferment  on  the  surface.  There  is  nothing  very
natural  indeed  in  the  hypothesis  that  we  advance,  which  sets  aside  the
supposed  intennixture ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  aerobian  ferment  is
a  particular  ferment,  simply  intermixed  with  some  other  variety  and
developed  by  change  of  conditions,  how  are  we  to  account  for  its  great
resemblance  in  appearance  and  mode  of  budding  to  the  ferment  on  the
surface  of  which  it  appears  ?  This  resemblance,  however,  might  be
accounted  for  very  natiu*ally  if  the  two  ferments  were  originally  related.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  211

again  show  the  remarkable  extent  to  which  the  forms  of  a
particular  organism  may  be  varied  by  changes  in  composition
of  the  nutritive  medium  : —

On  August  6th,  1873,  we  took  some  of  the  ferment
saccharomyces  pastoriamis  from  a  flask  of  wort  that  had  under-
gone fermentation,  and  sowed  a  scarcely  perceptible  quantity
of  it  in  another  flask  containing  a  saline  medium,  composed  as
follows  : —

Water    containing   about    10  per

cent,  of  sugar-candy     . .  . .  150  c.c.  (5j  fl.  oz.)

Ash  of  yeast         .  .  .  .  . .  0'5  gramme    (8  grs.)

Ammonic  bitartrate  . .  . .  0'2         „         (3  grs.)

Ammonic  sulphate  . .  . .  0*2         „         (3  grs.)

In  the  course  of  the  following  days  the  ferment  began  to
develop,  although  with  difiiculty,  the  fermentation  revealing
itself  by  collections  of  bubbles  appearing  here  and  there  on
the  surface  of  the  liquid.  We  left  the  flask  undisturbed  till
the  25th  of  November  following.  On  that  day  we  found  a  very
white  deposit  of  ferment  covering  the  yeast-ash  that  had  not
been  taken  into  solution,  and  a  ring  of  aerobian  ferment  on  a
level  with  the  surface  of  liquid  ;  all  the  sugar  had  disappeared  ;
the  liquid  contained  5 '2  per  cent,  of  alcohol,  by  volume,  at  a
temperature  of  15°  C.  (59°  F.)  ;  and,  lastly,  in  consequence  of
the  purity  of  the  materials  employed,  there  was  no  trace  of  the
formation  of  fungoid  growths,  whether  of  mycoderma  vini  or  of
mycoderma  cerevisiw,  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  or  of  vibrios  or
lactic-ferment  below  the  surface.

Thus  then  we  see — and  several  other  examples  throughout
this  work  confirm  the  fact — that  saccharine  liquids  holding
mineral  salts  in  solution  are  as  capable  of  complete  fermentation
as  any  media  of  natural  composition.  It  is  true  that  ferment
develops  slowly  and  with  dijficulty  in  them,  and  at  times  takes
on  rather  curious  forms,  but,  nevertheless,  it  does  develop  in
the    media    and    carry    on   a  fermentation   in  which    not    the

p  2


212  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

minutest  particle  of  sugar  is  left  undecomposed.  This  is  true,
at  least,  in  the  case  of  saccharomyces  pastoriaiius,  but  there  are
other  ferments  which  in  such  media  are  checked  in  their  multi-
plication and  in  their  continued  action  on  sugar.  One  condition
indispensable  to  the  accomplishment  of  fermentation  in  such  a
sweetened  mineral  medium,  by  means  of  saccharomyces  padori-
anus,  is  the  absolute  purity  of  the  materials  and  of  the  ferment.
It  is  necessary  that  the  life  and  physiological  action  of  the  latter
should  be  in  no  way  interfered  with  by  the  presence  of  other
microscopic  organisms.  We  shall  have  occasion  to  revert  to
this  important  detail  in  connection  with  our  growths.

Fig.  49  represents  the  ferment  as  it  appeared  when  examined
on  August  11th,  1873.     We  can  no  longer  recognize  in  it  any


Fig.  49.

saccharomyces  pastoriamis.  The  general  appearance  is  spherical,
and  there  are  a  number  of  clusters  of  budding  cells  which
remind  one  at  first  sight  of  the  mode  of  germination  of  brewers'
*'  high "  yeast.  At  a,  a,  a,  we  see  globules  from  which
irregular  abortive  filaments  have  sprung,  a  proof  of  difficult
germination.  No  such  monstrosities  could  ever  have  occurred
if  we  had  used  beer- wort  or  must  as  our  nutritive  medium.

On  November  25th  we  made  another  examination  and  sketch
of  the  ferment,  the  appearance  of  which  did  not  difier  materially
from  that  given  above.  The  general  appearance  was  the  same,
consisting  mostly  of  globules  joined  together  in  clusters  of  two
or  three  or  more.     No  separation,  such  as  occurs  in  the  case  of


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


213


ferment  formed  in  natural  worts,  had  taken  place.  The
ferment,  moreover,  was  very  irregular,  and  comprised  cells  of  all
sizes.  We  sowed  some  of  it  in  a  flask  of  pure  wort.  On
November  26th  there  was  no  apparent  development  :  on
November  27th,  however,  not  more  than  forty-eight  hours  after
impregnation,  there  was  a  considerable  deposit  of  white  ferment
at  the  bottom  of  the  liquid,  and  fermentation  was  so  active  that
the  surface  of  the  liquid  was  covered  with  an  abundant  froth.
This  shows  us  the  wonderful  vitality  and  recuperative  power
possessed  by  germs  which,  left  to  themselves  for  about  four
months,  revived  so  readily.  It  proves  too  that  the  reviving
influences  took  efi'ect  on  some  aerobian  ferment.  From  the
mode  of  life  of  this  latter  being  similar  to  that  of  a  surface
fungoid  growth,  it  does  not  become  exhausted  as  the  cells  of
ordinary  ferment  do.  Now  the  cells  which,  sown  on  August
6th,  had  become  exhausted  by  prolonged  stay  in  the  mineral
liquid,  and  were  almost  inert,  would  have  required  several  days
for  their  revival ;  but  in  the  experiment  described  the  revival
was  rapid,  and  this  rapidity  proves,  as  we  have  said,  that  the
revival  must  have  taken  place  in  cells  of  aerobian  ferment.

Taking  some  fresh  yeast  from  the  bottom  of  the  liquid  we
examined  and  made  a  sketch  of  it  (Fig.  50).  The  field  was
filled  with  round  and  oval  cells,  jointed  and  ramified  filaments,


Fig.  50.


(9


budding   and   multiplying    in   the   most   remarkable   manner,
reminding  us  of  the  germination  of  the  cells  of  yeast  exhausted


214  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

in  sweetened  water,  and  also  of  the  germination  in  the  form  of
dematium  puUulans  of  certain  germ-cells  which  are  spread  over
the  surface  of  sweet,  domestic  fruits.  We  could  never  grow
tired,  as  we  wrote  it  in  our  original  notes,  of  sketching  this
beautiful  plant,  which  establishes  very  clearly  a  transition
between  one  of  the  best  defined  cellular  ferments,  viz.,
saccharomyccH  padorianus,  and  certain  forms  of  very  common
fungoid  growths,  those  of  dematium,  and  even  of  the  most
common  mould,  mucor  mucedo  or  racemosus,  when  it  vegetates
beneath  the  surface  of  a  liquid  and  acts  as  a  ferment.*  We
have  here,  as  in  these  cases,  filamentous  chains  branching  into
other  similar  chains,  composed  of  more  or  less  elongated  cells,
which  at  length  fall  off  and  germinate  exactly  as  the  conidia-
bearing  hyphae  of  mucor  do.

The  aerobian  ferment  of  "  high  "  yeast,  in  whatever  medium
we  cultivated  it,  presented  no  peculiarity,  as  far  as  its  forms
were  concerned.  It  was  composed  of  cells  of  spherical  shape,
like  ordinary  "  high  "  yeast,  and  germinated  in  the  same  way
as  the  latter.

Fig.  51  represents  the  revival  of  this  aerobian  ferment.


Fig.  61.

We  recognize  here  the  branched  mode  of  budding  and
spherical  contour  characteristic  of  "  high  "  j-east  proper.  Nor
does  the  aerobian  ferment  of  "  low  "  yeast  present  any  special

*  We  insist  on  this  fact,  that  Fig.  50  represents  the  forms  on  revival
of  the  aerobian  ferment  of  sacchuroinyces  pastorianus,  tvhen  this  has  grown
in  a  mineral  medium.  When  produced  on  the  surface  of  fermented  wort,
the  aerobian  ferment  of  which  we  are  speaking  presents  no  peculiarity,
nor  is  thoro  any  irroguLuity  in  its  forms  or  in  its  development,  and


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  ,  215

peculiarities,  in  forms,  dimensions,  and  mode  of  growtli  closely
resembling  the  "  low  "  yeast  from  whicli  it  is  derived.  At
the  commencement  of  its  restoration,  however,  if  this  is
performed  in  sweetened  water,  the  cells  in  the  groups  are
larger  than  those  which  are  subsequently  developed.

Fig.  52  represents  the  aerobian  ferment   of  yeast  used  in
"  low  "-fermentation    breweries,    examined    forty-eight    hours


after  pitching.  We  find  that  groups  resembling  that  at  a
are  of  very  rare  occurrence.  They  are  to  be  seen  only  at  the
very  beginning,  generally  only  for  the  first  few  hours  of  the
renewed  activity.  Yery  soon,  however,  they  develop  cells
which  are  of  the  size  of  the  oval  cells  budding  at  b.

Fig.  53  represents   the  aerobian  caseous  yeast  which  forms

'^  a    d

Fig.  53.

wlien  we  proceed  to  cultivate  it  in  a  natural  saccharine  medium,  or  in
wort,  it  does  not  produce  any  forms  of  dematium,  as  in  the  preceding  case  ;
but  the  reason  of  this  is  that,  in  consequence  of  the  nature  of  the  first
medium,  which  is  better  adapted  to  its  nutrition,  it  assumes  at  once,  in
the  second  medium,  the  forms  of  deposit-yeast  in  the  course  of  ordinary
germination .


216  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

rather  rapidly,  in  thick,  greasy-looking  pellicles,  on  the  surface
of  liquids  which  have  been  fermented  by  means  of  caseous
ferment.  The  larger  form  of  cells,  a  and  h,  is  not  often  met
with.

On  May  27th,  1875,  we  sowed,  in  a  flask  of  wort,  a  trace
of  a  pellicle  of  this  kind,  which  had  formed  on  the  surface
of  a  flask  in  which  fermentation  had  been  set  up  by  means
of  caseous  yeast  in  May  of  the  preceding  year.  On  May
30th  fermentation  began  to  reveal  its  presence  by  a  voluminous
froth,  and  the  newly-formed  yeast  had  reached  the  bottom
of  the  flask.  A  small  quantity  was  taken  out  by  a  capillary
glass  tube,  and  a  sketch  of  the  ferment  made ;  this  is  given
in  Fig.  54.  Amongst  the  cells  which  occupy  the  field  there
are  groups  of  some  of  larger  size.  These  are  not  distinct  forms
mixed  with  the  others,  but  simply  another  illustration  of  the
fact  that  old  cells  in  course  of  revival,  especially  when  they

Fig.  54.


have  been  exhausted  in  sweetened  water,  as  we  have  just
observed  of  the  aerobian  ferment  of  "  low  "  yeast,  commence
with  forms  of  larger  diameter  or  more  elongated  than  the
ordinary  forms  peculiar  to  the  ferment  which  at  a  later  stage
are  developed  from  them.  We  have  seen  how  marked  and
exaggerated  this  feature  was  in  the  case  of  saccharomyces
pastorianus.

Let  us  again  call  attention  to  the  forms  of  aerobian  ferment
furnished  by  the  yeast  which  we  have  already  described  under
the   name    of  new    ''liigh"    ycad.      Fig.    55   represents   this


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  217

aerobian  ferment,  as  taken  on  November  27tli,  1873,  from  a
pellicle  of  rather  greasy  and  moist  appearance,  on  the  surface
of  a  flask  of  fermented  beer-wort  which  had  been  impreg-
nated on  July  21st,  1872.  It  might  readily  be  mistaken  for
ordinary  **  high "  j^east,  yet  no  two  ferments  can  be  more
distinct.

On  November  27th,  1873,  we  sowed  a  trace  of  this  ferment
in  a  flask  of  wort.  From  the  29th,  with  a  continuous  tem-
perature of  25°  C.  (77°  F,),  a  considerable  deposit  of  yeast
began  to  form,  and  the  froth  of  fermentation  covered  the  whole


|i«  %©  jm  ^


Fig.  bb.


surface  of  the  liquid.     We  took   a  little   of  this   deposit  for
examination ;    it   is    represented    in   Fig.    56.      The   field   is


Fig.  b^.

occupied  with  oval  cells  of  great  uniformity.  We  recognize
the  aspect  of  the  original  yeast  (Fig.  43),  Here  and  there,
indeed,  we  come  across  some  cells  of  larger  size,  such  as  those
at  a  and  h,  which  is  another  illustration  of  the  remark  that  we
have  just  made  respecting  the  forms  which  revived  exhausted
cells  take  on  at  the  commencement  of  a  new  germination.


218  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

The  physical  aspect  of  the  several  aerobian  ferments  is  in
general  so  characteristic  that  we  are  often  able  by  simple
inspection  to  distinguish  between  them  as  they  occur  on  the
surface  of  liquids,  S((ccharomijces  pastoHanns  in  its  aerobian
state  forms  a  crown  of  cells  round  the  sides  of  the  vessel  at
the  surface  of  the  liquid,  which  crown  is  broken  up  by  the
least  agitation  of  the  liquid ;  its  vitality  continues  for  years.

The  aerobian  ferment  of  "  high  "  yeast  appears  in  the  form
of  small  isolated  teats  on  the  surface  of  the  fermented  liquid.
It  develops  rather  sluggishly,  and  has  no  great  vitality.

The  aerobian  form  of  "  low  "  yeast  develops  as  a  somewhat
fragile  layer,  the  least  agitation  precipitating  it  to  the  bottom
of  the  vessel  in  a  cloud  of  verj'^  small  irregular  flocks,  that  do
not  diffuse  through  the  liquid  as  they  fall.  With  free  access
to  air  it  retains  life  for  a  long  time.

The  aerobian  ferment  of  caseous  yeast  forms  a  continuous
greasy-looking  pellicle,  gradually  thickening,  which  breaks
up  into  fragments  when  shaken.  AVith  a  supply  of  air  it
lives  very  long,  and  the  pellicle  gradually  increases  in
thickness.

In  reviewing  these  ferments  we  may  naturally  ask  ourselves
the  question  whether  the  ''  high  "  ferments  of  which  we  have
spoken — the  industrial  one  concerned  in  the  "  high "  fer-
mentation of  breweries,  and  the  other  which  we  have  termed
new  "  high "  ferment — are  not  aerobian  ferments  of  "  low "
yeasts.  We  are  inclined  to  think  that  the  ferment  which  in
the  preceding  paragraph  we  termed  netv  ^^  high"  ferment,  may,
perhaps,  be  the  aerobian  form  of  the  "  low  "  yeast  employed
by  Alsatian  and  German  brewers.  We  have  studied  this  new
"  high "  ferment  side  b}^  side  with  the  aerobian  ferment  of
"  low  "  yeast,  and  the  result  we  have  arrived  at  is,  that  in
appearance  and  mode  of  germination,  as  well  as  in  the  flavour
and  quality  of  the  beers  which  they  produce,  they  greatly
resemble  one  another.  In  the  last  respect,  however,  we  cannot
say  that  the  identity  is  quite  absolute,  and  hence  it  is  with
some  doubt  that  we  suggest  the  possible  identity  of  the  two


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  219

ferments.  As  regards  the  ordinary  "  high  "  yeast  of  breweries,
it  may  well  be  supposed,  both  from  its  power  of  rising  to  the
surface  during  fermentation  and  from  the  peculiar  smell  and
flavour  of  its  beer,  that  we  have  in  it  the  aerobian  ferment
of  some  "  low  "  yeast,  as  to  the  identity  of  which,  however,
we  can  say  nothing,  having  no  knowledge  as  to  where  it  is
to  be  found ;  or,  indeed,  any  certainty  that  such  a  yeast  actually
exists.

In  writing  these  lines  an  idea  suggests  itself  which  might
be  profitably  made  the  subject  of  serious  experimental  study.
What  would  be  the  peculiar  properties  of  the  aerobious  ferment-
form  of  an  aerobian  yeast  ?  Certain  facts  incline  us  to  believe
that  these  forms  differ  from  each  other  just  as  a  "low"  yeast
differs  from  its  aerobian  ferment.  If  this  were  actually  the
case  it  would  be  very  interesting  to  compare  the  peculiar  pro-
perties of  an  indefinite  series  of  aerobian  ferments,  all  derived
from  a  common  origin.  We  find  recorded  in  our  laboratory
notes  that  a  certain  aerobian  ferment  of  the  second  generation
produced  a  beer  different  from  that  produced  by  the  same
ferment  of  the  first  generation,  being  possessed  of  a  fragrance
so  marked  that,  on  entering  our  laboratory,  in  which  only  a
few  litres  of  this  beer  were  fermenting,  we  were  at  once  struck
by  the  powerful  odour  which  it  emitted.


§  VI. — The  Purification  of  Commercial  Yeasts.

We  have  already  stated  that  the  researches  detailed  in  the
preceding  chapter  require  for  their  successful  prosecution  that
the  ferments  on  which  we  experiment  should  be  absolutely  free
from  germs  of  other  organisms,  and  we  have  shown  how
impossible  it  would  be,  if  this  condition  were  not  complied
with,  to  follow  for  weeks  or  months,  sometimes  even  years,
the  changes  which  occur  in  a  yeast  maintained  in  contact  with
air,  either  in  sweetened  water  or  in  a  liquid  which  has  fer-
mented under  its  influence.     Equally  necessary  is  it  that  the


220  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

saccharine  woi-ts  employed  should  also  be  exempt  from  these
impurities,  as  well  as  the  air,  which  is  being  constantly  renewed
at  the  surface  of  the  liquids.  These  last  conditions  may  be
realized  by  the  adoption  of  our  double-necked  flasks,  with
which  a  laboratory  for  research  of  this  kind  should  be  fur-
nished, always  ready  for  use,  filled  with  the  different  kinds
of  liquids  that  may  be  required.

In  general,  the  inconveniences  resulting  from  the  impurity
of  a  yeast  employed  do  not  immediately  manifest  themselves,
in  consequence  of  the  enormous  preponderance  of  the  true
yeast,  which,  in  comparison  with  the  foreign  germs  that  con-
taminate it,  may  be  so  great  that  microscopical  examination
fails  to  reveal  even  the  presence  of  these  latter.  Again,  it  is  a
well-known  fact  that  the  abundance  of  one  growth  in  a  limited
medium  operates  to  the  prejudice  of  a  less  abundant  one,
inasmuch  as  the  first  consumes  the  uutritive  materials  at  the
expense  of  the  second,  and  more  particularly  the  needful
amount  of  oxygen.  It  follows,  that  when  a  saccharine  liquid
is  impregnated  with  commercial  yeast,  nothing  but  yeast  may
be  detected  for  a  time,  and  one  is  led  to  believe  in  the  purity
of  the  subsequent  growth.  This,  however,  supposes  that  the
external  conditions,  as  well  as  those  of  the  medium  of  growth,
are  equally  adapted  to  the  life  of  the  yeast  and  that  of  those
organisms  present  as  impurities  ;  for  if  these  conditions  rather
favoured  the  nutrition  of  the  latter,  we  should  be  sure  to  find
their  proper  developments  appearing  at  an  early  stage.  For
example,  when  the  growth  of  yeast  becomes  sluggish,  we  have
invariably  the  development  of  such  after- growths.  The  prin-
cipal germs,  having  exhausted  the  saccharine  liquid  which  has
fermented  under  their  influence  and  is  no  longer  adapted  for
their  growth,  cease  to  develop,  and  have  their  place  taken  by
ferments  of  disease,  spores  of  moulds,  mycodermata,  &c.,  the
growth  of  which  proceeds  more  or  less  rapidly,  in  proportion  as
the  character  of  the  liquid  and  the  surrounding  temperature
are  more  or  less  suited  to  their  growth.

Here,  too,  we  have  an  explanation  of  the  rapid  change  that


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  221

occurs  in  brewers'  yeast  when  left  to  itself  after  fermentation.
In  such  a  mass  of  cells,  kept  apart  from  any  food-supply,  and
only  wdth  difficulty  able  to  keep  themselves  in  life  by  consuming
their  own  soluble  contents,  we  have  an  excellent  field  for  the
development  of  foreign  germs.  In  this  way  we  may  have  a
rapid  putrefaction  in  yeast,  to  which  there  will  be  a  corre-
spondingly rapid  growth  of  organisms  in  the  liquid,  where  they
find,  as  well  as  in  the  yeast-cells,  appropriate  nourishment.
Nothing  could  better  confirm  this  view  of  the  matter  than  the
array  of  facts,  by  way  of  antithesis,  already  described,  in  which
we  have  seen  a  pure  yeast  remain  for  an  indefinite  time  in
contact  with  pure  air,  without  undergoing  any  putrefaction,  or
manifesting  other  changes  than  those  which  result  from  the
combustions  peculiar  to  living  cells  when  left  to  support  them-
selves, in  a  moist  state,  in  contact  with  oxygen.

In  the  process  of  brewing,  as  soon  as  fermentation  is  finished^
or  rather,  as  soon  as  certain  physical  effects  are  produced,  for
instance,  when  the  beer  falls  bright,  or,  as  the  French  say
technically,  when  the  yeast  breaks  up,*  the  beer  is  racked  ;
subsequently  the  yeast,  which  is  left  in  a  plastic  layer  at  the
bottom  of  the  vessels,  is  collected,  washed,  and  kept  under
water  in  a  cool  place,  to  be  used  again  in  the  course  of  twenty-
four  or  forty-eight  hours.  Brewers  never  care  to  keep  their
yeast  for  a  longer  time  before  using  it,  especially  in  summer.
We  can  understand  how  this  practice  prevents  the  foreign
germs  which  are  mixed  with  the  yeast  from  living  and  repro-
ducing ;  but  although  the  conditions  of  brewing,  as  far  as  the
treatment  of  the  yeast  is  concerned,  may,  in  a  certain  measure,
prevent  the  development  of  these  germs  of  disease,  nevertheless
they  are  there,  and  from  their  extreme  minuteness,  pass  into
the  beer  in  greater  or  less  number,  however  bright  it  may  have
been  rendered  by  racking.  There  they  only  await  conditions
favourable  to  their  existence  to  enable  them  to  develop,  and  to
affect  more  or  less  injuriously  the  qualities  of  that  delicate
beverage.

*  "  La  cassure  de  la  leviire."


222  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

On  December  15th,  1872,  we  bought  nine  samples  of  beer  in
different  large  cafes  in  Paris,  which  had  all  come  from  the
best  breweries  of  Strasburg,  Nancy,  Vienna,  and  Burton.  After
leaving  them  for  twenty-four  hours,  we  decanted  all  our
samples,  and  then  sowed  a  drop  of  the  deposit  of  each  in  flasks
of  pure  wort.  On  January  2nd,  1873,  we  examined  the  ferments
formed  in  these  worts,  which  had  been  kept  in  an  oven  at  a
temperature  of  20°  C.  (68°  F.),  and  also  tasted  the  beers  pro-
duced ;  they  all  had  an  abominable  taste,  and  each  contained
diseased  ferments.

At  the  same  time,  by  way  of  comparison,  we  impregnated
other  flasks  of  wort  with  pure  ferments.  None  of  the  beers  of
this  series  acquired  a  bad  taste  or  produced  foreign  ferments ;
they  only  became  flat.

When  we  review  the  operations  of  the  brewer^s  art,  we  are
surprised  by  the  comparative  perfection  to  which  that  art  has
been  brought  by  the  laborious  experience  of  years,  and  the
more  so  when  we  consider  that,  as  regards  the  question  of  the
diseases  of  beer,  the  brewer  has  never  been  guided  by  any  such
rigorous  principles  as  those  which  we  have  explained  in  this
work.  We  have  already  given  proofs  of  this  in  our  first
chapter.

The  beer  is  racked  and  separated  from  its  yeast  before
fermentation  has  entirely  ceased.  The  principal  reason  for
this  is  that  it  is  necessary  that  the  beer,  after  being  run  into
cask,  should  work  again  and  undergo  a  secondary  fermentation,
in  order  that  it  may  not  be  invaded  by  the  parasites,  of  which
we  have  already  spoken,  as  would  not  fail  to  be  the  case  if  the
beer  were  suffered  to  remain  in  a  state  of  perfect  quiescence.
Not  only  is  the  beer  racked  before  it  has  attained  its  limit  of
attenuation,  but  in  addition  to  this,  and  also  with  the  view
of  checking  the  development  of  parasites,  it  is  placed  in  cellars
sensibly  cooler  than  the  temperature  of  fermentation,  low  as
that  is  in  the  case  of  "  low "  beers :  the  temperature  of  the
cellars  being  not  higher  than  2°  or  3°  C.   (36°  F.).

Unfortunately,  the  requirements  of  trade  prevent  our  com-


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  223

pl3dng  with  these  exigencies  to  the  end.  When  the  beer  is
sold  it  is  conveyed  away,  no  matter  what  the  season  may  be,
and  deposited  in  the  retailer's  cellar,  for  a  longer  or  shorter
time,  according  to  the  variations  of  consumption.  On  a  warm
day  beer  will  be  in  great  demand  ;  the  next  day,  if  rain  or  cold
have  come  on,  the  demand  will  be  very  limited,  since  beer  is,
in  our  climate  at  least,  a  drink  for  hot  weather.  From  causes
of  this  nature,  the  beer  may  have  to  remain  a  long  time  in  the
cellars  of  the  retailers  or  consumers.  By  way  of  precaution,
indeed,  it  is  put  into  very  small  casks,  which  permit  of  a
frequent  renewal  of  the  supply,  and  is  conveyed  to  distances  by
express  trains,  and  during  the  night ;  it  is  even  sent  away  in
wagons  provided  with  a  kind  of  double  case,  the  outer  jacket
being  filled  with  ice,  which  keeps  the  air  surrounding  the  casks
constantly  cold.  Such  are  some  of  the  troublesome  measures
taken  to  obviate  the  danger  that  we  have  pointed  out.  They
operate  very  injuriously  in  restricting  the  trade  and  raising  the
price  of  beer.  It  is  a  matter  of  extreme  importance,  then,  that
our  produce  should  be  better  removed  from  the  action  of  those
microscopic  enemies  which  beer  contains  ;  in  other  words,  that
this  beverage  should  have  less  cause  to  fear  circumstances
favourable  to  the  development  of  the  germs  of  impurity  with
which  it  is  always  contaminated,  as  a  natural  consequence  of
the  methods  of  manufacture  at  present  adopted.  The  question
of  alteration  in  the  flavour  of  beer  should  be  regarded  from
another  point  of  view  which  merits  equal  attention.  We  have
seen  that  there  are  different  kinds  of  beer,  each  of  which  corre-
sponds to  a  special  ferment  from  which  it  derives  its  flavour
and  aroma,  and,  in  a  word,  everything  which  gives  it  a  value
in  the  eyes  of  the  consumer.  It  very  often  happens,  especially
in  badly-managed  breweries,  and  more  particularly  in  those  in
which  several  beers  are  manufactured,  that  the  yeast  is  a
mixture  of  difierent  ferments.  The  evil  efiects  of  such  a
mixture  are  experienced  in  the  course  of  manufacture,  and
still  more  so  in  the  beer  after  manufacture.  Brewers  in  good
"  low  "  fermentation  breweries,  who  brew  what  is  called  stock


224  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

beer,  during  the  winter  months,  for  consumption  in  summer,
up  to  August  and  September,  are  very  anxious  to  prevent  the
development  of  a  vinous  flavour  in  beers  of  this  kind.  Accord-
ing to  our  observations,  this  vinous  flavour  seems  to  be  prin-
cipally due  to  an  intermixture  with  the  pitching  yeast  of
saccJiarornyces  paHtorianus  or  its  varieties,  one  of  the  peculi-
arities of  which  ferment  is  that  in  the  course  of  time  it  imparts
a  decided  vinous  flavour  to  beer.  If  this  ferment  were  not
present  amongst  the  yeast-cells — and  here  we  are  speaking  of
an  absolute,  so  to  say,  mathematically  absolute  absence — the
beer  produced  would  gradually  grow  old  in  the  store  cellars,
without  ever  acquiring  any  vinous  flavour,  properly  so  called.

This  vinous  flavour  develops  more  especially  in  English
beers  when  these  are  kept.  It  is  an  easy  matter  to  show
that  in  English  beers,  after  their  manufacture,  saccJiaromyces
postorianus  and  the  ferment  which  we  have  termed  caseous,
which  also  imparts  a  peculiar  flavour,  form  almost  exclu-
sively, notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  yeast  used  in  the
manufacture  of  English  beer  is  a  ferment  essentially  distinct
from  saccharomyces  pastorianus.

The  secondary  fermentation  which  takes  place  in  "  high  "
and  "  low  "  beers  stored  in  cask  after  manufacture,  is  very
often  due  to  this  same  ferment,  which  may  be  recognized
by  elongated  jointed  cells,  at  times  more  or  less  ramified,
as  well  as  by  the  influence  which  it  exercises  upon  the  flavour
of  the  beer.

We  may  add  that  the  general  result  of  our  researches  has
convinced  us  that  "  high  "  yeast  cannot  transform  itself,  any
more  than  "  low  "  yeast  can,  into  the  ferment  of  which  we
are  speaking,  and  that  whenever  a  beer  produced  by  means
of  "high"  or  "low"  yeast  develops  a  foreign  ferment,
this  ferment  must  have  existed  in  the  original  yeast  in  the
form  of  germs,  which,  from  their  extreme  scarcity,  often  ftiil
to  be  detected  by  means  of  the  microscope.  The  best  proof
that  we  can  give  of  this  is  the  fact  that  a  beer  produced  by
means  of  "high"  or  "low"  yeast,  if  left  to  itself  for  months


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  225

or  years,  will  never  contain  in  its  deposit  anything  besides
the  yeast  that  was  used  in  its  manufacture,  provided  that
that  was  pure  to  begin  with.  Now  this  can  never  be  the
case  in  dealing  with  actual  commercial  beers,  no  matter  what
they  may  be  or  in  what  brewery  they  may  be  produced.
In  all  beers,  in  the  course  of  time,  in  addition  to  diseased
ferments,  ferments  essentially  different  from  those  used  in  their
manufacture  wall  appear,  and  notably  sacckaromi/ces  pastorianus ;
this  result  must  be  attributed  to  the  general  impurity  of
commercial  yeasts.

In  certain  cases  the  intermixture  of  ferments  is  to  be  feared
almost  as  much  as  the  presence  of  diseased  ferments,  when
these  latter  have  not  developed  to  any  great  extent.  We  have
often  seen  our  fermentations  invaded  by  ferments  differing
absolutely  from  those  w^hich  we  originally  employed.  The
repetition  of  growths,  and  more  jDarticularly  changes  in  the
composition  of  our  fermentable  media,  purposely  made  with
the  view  of  attaining  certain  results,  often  produce  complica-
tions of  this  kind.  For  a  long  time  we  were  unable  to  realize
the  true  significance  of  the  results  of  some  of  our  experiments,
in  consequence  of  the  facts  which  we  have  just  explained,  as
well  as  those  detailed  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  having
escaped  our  notice ;  indeed,  our  ignorance  of  those  facts  added
greatly  to  the  difficulty  and  length  of  our  researches.  Our
labours  from  the  commencement  of  this  work  to  the  date  of
its  publication  have  extended  over  not  less  than  five  years,
and  no  one  can  know  better  than  ourselves  wdth  what  advan-
tage we  might  devote  a  still  longer  time  to  it ;  but,  as  Lavoisier
says,  one  would  never  give  anything  to  the  world  if  he  delayed
doing  so  until  he  fully  attained  unto  his  ideal  aims,  which
always  seem  more  distant  the  more  one  increases  one's  efforts
in  the  attempt.

Our  preceding  observations  show  how  extremely  important  it  is
to  employ  pure  yeasts  to  obtain,  on  the  one  hand,  well  flavoured
beers,  whilst  adhering  to  the  processes  at  present  existing
in  breweries,  and  on  the  other,  beers  of  good  keeping  qualities,

Q


226  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

less  liable  to  injury,  less  dependent  on  actual  commercial
requirements,  capable,  that  is,  of  withstanding  conditions
favourable  to  the  development  of  ferments  prejudicial  to  the
soundness  of  the  produce,  what  we  have  named  ferments  of
disease.

In  the  case  of  intermixture  of  alcoholic  ferments,  we  may
sometimes  manage  to  effect  their  separation  by  taking  advan-
tage of  their  unequal  vitalities  in  different  media  of  cultivation.
On  December  17th,  1872,  we  made  a  powder  of  commercial
Dutch  yeast  and  plaster,  as  described  in  Chapter  III.  §  6.  The
Dutch  yeast  was  a  "  high  "  ferment.

On  July  25th,  1873,  we  sowed  a  portion  of  this  dried  mixture
in  a  flask  of  pure  wort.  From  July  27th  patches  of  bubbles
from  fermentation  were  visible  on  the  surface.

On  August  2ud  the  fermentation  was  completed.  The
yeast,  examined  under  the  microscope,  was  apparently  pure,
formed  of  spherical  cells  of  a  fine  "  high "  ferment.  We
poured  away  the  fermented  liquid,  observing  every  necessary
precaution,  and  left  in  the  flask  almost  all  the  deposit  of  yeast,
and  not  more  than  one  or  two  cubic  centimetres  (about  half
a  tea-spoonful)   of  beer.

On  ^November  15th  following  the  yeast,  examined  afresh,
still  seemed  pure  and  still  exhibited  the  form  of  round  ceUs
of  *^  high  ^'  3^east,  only  that  they  had  taken  on  a  very  aged  aspect,
showing  a  double  contour,  and  filled  with  granulations  collected
irregularly  about  the  centre.  Such  are  the  precise  charac-
teristics of  dead  cells ;  nevertheless  it  was  still  possible  that
some  living  cells  yet  remained.  To  assure  ourselves  of  this  we
took  some  of  the  yeast  and  placed  it  in  a  flask  of  pure  wort.
On  the  19th  a  little  froth  from  fermentative  action  appeared  on
the  surface.  We  then  examined  the  yeast  and  discovered  that
it  was  no  longer  "  high  "  yeast,  but  a  small  ferment  of  rather
irregular  appearance,  in  which  the  jointed  cells  of  saccharomyces
pasforianus,  as  it  usually  appears  after  a  succession  of  growths,
predominated.  It  must  not  be  imagined  here  that  what  we
saw   was  a  transformation   of  one   yeast  into   another.      The


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  227

phenomena  are  to  be  explained  mucli  more  simply.  The  Dutch
veast  employed  being  very  impure  must  have  contained  traces
of  foreign  ferments,  especially  of  mccharomyces  pastorianus.
Reduced  to  a  dry  powder  on  December  17th,  1872,  the  two
or  more  varieties  of  cells  comprising  it  had  preserved  their
vitality  in  consequence  of  the  plaster,  and  this  vitality  had
continued  at  all  events  until  July  25th,  1873.  Subsequently,
when  cultivated  in  wort,  they  had  multiplied  in  that  medium.
The  saccharomyces  had  revived  like  the  rest,  but  its  quantity,
compared  with  the  high  Dutch  yeast,  was  so  small  that  the
microscopical  observations  made  on  August  2nd,  when  the  flask
was  decanted,  failed  to  discover  its  presence.  Between  August
2nd  and  November  I5th  the  high  yeast  must  have  perished
entirely  :  the  cells  of  saccharomyces,  on  the  contrary,  still
maintained  their  vitality,  and  these  alone  multiplied  in  the
flask  of  wort  impregnated  on  November  15th.  Here  we  have
an  example  of  the  separation  of  alcoholic  ferments,  through
the  unequal  resistance  they  sometimes  ofier  to  adverse  con-
ditions to  which  they  may  be  subjected.  We  may  also  conclude
that  if  we  had  prepared  a  quantity  of  beer  with  the  **  high  "
yeast,  which  in  our  experiment  of  August  2nd,  1873,  seemed  to
have  developed  in  a  state  of  entire  purity,  this  beer  when  made
and  stored  in  cask  or  bottle  could  not  have  failed  to  undergo
a  secondary  fermentation,  in  consequence  of  a  development
of  saccharomyces  pastorianus.

Let  us  take,  as  another  example  of  purification  of  the  same
kind,  the  case  of  the  different  ferments  of  the  vintage.  When
must  begins  to  ferment  the  apiculated  ferment  invariably
appears,  and  becomes  afterwards  associated,  more  or  less,  with
the  saccharomyces  pastorianus,  in  the  presence  of  which  the
multiplication  of  the  apiculated  ferment  soon  ceases.  Saccha-
romyces pastorianus,  in  its  turn,  is  gradually  displaced  by  the
ferment  which  we  have  termed  the  ordinary  ferment  of  wine,
and  which  Dr.  Rees  has  named  saccharomyces  elKpsdideus.  On
the  subject  of  these  changes  in  the  proportion  of  the  ferments
of  wine,  the  Note  which  we  published  in  1862  in  the  Bulletin

Q  2


228  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

de  la  Societe  cliimique  may  be  consulted.  Now,  these  various
ferments  mutually  interfere  with  each  other  :  whereas  if  sac-
charomyces  apiculatvs  were  there  alone  it  would  multiply  to
a  greater  extent,  and  with  greater  advantage  to  the  fermenta-
tion of  the  must.  This  result  is  obtained  by  filtering  the
must,  as  we  have  already  observed.

It  is  evident  from  what  we  have  just  said  that  the  principal
part  of  the  deposits  of  yeast  in  the  sediment  of  fermented
grapes,  at  the  time  when  the  wine  is  first  racked,  which
in  the  Jura,  is  called  VentonnaiHon,  is  composed  of  the  ordinary
ferment  of  wine,  the  saccharomyces  ellipso'ideus,  and  that  the
cells  of  apiculated  ferment  are  scarcely  discoverable  with
the  microscope,  being  scattered  amongst  an  infinite  multitude
of  other  ferments.*

We  procured  from  Arbois,  on  Januar}'  20th,  1875,  some  wine
yeast  taken  from  a  large  barrel  of  the  preceding  vintage,
racked  on  January  18th.  The  ferment  was  very  irregular.
Some  of  its  cells  were  very  old,  of  a  yellowish  colour,  and  full
of  granulations — amongst  these  a  certain  number  formed
jointed  segments,  rather  elongated,  and  probably  belonging
to  saccharomyces  pastorianus.  The  other  cells  were  transparent,
and  apparently  still  young.  This  mixture  of  the  two  ferments
is  represented  in  Fig.  57.  No  doubt  if  we  had  searched
carefully  we  should  also  have  found  some  cells  of  saccharomyces
ajpiculatus.     On  January  21st  y\e  sowed  a  smaU  quantity  of  this

^  ^  °  o  ,^  M

Fig.  57.

*  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  ratio  of  the  proportions  of  these
ferments  depends  greatly  on  the  climatic  conditions  preceding  the  period
of  vintage,  on  the  state  of  dryness  or  humidity,  as  well  as  the  temperature
at  the  time  of  gathering  the  grapes,  and  also  on  the  nature  of  the  vines.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  229

raw  yeast  in  a  flask  of  sweetened  water.  On  the  24tli  we
poured  off  the  liquid,  and  supplied  the  deposit  with  fresh
sweetened  water.  The  exterior  temperature  was  12°  C.  (54°
F.).  On  the  27th  we  took  some  of  the  deposit  and  put  it
into  a  flask  of  wort.  The  following  days  there  was  a  develop-
ment of  yeast,  accompanied  by  fermentation.  We  obtained,
however,  neither  the  large  forms  of  the  ferments  of  fruits,
nor  those  of  the  more  minute  ferments  represented  in  Plate  XI.
The  saccharomyces  pastorianus,  represented  in  the  yeast  which
we  sowed  by  aged,  granular,  elongated  cells,  had,  therefore,
not  revived.  Fearing  that  this  result  might  have  been
attributable  to  insufiiciency  of  the  exhaustion,  which  had  only
lasted  for  a  few  days,  we  raised  the  temperature  of  the  flask
of  sweetened  water  to  25°  C.  (77°  F.),  at  which  we  kept  it  until
February  20th.  On  that  day  we  sowed  some  of  this  yeast  in
wort.  There  was  a  very  perceptible  revival  the  next  day,  but
it  was  still  impossible  to  detect  with  the  microscope  the  forms
we  have  just  mentioned,  nor  did  saccliaromyces  pastorianus
appear  in  fresh,  succeeding  growths.

Fig.  58  represents  the  yeast  formed,  which  evidently  had


Fig.  58.

sprung  from  the  transparent  cells  seen  in  Fig.  57,  and
doubtless  belonging  to  the  ordinary  ferment  of  wine,  saccha-
romyces ellipsoideus.  Here  we  have  another  example  of  the
natural  separation  of  ferments  brought  about  by  the  death
of  one  or  two  of  them,  or  by  extreme  difierences  in  the  time
of  their  revival.


230  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

"VVe  cultivated  this  yeast  (Fig.  58),  to  some  considerable
extent,  in  beer-wort.  It  produced  a  peculiar  beer,  of  vinous
character,  in  fact  a  true  barley  wine.  This  proves,  we  may
here  remark,  that  ordinary  wine,  in  its  flavour  and  quality,
depends  to  a  great  extent  on  the  specific  nature  of  the  ferments
which  develop  during  the  fermentation  of  the  vintage ;  and
we  may  fairly  assume  that  if  we  were  to  subject  the  same
must  to  the  action  of  different  ferments  we  should  obtain  wines
of  different  characters.  With  a  view  to  the  practical  appli-
cation of  this  idea,  it  would  be  well  to  undertake  new  studies
in  this  direction  ;  and  the  methods  of  cultivating  and  managing
ferments,  explained  in  this  work,  would  be  of  great  value  in
such  researches.

The  purification  of  ferments  may  be  accomplished  by  various
methods,  according  as  we  have  to  deal  with  an  intermixture
of  ferments,  or  to  regard  as  our  principal  object  the  expulsion
of  ferments  of  disease,  such  as  vibrio  germs,  lactic  ferment,
the  filamentous  ferment  of  turned  beer,  mycoderma  aceti  or
myeoderma  vini.

One  method  of  easy  application  consists  in  sowing  the  yeast
in  water  sweetened  with  10  per  cent,  of  sugar.  This  liquid
should  be  first  boiled,  and  preserved  in  the  two-necked  flasks
which  we  have  so  often  described.  Sweetened  water  is  a  very
exhaustive  medium  for  ferments,  and  the  organisms  mixed
with  them.  A  great  many  cells  perish  in  it,  and  the  chances
are  that  the  foreign  germs,  which  are  always  scarce  in  com-
parison with  the  great  number  of  cells  of  ferment,  may  be
amongst  those  which  die,  or  those  which  become  so  exhausted
that  when  the  yeast,  after  this  treatment,  is  sown  in  wort,  they
disappear,  and  allow  those  cells  which  have  remained  vigorous
enough  to  develop  alone.  The  addition  of  a  little  tartaric
acid  to  the  saccharine  solution — say,  from  ,  -^,\,  ^  to  -nrVu  P^^t
by  weight — often  facilitates  the  destruction  of  certain  germs
of  impurity.  Mycoderma  aceti  and  mycoderma  rini  do  not  find
suitable  life-conditions  in  the  sweetened  water ;  the}'  soon
disappear  if  cultivated  alternately  in  sweetened  water  and  wort.


STUDIES    ON    FERMEISTATION.  231

In  the  place  of  flasks  we  may  make  use  simply  of  shallow
basins,  covered  with  sheets  of  glass,  such  as  we  have  already
had  occasion  to  describe,  for  cultivating  yeast  in  wort  after
it  has  been  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  in  the  sweetened  water.
The  success  of  these  methods  of  purification  is  mainly  due  to
the  fact  that  wort  is  highly  aerated,  and  experience  shows  that
the  principal  disease-ferments  of  beer  are  as  much  checked
in  their  development  by  the  presence  of  air  as  they  are  favoured
by  its  absence,  the  inverse  of  which  holds  good  in  the  case
of  alcoholic  ferments.  So  true  is  this  that,  working  with
commercial  yeast,  which  is  invariably  impure,  it  would  be  im-
possible in  our  opinion  to  make  beer  in  closed  vessels ;  and,
indeed,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  one  has  never  succeeded  in  doing
this,  although  the  attempt  has  often  been  made.  To  do  so
requires,  much  more  than  in  methods  actually  in  use,  the
employment  of  pure  yeast.

There  is,  therefore,  this  advantage  in  cultivating  yeasts  in
shallow  basins,  that  the  multiplication  of  the  alcoholic  ferments
is  promoted,  and  that  of  most  of  the  disease -ferments  is
checked.  There  is  an  exception,  indeed,  in  the  case  of  myco-
dermata  ;  but  of  all  disease-ferments  these  are  the  most  easily
got  rid  of,  by  repeating  our  growths  before  they  make  their
appearance.  Notwithstanding  this,  our  two-necked  flasks,
which  also  contain  much  air  at  first,  are  to  be  preferred  to
the  shallow  basins,  inasmuch  as  they  are  a  perfect  safeguard
against  the  germs  floating  in  the  surrounding  air,  as  well  as
those  of  the  ferment  saccharomyces  pastorianus.

Another  method  is  suggested  to  us  by  the  curious  results
of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  obtained  by  sowing  yeasts
in  a  wort  rendered  acid  and  alcoholic  by  the  addition  of
bi-tartrate  of  potash  and  alcohol.  Experience  proves  that
many  disease-ferments  find  great  diflSculty  in  withstanding
a  succession  of  growths  in  wort  to  which  1|  per  cent,  of
tartaric  acid  and  from  2  to  3  per  cent,  of  alcohol  have  been
added.  Such  a  mixture,  however,  is  equally  well  adapted  to  the
requirements  of  saccharom>/ces 2)cistori'anus,  and  we  must  always


232  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

assure  ourselves  that  this  organism  has  not  taken  the  place
of  the  yeast  we  are  endeavouring  to  purify.  Growths  at  a
A'ery  low  temperature  are  of  great  help  in  enabling  us
to  get  rid  of  all  ferments  that  are  foreign  to  "  low  "  yeast,
and  should  be  resorted  to  in  all  cases  where  this  yeast  is  to
be  purified.

Another  method  of  purification,  which  is  perhaps  quicker,
although  inferior  in  other  respects,  consists  in  the  employment
of  carbolic  acid — that  is  to  say,  in  purifying  our  j^east  by
successive  growths,  we  may  add  to  every  100  c.c.  {3^  fluid
ounces)  of  wort  that  we  employ  from  ten  to  twelve  drops  of
phenol  water,  containing  10  per  cent,  of  the  acid.  The  action
of  the  phenol,  which  at  first  is  invariably  combined  with  that
of  the  oxygen  of  the  air,  tends  to  destroy  the  vitality  of  many
of  the  cells  sown,  involving  to  some  extent  also  the  yeast  which
we  are  interested  in  preserving.  But  amongst  the  number  of
cells  that  are  afiected  those  which  are  less  abundant,  that  is
to  say,  those  which  are  present  as  impurities,  are  paralj^zed
relatively  in  much  greater  proportion.  If  the  acid  does  not
destroy  them  it  greatly  checks  their  development,  and  the  cells
of  yeast,  which  multiply  continuously  in  vast  numbers  (for  the
fermentation  goes  on  in  spite  of  the  phenol,  if  this  is  added
in  small  quantity),  gradually  choke  the  foreign  germs  in  a
succession  of  growths.

By  these  different  means,  which  are  employed  separately  or
combined  with  one  another,  we  generally  manage  to  obtain  the
yeast  which  we  wish  to  purify  in  a  very  pure  state.  We  need
scarcely  add  that  it  is  always  well,  in  the  case  of  our  purifi-
cations, to  begin  with  specimens  which  are  already  as  pure  as  it
is  possible  to  obtain  them.  In  making  our  choice  the  microscope
is  our  best  guide,  but  it  is  not  a  sufiicient  one.  We  should
be  strangely  deceived  if  we  believed  in  the  purity  of  a  yeast  for
the  sole  reason  that  M'hen  examined  under  the  microscope  it
appeared  to  contain  nothing  of  a  foreign  nature.  The  best
means  of  assuring  ourselves  of  the  purity  of  a  j-east  consists  in
making  some  beer  in  one  of  our  two-necked  flasks,  and  leaving


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  233

this  flask,  after  fermentation,  in  an  oven  at  a  temperature  of
20°  or  25°  C.  (68°  to  77°  F.).  If  the  beer,  in  the  course  of  a
few  weeks,  does  not  thicken,  or  become  covered  with  efflo-
rescence, if  its  deposit  is  microscopically  pure,  if,  in  short,  it
only  tastes  flat,  we  may  have  every  confidence  in  the  purity
of  the  yeast  which  produced  it.  After  we  have  purified  a  yeast
we  are,  unfortunately,  never  sure  that  it  has  not  undergone
some  change  in  the  course  of  the  manipulations  to  which  it
has  been  subjected  in  purification.  It  is  indispensable,  there-
fore, that  we  should  test  it,  and  see  if  the  flavour  of  the  beer
produced  by  it  is  really  the  one  that  we  want — viz.,  that  of  the
beer  from  which  we  took  the  yeast  that  we  submitted  to  puri-
fication.

In  the  course  of  a  series  of  practical  experiments  that
we  were  carrying  out  in  the  large  brewery  of  Tourtel,  at
Tantonville,  in  1875,  in  connection  with  the  new  process  of
brewing,  which  will  be  explained  in  Chap.  YII.,  the  following
circumstance  occurred.  We  had  purified  some  of  the  yeast
of  the  brewery,  by  means  of  a  succession  of  growths  and
adding  a  few  drops  of  phenol,  and  had  obtained  a  yeast  of  irre-
proachable purity.  It  happened  that  this  yeast,  which  was
repeatedly  cultivated  in  the  brewery  during  the  summer  of  1875,
from  six  to  ten  hectolitres  (130  to  220  gallons)  of  wort  being
used  on  each  occasion,  always  produced  a  beer  that  had  a  yeast-
bitten  flavour  and  defective  clarifying  powers,  notwithstanding
that  it  possessed  remarkable  keeping  properties,  which  it  owed
to  the  pureness  of  the  ferment  employed.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
the  beer  sufiered  no  injury  from  journeys  of  more  than  300
miles,  by  slow  trains,  in  ordinary  casks,  containing  from  50  to
100  litres  (10  to  20  gallons),  during  the  great  heats  of  June
and  July,  or  from  being  subsequently  stored  for  two  months  in
a  cellar,  the  temperature  of  which  rose  daring  that  time  from
12°  to  18°  C.  (54°  to  65°  F.)  The  temperature  of  fermentation
had  been  13°  C.  (55°  F.).  Beer  from  the  same  brewery,  made
with  the  same  wort  by  the  ordinary  process,  did  not  remain
sound  for  three  weeks  in  this  same  cellar.


234  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

To  what  may  we  attribute  the  peculiarity  of  the  beer  as  just
described  ?  It  is  probable  that  during  our  processes  of  purifi-
cation some  ferment  had  taken  the  place  of  the  principal  yeast.
Commercial  yeasts,  even  those  with  which  the  brewer  is
thoroughly  satisfied,  generally  contain  various  ferments,  which
are  maintained  in  their  relative  proportions,  or  very  nearly  so,
by  the  uniform  conditions  under  which  work  is  carried  on  in  a
brewery;  but  these  proportions,  it  is  obvious,  might  be  very
seriously  afiected  by  any  radical  change  in  the  conditions  of
growth.


235


CHAPTER   YI.

THE    PHYSIOLOGICAL   THEORY    OF    FERMENTATION.

§  I. — On  the  Relations  existing  between  Oxygen  and

Yeast.

The  object  of  all  science  is  a  continuous  reduction  of  the
number  of  unexplained  pbenomena.  It  is  observed,  for  in-
stance, that  fleshy  fruits  are  not  liable  to  fermentation  so  long
as  their  epidermis  remains  uninjured.  On  the  other  hand,
they  ferment  very  readily  when  they  are  piled  up  in  heaps,
more  or  less  open,  and  immersed  in  their  saccharine  juice.  The
mass  becomes  heated  and  swells  ;  carbonic  acid  gas  is  disen-
gaged, and  the  sugar  disappears  and  is  replaced  by  alcohol.
Now,  as  to  the  question  of  the  origin  of  these  spontaneous
phenomena,  so  remarkable  in  character  as  well  as  usefulness
for  man's  service,  modern  knowledge  has  taught  us  that  fermen-
tation is  the  consequence  of  a  development  of  vegetable  cells,
the  germs  of  which  do  not  exist  in  the  saccharine  juices  within
fruits ;  that  many  varieties  of  these  cellular  plants  exist,  each
giving  rise  to  its  own  particular  fermentation.  The  principal
products  of  these  various  fermentations,  although  resembling
each  other  in  their  nature,  differ  in  their  relative  proportions
and  in  the  accessory  substances  that  accompany  them,  a  fact
which  alone  is  sufficient  to  account  for  wide  differences  in  the
quality  and  commercial  value  of  alcoholic  beverages.

Now  that  the  discovery  of  ferments  and  their  living  nature,
and  our  knowledge  of  their  origin,  may  have  solved  the
mystery  of  the  spontaneous   appearance   of    fermentations   in


236  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

natural  saccharine  juices,  we  may  ask  whether  we  must  still
regard  the  reactions  that  occur  in  these  fermentations  as  phe-
nomena inexplicable  by  the  ordinary  laws  of  chemistry.  We
can  readily  see  that  fermentations  occupy  a  special  place  in  the
series  of  chemical  and  biological  phenomena.  What  gives  to
fermentations  certain  exceptional  characters,  of  which  we  are
only  now  beginning  to  suspect  the  causes,  is  the  mode  of  life
in  the  minute  plants  designated  under  the  generic  name  of
ferments,  a  mode  of  life  which  is  essentially  diflferent  from  that
in  other  vegetables,  and  from  which  result  phenomena  equally
exceptional  throughout  the  whole  range  of  the  chemistry  of
livinw  beings.

The  least  reflection  will  suffice  to  convince  us  that  the
alcoholic  ferments  must  possess  the  faculty  of  vegetating  and
performing  their  functions  out  of  contact  with  air.  Let  us
consider,  for  instance,  the  method  of  vintage  practised  in  the
Jura.  The  bunches  are  laid  at  the  foot  of  the  vine  in  a  large
tub,  and  the  grapes  there  stripped  from  them.  When  the
grapes,  some  of  which  are  uninjured,  others  bruised,  and  all
moistened  by  the  juice  issuing  from  the  latter,  fill  the  tub —
where  they  form  what  is  commonly  called  the  vintage — they
are  conveyed  in  barrels  to  large  vessels  fixed  in  cellars  of  a
considerable  depth.  These  vessels  are  not  filled  to  more  than
three-quarters  of  their  capacity.  Fermentation  soon  takes
place  in  them,  and  the  carbonic  acid  gas  finds  escape  through
the  bunghole,  the  diameter  of  which,  in  the  case  of  the  largest
vessels,  is  not  more  than  ten  or  twelve  centimetres  (about
four  inches).  The  wine  is  not  drawn  off  before  the  end  of  two
or  three  months.  In  this  way  it  seems  highly  probable  that
the  yeast  which  produces  the  wine  under  such  conditions  must
have  developed,  to  a  great  extent  at  least,  out  of  contact  with
oxygen.  No  doubt  oxygen  is  not  entirely  absent  from  the
first ;  nay,  its  limited  presence  is  even  a  necessity  to  the
manifestation  of  the  phenomena  which  follow.  The  grapes  are
stripped  from  the  bunch  in  contact  with  air,  and  the  must
which  drops  from  the  wounded  fruit  takes  a  little  of  this  gas


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.  237

into  solution.  This  small  quantity  of  air  so  introduced  into  the
must,  at  the  commencement  of  operations,  plays  a  most  indis-
pensable part,  it  being  from  the  presence  of  this  that  the  spores
of  ferments  which  are  spread  over  the  surface  of  the  grapes  and
the  woody  part  of  the  bunches  derive  the  power  of  starting
their  vital  phenomena.*  This  air,  however,  especially  when
the  grapes  have  been  stripped  from  the  bunches,  is  in  such
small  proportion,  and  that  which  is  in  contact  with  the  liquid
mass  is  so  promptly  expelled  by  the  carbonic  acid  gas,  which  is
evolved  as  soon  as  a  little  yeast  has  formed,  that  it  will  readily
be  admitted  that  most  of  the  yeast  is  produced  apart  from  the
influence  of  oxygen,  whether  free  or  in  solution.  We  shall
revert  to  this  fact,  which  is  of  great  importance.  At  present
we  are  only  concerned  in  pointing  out  that,  from  the  mere
knowledge  of  the  practices  of  certain  localities,  we  are  induced
to  believe  that  the  cells  of  yeast,  after  they  have  developed  from
their  spores,  continue  to  live  and  multiply  without  the  inter-
vention of  oxygen,  and  that  the  alcoholic  ferments  have  a  mode
of  life  which  is  probably  quite  exceptional,  since  it  is  not
generally  met  with   in  other  species,  vegetable  or  animal.

Another  equally  exceptional  characteristic  of  yeast  and
fermentation  in  general  consists  in  the  small  proportion  which
the  yeast  that  forms  bears  to  the  sugar  that  decomposes.  In
all  other  known  beings  the  weight  of  nutritive  matter  assi-
milated corresponds  with  the  weight  of  food  used  up,  any
difference  that  may  exist  being  comparatively  small.  The  life
of  yeast  is  entirely  different.  For  a  certain  weight  of  j^east
formed,  we  may  have  ten  times,  twenty  times,  a  hundred  times
as  much  sugar,  or  even  more  decomposed,  as  we  shall  experi-
mentally prove  by-and-bye  ;   that   is  to  say,  that  whilst  the

*  It  has  been  remarked  in  practice  that  fermentation  is  facilitated  by
leaving  the  grapes  on  the  bunches.  The  reason  of  this  has  not  yet  been
discovered.  Still  we  have  no  doubt  that  it  may  be  attributed,  principally,
to  the  fact  that  the  interstices  between  the  grapes,  and  the  spaces  which
the  bunch  leaves  throughout,  considerably  increase  the  volume  of  air
placed  at  the  service  of  the  germs  of  ferment.


'  238  STUDIES    ox    FERMENTATION.

proportion  varies  in  a  precise  manner,  according  to  conditions
which  we  shall  have  occasion  to  specify,  it  is  also  greatly  out
of  proportion  to  the  weight  of  the  yeast.  We  repeat,  the  life
of  no  other  being,  under  its  normal  physiological  conditions,
can  show  anything  similar.  The  alcoholic  ferments,  therefore,
present  themselves  to  us  as  plants  which  possess  at  least  two
singular  properties  :  they  can  live  without  air,  that  is,  without
oxygen,  and  they  can  cause  decomposition  to  an  amount  which,
though  variable,  yet,  as  estimated  by  weight  of  product  formed,
is  out  of  all  proportion  to  the  weight  of  their  own  substance.
These  are  facts  of  so  great  importance,  and  so  intimately
connected  with  the  theory  of  fermentation,  that  it  is  indis-
pensable to  endeavour  to  establish  them  experimentally,  with
all  the  exactness  of  which  they  will  admit.

The  question  before  us  is  whether  yeast  is  in  reality  an  anaero-
bian  plant,  and  what  quantities  of  sugar  it  may  cause  to  ferment,
under  the  various  conditions  under  which  we  cause  it  to  act.

The  following  experiments  were  undertaken  to  solve  this  double
problem  : — We  took  a  double-necked  flask,  of  three  litres  (five
pints)  capacity,  one  of  the  tubes  being  curved  and  forming  an
escape  for  the  gas ;  the  other  one,  on  the  right  hand  side
(Fig.  59),  being  furnished  with  a  glass  tap.  We  filled  this
flask  with  pure  yeast-water,  sweetened  with  5  per  cent,  of
sugar  candy,  the  flask  being  so  full  that  there  was  not  the  least
trace  of  air  remaining  above  the  tap  or  in  the  escape  tube  ;  this
artificial  wort  had,  however,  been  itself  aerated.  The  curved
tube  was  plunged  in  a  porcelain  vessel  full  of  mercury,  resting
on  a  firm  support.  In  the  small  cylindrical  funnel  above  the
tap,  the  capacity  of  which  was  from  10  c.c.  to  15  c.c.  (about
half  a  fluid  ounce)  we  caused  to  ferment,  at  a  temperature  of
20°  or  25°  C.  (about  75°  F.),  five  or  six  cubic  centimetres  of  the
saccharine  liquid,  by  means  of  a  trace  of  yeast,  which  mul-
tiplied rapidly,  causing  fermentation,  and  forming  a  slight
deposit  of  yeast  at  the  bottom  of  the  funnel  above  the  tap.  We
then  opened  the  tap,  and  some  of  the  liquid  in  the  funnel
entered  the  flask,  carrying  with  it  the  small  deposit  of  yeast.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


239


which  was  sufficient  to  impregnate  the  saccharine  liquid  con-
tained in  the  flask.  In  this  manner  it  is  possible  to  introduce
as  small  a  quantity  of  yeast  as  we  wish,  a  quantity  the  weight
of  which,  we  may  say,  is  hardly  appreciable.  The  yeast  sown
multiplies  rapidly  and  produces  fermentation,  the  carbonic  acid
gas  from  which  is  expelled  into  the  mercury.  In  less  than
twelve  days  all  the  sugar  had  disappeared,  and  the  fermentation
had  finished.  There  was  a  sensible  deposit  of  yeast  adhering
to  the  sides  of  the  flask  ;  collected  and  dried  it  weighed  2*25
grammes  (34  grains).  It  is  evident  that  in  this  experiment  the
total  amount  of  yeast  formed,  if  it  required  oxygen  to  enable  it
to  live,  could  not  have  absorbed,  at  most,  more  than  the  volume
which  was  originally  held  in  solution  in  the  saccharine  liquid,
when  that  was  exposed  to  the  air  before  being  introduced  into
the  flask.


Fig.  59.


Some  exact  experiments  conducted  by  M.  Raulin  in  our
laboratory  have  established  the  fact  that  saccharine  worts,  like
water,   soon  become  saturated  when  shaken  briskly  with    an


B40


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


excess  of  air,  and  also  that  they  always  take  into  solution  a  little
less  air  than  saturated  pure  water  contains  under  the  same  con-
ditions of  temperature  and  pressure.  At  a  temperature  of  25°  C.
(77°  F.)  therefore,  if  we  adopt  the  coefficient  of  the  solubility  of
oxygen  in  water  given  in  Bunsen's  tables,  we  find  that  1  litre
(If  pints)  of  water  saturated  with  air  contains  5"5  c.c.  (0'3  cubic
inch)  of  oxygen.  The  three  litres  of  yeast-water  in  the  flask,
supposing  it  to  have  been  saturated,  contained  less  than  16.5  c.c.
(1  cubic  inch)  of  oxygen,  or,  in  weight,  less  than  23  milli-
grammes (0"35  grains).  This  was  the  maximum  amount  of
oxygen,  supposing  the  greatest  possible  quantity  to  have  been
absorbed,  that  was  required  by  the  yeast  formed  in  the  fermenta-
tion of  150  grammes  (4"8  Troy  ounces)  of  sugar.  We  shall
better  understand  the  significance  of  this  result  later  on.  Let  us
repeat  the  foregoing  experiment,  but  under  altered  conditions.
Let  us  fill,  as  before,  our  flask  with  sweetened  yeast- water,  but
let  this  be  first  boiled,  so  as  to  expel  all  the  air  it  contains.  To
efiect  this  we  arrange  our  apparatus  as  represented  in  the
accompanying  sketch  (Fig.   60).     "We  place  our  flask.  A,  on  a


Fig.  60.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


241


tripod  above  a  gas  flame,  and  in  place  of  the  vessel  of  mer-
cury substitute  a  porcelain  dish,  under  which  we  can  put  a
gas  flame,  and  which  contains  some  fermentable,  saccharine
liquid,  similar  to  that  with  which  the  flask  is  filled.  We  boil
the  liquid  in  the  flask  and  that  in  the  basin  simultaneously,  and
then  let  them  cool  down  together,  so  that  as  the  liquid  in  the
flask  cools  some  of  the  liquid  is  sucked  from  the  basin  into  the
flask.  From  a  trial  experiment  which  we  conducted,  determin-
ing the  quantity  of  oxygen  that  remained  in  solution  in  the
liquid  after  cooling,  according  to  M.  Schiitzenberger's  valuable
method,  by  means  of  hydrosulphite  of  soda,*  we  found  that  the
three  litres  in  the  flask,  treated  as  we  have  described,  contained
less  than  one  milligramme  (O'Olo  grain)  of  oxygen.  At  the
same  time  we  conducted  another  experiment,  by  way  of  com-
parison (Fig.  61).     We  took  a  flask,  B,  of  larger  capacity  than


Tig.  61.

the  former  one,  which  we  filled  about  half  with  the  same
volume  as  before  of  a  saccharine  liquid  of  identically  the  same
composition.  This  liquid  had  been  previously  freed  from
alterative  germs  by  boiling.  In  the  funnel  surmounting  A,  we
put  a  few  cubic  centimetres  of  saccharine  liquid  in  a  state  of

*  [NaH  SO^iTiow  called  Sodium  Jit/j^osuJphite.  See  p.  355,  footnote. — D.C.E.]

K


242


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


fermentation,  and  when  this  small  quantity  of  liquid  was  in  full
fermentation,  and  the  yeast  in  it  was  young  and  vigorous,  we
opened  the  tap,  closing  it  again  immediately,  so  that  a  little  of
the  liquid  and  yeast  still  remained  in  the  funnel.  By  this
means  wc  caused  the  liquid  in  A  to  ferment.  We  also  impreg-
nated the  liquid  in  B  with  some  yeast  taken  from  the  funnel  of
A.  We  then  replaced  the  porcelain  dish  in  which  the  curved
escape  tube  of  A  had  been  plunged,  by  a  vessel  filled  with
mercury.

The  following  is  a  descrij)tion  of  two  of  these  comparative
fermentations  and  the  results  they  gave.

The  fermentable  liquid  was  composed  of  yeast- water  sweetened
with  5  per  cent,  of  sugar-candy  ;  the  ferment  employed  was
saccharomyces  pastorianus.

The  impregnation  took  place  on  January  20th.  The  flasks
were  placed  in  an  oven  at  25°  C.  (77°  F.).


Flask  B,  with  air.

January  21st. — A  sensi-
ble development  of  yeast.

The  following  days,
fermentation  was  active,
and  there  was  an  abun-
dant froth  on  the  surface
of  the  liquid.

February  1st.  —  All
symptoms  of  fermenta-
tion had  ceased.


Flash  A,  without  air.

January  21st. — Fermentation  commenced  ;
a  little  frothy  liquid  issued  from  the  escape-
tube  and  covered  the  mercury.

The  following  days,  fermentation  was
active.  Examining  the  yeast  mixed  with  the
froth  that  was  expelled  into  the  mercury
by  the  evolution  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  we
found  that  it  was  very  fine,  young,  and
actively  budding.

February  3rd. — Fermentation  still  con-
tinued, showing  itself  by  a  number  of  little
bubbles  rising  from  the  bottom  of  the  liquid,
which  had  settled  bright.  The  yeast  was  at
the  bottom  in  the  form  of  a  deposit.

February  7th.  —  Fermentation  still  con-
tinued, but  very  languidly.

February  9th.— A  very  languid  fermen-
tation still  went  on,  discernible  in  little
bubbles  rising  from  the  bottom  of  the  flask.

As  the  fermentation  in  A  would  have  continued  for  a  long
time,  being  so  very  languid,  and  as  that  in  B  had  been  finished
for  several  days,  we  brought  to  a  close  our  two  experiments  on


STUDIES   OX    FERMENTATION.  243

February  9th.  To  do  this  we  poured  oif  the  liquids  in  A  and
B,  collecting  the  j^easts  on  tared  filters.  Filtration  was  an
easy  matter,  more  especially  in  the  case  of  A.  Examining  the
yeasts  under  the  microscope,  immediately  after  decantation,  we
found  that  both  of  them  remained  very  pure.  The  yeast  in  A
was  in  little  clusters,  the  globules  of  which  were  collected
together,  and  appeared  by  their  well  defined  borders  to  be
ready  for  an  easy  revival  in  contact  with  air.

As  might  have  been  expected,  the  liquid  in  the  flask  B
did  not  contain  the  least  trace  of  sugar;  that  in  the  flask  A
still  contained  some,  as  was  evident  from  the  non-completion  of
fermentation,  but  not  more  than  4'6  grammes  (71  grains).
Now,  as  each  flask  originally  contained  3  litres  of  liquid,
holding  in  solution  5  per  cent,  of  sugar,  it  follows  that  150
grammes  (2,310  grains)  of  sugar  had  fermented  in  the  flask
B,  and  145-4  grammes  (2,239"2  grains)  in  the  flask  A,  The
weights  of  yeast  after  drying  at  100°  C.  (212°  F.)  were—

For  the  flask  B,  with  air  . .  1'970  grammes  (30'4  grains).
For  the  flask  A,  without  air    .  .      1"368  grammes.*

The  proportions  were  1  of  yeast  to  76  of  fermented  sugar  in  the

first  case,  and  1  of  yeast  to  89  of  fermented  sugar  in  the  second.

From  these  facts  the  following  consequences  may  be  deduced  :

1.  The  fermentable  liquid  (flask  B),  which  since  it  had  been
In  contact  with  air,  necessarily  held  air  In  solution,  although
not  to  the  point  of  saturation,  inasmuch  as  It  had  been  once
boiled  to  free  it  from  all  foreign  germs,  furnished  a  weight
of  yeast  sensibly  greater  than  that  yielded  by  the  liquid  which
contained  no  air  at  all  (flask  A),  or,  at  least,  which  could  only
have  contained  an  exceedingly  minute  quantity.

2.  This  same  slightly  aerated  fermentable  liquid  fermented
much  more  rapidly  than  the  other.  In  eight  or  ten  days  it
contained  no  more  sugar ;  while  the  other,  after  twenty  days,
still  contained  an  appreciable  quantity.

Is  this  last  fact  to  be  explained  by  the  greater  quantity  of

*  [This  appears  to  be  a  misprint  fori '638  grarames=25'3  grains. — D.C.  E.]

R   2


244  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

yeast  formed  in  B  ?  By  no  means.  At  first,  when  the  air  has
access  to  the  liquid,  much  yeast  is  formed  and  little  sugar
disappears,  as  we  shall  prove  immediately  ;  nevertheless  the
yeast  formed  in  contact  with  the  air  is  more  active  than  the
other,  fermentation  is  correlative,  first  to  the  development  of
the  globules,  and  then  to  the  continued  life  of  those  globules
once  formed.  The  more  oxygen  these  last  globules  have  at
their  disposal  during  their  formation,  the  more  vigorous,  trans-
parent, and  turgescent,  and,  as  a  consequence  of  this  last
quality,  the  more  active  they  are  in  decomposing  sugar.  We
shall  revert  hereafter  to  these  facts.

3.  In  the  airless  flask  the  proportion  of  yeast  to  sugar  was
■g'-y  ;  it  was  only  y'^  in  the  flask  which  had  air  at  first.

The  proportion  that  the  weight  of  yeast  formed  bears  to  the
weight  of  the  sugar  is,  therefore,  variable,  and  this  variation
depends,  to  a  certain  extent,  upon  the  presence  of  air  and  the
possibility  of  oxygen  being  absorbed  by  the  yeast.  We  shall
presently  show  that  yeast  possesses  the  power  of  absorbing  that
gas  and  emitting  carbonic  acid,  like  ordinary  fungi,  that  even
oxygen  may  be  reckoned  amongst  the  number  of  food-stuffs  that
may  be  assimilated  by  this  plant,  and  that  this  fixation  of
oxygen  in  yeast,  as  well  as  the  oxidations  resulting  from  it,
have  the  most  marked  effect  on  the  life  of  yeast,  on  the  multi-
plication of  its  cells,  and  on  their  activity  as  ferments  acting
upon  sugar,  whether  immediately  or  afterwards,  apart  from
supplies  of  oxygen  or  air.

In  the  preceding  experiment,  conducted  without  the  presence
of  air,  there  is  one  circumstance  particularly  worthy  of  notice.
This  experiment  succeeds,  that  is  to  say,  the  yeast  sown  in  the
medium  deprived  of  oxygen  develops,  only  when  this  yeast
is  in  a  state  of  great  vigour.  We  have  already  explained  the
meaning  of  this  last  expression.  But  we  wish  now  to  cull
attention  to  a  very  evident  fact  in  connection  with  this  point.
We  impregnate  a  fermentable  liquid ;  yeast  develops  and
fermentation  appears.  This  lasts  for  several  days  and  then
ceases.     Let  us  suppose  that,  from  the  day  when  fermentation


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  245

first  appears  in  the  production  of  a  minute  froth,  which
gradually  increases  till  it  whitens  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  we
take,  every  twentj'-four  hours,  or  at  longer  intervals,  a  trace  of
the  yeast  deposited  on  the  bottom  of  the  vessel  and  use  it
for  starting  fresh  fermentations.  Conducting  these  fermenta-
tions all  under  precisely  the  same  conditions  of  temperature,
character,  and  volume  of  liquid,  let  us  continue  this  for  a
prolonged  time,  even  after  the  original  fermentation  is  finished.
We  shall  have  no  difilculty  in  seeing  that  the  first  signs  of
action  in  each  of  our  series  of  second  fermentations  appear
always  later  and  later  in  proportion  to  the  length  of  time
that  has  elapsed  from  the  commencement  of  the  original  fer-
mentation. In  other  words,  the  time  necessary  for  the  develop-
ment of  the  germs  and  the  production  of  that  amount  of  yeast
sufficient  to  cause  the  first  appearance  of  fermentation  varies
with  the  state  of  the  impregnating  cells,  and  is  longer  in
proportion  as  the  cells  are  further  removed  from  the  period  of
their  formation.  It  is  essential,  in  experiments  of  this  kind,
that  the  quantities  of  yeast  successively  taken  should  be  as
nearly  as  possible  equal  in  weight  or  volume,  since,  ceteris
paribus,  fermentations  manifest  themselves  more  quickly  the
larger  the  quantity  of  yeast  employed  in  impregnation.

If  we  compare  under  the  microscope  the  appearance  and
character  of  the  successive  quantities  of  yeast  taken,  we  shall
see  plainly  that  the  structure  of  the  cells  undergoes  a  pro-
gressive change.  The  first  sample  which  we  take,  quite  at  the
beginning  of  the  original  fermentation,  generally  gives  us  cells
rather  larger  than  those  later  on,  and  possessing  a  remarkable
tenderness.  Their  walls  are  extremely  thin,  the  consistency
and  softness  of  their  protoplasm  is  akin  to  fluidity,  and  their
granular  contents  appear  in  the  form  of  scarcely  visible  spots.
The  borders  of  the  cells  soon  become  more  marked,  a  proof
that  their  walls  undergo  a  thickening  ;  their  protoplasm  also
becomes  denser,  and  the  granulations  more  distinct.  Cells  of
the  same  organ,  in  the  states  of  infancy  and  old  age,  should  not
differ  more  than  the  cells  of  which  we  are   speaking,   taken


246  STUDIES    ox    FEKMEXTATIOX.

in  their  extreme  states.  The  progressive  changes  in  the  cells,
after  they  have  acquired  their  normal  form  and  volume,  clearly
demonstrate  the  existence  of  a  chemical  work  of  a  remarkable
intensity,  during  which  their  weight  increases,  although  in  vo-
lume they  undergo  no  sensible  change,  a  fact  that  we  have  often
characterized  as  "  the  continued  life  of  cells  already  formed."
"\Ve  may  call  this  work  a  process  of  maturation  on  the  part  of
the  cells,  almost  the  same  that  we  see  going  on  in  the  case
of  adult  beings  in  general,  which  continue  to  live  for  a  long
time,  even  after  they  have  become  incapable  of  reproduction,
and  long  after  their  volume  has  become  permanently  fixed.

This  being  so  it  is  evident,  we  repeat,  that,  to  multiply  in  a
fermentable  medium,  quite  out  of  contact  with  oxygen,  the  cells
of  yeast  must  be  extremely  young,  full  of  life  and  health,  and
still  under  the  influence  of  the  vital  activity  which  they  owe  to
the  free  oxygen  which  has  served  to  form  them,  and  which  they
have  perhaps  stored  up  for  a  time.  When  older,  they  repro-
duce themselves  with  much  difficulty  when  deprived  of  air,  and
gradually  become  more  languid  ;  and  if  they  do  multiply,  it  is
in  strange  and  monstrous  forms.  A  little  older  still,  they
remain  absolutely  inert  in  a  medium  deprived  of  free  oxygen.
This  is  not  because  the}'^  are  dead ;  for  in  general  they  may  be
revived  in  a  marvellous  manner  in  the  same  liquid  if  it  has  been
first  aerated  before  they  are  sown.  It  would  not  surprise  us  to
learn  that  at  this  point  certain  preconceived  ideas  suggest  them-
selves to  the  mind  of  an  attentive  reader  on  the  subject  of  the
causes  that  may  serve  to  account  for  such  strange  phenomena  in
the  life  of  these  beings  which  our  ignorance  hides  under  the
expressions  of  youth  and  age ;  this,  however,  is  a  subject  that
we  cannot  pause  to  consider  here.

At  this  point  we  must  observe — for  it  is  a  matter  of  great  im-
portance— that,  in  the  operations  of  the  brewer  there  is  always  a
time  when  the  yeasts  are  in  this  state  of  vigorous  youth  of
which  we  have  been  speaking,  acquired  under  the  influence  of
free  oxygen,  since  all  the  worts  and  all  the  yeasts  of  commerce
are  necessarily  manipulated  in  contact  with  air,  and  so  impreg-


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  247

nated  more  or  less  with  oxygen.  The  yeast  immediately  seizes
upon  this  gas  and  acquires  a  state  of  freshness  and  activity,  which
permits  it  to  live  afterwards  out  of  contact  with  air,  and  to  act  as
a  ferment.  Thus,  in  ordinary  brewery  practice,  we  find  the  yeast
already  formed  in  abundance  even  before  the  earliest  external
signs  of  fermentation  have  made  their  appearance.  In  this  first
phase  of  its  existence,  yeast  lives  chiefly  like  an  ordinary  fungus.

From  the  same  circumstances  it  is  clear  that  the  brewer's
fermentations  may,  speaking  quite  strictly,  last  for  an  indefinite
time,  in  consequence  of  the  unceasing  supply  of  fresh  wort,  and
from  the  fact,  moreover,  that  the  exterior  air  is  constantly  being
introduced  during  the  work,  and  that  the  air  contained  in  the
fresh  worts  keeps  up  the  vital  activity  of  the  yeast,  as  the  act  of
breathing  keeps  up  the  vigour  and  life  of  cells  in  all  living
beings.  If  the  air  could  not  renew  itself  in  any  way,  the  vital
activity  which  the  cells  originally  received,  under  its  influence,
would  become  more  and  more  exhausted,  and  the  fermentation
eventually  come  to  an  end.

We  may  recount  one  of  the  results  obtained  in  other  experi-
ments similar  to  the  last,  in  which,  however,  we  employed  j^east
which  was  still  older  than  that  used  for  our  experiment  with
flask  A  (Fig.  60),  and  moreover  took  still  greater  precautions  to
prevent  the  presence  of  air.  Instead  of  leaving  the  flask,  as
well  as  the  dish,  to  cool  slowly,  after  having  expelled  all  air  by
boiling,  we  permitted  the  liquid  in  the  dish  to  continue  boiling
whilst  the  flask  was  being  cooled  by  artificial  means  ;  the  end  of
the  escape  tube  was  then  taken  out  of  the  still  boiling  dish  and
plunged  into  the  mercury  trough.  In  impregnating  the  liquid,
instead  of  employing  the  contents  of  tlie  small  cylindrical  funnel
whilst  still  in  a  state  of  fermentation,  we  waited  until  this  was
finished.  Under  these  conditions,  fermentation  was  still  going
on  in  our  flask,  after  a  lapse  of  three  months.  We  stopped  it
and  found  that  0-255  gramme  (3-9  grains)  of  yeast  had  been
formed,  and  that  45  grammes  (693  grains)  of  sugar  had
fermented,  the  ratio  between   the  weights  of  yeast  and  sugar

0*255  1

being    thus    = .     In  this  experiment  the  yeast  de-

45  176


248  STUDIES    ox    FERMENTATIOX

veloped  with  much  difficulty,  by  reason  of  the  conditions  to  which
it  had  been  subjected.  In  appearance  the  cells  varied  much,  some
were  to  be  found  large,  elongated,  and  of  tubular  aspect,  some
seemed  very  old  and  were  extremely  granular,  whilst  others  were
more  transparent.  All  of  them  might  be  considered  abnormal  cells.

In  such  experiments  we  encounter  another  difficulty.  If  the
yeast  sown  in  the  non -aerated  fermentable  liquid  is  in  the  least
degree  impure,  especially  if  we  use  sweetened  yeast-water,  we
may  be  sure  that  alcoholic  fermentation  will  soon  cease,  if,
indeed,  it  ever  commences,  and  that  accessory  fermentations  will
go  on.  The  vibrios  of  butyric  fermentation,  for  instance,  will
propagate  with  remarkable  facility  under  these  circumstances.
Clearly  then,  the  purity  of  the  yeast  at  the  moment  of  impreg-
nation, and  the  purity  of  the  liquid  in  the  funnel,  are  conditions
indispensable  to  success.

To  secure  the  latter  of  these  conditions,  we  close  the  funnel,
as  shown  in  Fig.  60,  by  means  of  a  cork  pierced  with  two  holes,
through  one  of  which  a  short  tube  passes,  to  which  a  short
length  of  india-rubber  tubing  provided  with  a  glass  stopper  is
attached;  through  the  other  hole  a  thin  cui^ved  tube  is  passed.
Thus  fitted,  the  funnel  can  answer  the  same  purposes  as  our
double-necked  flasks.  A  few  cubic  centimetres  of  sweetened
veast- water  are  then  put  in  it  and  boiled,  so  that  the  steam  may
destroy  any  germs  adhering  to  the  sides.  When  cold  the  liquid
is  impregnated  by  means  of  a  trace  of  pure  yeast,  introduced
through  the  glass-stoppered  tube.  If  these  precautions  are
neglected  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  secure  a  successful  fermenta-
tion in  our  flasks,  because  the  yeast  sown  is  immediately  held  in
check  by  a  development  of  anaerobian  vibrios.  For  greater
security,  we  may  add  to  the  fermentable  liquid,  at  the  moment
when  it  is  prepared,  a  very  small  quantity  of  tartaric  acid,
which  will  prevent  the  development  of  but3'ric  vibrios.

The  variation  of  the  ratio  between  the  weight  of  the  yeast
and  that  of  the  sugar  decomposed  by  it  now  claims  special  atten-
tion. Side  by  side  with  the  experiments  which  we  have  just
described,  we  conducted  a  third  lot  by  means  of  the  flask  C


STUPIES   ON    FERMENTATTOS.


249


(Fig.  62),  liolding  4-7  litres  (8^  pints),  and  fitted  up  like  the
usual  two-necked  flasks,  with  the  object  of  freeing  the  ferment-
able liquid  from  foreign  germs,  by  boiling  it  to  begin  with,  so


Fig.  62.

that  we  might  carry  on  our  work   under  conditions   of  purity.
The  volume  of  yeast-water  (containing  5  per  cent,  of  sugar)  was
only  200  c.c.  (7  fl.  oz.),  and  consequently,  taking  into   account
the  capacity  of  the  flask,  it  formed  but  a  very  thin  layer  at  the
bottom.     On   the   day  after  impregnation  the  deposit  of  yeast
was  already  considerable,  and  forty-eight  hours  afterwards  the
fermentation  was  completed.     On  the  third  day    we  collected
the  yeast,  after  having  analyzed  the  gas  contained  in  the  flask.
This  analysis  was  easily  accomplished  by  placing  the  flask  in  a
hot-water  bath,  whilst  the  end  of  the  curved  tube  was  plunged
under  a  cylinder  of  mercury.     The  gas  contained  41*4  per  cent,
of  carbonic  acid,  and,  after  the  absorption,  the  remaining  air
contained —

Oxygen        .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19  7

Nitrogen 80-3

1000
Taking  into  consideration  the  volume  of  the  flask,  this  shows  a
minimum  of  50  c.c.    (3"05  cub.  in.)  of  oxygen  to  have   been


250  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

absorbed  by  the  yeast.     The  liquid  contained  no  more  sugar,

and  the  weight  of  the  yeast,  dried  at  a  temperature  of  100°  C.

(212°  F.),  Avas  0'44  gramme  (6'8  grains).     The  ratio  between

the  weight  of  the  yeast  and  that  of  the   sugar  was,  therefore,

044  1  .  .

"^L-^  =  K-y^-     On   this  occasion,  where  we  had  increased  the

quantity  of  oxygen  held  in  solution,  so  as  to  yield  itself  for
assimilation  at  the  beginning  and  during  the  earlier  develop-
ments of  the  yeast,  we  found  instead  of  the   previous   ratio   of

i^r-.  that  of  7^.
76  23

The  next  experiment  was  to  increase  the  proportion  of  oxj'gen
to  a  still  greater  extent,  by  rendering  the  diffusion  of  gas  a  more
easy  matter  than  it  is  in  a  flask,  the  air  in  which  is  in  a  state  of
perfect  quiescence.  Such  a  state  of  matters  hinders  the  supply
of  oxygen,  inasmuch  as  the  carbonic  acid,  as  soon  as  it  is
liberated,  at  once  forms  an  immovable  layer  on  the  surface  of
the  liquid,  and  so  separates  off  the  oxygen.  To  effect  the  pur-
pose of  our  present  experiment,  we  used  flat  basins  having  glass
bottoms  and  low  sides,  also  of  glass,  in  which  the  depth  of  the
liquid  is  not  more  than  a  few  millimetres  (less  than  ^-inch)
(Fig.   63).     The    following  is  one  of  our  experiments  so  con-


Fig.  63.

ducted: — On  April  16th,  1860,  we  sowed  a  trace  of  beer  yeast
("  high "  yeast)  in  200  c.c.  (7  fl.  oz.)  of  a  saccharine  liquid
containing  1-720  grammes  (26"2  grains)  of  sugar-candy.  From
April  18th  our  yeast  was  in  good  condition  and  well  developed.
"VYe  collected  it,  after  having  added  to  the  liquid  a  few  drops  of
concentrated  sulphuric  acid,  with  the  object  of  checking  the
fermentation  to  a  great  extent,  and  facilitating  filtration.  The
sugar  remaining  in  the  filtered  liquid,  determined  by  Fehling's

•  [200  c.c.  of  liquid  wei-e  used,  which,  as  containiug  5  per  cent.,  had  iu
solution  10  grammes  of  sugar. — D.  C.  E.]


STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATIOX.  251

solution,  sho^\-ed  that  1-04  grammes   (16  grains)   of  sugar  had

disappeared.    The  weight  of  the  yeast,  dried  at  100°  C.  (212°  F.),

was  0127  gramme  (2  grains),  which  gives  us  the  ratio  between

the    weight    of  the    yeast   and    that   of  the   fermented   sugar

0"127         1        •

=  b  1  >  which  is  considerably  higher  than  the  preceding

ones.

We  may  still  further  increase  this  ratio  by  making  our
estimation  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  impregnation,  or  the
addition  of  the  ferment.  It  will  be  readily  understood  why
yeast,  which  is  composed  of  cells  that  bud  and  subsequently
detach  themselves  from  one  another,  soon  forms  a  deposit  at  the
bottom  of  the  vessels.

In  consequence  of  this  habit  of  growth,  the  cells  constantly

covering  each  other  prevents  the  lower  layers  from  having  access

to  the  oxygen  held  in  solution  in  the  liquid,  which  is  absorbed

by    the    upper   ones.     Hence,    those    which   are    covered    and

deprived  of  this  gas  act  on  the  sugar  without  deriving  any  vital

benefit  from  the  oxygen — a  circumstance  which  must  tend  to

diminish    the    ratio  of  which  we   are    speaking.      Once  more

repeating  the  preceding  experiment,  but  stopping  it  as  soon  as  we

think  that  the  weight  of  yeast  formed  may  be  determined  by  the

balance  {we  find  that  this  may  be  done  twenty -four  hcu:"s  after

impregnation  with  an  inappreciable  quantity   of  yeast)  in  this

case   the    ratio    between    the    weights    of  yeast   and   sugar   is

0s'--024  yeast        1      ^,  .    .     ,     ,  .  ,  .      ,

Ao^  nno  =-,-     I  his  IS  the  highest  ratio  that  we  have  been

0^-098  sugar        4  °

able  to  obtain.

Under  these  conditions  the  fermentation  of  sugar  is  extremely
languid :  the  ratio  obtained  is  very  nearly  the  same  that  ordi-
nary fungoid  growths  would  give.  The  carbonic  acid  evolved
is  principally  formed  by  the  decompositions  which  result  from
the  assimilation  of  atmospheric  ox^'^gen.  The  yeast,  therefore,
lives  and  performs  its  functions  after  the  manner  of  ordinary
fungi  :  so  far  it  is  no  longer  a  ferment,  so  to  say  ;  moreover,
we  might  exptct  to  find  it  cease  to  be  a  ferment  at  all  if  we


252  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

could  only  surround  each  cell  separately  with  all  the  air  that  it
required.  This  is  what  the  preceding  phenomena  teach  us  ;  we
shall  have  occasion  to  compare  them  later  on  with  others  which
relate  to  the  vital  action  exercised  on  yeast  by  the  sugar  of  milk.

We  may  here  be  permitted  to  make  a  digression.

In  his  work  on  fermentations,  which  M.  Schiitzenberger  has
recently  published,  the  author  criticises  the  deductions  that  we
have  drawn  from  the  preceding  experiments,  and  combats  the
explanation  which  we  have  given  of  the  phenomena  of  fermen-
tation.* It  is  an  easy  matter  to  show  the  weak  point  of  M.
Schiitzenberger's  reasoning.  We  determined  the  power  of  the
ferment  by  the  relation  of  the  weight  of  sugar  decomposed  to
the  weight  of  yeast  produced.  M.  Schiitzenberger  asserts  that
in  doing  this  we  lay  down  a  doubtful  hypothesis,  and  he  thinks
that  this  power,  which  he  terms  fermentative  energy,  may  be
estimated  more  correctly  by  the  quantity  of  sugar  decomposed
by  the  unit-weight  of  yeast  in  unit-time  ;  moreover,  since  our
experiments  show  that  yeast  is  very  vigorous  when  it  has  a
sufficient  supply  of  oxj^gen,  and  that,  in  such  a  case,  it  can
decompose  much  sugar  in  a  little  time,  M.  Schiitzenberger  con-
cludes that  it  must  then  have  great  power  as  a  ferment,  even
greater  than  it  has  when  it  performs  its  functions  without  the  aid
of  air,  since  under  this  condition  it  decomposes  sugar  very  slowly.
In  short,  he  is  disposed  to  draw  from  our  observations  the  very
opposite  conclusion  to  that  which  we  arrived  at.

M.  Schiitzenberger  has  failed  to  notice  that  the  power  of  a
ferment  is  independent  of  the  time  during  which  it  performs  its
functions.  We  placed  a  trace  of  yeast  in  one  litre  of  saccharine
wort ;  it  propagated,  and  all  the  sugar  was  decomposed.  Now,
whether  the  chemical  action  involved  in  this  decomposition  of
sugar  had  required  for  its  completion  one  day,  or  one  month,  or
one  year,  such  a  factor  was  of  no  more  importance  in  this  matter
than  the  mechanical  labour  required  to  raise  a  ton  of  materials
from  the  ground  to  the  top  of  a  house  would  be  affected  by  the

*  [International  Science  Series,  vol.  xx.,  pp.  179-182.  London,  1876. —
D.  C.  E.]


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  253

fact  that  it  had  taken  twelve  hours  instead  of  one.  The  notion
of  time  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  definition  of  work.  M.
Schiitzenberger  has  not  perceived  that  in  introducing  the  con-
sideration of  time  into  the  definition  of  the  power  of  a  ferment,
he  must  introduce,  at  the  same  time,  that  of  the  vital  activity  of
the  cells,  which  is  independent  of  their  character  as  a  ferment.
Apart  from  the  consideration  of  the  relation  existing  between
the  weight  of  fermentable  substance  decomposed  and  that  of
ferment  produced,  there  is  no  occasion  to  speak  of  fermentations
or  of  ferments.  The  phenomena  of  fermentation  and  of  ferments
have  been  placed  apart  from  others,  precisely  because,  in  certain
chemical  actions,  that  ratio  has  been  out  of  proportion  ;  but  the
time  that  these  phenomena  require  for  their  accomplishment
has  nothing  to  do  either  with  their  existence  proper,  or  with
their  power.  The  cells  of  a  ferment  may,  under  some  circum-
stances, require  eight  days  for  revival  and  propagation,  whilst,
under  other  conditions,  only  a  few  hours  are  necessary  ;  so  that,
if  we  introduce  the  notion  of  time  into  our  estimate  of  their
power  of  decomposition,  we  may  be  led  to  conclude  that  in  the
first  case  that  power  was  entirely  wanting,  and  that  in  the
second  case  it  was  considerable,  although  all  the  time  we  are
dealing  with  the  same  organism — the  identical  ferment.

M.  Schiitzenberger  is  astonished  that  fermentation  can  take
place  in  the  presence  of  free  oxygen,  if,  as  we  suppose,  the
decomposition  of  the  sugar  is  the  consequence  of  the  nutrition
of  the  yeast,  at  the  expense  of  the  combined  oxygen,  which
yields  itself  to  the  ferment.  At  all  events,  he  argues,  fermen-
tation ought  to  be  slower  in  the  presence  of  free  oxygen.  But
why  should  it  be  slower  ?  We  have  proved  that  in  the  presence
of  oxygen  the  vital  activity  of  the  cells  increases,  so  that,
as  far  as  rapidity  of  action  is  concerned,  its  power  cannot  be
diminished.  It  might,  nevertheless,  be  weakened  as  a  ferment,
and  this  is  precisely  what  happens.  Free  oxygen  imparts  to
the  yeast  an  increased  vital  activity,  but  at  the  same  time
impairs  rapidly  its  power  as  yeast — quCt  yeast,  inasmuch  as
under  this  condition  it  approaches  the  state  in  which  it  can  carry


254  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

on  its  vital  processes  after  the  manner  of  an  ordinary  fungus ;  the
mode  of  life,  that  is,  in  which  the  ratio  between  the  weight  of
sugar  decomposed  and  the  weight  of  the  new  cells  produced  will
be  the  same  as  holds  generally  among  organisms  which  are  not
ferments.  In  short,  varying  our  form  of  expression  a  little,  we
may  conclude  with  perfect  truth,  from  the  sum  total  of  observed
facts,  that  the  yeast  which  lives  in  the  presence  of  oxygen  and
can  assimilate  as  much  of  that  gas  as  is  necessary  to  its  perfect
nutrition,  ceases  absolutely  to  be  a  ferment  at  all.  Nevertheless,
yeast  formed  under  these  conditions  and  subsequently  brought
into  the  presence  of  sugar,  out  of  the  influence  of  air,  would  de-
compose more  in  a  given  time  than  in  any  other  of  its  states.
The  reason  is  that  yeast  which  has  formed  in  contact  with  air,
having  the  maximum  of  free  oxygen  that  it  can  assimilate,  is
fresher  and  possessed  of  greater  vital  activity  than  that  which
has  been  formed  without  air  or  with  an  insufificiency  of  air.  M.
Schiitzenberger  would  associate  this  activity  with  the  notion
of  time  in  estimating  the  power  of  the  ferment ;  but  he  forgets
to  notice  that  yeast  can  only  manifest  this  maximum  of  energy
under  a  radical  change  of  its  life-conditions  ;  by  having  no
more  air  at  its  disposal  and  breathing  no  more  free  oxygen.
In  other  words,  when  its  respiratory  power  becomes  null,  its
fermentative  power  is  at  its  greatest.  M.  Schiitzenberger
asserts  exactly  the  opposite  (p.  151  of  his  work — Paris,  1875),*
and  so  gratuitously  places  himself  in  opposition  to  facts.
In    presence   of  abundant  air-supply,   yeast    vegetates  with


extraordinary   activity.     AVe   see   this  in  the  weight  of  new
yeast,  comparatively  large,  that  may  be  formed  in  the  course

*  Page  182,  English  edition.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  255

of  a  few  hours.  The  microscope  still  more  clearly  shows  this
activity  in  the  rapidity  of  budding,  and  the  fresh  and  active
appearance  of  all  the  cells.  Fig.  64  represents  the  yeast  of
our  last  experiment  at  the  moment  when  we  stopped  the
fermentation.  Nothing  has  been  taken  from  imagination,  all
the  groups  have  been  faithfully  sketched  as  they  were.*

In  passing  it  is  of  interest  to  note  how  promptly  the  preced-
ing results  were  turned  to  good  account  practically.  In  well-
managed  distilleries,  the  custom  of  aerating  the  wort  and  the
juices,  to  render  them  more  adapted  to  fermentation,  has  been
introduced.  The  molasses,  mixed  with  water,  is  permitted  to
run  in  thin  threads  through  the  air  at  the  moment  when  the
yeast  is  added.  Manufactories  have  been  erected,  in  which  the
manufacture  of  yeast  is  almost  exclusively  carried  on.  The
saccharine  worts,  after  the  addition  of  yeast,  are  left  to  them-
selves, in  contact  with  air,  in  shallow  vats  of  large  superficial
area,  realizing  thus  on  an  immense  scale  the  conditions  of  the
experiments  which  we  undertook  in  1861,  and  which  we  have
already  described  in  determining  the  rapid  and  eas}^  multiplica-
tion of  yeast  in  contact  with  air.

The  next  experiment  attempted  was  to  determine  the  volume
of  oxygen  absorbed  by  a  known  quantity  of  yeast,  the  yeast
living  in  contact  with  air,  and  under  such  conditions  that  the
absorption  of  air  was  comparatively  easy  and  abundant.

With  this  object  we  repeated  the  experiment  that  we
performed  with  the  large-bottomed  flask  (Fig.  62),  employing


Tig.  65.


a  vessel  shaped  like  Fig.  B.  (Fig.  65),  which   is,  in  point  of

*  This  figure  is  on  a  scale  of  300  diameters,  most  of  the  figures  in  this
work  being  of  400  diameters.


256  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

fact,  the  flask  A  with  its  neck  drawn  out  and  closed  in  a
flame,  after  the  introduction  of  a  thin  layer  of  some  saccharine
juice  impregnated  with  a  trace  of  pure  yeast.  The  following
are  the  data  and  results  of  an   experiment  of  this  kind.

We  employed  60  c.c.  (about  2  fluid  ounces)  of  yeast- water,
sweetened  with  2  per  cent,  of  sugar  and  impregnated  with
a  trace  of  yeast.  After  having  subjected  our  vessel  to  a
temperature  of  25°  C.  (77°  F.)  in  an  oven  for  fifteen  hours,
the  drawn-out  point  was  brought  under  an  inverted  jar  filled
with  mercury  and  the  point  broken  ofl".  A  portion  of  the  gas
escaped  and  was  collected  in  the  jar.

For  25  c.c.  of  this  gas  we  found,  after  absorption  by  potash,
20*6,  and  after  absorption  by  pyrogallic  acid,  17*3.  Taking
into  account  the  volume  which  remained  free  in  the  flask,
which  held  315  c.c,  there  was  a  total  absorption  of  14'5  c.c.
(0*88  cub.  in.)  of  oxygen.*  The  weight  of  yeast,  in  a  state
of  dryness,  was  0*035  gramme.

It  follows  that  in  the  production  of  35  milligrammes  (0*524
grain)  of  yeast  there  was  an  absorption  of  14  or  15  c.c.  (about
I  cubic  inch)  of  oxygen,  even  supposing  that  the  yeast  was
formed  entirely  under  the  influence  of  that  gas :  this  is  equiva-
lent to  not  less  than  414  c.c.  for  1  gramme  of  yeast  (or  about
33  cubic  inches  for  every  20  grains). f

*  [It  may  be  useful  for  the  non- scientific  reader  to  put  it  thus  : — that
the  25  c.c.  which  escaped,  being  a  fair  sample  of  the  whole  gas  in  the
flask,  and  containing  (1)  25  — 20-6  =  4-4  c.c,  absorbed  by  potash  and
therefore  due  to  carbonic  acid,  and  (2)  20'6— 17*3  =  3*3  c.c,  absorbed  by
pyrogallate,  and  therefore  due  to  oxygen,  and  the  remaining  17 "3  c.c.
being  nitrogen,  the  whole  gas  in  the  flask,  which  has  a  capacity  of  315  c.c,
will  contain  oxygen  in  the  above  jiroportion,  and  therefore  its  amount  may
be  determined,  provided  we  know  the  total  gas  in  the  flask  before  opening.
On  the  other  hand,  we  know  that  air  normally  contains,  approximately,
ith  its  volume  of  oxygen,  the  rest  being  nitrogen,  so  that,  by  ascertaining
the  diminution  of  the  proportion  in  the  flask,  we  can  find  how  many  cubic
centimetres  have  been  absorbed  by  the  yeast.  The  author,  however,
has  not  given  all  the  data  necessary  for  accurate  calculation. — D.C.R.]

t  This  number  is  probably  too  small ;  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  the
increase  of  weight  in  the  yeast,  even  under  the  exceptional  conditions  of


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  257

Such  is  the  large  volume  of  oxygen  necessary  for  the  develop-
ment of  one  gramme  of  yeast  when  the  plant  can  assimilate
this  gas  after  the  manner  of  an  ordinary  fungus.

Let  us  now  return  to  the  first  experiment  described  in  this
paragraph  (page  238),  in  which  a  flask  of  three  litres  capacity
was  filled  with  fermentable  liquid,  which,  when  caused  to  fer-
ment, yielded  2 '25  grammes  of  yeast,  under  circumstances  where
it  could  not  obtain  a  greater  supply  of  free  oxygen  than  16*5  c.c.
(about  one  cubic  inch).  According  to  what  we  have  just  stated,
if  this  2"25  grammes  (34  grains)  of  yeast  had  not  been  able  to
live  without  oxygen,  in  other  words,  if  the  original  cells  had
been  unable  to  multiply  otherwise  than  by  absorbing  free
oxygen,  the  amount  of  that  gas  required  could  not  have  been
less  than  2*25  x  414  c.c,  that  is,  931'5  c.c.  (56'85  cubic  inches).
The  greater  part  of  the  2-25  grammes,  therefore,  had  evidently
been  produced  as  the  growth  of  an  anaerobian  plant.

Ordinary  fungi  likewise  require  large  quantities  of  oxygen
for  their  development,  as  we  may  easily  prove  by  cultivating
any  mould  in  a  closed  vessel  full  of  air,  and  then  taking  the
weight  of  plant  formed  and  measuring  the  volume  of  oxygen
absorbed.  To  do  this,  we  take  a  flask  of  the  shape  shown  in
Fig.  66,  capable  of  holding  about  300  c.c.  (lOJ  fluid  ounces),
and  containing  a  liquid  adapted  to  the  life  of  moulds.  We
boil  this  liquid  and  seal  the  drawn-out  point,  after  the  steam
has  expelled  the  air  wholly  or  in  part ;  we  then  open  the  flask
in  a  garden  or  in  a  room.  Should  a  fungus- spore  enter  the  flask,
as  will  invariably  be  the  case  in  a  certain  number  of  flasks  out
of  several  used  in  the  experiment,  except  under  special  circum-
stances, it  will  develop  there  and  gradually  absorb  all  the
oxygen   contained   in    the    air  of  the    flask.       Measuring    the

the  experiment  described,  was  not  to  some  extent  at  least  due  to  oxida-
tion apart  from  free  oxygen,  inasmuch  as  some  of  the  cells  were  covered
by  others.  The  increased  weight  of  the  yeast  is  always  due  to  the  action
of  two  distinct  modes  of  vital  energy — activity,  namely,  in  presence  and
activity  in  absence  of  air.  We  might  endeavour  to  shorten  the  duration
of  the  experiment  still  further,  in  which  case  we  woiild  still  more  assimi-
late the  Life  of  the  yeast  to  that  of  ordinary  moulds.

S


258  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

volume  of  this  air,  and  weighing,  after  drying,  the  amount
of  plant  formed,  we  find  that  for  a  certain  quantity  of  oxygen
absorbed  we  have  a  certain  weight  of  mycelium,  or  of  mycelium
together  with  its  organs  of  fructification.     In  an  experiment  of


Tig.  66.

this  kind,  in  which  the  plant  was  weighed  a  year  after  its
development,  we  found  for  0*008  gramme  (0'123  grain)  of
mycelium,  dried  at  100°  C.  (212°  F.),  an  absorption  that
amounted  to  not  less  than  43  c.c.  (1'5  cubic  inches)  of  oxygen,
at  25°.  These  numbers,  however,  must  vary  sensibly  with  the
nature  of  the  mould  employed,  and  also  with  the  greater  or
less  activity  of  its  development,  because  the  phenomenon  is
complicated  by  the  presence  of  accessory  oxidations,  such  as  we
find  in  the  case  of  mycoderma  vini  and  aceti,  to  which  cause
the  large  absorption  of  oxygen  in  our  last  experiment  may
doubtless  be  attributed.*

*  In  these  experiments,  in  which  the  moulds  remain  for  a  long  time  in
contact  with  a  eacchariue  wort  out  of  contact  with  oxygen — the  oxygen
being  promptly  absorbed  by  the  vital  action  of  the  plant  (see  our  Memoire
sur  Jes  Oenerations  elites  Spoidanees,  p.  54,  note) — there  is  no  doubt  that  an
appreciable  quantity  of  alcohol  is  formed  because  the  plant  does  not
immediately  lose  its  vital  activity,  after  the  absorption  of  oxygen.

A  300-c.c.  (lO-oz.)Ha8k,  containing  100  c.c.  of  must,  after  the  air  in  it
had  been  expelled  by  boiling,  was  opened  and  immediately  re-closed,  on
August  15th,  1873.  A  fungoid  growth — a  unique  one,  of  greenish-grey
colour — developed  from  spontaneous  impregnation,  and  decolorized  the
liquid,  which  originally  was  of  a  yellowish- brown.  Some  large  crystals,
sparkling  like  diamonds,  of  neutral  tartrate  of  lime,  were  precipitated.
About  a  year  afterwards,  long  after  the  death  of  the  plant,  we  examined


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  259

The  conclusions  to  be  drawn  from  the  whole  of  the  pre-
ceding facts  can  scarcely  admit  of  doubt.  As  for  ourselves,  we
have  no  hesitation  in  finding  in  them  the  foundation  of  the
true  theory  of  fermentation.  In  the  experiments  which  we
have  described,  fermentation  by  yeasty  that  is  to  say,  by  the
type  of  ferments  properly  so  called,  is  presented  to  us,  in  a
w^ord,  as  the  direct  consequence  of  the  processes  of  nutrition,
assimilation,  and  life,  when  these  are  carried  on  without  the
agency  of  free  oxygen.  The  heat  required  in  the  accomplish-
ment of  that  work  must  necessarily  have  been  borrowed  from
the  decomposition  of  the  fermentable  matter,  that  is  from  the
saccharine  substance  which,  like  other  unstable  substances,
liberates  heat  in  undergoing  decomposition.  Fermentation  by
means  of  yeast  appears,  therefore,  to  be  essentially  connected
with  the  property  possessed  by  this  minute  cellular  plant  of
performing  its  respiratory  functions,  somehow  or  other,  with
oxygen  existing  combined  in  sugar.  Its  fermentative  power —
which  power  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  fermentative
activity  or  the  intensity  of  decomposition  in  a  given  time —
varies  considerably  between  two  limits,  fixed  by  the  greatest
and  least  possible  access  to  free  oxygen  which  the  plant  has  in
the  process  of  nutrition.  If  we  supply  it  with  a  sufficient
quantity  of  free  oxygen  for  the  necessities  of  its  life,  nutrition,
and  respiratory  combustions,  in  other  words,  if  we  cause  it  to
live  after  the  manner  of  a  mould,  properly  so  called,  it  ceases  to
be  a  ferment,  that  is,  the  ratio  between  the  weight  of  the  plant
developed  and  that  of  the  sugar  decomposed,  which  forms  its
principal  food,  is  similar  in  amount  to  that  in  the  case  of
fungi*      On  the  other  hand,  if  we  deprive  the  yeast  of  air

this  liquid.  It  contained  0'3  gramme  (4-6  grains)  of  alcohol,  and
0-053  gramme  (08  grain)  of  vegetable  matter,  dried  at  100°  C.  (212°  F.).
"We  ascertained  that  the  spores  of  the  fungus  were  dead  at  the  moment
when  the  flask  was  opened.  When  sown,  they  did  not  develop  in  the
least  degree.

*  We  find  in  M.  Eaulin's  Note,  already  quoted,  that  "the  minimum
ratio  between  the  weight  of  sugar  and  the  weight  of  organized  matter,
that  is,  the  weight  of  fungoid  growth  which  it  helps  to  form,  may  be

s  2"


260  STUDIES    ON    rERMENTATIOX.

entirely,  or  cause  it  to  develop  in  a  saccharine  medium  de-
prived of  free  oxygen,  it  will  multiply  just  as  if  air  were
present,  althougli  with  less  activity,  and  under  these  circum-
stances its  fermentative  character  will  be  most  marked ;  under
these  circumstances,  moreover,  we  shall  find  the  greatest  dis-
proportion, all  other  conditions  being  the  same,  between  the
weight  of  yeast  formed  and  the  weight  of  sugar  decomposed.
Lastly,  if  free  oxygen  occurs  in  varying  quantities,  the  ferment-
power  of  the  yeast  may  pass  through  all  the  degrees  com-
prehended between  the  two  extreme  limits  of  which  we  have
just  spoken.  It  seems  to  us  that  we  could  not  have  a  better
proof  of  the  direct  relation  that  fermentation  bears  to  life,
carried  on  in  the  absence  of  free  oxygen,  or  with  a  quantity  of
that  gas  insufficient  for  all  the  acts  of  nutrition  and  assimilation.

Another  equally  striking  proof  of  the  truth  of  this  theory
is  the  fact,  demonstrated  in  Chapter  IV.,  that  the  ordinary
moulds  assume  the  character  of  a  ferment  when  compelled  to
live  without  air,  or  with  quantities  of  air  too  scant  to  permit
of  their  organs  having  around  them  as  much  of  that  element  as
is  necessary  for  their  life  as  aerobian  plants.  Ferments,  there-
fore, only  possess  in  a  higher  degree  a  character  which  belongs
to  many  common  moulds,  if  not  to  all,  and  which  they  share,
probablj'',  more  or  less,  with  all  living  cells,  namely  the  power
of  living  either  an  aerobian  or  anaerobian  life,  according  to
the  conditions  under  which  the}'  are  placed.

It  may  be  readily  understood  how,  in  their  state  of  aerobian
life,  the  alcoholic  ferments  have  failed  to  attract  attention.
Those  ferments  are  only  cultivated  out  of  contact  with  air,
at  the  bottom  of  liquids  which  soon  become  saturated  with
carbonic  acid  gas.  Air  is  only  present  in  the  earlier  develop-
ments of  their  germs,  and  without  attracting  the  attention
of  the  operator,  whilst  in   their   state   of  anaerobian  growth

expressed  as  .^  ._,  :=  3'1."  Jules  Eaulin,  Etudes  chimiques  sur  la  vegeta-
tion. Eecherches  sur  le  developpement  d'une  mucedinee  dans  tin  milieu
artificiel,  p.  192,  Paris,  1870.  We  have  seen,  iu  the  case  of  yeast,  that
this  ratio  may  be  as  low  as  y.


I


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  261

their  life  and  action  are  of  prolonged  duration.  We  must
have  recourse  to  special  experimental  apparatus  to  enable
us  to  demonstrate  the  mode  of  life  of  alcoholic  ferments
under  the  influence  of  free  oxygen  ;  it  is  their  state  of  existence
apart  from  air,  in  the  depths  of  liquids  that  attracts  all
our  attention.  The  results  of  their  action  are,  however,
marvellous,  if  we  regard  the  products  resulting  from  them,
in  the  important  industries  of  which  they  are  the  life  and
soul.  In  the  case  of  ordinary  moulds,  the  opposite  holds  good.
What  we  want  to  use  special  experimental  apparatus  for  with
them  is  to  enable  us  to  demonstrate  the  possibility  of  their
continuing  to  live  for  a  time  out  of  contact  with  air,  and  all
our  attention,  in  their  case,  is  attracted  by  the  facility  with
which  they  develop  under  the  influence  of  oxygen.  Thus  the
decomposition  of  saccharine  liquids,  which  is  the  consequence
of  the  life  of  fungi  without  air,  is  scarcely  perceptible,  and  so
is  of  no  practical  importance.  Their  aerial  life,  on  the  other
hand,  in  which  they  respire  and  accomplish  their  process
of  oxidation  under  the  influence  of  free  oxygen,  is  a  normal
phenomenon,  and  one  of  prolonged  duration  which  cannot  fail
to  strike  the  least  thoughtful  of  observers.  We  are  convinced
that  a  day  will  come  when  moulds  will  be  utilized  in  certain
industrial  operations,  on  account  of  their  power  of  destroying
organic  matter.  The  conversion  of  alcohol  into  vinegar  in  the
process  of  acetification,  and  the  production  of  gallic  acid  by  the
action  of  fungi  on  wet  gall-nuts,  are  already  connected  with
this  kind  of  phenomena.*     On  this  last  subject,  the  important

*  We  shall  show,  some  day,  that  the  processes  of  oxidation  due  to
growth  of  fungi  cause,  in  certain  decompositions,  liberation  of  ammonia
to  a  considerable  extent,  and  that  by  regulating  their  action  we  might
cause  them  to  extract  the  nitrogen  from  a  host  of  organic  debris,  as  also,
by  checking  the  production  of  such  organisms,  we  might  considerably
increase  the  proportion  of  nitrates  in  the  artificial  nitrogenous  substances.
By  cultivating  various  moulds  on  the  surface  of  damp  bread  in  a  current
of  air,  we  have  obtained  an  abundance  of  ammonia,  derived  from  the
decomposition  of  the  albuminoids  eflPected  by  the  fungoid  life.  The  decom-
position of  asparagus,  and  several  other  animal  or  vegetable  substances,
has  given  similar  results.


262  STUDIES    ON    FKKMKXTATIOX.

work   of    M.    Van   Tiegliem  {Annalcs    Scientifques   de  Vilcole
Normale,  vol.  vi.)  may  be  consulted.

The  possibility  of  living  without  oxygen,  in  the  case  of
ordinary  moulds,  is  connected  with  certain  morphological
modifications  which  are  more  marked  in  proportion  as  this
faculty  is  itself  more  developed.  These  changes  in  the  vegeta-
tive forms  are  scarcely  perceptible  in  the  case  of  penicilliuni
and  mycoderma  vini,  but  they  are  very  evident  in  the  case
of  aspergillus,  consisting  of  a  marked  tendency  on  the  part
of  the  submerged  mycelial  filaments  to  increase  in  diameter,
and  to  develop  cross  partitions  at  short  intervals,  so  that  they
sometimes  bear  a  resemblance  to  chains  of  conidia.  In  mucor,
again,  they  are  very  marked,  the  inflated  filaments  which,
closely  interwoven,  present  chains  of  cells  which  fall  off  and
bud,  gradually  producing  a  mass  of  cells.  If  we  consider  the
matter  carefully,  we  shall  see  that  yeast  presents  the  same
characteristics.  For  instance,  what  can  more  closely  resemble
the  mucor  of  Plates  V.  and  YI.  than  the  saccharomyces  of
Fiffs.  .33  and  37  ?  Have  we  not  in  each  case  ramified  chains
of  elongated  cells  or  joints,  more  or  less  narrowed  in  the  middle,
and  shorter  segments  or  cells  dropping  off  at  the  constrictions,
and  proceeding  to  bud  in  the  liquid  on  their  own  account?
Moreover,  the  less  oxygen  there  is  present,  the  more  marked  is
the  tendency  to  the  formation  of  these  budding  cells,  which
isolate  themselves  and  soon  drop  off.  Who  could  ever  imagine,
in  examining  the  ferment  of  mucor  represented  in  Plate  VI.,
that  its  first  germ  was  the  ordinary  mucor  that  is  found
everywhere,  with  fine  filaments,  straight  or  ramified  according
to  the  variety,  which  send  up  aerial  hyphae,  terminating  in
little  round  heads  bearing  spores.  So  was  it  that  in  the
ferment  of  Plate  XI.  we  could  scarcely  recognize  the  ramified
filaments  of  Figs.  33  and  37.

It  is  a  great  presumption  in  favour  of  the  truth  of  theoretical
ideas  when  the  results  of  experiments  undertaken  on  the
strength  of  those  ideas  are  confirmed  by  various  facts  more
recently  added  to  science,  and  when  those  ideas  force  them-


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  263

selves  more  and  more  on  our  minds,  in  spite  of  a  prima  facie
improbability.  This  is  exactly  the  character  of  those  ideas
which  we  have  just  expounded.  We  propounded  them  in  1861,
and  not  only  have  they  remained  unshaken  since,  but  they  have
served  to  foreshadow  new  facts,  so  that  it  is  much  easier  to
defend  them  in  the  present  day  than  it  was  to  do  so  fifteen  years
ago.  We  first  called  attention  to  them  in  various  notes,  which
we  read  before  the  Chemical  Society  of  Paris,  notably  at  its
meetings  of  April  12th  and  June  28th,  1861,  and  in  papers  in
the  Coniptes  rendus  de  VAcadhnie  des  Sciences.  It  may  be  of
some  interest  to  quote  here,  in  its  entirety,  our  communication
of  June  28th,  1861,  entitled,  "  Influences  of  Oxygen  on  the
Development  of  Yeast  and  on  Alcoholic  Fermentation,"  which
we  extract  from  the  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  Chimique  de  Paris  : —

"  M.  Pasteur  gives  the  results  of  his  researches  on  the  fer-
mentation of  sugar  and  the  development  of  yeast-cells,  accord-
ing as  that  fermentation  takes  place  apart  from  the  influence
of  free  oxygen  or  in  contact  with  that  gas.  His  experiments,
however,  have  nothing  in  common  with  those  of  Gay-Lussac,
which  were  performed  with  the  juice  of  grapes,  crushed  under
conditions  where  they  would  not  be  afiected  bj'  air,  and  then
brought  in  contact  with  oxygen.

"  Yeast,  when  perfectly  developed,  is  able  to  bud  and  gro  w
in  a  saccharine  and  albuminous  liquid,  in  the  complete  absence
of  oxygen  or  air.  In  this  case  but  little  yeast  is  formed,  and  a
comparatively  large  quantity  of  sugar  disappears — sixty  or
eighty  parts  for  one  of  yeast  formed.  Under  these  conditions
fermentation  is  very  sluggish.

"  If  the  experiment  is  made  in  contact  \vith  the  air,  and
with  a  great  surface  of  liquid,  fermentation  is  rapid.  For  the
same  quantity  of  sugar  decomposed  much  more  yeast  is  formed.
The  air  with  which  the  liquid  is  in  contact  is  absorbed  by  the
yeast.  The  yeast  develops  very  actively,  but  its  fermentative
character  tends  to  disappear  under  these  conditions ;  we  find,  in
fact,  that  for  one  part  of  yeast  formed,  not  more  than  from  four
to    ten    parts   of  sugar    are   transformed.      The   fermentative


2,64  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

character  of  this  yeast,  nevertheless,  continues,  and  produces
even  increased  effects,  if  it  is  made  to  act  on  sugar  apart  from
the  influence  of  free  oxygen.

"  It  seems,  therefore,  natural  to  admit  that  when  yeast
functions  as  a  ferment  by  living  apart  from  the  influence  of
air,  it  derives  oxygen  from  the  sugar,  and  that  this  is  the
origin  of  its  fermentative  character.

"  M.  Pasteur  explains  the  fact  of  the  immense  activity  at
the  commencement  of  fermentations  by  the  influence  of  the
oxygen  of  the  air  held  in  solution  in  the  liquids,  at  the  time
when  the  action  commences.  The  author  has  found,  moreover,
that  the  yeast  of  beer  sown  in  an  albuminous  liquid,  such  as
yeast-water,  still  multiplies,  even  when  there  is  not  a  trace  of
sugar  in  the  liquid,  provided  always  that  atmospheric  oxygen
is  present  in  large  quantities.  When  deprived  of  air,  under
these  conditions,  yeast  does  not  germinate  at  all.  The  same
experiments  may  be  repeated  with  albuminous  liquid,  mixed
with  a  solution  of  non- fermentable  sugar,  such  as  ordinary
crystallized  milk-sugar.     The  results  are  precisely  the  same.

"  Yeast  formed  thus  in  the  absence  of  sugar  does  not  change
its  nature  ;  it  is  still  capable  of  causing  sugar  to  ferment,  if
brought  to  bear  upon  that  substance  apart  from  air.  It  must
be  remarked,  however,  that  the  development  of  yeast  is  effected
with  great  difficulty  when  it  has  not  a  fermentable  substance
for  its  food.  In  short,  the  yeast  of  beer  acts  in  exactly  the  same
manner  as  an  ordinary  plant,  and  the  analogy  would  be  com-
plete if  ordinary  plants  had  such  an  affinity  for  oxygen  as
permitted  them  to  breathe  by  appropriating  this  element  from
unstable  compounds,  in  which  case,  according  to  M.  Pasteur,
they  would  appear  as  ferments  for  those  substances.

"  M.  Pasteur  declares  that  he  hopes  to  be  able  to  realize  this
result,  that  is  to  say,  to  discover  the  conditions  under  which
certain  inferior  plants  may  live  apart  from  air  in  the  presence
of  sugar,  causing  that  substance  to  ferment  as  the  yeast  of  beer
would  do."

This  summary  and  the  preconceived  views  that  it  set  forth


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  265

have  lost  nothing  of  their  exactness  ;  on  the  contrary,  time  has
strengthened  them.  The  surmises  of  the  last  two  paragraphs
have  received  a  valuable  confirmation  from  recent  observations
made  by  Messrs.  Lechartier  and  Bellamy,  as  well  as  by  our-
selves, an  account  of  which  we  must  put  before  our  readers.
It  is  necessary,  however,  before  touching  upon  this  curious
feature  in  connection  with  fermentations  to  insist  on  the
accuracy  of  a  passage  in  the  preceding  summary,  the  statement,
namely,  that  yeast  could  multiply  in  an  albuminous  liquid,
in  which  it  found  a  non- fermentable  sugar,  milk-sugar  for
example.  The  following  is  an  experiment  on  this  point: —
On  August  15th,  1875,  we  sowed  a  trace  of  yeast  in
150  c.c.  (rather  more  than  5  fluid  ounces)  of  yeast-water,
containing  2^  per  cent,  of  milk-sugar.  The  solution  was
prepared  in  one  of  our  double-necked  flasks,  with  the  neces-
sary precautions  to  secure  absence  of  germs,  and  the  yeast
sown  was  itself  perfectly  pure.  Three  months  afterwards,
November  15th,  1875,  we  examined  the  liquid  for  alcohol ;  it
contained  only  the  smallest  trace  ;  as  for  the  yeast,  which  had
sensibly  developed,  collected  and  dried  on  a  filter  paper,  it
weighed  0*050  gramme  (0"76  grain).  In  this  case  we  have
the  yeast  multiplying  without  giving  rise  to  the  least  fermenta-
tion, like  a  fungoid  growth,  absorbing  oxygen,  and  evolving
carbonic  acid,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  cessation  of  its
development  in  this  experiment  was  due  to  the  progressive
deprivation  of  oxygen  that  occurred.  As  soon  as  the  gaseous
mixture  in  the  flask  consisted  entirel}'-  of  carbonic  acid  and
nitrogen,  the  vitality  of  the  yeast  was  dependent  on,  and  in  pro-
portion to,  the  quantity  of  air  which  entered  the  flask  in  conse-
quence of  variations  of  temperatui'e.  The  question  now  arose,
was  this  yeast,  which  had  developed  wholly  as  an  ordinary
fungus,  still  capable  of  manifesting  the  character  of  a  ferment  ?
To  settle  this  point  we  had  taken  the  precaution,  on  August  loth,
1875,  of  preparing  another  flask,  exactly  similar  to  the  pre-
ceding one  in  every  respect,  and  which  gave  results  identical
with  those  described.     We  decanted  this  on  jSTovember  15th,


266  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

pouriug  some  wort  on  the  deposit  of  the  plant,  which  remained
in  the  flask.  In  less  than  five  hours  from  the  time  when  we
placed  it  in  the  oven,  the  plant  had  started  fermentation  in  the
wort,  as  we  could  see  by  the  bubbles  of  gas  rising  to  form
patches  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  We  may  add  that  yeast
in  the  medium  which  we  have  been  discussing  will  not  develop
at  all  without  air.

The  importance  of  these  results  can  escape  no  one  ;  they
prove  clearly  that  the  fermentative  character  is  not  an  invariable
phenomenon  of  yeast-life,  they  show  that  j'east  is  a  plant  which
does  not  differ  from  ordinary  plants,  and  which  manifests  its  fer-
mentative power  solel}^  in  consequence  of  particular  conditions
under  which  it  is  compelled  to  live.  It  may  carry  on  its  life  as
a  ferment  or  not,  and  after  having  lived  without  manifesting  the
slightest  symptom  of  fermentative  character,  it  is  quite  ready  to
manifest  that  character  when  brought  under  suitable  conditions.
The  fermentative  property,  therefore,  is  not  a  power  peculiar  to
cells  of  a  special  nature.  It  is  not  a  permanent  character  of  a
particular  structure,  like,  for  instance,  the  property  of  acidity  or
alkalinity.  It  is  a  peculiarity  dependent  on  external  circum-
stances and  on  the  nutritive  conditions  of  the  organism.


§  II.—  Fermentation  in  Saccharine  Fruits  Immersed
IX  Carbonic  Acid  Gas.

The  theory  which  we  have,  step  by  step,  evolved,  on  the
subject  of  the  causes  of  the  chemical  phenomena  of  fermenta-
tion, may  claim  a  character  of  simplicity  and  generality  that  is
well  worthy  of  attention.  Fermentation  is  no  longer  one  of
those  isolated  and  mysterious  phenomena  which  do  not  admit
of  explanation.  It  is  the  consequence  of  a  peculiar  vital  pro-
cess of  nutrition  which  occurs  under  certain  conditions,  differing
from  those  which  characterize  the  life  of  all  ordinary  beings,
animal  or  vegetable,  but  by  which  the  latter  may  be  affected,
more   or  less,  in  a  way  which  brings  them,   to  some  extent.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  267

within  the  class  of  ferments,  properly'  so  called.  We  can  even
conceive  that  the  fermentative  character  may  belong  to  every
organized  form,  to  every  animal  or  vegetable  cell,  on  the  sole
condition  that  the  chemico- vital  acts  of  assimilation  and  excretion
must  be  capable  of  taking  place  in  that  cell  for  a  brief  period,
longer  or  shorter  it  may  be,  without  the  necessity  for  recourse  to
supplies  of  atmospheric  oxygen  ;  in  other  words,  the  cell  must
be  able  to  derive  its  needful  heat  from  the  decomposition  of
some  body  which  yields  a  surplus  of  heat  in  the  process.

As  a  consequence  of  these  conclusions  it  should  be  an  easy
matter  to  show,  in  the  majority  of  living  beings,  the  manifesta-
tion of  the  phenomena  of  fermentation  ;  for  there  are,  probably,
none  in  Vvhich  all  chemical  action  entirely  disappears,  ujjon
the  sudden  cessation  of  life.  One  day,  when  we  were  expressing
these  views  in  our  laboratory,  in  the  presence  of  M.  Dumas,
who  seemed  inclined  to  admit  their  truth,  we  added  :  "  We
would  make  a  wager  that  if  we  were  to  plunge  a  bunch  of  grapes
into  carbonic  acid  gas,  there  would  be  immediately  produced
alcohol  and  carbonic  acid,  in  consequence  of  a  renewed  action
starting  in  the  interior  cells  of  the  grapes,  in  such  a  way  that
these  cells  would  assume  the  function  of  yeast-cells.  We  will
make  the  experiment,  and  when  you  come  to-morrow — it  was
our  good  fortune  to  have  M.  Dumas  working  in  our  laboratory
at  that  time — we  will  give  you  an  account  of  the  result."  Our
predictions  were  realized.  We  then  endeavoured  to  find,  in
the  presence  of  M.  Dumas,  who  assisted  us  in  our  endeavour,
cells  of  yeast  in  the  grapes  ;  but  it  was  quite  impossible  to
discover  any.*

*  To  determine  the  absence  of  cells  of  ferment  in  fruits  that  have  been
immersed  in  carbonic  acid  gas,  we  must  first  of  all  carefully  raise  the
l)ellicle  of  the  fruit,  taking  care  that  the  subjacent  parenchyma  does  not
touch  the  surface  of  the  pellicle,  since  the  organized  corpuscles  existing
on  the  exterior  of  the  fi'uit  might  introduce  an  error  into  our  microscopi-
cal observations.  Experiments  on  grapes  ha^ve  given  us  an  explanation
of  a  fact  generally  known,  the  cause  of  which,  however,  had  hitherto
escaped  our  knowledge.  We  all  know  that  the  taste  and  aroma  of  the
vintage,  that  is,  of  the  grapes  stripped  from  the  bunches  and  thrown  into


268  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION-.

Encouraged  b}'  this  result^  we  undertook  fresh  experiments
on  grapes,  on  a  melon,  on  oranges,  on  plums,  and  on  rhubarb
leaves,  gathered  in  the  garden  of  the  Ecole  Kormale,  and,  in
every  case,  our  substance  when  immersed  in  carbonic  acid  gas,
gave  rise  to  the  production  of  alcohol  and  carbonic  acid.  We
obtained  the  following  surprising  results  from  some  prunes  de
Monsieur*  : — On  July  31st,  1872,  we  placed  twent3^-four  of  these
plums  imder  a  glass  cylinder,  which  we  immediately  filled  with
carbonic  acid  gas.  The  plums  had  been  gathered  on  the  pre-
vious day.  By  the  side  of  the  cylinder  we  placed  other  twenty-
four  plums,  which  were  left  there  uncovered.  Eight  days
afterwards,  in  the  course  of  which  time  there  had  been  a  con-
siderable   evolution    of  carbonic    acid    from    the   cylinder,    we

tubs,  where  they  get  soaked  in  the  juice  that  issues  from  wounded
specimens,  are  very  different  from  the  taste  and  aroma  of  an  uninjured
bunch.  Now  grapes  that  have  been  immersed  in  an  atmosphere  of
carbonic  acid  gas  have  exactly  the  flavour  and  smell  of  the  vintage ;  the
reason  is  that,  in  the  vintage  tub,  the  grapes  are  immediately  surrounded
by  an  atmosphere  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  and  undergo,  in  consequence,  the
fermentation  peculiar  to  grapes  that  have  been  plunged  in  this  gas.
These  facts  deserve  to  be  studied  from  a  practical  point  of  view.  It
would  be  interesting,  for  example,  to  learn  what  difference  there
would  be  in  the  quality  of  two  wines,  the  grapes  of  which,  in  the  one
case,  had  been  perfectly  crushed,  so  as  to  cause  as  great  a  separation  of
the  cells  of  the  parenchyma  as  possible  ;  in  the  other  case,  left,  for  the
most  part,  whole,  as  in  the  case  in  the  ordinary  vintage.  The  first  wine
would  be  deprived  of  those  fixed  and  fragrant  principles  produced  by  the
fermentation  of  which  we  have  just  spoken,  when  the  grapes  are
immersed  in  carbonic  acid  gas.  By  such  a  comparison  as  that  which  we
suggest,  we  should  be  able  to  form  an  «/;rj'orf  judgment  on  the  merits  of
the  new  system,  which  has  not  been  carefully  studied,  although  already
widely  adopted,  of  milled,  cylindrical  crushers,  for  pressing  the  vintage.

*  We  have  sometimes  found  small  quantities  of  alcohol  in  fruits  and
other  vegetable  organs,  surrounded  with  ordinary  air,  but  always  in
small  proportion,  and  in  a  manner  which  suggested  its  accidental  charac-
ter. It  is  easy  to  understand  how,  in  the  thickness  of  certain  fruits,
certain  parts  of  those  fruits  might  be  deprived  of  air,  under  which
circumstance  they  would  have  been  acting  under  conditions  similar  to
those  under  which  fruits  act  when  wholly  immersed  in  carbonic  acid  gas.
Moreover  it  would  be  useful  to  determine  whether  alcohol  is  not  a  normal
product  of  vegetation.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.  269

withdrew  the  plums  and  compared  them  with  those  which  had
heen  left  exposed  to  the  air.  The  difference  was  striking,
almost  incredible.  Whilst  the  plums  which  had  been  surrounded
wdth  air  (the  experiments  of  Berard  have  long  since  taught  us
that,  under  this  latter  condition,  fruits  absorb  oxygen  from  the
air  and  emit  carbonic  acid  gas  in  almost  equal  volume)  had
become  very  soft  and  watery  and  sweet,  the  plums  taken  from
under  the  jar  had  remained  very  firm  and  hard,  the  flesh  was
by  no  means  watery,  but  they  had  lost  much  sugar.  Lastly,
when  submitted  to  distillation,  after  crushing,  they  yielded  6*5
grammes  (99 "7  grains)  of  alcohol,  more  than  1  per  cent,  of
the  total  weight  of  the  plums.  What  better  proof  could  we
have  than  these  facts  of  the  existence  of  a  considerable
chemical  action  in  the  interior  of  fruit,  an  action  which  derives
the  heat  necessary  for  its  manifestation  from  the  decomposition
of  the  sugar  present  in  the  cells  ?  Moreover,  and  this  circum-
stance is  especially  worthy  of  our  attention,  in  all  these  experi-
ments we  found  that  there  was  a  liberation  of  heat,  of  which
the  fruits  and  other  organs  were  the  seat,  as  soon  as  they  were
plunged  in  the  carbonic  acid  gas.  This  lieat  is  so  considerable
that  it  may  at  times  be  detected  by  the  hand,  if  the  two  sides
of  the  cylinder,  one  of  which  is  in  contact  with  the  objects,  are
touched  alternately.  It  also  makes  itself  evident  in  the  for-
mation of  vapour,  which  condenses  in  little  drops  on  those
parts  of  the  bell  which  are  less  directly  exposed  to  the  influence
of  the  heat  resulting  from  the  decomposition  of  the  sugar  of
the  cells.*

*  lu  these  studies  on  plauts  living  immersed  in  carbonic  acid  gas,  we
have  come  across  a  fact  which  corroborates  those  which  we  have  already
given  in  reference  to  the  facility  with  which  lactic  and  viscous  ferments,
and,  generally  speaking,  those  which  we  have  termed  the  disease-fer-
ments of  beer,  develop  when  deprived  of  air,  and  which  shows,  conse-
quently, how  very  marked  their  aerobian  character  is.  If  we  immerse
beetroots  or  turnips  in  carbonic  acid  gas,  we  produce  well-defined
fermentations  in  those  roots.  Their  whole  surface  readily  permits  the
escape  of  the  highly  acid  liquids,  and  they  become  filled  with  lactic,
viscous,  and  other  ferments.     This  shows  us  the  great  danger  which  may


270  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

In  short,  fermentation  is  a  very  general  phenomenon.  It  is
life  without  air,  or  life  without  free  oxygen,  or,  more  generally
still,  it  is  the  result  of  a  chemical  process  accomplished  on  a
fermentable  substance,  i.e.  a  substance  capable  of  producing  heat
by  its  decomposition,  in  which  process  the  entire  heat  used  up
is  derived  from  a  part  of  the  heat  that  the  decomposition  of  the
fermentable  substance  sets  free.  The  class  of  fermentations,
properly  so  called,  is,  however,  restricted  by  the  small  number
of  substances  capable  of  decomposing  with  the  production  of
heat,  and  at  the  same  time  of  serving  for  the  nourishment  of
lower  forms  of  life,  when  deprived  of  the  presence  and  action  of
air.  This,  again,  is  a  consequence  of  our  theory,  which  is  well
worthy  of  notice.

The  facts  that  we  have  just  mentioned  in  reference  to  the
formation  of  alcohol  and  carbonic  acid  in  the  substance  of  ripe
fruits,  under  certain  special  conditions,  and  apart  from  the
action  of  ferment,  are  already  known  to  science.  They  were
discovered  in  1869  by  M.  Lechartier,  formerly  a  pupil  in  the
Ecole  Nonnale  Supirienre,  and  his  coadjutor,  M.  Bellamy.*
In  1821,  in  a  very  remarkable  work,  especially  when  we
consider  the  period  when  it  appeared,  Berard  demonstrated
several  important  propositions  in  connection  with  the  matura-
tion of  fruits  : —

I.  All  fruits,  even  those  that  are  still  green,  and  likewise
even  those  that  are  exposed  to  the  sun,  absorb  oxygen  and  set
free  an  almost  equal  volume  of  carbonic  acid  gas.  This  is  a
condition  of  their  proper  ripening.

II.  Ripe  fruits  placed  in  a  limited  atmosphere,  after  having
absorbed  all  the  oxygen  and  set  free  an  almost  equal  vohxrae  of

result  from  the  use  of  pits,  in  -which  the  beetroots  are  preserved,  when
the  air  is  not  renewed,  and  that  the  original  oxygen  is  expelled  by  the
vital  processes  of  fungi,  or  other  deoxidizing  chemical  actions.  We  have
directed  the  attention  of  the  manufacturers  of  beetroot  sugar  to  this
point.

*  Lechartier  and  Bellamy,  Comptes  rendus  deVAcademie  des  Sciences,
vol.  Ixix.,  pp.  3(36  and  4GG,  1869.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  271

carbonic  acid,  continue  to  emit  that  gas  in  notable  quantity,
even  when  no  bruise  is  to  be  seen — "  as  though  by  a  kind  of
fermentation,"  as  Berard  actually  observes  —  and  lose  their
saccharine  particles,  a  circumstance  which  causes  the  fruits  to
appear  more  acid,  although  the  actual  weight  of  their  acid
may  undergo  no  augmentation  whatever.

In  this  beautiful  work,  and  in  all  subsequent  ones  of  which
the  ripening  of  fruits  has  been  the  subject,  two  facts  of  great
theoretical  value  have  escaped  the  notice  of  the  authors ;  these
are  the  two  facts  which  Messrs.  Lechartier  and  Bellamy  pointed
out,  for  the  first  time,  namely,  the  production  of  alcohol  and
the  absence  of  cells  of  ferments.  It  is  worthy  of  remark  that
these  two  facts,  as  we  have  shown  above,  were  actually  fore-
shadowed in  the  theory  of  fermentation  that  we  advocated  as
far  back  as  1861,  and  we  are  happy  to  add  that  Messrs.
Lechartier  and  Bellamy,  who,  at  first,  had  prudently  drawn
no  theoretical  conclusions  from  their  work,  now  entirely  agree
with  the  theory  we  have  advanced.*  Their  mode  of  reasoning
is  very  different  from  that  of  the  savants  with  whom  we  dis-
cussed the  subject  before  the  Academy,  on  the  occasion  when
the  communication  which  we  addressed  to  the  Academy,  in
October,  1872,  attracted  attention  once  more  to  the  remarkable


*  Those  gentlemen  express  themselves  thus  :  "  In  a  note  presented  to
the  Academy  in  November,  1872,  we  pubhshed  certain  experiments
which  showed  tbat  carbonic  acid  and  alcohol  may  be  produced  in  fruits
kept  in  a  closed  vessel,  out  of  contact  with  atmospheric  oxygen,  without
our  being  able  to  discover  alcohoHc  ferment  in  the  interior  of  those
fruits.

' '  M.  Pasteur,  as  a  logical  deduction  from  the  principles  which  he  has
established  m  connection  with  the  theory  of  fermentation,  considers  that
the  formation  of  alcohol  may  he  attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  physical
and  chemical  processes  of  life  in  the  cells  of  fruit  continue  under  new
conditions,  in  a  manner  similar  to  those  of  the  cells  of  ferment.  Experi-
ments, continued  during  1872,  1873,  and  1874,  on  different  fruits,  have
furnished  results  all  of  which  seem  to  us  to  harmonize  with  this  proposi-
tion, and  to  establish  it  on  a  firm  basis  of  proof."  Comptes  rendits,
t.  Ixxix.,  p.  949,  1874.


272  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

observations  of  Messrs.  LecUartier  and  Bellamy.*  M.  Fremy,
in  particular,  was  desirous  of  finding  in  those  observations  a
confirmation  of  his  views  on  the  subject  of  hemi-organism,  and  a
condemnation  of  ours,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  pre-
ceding explanations  and,  more  particularly  our  Note  of  1861,
which  we  have  quoted  word  for  word  in  the  last  paragraph,
furnish  the  most  conclusive  evidence  in  favour  of  those  ideas
which  we  advocate.  Indeed,  as  far  back  as  1861  we  pointed
out  very  clearly  that  if  we  could  find  plants  able  to  live  when
deprived  of  air,  in  the  presence  of  sugar,  they  would  bring
about  a  fermentation  of  that  substance,  in  the  same  manner  as
yeast  does.  Such  is  the  case  with  the  fungi  already  studied  in
Chapter  IV.  ;  such,  too,  is  the  case  with  the  fruits  employed  in
the  experiments  of  Messrs.  Lechartier  and  Bellamy,  and  in  our
own  experiments,  the  results  of  which  not  only  confirm  those
obtained  by  these  gentlemen,  but  even  extend  them,  in  so  far
as  we  have  shown  that  fruits,  when  surrounded  with  carbonic
acid  gas,  immediately  produce  alcohol.  When  surrounded  with
air,  they  live  in  their  aerobian  state,  and  we  have  no  ferment-
action  ;  immersed  immediately  afterwards  in  carbonic  acid  gas,
they  now  assume  their  anaerobian  state,  and  at  once  begin  to
act  upon  the  sugar  in  the  manner  of  ferments,  and  emit  heat.
As  for  seeing  in  these  facts  anything  like  a  confirmation  of  the
theory  of  hemi-organism,  imagined  by  ]M.  Fremy,  the  idea  of
such  a  thing  is  absurd.  The  following,  for  instance,  is  the
theory  of  the  fermentation  of  the  vintage,  according  to  M.
Fremy. t

"  To   speak   here   of    alcoholic   fermentation    alone,"  +    our

*  Pasteur,  Fa  lies  nouveaux  pour  servir  d  la  connaissance  de  la  theorie
(les  fermentations  proprement  dites.  {Camptes  rendus  de  V Academie  des
Sciences,  t.  Ixxv.,  p.  7(S4).  See,  in  the  same  vohime,  the  discussion  that
followed  ;  also,  Pasteur,  Note  sur  la  production  de  Valcool  par  les  fruits,
same  volume,  p.  1054,  in  which  we  recount  the  observations  anterior  to
our  own,  made  by  Messrs.  Lechartier  and  Bellamy  in  18G9.

t  Comptes  rendus,  meeting  of  January  15th,  1872.

t  As  a  matter  of  fact,  M.  Fremy  applies  his  theory  of  hemi-organism,
not  only  to  the  alcoholic  fermentation  of  grape  juice,  but  to  all  other


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.  273

author  says,  "  I  hold  that  in  the  production  of  wine  it  is  the
juice  of  the  fruit  itself  that,  in  contact  with  air,  produces  grains
of  ferment,  by  the  transformation  of  the  albuminous  matter ;
M.  Pasteur,  on  the  other  hand,  maintains  that  the  fermentation
is  produced  by  germs  existing  outside  the  skin  of  the
grapes."

Now  what  bearing  on  this  purely  imaginary  theory  can  the
fact  have,  that  a  whole  fruit,  immersed  in  carbonic  acid  gas,
immediately  produces  alcohol  and  carbonic  acid  ?  In  the  pre-
ceding passage,  which  we  have  borrowed  from  M.  Fremy,  an
indispensable  condition  of  the  transformation  of  the  albumi-
nous matter  is  the  contact  with  air  and  the  crushing  of  the
grapes.  Here,  however,  we  are  dealing  with  uninjured  fruits  in
contact  with  carbonic  acid  gas.  Our  theory,  on  the  other  hand,
which,  we  may  repeat,  we  have  advocated  since  1861,  maintains

fermentations.  The  following  passage  occurs  in  one  of  his  Notes  (Comptes
rendus  de  VAcademie,  t.  Ixxv.,  p.  979,  October  28th,  1872) :

^^Experiments  on  Germinated  Barley. — The  object  of  these  was  to  show
that,  when  barley,  left  to  itself  in  sweetened  water,  produces  in  succession
alcoholic,  lactic,  butyric,  and  acetic  fermentations,  these  modifications
are  brought  about  by  ferments  which  are  produced  inside  the  grains
themselves,  and  not  by  atmospheric  germs.  More  than  forty  different
experiments  were  devoted  to  this  part  of  my  work."  Need  we  add  that
this  assertion  is  based  on  no  substantial  foundation  ?  The  cells  belong-
ing to  the  grains  of  barley,  or  their  albuminous  contents,  never  do  pro-
duce cells  of  alcoholic  ferment,  or  of  lactic  ferment,  or  butyric  vibrios.
"Whenever  those  ferments  appear  they  may  be  traced  to  germs  of  those
organisms,  diffused  throughout  the  interior  of  the  grains,  or  adhering  to
their  exterior  surface,  or  existing  in  the  water  employed,  or  on  the  sides
of  the  vessels  used.  There  are  many  ways  of  demonstrating  this,  of
which  the  following  is  one :  since  the  results  of  our  experiments  have
shown  that  sweetened  water,  phosphates,  and  chalk  very  readily  give  rise
to  lactic  and  butyric  fermentations,  what  reason  is  there  for  supposing
that  if  we  substitute  grains  of  barley  for  chalk,  the  lactic  and  butyric
ferments  will  spring  from  those  grains,  in  consequence  of  a  transforma-
tion of  their  cells  or  albuminous  substances  ?  Surely,  there  is  no  ground
for  maintaining  that  they  are  produced  by  hemi- organism,  since  a
medium  composed  of  sugar,  or  chalk,  or  phosphates  of  ammonia,  potash,
or  magnesia  contains  no  albuminous  substances.  This  is  an  indirect  but
irresistible  argument  against  the  hemi-organism  theory.

T


274  STUDIES    ON    FERMKXTATIOX.

that  all  cells  become  fermentative  Avhen  their  vital  action  is
protracted  in  the  absence  of  air,  which  are  precisely  the  con-
ditions that  hold  in  the  experiment  on  fruits  immersed  in
carbonic  acid  gas.  The  vital  energy  is  not  immediately
suspended  in  their  cells,  and  the  latter  are  deprived  of  air.
Consequently,  fermentation  must  result.  Moreover,  we  may
add,  if  we  destroy  the  fruit,  or  crush  it  before  immersing  it  in
the  gas,  it  no  longer  produces  alcohol  or  fermentation  of  any
kind,  a  circumstance  that  may  be  attributed  to  the  fact  of  the
destruction  of  vital  action  in  the  crushed  fruit.  On  the  other
hand,  in  what  way  ought  this  crushing  to  affect  the  hypothesis
of  hemi-organism  ?  The  crushed  fruit  ought  to  act  quite  as
well,  or  even  better  than  that  which  is  uncrushed.  In  short,
nothing  can  be  more  directly  opposed  to  the  theory  of  the  mode
of  manifestation  of  that  hidden  force  to  which  the  name  of
hemi-organism  has  been  given,  than  the  discovery  of  the  pro-
duction of  these  phenomena  of  fermentation  in  fruits  sur-
rounded with  carbonic  acid  gas  ;  whilst  the  theory,  which  sees
in  fermentation  a  consequence  of  vital  energy  in  absence  of  air,
finds  in  these  facts  the  strictest  confirmation  of  an  express
prediction,  which  from  the  first  formed  an  integral  part  of  its
statement.

We  should  not  be  justified  in  devoting  further  time  to
opinions  which  are  not  supported  by  anj^  serious  experi-
ment. Abroad,  as  well  as  in  France,  the  theory  of  the  trans-
formation of  albuminous  substances  into  organized  ferments
had  been  advocated  long  before  it  was  taken  up  by  M.
Fremy.  It  no  longer  commands  the  slightest  credit,  nor
do  any  observers  of  note  any  longer  give  it  the  least  atten-
tion ;  it  might  even  be  said  that  it  has  become  a  subject
of  ridicule.

An  attempt  has  also  been  made  to  prove  that  we  have  con-
tradicted ourselves,  inasmuch  as  in  1860  we  published  our
opinion  that  alcoholic  fermentation  can  never  occur  without  a
simultaneous  occurrence  of  organization,  development,  and
multiplication  of  globules ;    or  continued  life,  carried  ou  from


STIDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  275

globules  already  formed.*  Nothing,  however,  can  be  truer  than
that  opinion,  and  at  the  present  moment,  after  fifteen  years
of  study  devoted  to  the  subject,  since  the  publication  to  which
we  have  referred,  we  need  no  longer  say  "we  think,"  but
instead,  "  we  afiirm  "  that  it  is  correct.  It  is,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  to  alcoholic  fermentation,  properly  so  called,  that  the
charge  to  which  we  have  referred  relates — to  that  fermentation
which  yields,  besides  alcohol,  carbonic  acid,  succinic  acid,
glycerine,  volatile  acids,  and  other  products.  This  fermentation
undoubtedly  requires  the  presence  of  yeast-cells,  under  the
conditions  that  we  have  named.  Those  who  have  contradicted
us  have  fallen  into  the  error  of  supposing  that  the  fermentation

*  Pasteur,  Me  moire  sur  la  fermentation  alcoolique,  1860;  Annahs  de
Chimie  et  de  Physique.  The  word  globules  is  here  used  for  cells.  In  our
researches  we  have  always  endeavoured  to  prevent  any  confusion  of  ideas.
"We  stated  at  the  beginning  of  our  Memoir  of  1860,  that:  "^  We  apply  the
term  alcoholic  to  that  fermentation  which  sugar  undergoes  under  the
influence  of  the  ferment  known  as  beer  yeast.^'  This  is  the  fermentation
which  produces  wine  and  all  alcoholic  beverages.  This,  too,  is  regarded
as  the  type  for  a  host  of  similar  phenomena,  designated,  by  general
usage,  under  the  generic  name  of  ferrnentation,  and  qualified  by  the
name  of  one  of  the  essential  products  of  the  special  phenomenon  under
observation.  Bearing  in  mind  this  fact  in  reference  to  the  nomenclature
that  we  have  adopted,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  expression  alcoholic  fermfn-
tation  cannot  be  applied  to  every  phenomenon  of  fermentation  in  which
alcohol  is  produced,  inasmuch  as  there  may  be  a  number  of  phenomena
having  this  character  in  common.  If  we  bad  not  at  starting  defined  that
particular  one  amongst  the  number  of  very  distinct  phenomena,  which,
to  the  exclusion  of  the  others,  should  bear  the  name  alcoholic  fermentation ,
we  should  inevitably  have  given  rise  to  a  confusion  of  language  that
would  soon  pass  from  words  to  ideas,  and  tend  to  introduce  unnecessaiy
complexity  into  researches  which  are  already,  in  themselves,  sufficiently
complex  to  necessitate  the  adoption  of  scrupulous  care  to  prevent  their
becoming  still  more  involved.  It  seems  to  us  that  any  further  doubt  as
to  the  meaning  of  the  words  alcoholic  fermentation,  and  the  sense  in
which  they  are  employed,  is  impossible,  inasmuch  as  Lavoisier,  Gay-
Lussac,  andThenard  have  applied  this  term  to  the  fermentation  of  su^ar
by  means  of  beer  yeast.  It  would  be  both  dangerous  and  unprofitable  to
discard  the  example  set  by  those  illustrious  masters,  to  whom  we  are
indebted  for  our  earliest  knowledge  of  this  subject.

T    2


276  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

of  fruits  is  an  ordinary  alcoholic  fermentation,  identical  with
that  produced  by  beer-yeast,  and  that,  consequently,  the  cells
of  that  yeast  must,  according  to  our  own  theory,  be  always
present.  There  is  not  the  least  authority  for  such  a  supposition.
When  we  come  to  exact  quantitative  estimations — and  these
are  to  be  found  in  the  figures  supplied  by  Messrs.  Lechartier
and  Bellamy — it  will  be  seen  that  the  proportions  of  alcohol
and  carbonic  acid  gas  produced  in  the  fermentation  of  fruits
differ  widely  from  those  that  we  find  in  alcoholic  fermentations,
properly  so  called,  aa  must  necessarily  be  the  case,  since,  in  the
former,  the  ferment-action  is  effected  by  the  cells  of  a  fruit,  but
in  the  latter  by  cells  of  ordinary  alcoholic  ferment.  Indeed  we
have  a  strong  conviction  that  each  fruit  would  be  found  to  give
rise  to  a  special  action,  the  chemical  equation  of  which  would
be  different  from  that  in  the  case  of  other  fruits.  As  for  the
cii^cumstance  that  the  cells  of  these  fruits  cause  fermentation,
without  multiplying,  this  comes  under  the  kind  of  activity,
which  we  have  already  distinguished  by  the  expression  con-
tinuous life  in  cells  already  formed.

We  will  conclude  this  paragraph  with  a  few  remarks  on  the
subject  of  the  equations  of  fermentations,  which  have  been
suggested  to  ns  principally  in  attempts  to  explain  the  results
derived  from  the  fermentation  of  fruits  immersed  in  carbonic
acid  gas.

Originally,  when  fermentations  were  put  amongst  the  class
of  decompositions  by  contact-action,  it  seemed  probable,  and,  in
fact,  was  believed,  that  every  fermentation  had  its  own  well-
defined  equation,  which  never  varied.  In  the  present  day,  on
the  contrary,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  equation  of  a
fermentation  varies  essentially  with  the  conditions  under  which
that  fermentation  is  accomplished,  and  that  a  statement  of  this
equation  is  a  problem  no  less  complicated  than  that  in  the  case
of  the  nutrition  of  a  living  being.  To  every  fermentation  may
be  assigned  an  equation  in  a  general  sort  of  wa^-,  an  equation,
however,  which,  in  numerous  points  of  detail,  is  liable  to  the
thousand   variations    connected    with    the    phenomena   of  life.


STUDIES    OJJ    FERMENTATION.  277

Moreover,  there  will  be  as  many  distinct  fermentations  brought
about  by  one  ferment  as  there  are  fermentable  substances
capable  of  supplying  the  carbon  element  of  the  food  of  that
same  ferment^  in  the  same  way  that  the  equation  of  the
nutrition  of  an  animal  will  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  food
which  it  consumes.  As  regards  fermentation  producing  alcohol,
which  may  be  effected  by  several  different  ferments,  there  will
be,  in  the  case  of  a  given  sugar,  as  many  general  equations
as  there  are  ferments,  whether  they  be  ferment-cells,  properly
so  called,  or  cells  of  the  organs  of  living  beings  functioning  as
ferments.  In  the  same  way  the  equation  of  nutrition  varies  in
the  case  of  different  animals  nourished  on  the  same  food.  And
it  is  from  the  same  reason  that  ordinary  wort  produces  such  a
variety  of  beers  when  treated  with  the  numerous  alcoholic
ferments  which  we  have  described.  These  remarks  are  appli-
cable to  all  ferments  alike ;  for  instance,  butyric  ferment  is
capable  of  producing  a  host  of  distinct  fermentations,  in  conse-
quence of  its  ability  to  derive  the  carbonaceous  part  of  its  food
from  very  different  substances,  from  sugar,  or  lactic  acid,  or
glycerine,  or  mannite,  and  many  others.

When  we  say  that  every  fermentation  has  its  own  peculiar
ferment,  it  must  be  understood  that  we  are  speaking  of  the
fermentation  considered  as  a  whole,  including  all  the  accessory
products.  We  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  the  ferment  in
question  is  not  capable  of  acting  on  some  other  fermentable
substance  and  giving  rise  to  fermentation  of  a  very  different
kind.  Moreover,  it  is  quite  erroneous  to  suppose  that  the  pre-
sence of  a  single  one  of  the  products  of  a  fermentation  implies
the  co-existence  of  a  particular  ferment.  If,  for  example,  we
find  alcohol  among  the  products  of  a  fermentation,  or  even
alcohol  and  carbonic  acid  gas  together,  this  does  not  prove  that
the  ferment  must  be  an  alcoholic  ferment,  belonging  to  alco-
holic fermentations,  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term.  Nor,
again,  does  the  mere  presence  of  lactic  acid  necessarily  imply
the  presence  of  lactic  ferment.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  different
fermentations  may  give  rise  to  one  or  even  several  identical


278     ■  STUDIES    ox    FERMENTATION.

products.  "\Ve  could  not  say  with  certainty,  from  a  purely
cliemical  point  of  view,  that  we  were  dealing,  fur  example,  with
an  alcoholic  fermentation,  properly  so  called,  and  that  the
veast  of  beer  must  be  present  in  it,  if  we  had  not  first  deter-
mined the  presence  of  all  the  numerous  products  of  that
particular  fermentation,  and  that  they  were  present  in  those
proportions,  characteristic  of  that  fermentation  under  condi-
tions similar  to  those  under  which  the  fermentation  in  question
had  occurred.  In  works  on  fermentation,  the  reader  will  often
find  those  confusions  against  which  we  are  now  attempting  to
guard  him.  It  is  precisely  in  consequence  of  not  having  had
their  attention  drawn  to  such  observations  that  some  have
imagined  that  the  fermentation  in  fruits,  immersed  in  carbonic
acid  gas,  is  in  contradiction  to  the  assertion  which  we  originally
made  in  our  Memoir  on  alcoholic  fermentation,  published
ill  1860,  the  exact  words  of  which  we  maj^  here  repeat : — "  The
chemical  phenomena  of  fermentation  are  related  essentially  to  a
vital  activity,  beginning  and  ending  with  the  latter  ;  we  believe
that  alcoholic  fermentation  never  occurs  " — we  were  discussing
the  question  of  ordinary  alcoholic  fermentation  produced  by
the  yeast  of  beer — "  without  the  simultaneous  occurrence  of
organization,  development,  and  multiplication  of  globules,  or
c<:)ntinued  life,  carried  on  by  means  of  globules  already  formed.
The  general  results  of  the  present  Memoir  seem  to  us  to  be  in
direct  opposition  to  the  opinions  of  MM.  Liebig  and  Berzelius."
These  conclusions,  we  repeat,  are  as  true  now  as  they  ever
were,  and  are  as  applicable  to  the  fermentation  of  fruits,  of
which  nothing  was  known  in  18(>0,  as  they  are  to  the  fer-
mentation produced  by  means  of  yeast.  Onl}',  in  the  case
of  fruits,  it  is  the  cells  of  the  parenchyma  that  function  as
ferment,  h)/  a  cojifi)iiiaf/oii  of  tlicir  vital  acfiviti/  in  carbonic  acid
(/as,  whilst  in  the  other  case  the  ferment  consists  of  the  cells
of  yeast.

There  should  be  nothing  very  surprising  in  the  fact  that
fermentation  can  originate  in  fruits  and  form  alcohol,  without
the  presence  of  yeast,  if  the  fermentation   of  fruits  were  not


i


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  279

confounded  completely  with  ordinary  alcoholic  fermentation,
yielding  the  same  products  and  in  the  same  proportions.  It
is  through  the  misuse  of  words  that  the  fermentation  of  fruits
has  been  termed  alcoholic,  in  a  way  which  has  misled  many
persons.*  In  this  fermentation,  neither  alcohol  nor  carbonic
acid  gas  exists  in  those  proportions  in  which  they  are  found  in
fermentations  produced  by  yeast ;  and  although  we  may  deter-
mine in  it  the  presence  of  succinic  acid,  glycerine,  and  a  small
quantity  of  volatile  acids,t  the  relative  proportions  of  these
substances  will  be  different  from  what  they  are  in  the  case  of
alcoholic  fermentation.


§  III. — Eeply  to  certain  Critical  Observations  of  the
German  Naturalists,  Oscar  Brefeld  and  Moritz
Traube.

The  essential  point  of  the  theory  of  fermentation,  which
we  have  been  concerned  in  proving  in  preceding  paragraphs,
may  be  briefly  put  in  the  statement  that  ferments,  pro-
perly so  called,  constitute  a  class  of  beings  possessing  the
faculty  of  living  out  of  contact  with  free  oxygen  ;  or,  more
concisely  still,  we  may  say,  fermentation  is  a  result  of  life
without  air.

If  our  affirmation  were  inexact,  if  ferment-cells  did  require
for  their  growth  or  for  their  increase  in  number  or  weight,  as

*  See,  for  example,  the  communications  of  MM.  Colin  and  Poggiale,
aud  the  discussion  on  them,  in  the  Bulletin  de  V Academic  de  Medicine,
March  2nd,  9th,  and  30th,  and  February  16th  and  23rd,  1875.

f  We  have  elsewhere  determined  the  formation  of  minute  quantities  of
volatile  acids  in  alcoholic  fermentation.  M.  Bechamp,  who  studied  these,
lecognized  several  belonging  to  the  series  of  fatty  acids,  acetic  acid,
butyric  acid,  &c.  "The  presence  of  succinic  acid  is  not  accidental,  but
constant ;  if  we  put  aside  volatile  acids  that  form  in  quantities  which  we
may  call  infinitely  small,  we  may  say  that  succinic  acid  is  the  only
normal  acid  of  alcoholic  fermentation."  Pasteur,  Comptes  revdus  de
V Academic,  t.  slvii.  p.  224,  lRo8


280  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

all  other  vegetable  cells  do,  the  presence  of  oxygen,  whether
gaseous  or  held  in  solution  in  liquids,  this  new  theory  would
lose  all  value,  its  very  rakon  d^etn  would  be  gone,  at  least  as
far  as  the  most  important  part  of  fermentations  is  concerned.
This  is  precisely  what  M,  Oscar  Brefeld  has  endeavoured  to
prove,  in  a  Memoir  read  to  the  Physico-Medical  Society  of
"Wurzburg,  on  July  26th,  1873,  in  which,  although  we  have
ample  evidence  of  the  great  experimental  skill  of  its  author,
he  has,  nevertheless,  in  our  opinion,  arrived  at  conclusions
entirely  opposed  to  fact.

"  From  the  experiments  which  I  have  just  described,"  he
says,  "it  follows,  in  the  most  indisputable  manner,  that  a
ferment  cannot  increase  without  free  oxygen.  Pasteur's  supposi-
tion that  a  ferment,  unlike  all  other  living  organisms,  can  live
and  increase  at  the  expense  of  oxygen  held  in  combination,  is,
consequently,  altogether  wanting  in  any  solid  basis  of  experi-
mental proof.  Moreover,  since,  according  to  the  theory  of
Pasteur,  it  is  precisely  this  faculty  of  living  and  increasing  at
the  expense  of  the  oxygen  held  in  combination  that  constitutes
the  phenomenon  of  fermentation,  it  follows  that  the  whole
theory,  commanding  though  it  does  such  general  assent,  is
shown  to  be  imtenable  ;    it  is  simply  inaccurate."

The  experiments  to  which  Dr.  Brefeld  alludes,  consisted  in
keeping  under  continued  study  with  the  microscope,  in  a  room
specially  prepared  for  the  purpose,  one  or  more  cells  of  ferment
in  wort,  in  an  atmosphere  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  free  from  the
least  traces  of  free  oxygen.  We  have,  however,  recognized  the
fact  that  the  increase  of  a  ferment  out  of  contact  with  air  is
only  possible  in  the  case  of  a  very  young  specimen  ;  but  our
author  employed  brewer's  yeast  taken  after  fermentation,  and
to  this  fact  we  may  attribute  the  non-success  of  his  growths.
Dr.  Brefeld,  without  knowing  it,  operated  on  yeast  in  one  of
the  states  in  which  it  requires  gaseous  oxygen  to  enable  it  to
germinate  again.  A  perusal  of  what  we  have  previously
written  on  the  subject  of  the  revival  of  yeast,  according  to  its
age,  will  show  Low  widely  the  time  required  for  such  revival


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  281

may  vary  in  different  cases.  What  may  be  perfect!}^  true  of
the  state  of  a  yeast  to-day  may  not  be  so  to-morrow,  since
yeast  is  continually  undergoing  modifications.  We  have  already
shown  the  energy  and  activity  with  which  a  ferment  can  vege-
tate in  the  presence  of  free  oxygen,  and  we  have  pointed  out
the  great  extent  to  which  a  very  small  quantity  of  oxygen  held
in  solution  in  fermenting  liquids  can  operate  at  the  beginning
of  fermentation.  It  is  this  oxygen  that  produces  revival  in
the  cells  of  the  ferment  and  enables  them  to  resume  the  faculty
of  germinating  and  continuing  their  life,  and  of  multiplying
when  deprived  of  air.

In  our  opinion,  a  simple  reflection  should  have  guarded
Dr.  Brefeld  against  the  interpretation  which  he  has  attached
to  his  observations.  If  a  cell  of  ferment  cannot  bud  or  increase
without  absorbing  oxygen,  either  free  or  held  in  solution  in
the  liquid,  the  ratio  between  the  weight  of  ferment  formed
during  fermentation  and  that  of  oxygen  used  up  must  be  con-
stant. We  had,  however,  clearly  established,  as  far  back  as
1861,  the  fact  that  this  ratio  is  extremely  variable,  a  fact,
moreover,  which  is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  the  experiments
described  in  the  preceding  paragraph.  Though  but  small
quantities  of  oxygen  are  absorbed,  a  considerable  weight  of
ferment  may  be  generated ;  whilst  if  the  ferment  has  abun-
dance of  oxygen  at  its  disposal,  it  will  absorb  much,  and  the
weight  of  yeast  formed  will  be  still  greater.  The  ratio  between
the  weight  of  ferment  formed  and  that  of  sugar  decomposed
may  pass  through  all  stages  between  certain  very  wide  limits,
the  variations  depending  on  the  greater  or  less  absorption  of
free  oxygen.  And  in  this  fact,  we  believe,  lies  one  of  the
most  essential  supports  of  the  theory  which  we  advocate.  In
denouncing  the  impossibility,  as  he  considered  it,  of  a  ferment
living  without  air  or  oxygen,  and  so  acting  in  defiance  of  that
law  which  governs  all  living  beings,  animal  or  vegetable,  Dr.
Brefeld  ought  also  to  have  borne  in  mind  the  fact  which  we
have  pointed  out,  that  alcoholic  3'east  is  not  the  only  organized
ferment  which  lives   in  an   anaerobian  state.      It   is  really  a


282


STUJ)II-:S    ON    FERMEXTATIOX,


small  matter  tliat  one  more  ferment  should  be  placed  in  a  list
of  exceptions  to  the  generality  of  living  beings,  for  whom
there  is  a  rigid  law  in  their  vital  economy  which  requires  for
continued  life  a  continuous  respiration,  a  continuous  supply
of  free  oxygen.  Wh)',  for  instance,  has  Dr.  Brefeld  omitted
the  facts  bearing  on  the  life  of  the  vibrios  of  butyric  fer-
mentation ?  Doubtless  he  thought  we  were  equally  mistaken
in  these :  a  few  actual  experiments  would  have  put  him
right.

These  remarks  on  the  criticisms  of  Dr.  Brefeld  are  also
applicable  to  certain  observations  of  M.  Moritz  Traube's,
although,  as  regards  the  principal  object  of  Dr.  Brefeld's
attack,  we  are  indebted  to  M.  Traube  for  our  defence.  This
gentleman  maintained  the  exactness  of  our  results  before  the
Chemical  Society  of  Berlin,  proving  by  fresh  experiments  that
yeast  is  able  to  live  and  multiply  without  the  intervention  of
oxygen.  "  My  researches,"  he  said,  "  confirm  in  an  indis-
putable manner  M.  Pasteur's  assertion  that  the  multiplication
of  yeast  can  take  place  in  media  which  contain  no  trace  of
free  oxygen.  .  .  .  M.  Brefeld's  assertion  to  the  contrary
is  erroneous.'^  But,  immediately  afterwards,  M.  Traube  adds  :
"  Have  we  here  a  confirmation  of  Pasteur's  theory  ?  By  no
means.  The  results  of  my  experiments  demonstrate,  on  the
contrary,  that  this  theor}^  has  no  sure  foundation."  What
were  these  results  ?  Whilst  proving  that  yeast  could  live
without  air,  M.  Traube,  as  we  ourselves  did,  found  that  it  had
great  difl&culty  in  living  under  these  conditions  ;  indeed  he
never  succeeded  in  obtaining  more  than  the  first  stages  of
true  fermentation.  This  was  doubtless  for  the  two  following
reasons — first,  in  consequence  of  the  accidental  production  of
secondary  and  diseased  fermentations,  which  frequently  prevent
the  propagation  of  alcoholic  ferment ;  and,"  secondly,  in  conse-
quence of  the  original  exhausted  condition  of  the  yeast
employed.  As  long  ago  as  1861  we  pointed  out  the  slowness
and  difficulty  of  the  vital  action  of  yeast  when  deprived  of  air,
and  a  little  way  back,   in  the  preceding  paragraph,  we  have


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  283

culled  attention  to  certain  fermentations  that  cannot  be  com-
pleted under  such  conditions  without  going  into  the  causes
of  these  peculiarities.  M.  Traube  expresses  himself  thus :
"Pasteur's  conclusion,  that  yeast  in  the  absence  of  air  is  able
to  derive  the  oxygen  necessary  for  its  development  from  sugar,
is  erroneous  ;  its  increase  is  arrested,  even  when  the  greater
part  of  the  sugar  still  remains  undecomposed.  It  is  in  a
mixture  of  albuminous  substances  that  yeast,  u-lien  deprived  of
air,  finds  the  materials  for  its  development."  This  last  assertion
of  M.  Traube's  is  entirely  disproved  by  those  fermentation
experiments  in  which,  after  suppressing  the  presence  of  albu-
minous substances,  the  action,  nevertheless,  went  on  in  a
purely  inorganic  medium,  out  of  contact  with  air,  a  fact  of
which  we  shall  give  irrefutable  proofs*

*  Traube's  conceptions  were  governed  by  a  theory  of  fermentation
entirely  his  own,  a  hypothetical  one,  as  he  admits,  of  which  the  following
is  a  brief  summary :  "  We  have  no  reason  to  doubt,"  Traube  says,  "  that
the  protoplasm  of  vegetable  cells  is  itself,  or  contains  within  it,  a  chemical
ferment  which  causes  the  alcoholic  fermentation  of  sugar ;  its  efficacy
seems  closely  connected  with  the  presence  of  the  cell,  inasmuch  as,  up  to
the  present  time,  we  have  discovered  no  means  of  isolating  it  from  the
cells  with  success.  In  the  presence  of  air,  this  ferment  oxidizes  sugar,
by  bringing  oxygen  to  bear  upon  it ;  in  the  absence  of  air  it  decomposes
the  sugar  by  taking  away  oxygen  from  one  group  of  atoms  of  the  mole-
cule of  sugar  and  bringing  it  to  act  upon  other  atoms ;  on  the  one  hand
yielding  a  product  of  alcohol  by  reduction,  on  the  other  hand  a  product  of
carbonic  acid  by  oxidation.

Traube  supposes  that  this  chemical  ferment  exists  in  yeast  and  in  all
sweet  fruits,  but  only  when  the  cells  are  intact,  for  he  has  proved  for
himself  that  thoroughly  crushed  fruits  give  rise  to  no  fei-nientation
whatever  in  carbonic  acid  gas.  In  this  respect  this  imaginary  chemical
ferment  would  differ  entirely  from  those  which  we  call  soluble  ferments,
since  diastase,  emulsine,  &c.,  may  be  easilj'  isolated.

For  a  full  account  of  the  views  of  Brefeld  and  Traube,  and  the
discussion  which  they  carried  on  on  the  subject  of  the  results  of
our  experiments,  our  readers  may  consult  the  Journal  of  the  Chemical
F^ociety  of  Berlin,  vii.  p.  872.  The  numbers  for  September  and
December,  1874,  in  the  same  volume,  contain  the  replies  of  the  two
authors.


284  STUDIES    ox    FETIMENTATIOX.

^  IV. — Fermentation  of  Dkxtro-Taktrate  of  Lime.*

Tartrate  of  lime,  in  spite  of  its  insolubility  in  water,  is
capable  of  complete  fermentation  in  a  mineral  medium.

If  we  put  some  pure  tartrate  of  lime,  in  tbe  form  of  a
granulated,  crystalline  powder,  into  pure  water,  together  with
some  sulphate  of  ammonia  and  phosphates  of  potassium  and
magnesium,  in  very  small  proportions,  a  spontaneous  fermenta-
tion will  take  place  in  the  deposit  in  the  course  of  a  few  days,
although  no  g^erms  of  ferment  have  been  added.  A  living:,
organized  ferment,  of  the  vibrionic  type,  filiform,  with  tortuous
motions,  and  often  of  immense  length,  forms  spontaneously  by
the  development  of  some  germs  derived  in  some  way  from  the
inevitable  particles  of  dust  floating  in  the  air  or  resting  on  the
surface  of  the  vessels  or  materials  which  we  employ.  The
germs  of  the  vibrios  concerned  in  putrefaction  are  diffused
around  us  on  every  side,  and,  in  all  probability,  it  is  one  or
more  of  these  germs  that  develop  in  the  medium  in  question.
In  this  way  they  effect  the  decomposition  of  the  tartrate,  from
which  they  must  necessarily  obtain  the  carbon  of  their  food,
without  which  they  cannot  exist,  while  the  nitrogen  is  fur-
nished by  the  ammonia  of  the  ammoniacal  salt,  the  mineral
principles  by  the  phosphate  of  potassium  and  magnesium,  and
the  sulphur  by  the  sulphate  of  ammonia.  How  strange  to  see
organization,  life,  and  motion  originating  under  such  con-
ditions !  Stranger  still  to  think  that  this  organization,  life,
and  motion  are  effected  without  the  participation  of  free
oxygen.  Once  the  germ  gets  a  primar}'^  impulse  on  its  living
career  by  access  of  oxygen,  it  goes  on  reproducing  indefinitely,
absolutely  without  atmospheric  air.  Here  then  we  have  a  fact
which  it  is  important  to  establish  beyond  the  possibility  of
doubt,  that  we  may  prove  that  yeast  is  not  the  only  organized
ferment  able  to  live  and  multiply  when  out  of  the  influence  of
free  oxygen.

•  See  Pasteur,  Comptes  rendus  de  V Academie  dts  Sciences,  t.  Ivi.  p.  416.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


285


100  grammes

1

5>

1

j>

0-5

>)

0-5

?•

Into  a  flask,  like  that  represented  in  Fig.  67,  of  2'5  litres
(about  four  pints)  in  capacity,  we  put :  —
Pure,  crystallized,  neutral  tartrate  of

lime  . .
Phosphate  of  ammonia
„  magnesium

,,  potassium

Sulphate  of  ammonia.  .

(1  gramme =15-43  grains.)
To  this  we  added  pure  distilled  water,  so  as  to  entirely  fill  the
flask.

In  order  to  expel  all  the  air  dissolved  in  the  water  and
adhering  to  the  solid  suBstances,  we  first  placed  our  flask  in  a
bath  of  chloride  of  calcium,  in  a  large  cjlindrical  white  iron
pot,  set  over  a  flame.  The  exit-tube  of  the  flask  was  plunged
in  a  test-tube  of  Bohemian  glass  three-quarters  full  of  distilled
water,  and  also  heated  by  a  flame.  We  boiled  the  liquids  in
the  flask  and  test-tube  for  a  sufl&cient  time  to  expel  all  the  air
contained  in  them.  We  then  withdrew  the  heat  from  under  the
test-tube,  and  immediately  afterwards  covered  the  water  which
it  contained  with  a  layer  of  oil,  and  then  permitted  the  whole
apparatus  to  cool  down.


286  STUDIES    ON    FERMKNTATION.

Next  da}'  we  applied  a  finger  to  the  open  extremity  of  the
exit-tube,  which  we  then  plunged  in  a  vessel  of  mercury.  In
this  particular  experiment  which  we  are  describing,  we  per-
mitted the  flask  to  remain  in  this  state  for  a  fortnight.  It
might  have  remained  for  a  century  without  ever  manifesting
the  least  sign  of  fermentation,  the  fermentation  of  the  tartrate
being  a  consequence  of  life,  and  life  after  the  boiling  no  longer
existed  in  the  flask.  When  it  was  evident  that  the  contents  of
the  flask  were  perfectly  inert,  we  impregnated  them  rapidly,  as
follows  : — All  the  liquid  contained  in  the  exit-tube  was  removed
by  means  of  a  fine  caoutchouc  tube,  and  replaced  by  about  1  c.c.
(about  17  minims)  of  liquid  and  deposit  from  another  flask,
similar  to  the  one  we  have  described,  but  which  had  been  fer-
menting spontaneously  for  twelve  days ;  we  lost  no  time  in
refilling  completely  the  exit-tube  with  water  which  had  been
first  boiled  and  then  cooled  down  in  carbonic  acid  gas.  This
operation  lasted  only  a  few  minutes.  The  exit-tube  was  again
plunged  under  mercury.  Subsequently  the  tube  was  not
moved  from  under  the  mercury,  and  as  it  formed  part  of  the
flask,  and  there  was  neither  cork  nor  india-rubber,  any  intro-
duction of  air  was  consequently  impossible.  The  small  quantity
of  air  introduced  during  the  impregnation  was  insignificant,  and
it  might  even  be  shown  that  it  injured  rather  than  assisted  the
growth  of  the  organisms,  inasmuch  as  these  consisted  of  adult
individuals  which  had  lived  without  air  and  might  be  liable  to
be  damaged  or  even  destroyed  by  it.  Be  this  as  it  may,  in  a
subsequent  experiment  we  shall  find  the  possibility  removed  of
any  aeration  taking  place  in  this  way,  however  infinitesimal,  so
that  no  doubt  may  linger  on  this  subject.

The  following  days  the  organisms  multiplied,  the  deposit  of
tartrate  gradually  disappeared,  and  a  sensible  ferment  action
was  manifest  on  the  surface,  and  throughout  the  bulk  of  the
liquid.  The  deposit  seemed  lifted  up  in  places,  and  was  covered
with  a  layer  of  a  dark-grey  colour,  puffed  up,  and  having  an
organic  and  gelatinous  appearance.  For  several  days,  in  spite
of  this  action  in  the  deposit,  we  detected  no  disengagement  c


STUDIES    ON    FERMEXTATIOX.  287

gas,  except  when  the  flask  was  slightly  shaken,  in  which  case
rather  large  bubbles  adhering  to  the  deposit  rose,  carrying  with
them  some  solid  particles,  which  quickly  fell  back  again,  whilst
the  bubbles  diminished  in  size  as  they  rose,  from  being  partially
taken  into  solution,  in  consequence  of  the  liquid  not  being
saturated.  The  smallest  bubbles  had  even  time  to  dissolve  com-
pletely before  they  could  reach  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  lu
course  of  time  the  liquid  was  saturated,  and  the  tartrate  was
gradually  displaced  by  mammillated  crusts,  or  clear,  trans-
parent crystals  of  carbonate  of  lime  at  the  bottom  and  on  the
sides  of  the  vessel.

The  impregnation  took  place  on  February  10th,  and  on  March
15th  the  liquid  was  nearly  saturated.  The  bubbles  then  began
to  lodge  in  the  bent  part  of  the  exit-tube,  at  the  top  of  the
flask.  A  glass  measuring-tube  containing  mercury  was  now
placed  with  its  open  end  over  the  point  of  the  exit-tube  under
the  mercury  in  the  trough,  so  that  no  bubble  might  escape.  A
steady  evolution  of  gas  went  on  from  the  17th  to  the  18th,
17*4  c.c.  (1"06  cubic  inches)  having  been  collected.  This  was
proved  to  be  nearly  absolutely  pure  carbonic  acid,  as  indeed
might  have  been  suspected  from  the  fact  that  the  evolution  did
not  begin  before  a  distinct  saturation  of  the  liquid  was  observed.*

The  liquid,  which  was  turbid  on  the  day  after  its  impregna-
tion, had,  in  spite  of  the  liberation  of  gas,  again  become  so
transparent  that  we  could  read  our  handwriting  through  the
body  of  the  flask.  Notwithstanding  this,  there  was  still  a  very
active  operation  going  on  in  the  deposit,  but  it  was  confined  to
that  spot.  Indeed,  the  swarming  vibrios  were  bound  to  remain
there,  the  tartrate  of  lime  being  still  more  insoluble  in  water
saturated  with  carbonate  of  lime  than  it  is  in  pure  water.  A
supply  of  carbonaceous  food,  at  all  events,  was  absolutely
wanting  in  the  bulk  of  the  liquid.  Every  day  we  continued  to
collect  and  analyze  the  total  amount  of  gas  disengaged.  To
the  very  last,  it  was  composed  of  pure  carbonic  acid  gas.     Only

*  [Carboinc  acid  being  considerably  more  soluble  than  other  gases
possible  under  the  circumstances. — Ed.]


288  STUDIES    ox    FERMENTATION.

during  the  first  few  days  did  the  absorption  by  the  concentrated
potash  leave  a  very  minute  residue.  By  April  2Gth  all  libera-
tion of  gas  had  ceased,  the  last  bubbles  having  risen  in  the
course  of  April  23rd.  The  flask  had  been  all  the  time  in  the
oven,  at  a  temperature  between  25°  C.  and  28°  C.  (77°  F.  and
83°  F.).  The  total  volume  of  gas  collected  was  2-135  litres
(130"2  cubic  inches).  To  obtain  the  whole  volume  of  gas
formed  we  had  to  add  to  this  what  was  held  in  the  liquid  in  the
state  of  acid  carbonate  of  lime.  To  determine  this  we  poured  a
portion  of  the  liquid  from  the  flask  into  another  flask  of  similar
shape,  but  smaller,  up  to  a  gauge-mark  on  the  neck.*  This
smaller  flask  had  been  previously  filled  with  carbonic  acid.
The  carbonic  acid  of  the  fermented  liquid  was  then  expelled  b}^
means  of  heat,  and  collected  over  mercury.  In  this  way  we
found  a  volume  of  8'322  litres  (508  cubic  inches)  of  gas  in
solution,  which,  added  to  2'135  litres,  gave  a  total  of  10  457
litres  (638 '2  cubic  inches)  at  20°  and  760,  which  calculated  to
0°  C.  and  760  mm.  atmospheric  pressure  (32°  F.  and  30  inches)
gave  a  weight  of  19'70  grammes  (302'2  grains)  of  carbonic  acid.
Exactly  half  of  the  lime  of  the  tartrate  employed  got  used
up  in  the  soluble  salts  formed  during  fermentation ;  the  other
half  was  partly  precipitated  in  the  form  of  carbonate  of  lime,
partly  dissolved  in  the  liquid  by  the  carbonic  acid.  The  soluble
salts  seemed  to  us  to  be  a  mixture  or  combination  of  1  equiva-
lent of  metacetate  of  lime,  with  2  equivalents  of  the  acetate,
for  every  10  equivalents  of  carbonic  acid  produced,  the  whole
corresponding  to  the  fermentation  of  3  equivalents  of  neutral
tartrate  of  lime.f      This    point,   however,  is   worthy  of  being

*  We  had  to  avoid  tilling  the  small  flask  completely,  for  fear  of  causing
some  of  the  liquid  to  pass  on  to  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in  the
measuring  tube.  The  lii^uid  condensed  bj-  boiling  forms  pure  water,  the
solvent  affinity  of  which  for  carbonic  acid,  at  the  temperature  we  employ,
is  well  known.

f  The  following  is  a  curious  consequence  of  these  numbers  and  of  the
nature  of  the  products  of  this  fermentation.  The  carbonic  acid  liberated
being  quite  pure,  especiallj'  when  the  liquid  has  been  boiled  to  expel  all
air  from  the  flask,  and  capable  of  perfect  solution,  it  follows  that,  the


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.  289

studied  with  greater  care :  the  present  statement  of  the  nature
of  the  products  formed  is  given  with  all  reserve.  For  our  point,
indeed,  the  matter  is  of  little  importance,  since  the  equation  of
the  fermentation  does  not  concern  us.

After  the  completion  of  fermentation  there  was  not  a  trace  of
tartrate  of  lime  remaining  at  the  bottom  of  the  vessel :  it  had
disappeared  gradually  as  it  got  broken  up  into  the  different
products  of  fermentation,  and  its  place  was  taken  by  some
crystallized  carbonate  of  lime — the  excess,  namely,  which  had
been  unable  to  dissolve  by  the  action  of  the  carbonic  acid.
Associated,  moreover,  with  this  carbonate  of  lime  there  was  a
quantity  of  some  kind  of  animal  matter,  which,  under  the
microscope,  appeared  to  be  composed  of  masses  of  granules
mixed  with  very  fine  filaments  of  varying  lengths,  studded
with  minute  dots,  and  presenting  all  the  characteristics  of  a
nitrogenous  organic  substance.*  That  this  was  really  the  fer-
ment is  evident  enough  from  all  that  we  have  already  said.
To  convince  ourselves  more  thoroughly  of  the  fact,  and  at  the
same  time  to  enable  us  to  observe  the  mode  of  activity  of  the
organism,  we  instituted  the  following  supplementary  observa-
tion.    Side  by  side   with   the  experiment  just   described,   we

volume  of  liquid  being  sufficient  and  the  weight  of  tartrate  suitably  chosen
— we  may  set  aside  tartrate  of  lime  in  an  insoluble,  crystalline  powder,
along  with  phosphates  at  the  bottom  of  a  closed  vessel  fall  of  water,  and
find  soon  afterwards  in  their  place  carbonate  of  lime,  and,  in  the  liquid,
soluble  salts  of  lime,  with  a  mass  of  organic  matter  at  the  bottom,  without
any  liberation  of  gas  or  appearance  of  fermentation  ever  taking  place,
except  as  far  as  the  vital  action  and  transformation  in  the  tartrate  are
concerned.  It  is  easy  to  calculate  that  a  vessel  or  flask  of  five  litres
(rather  more  than  a  gallon)  would  be  large  enough  for  the  accomplishment
of  this  remarkable  and  singularly  quiet  transformation,  in  the  case  of
fifty  grammes  (767  grains)  of  tartrate  of  lime.

*  We  treated  the  whole  deposit  with  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  which
dissolved  the  carbonate  of  lime,  and  the  insoluble  phosphates  of  calcium
and  magnesium  ;  afterwards  filtering  the  liquid  through  a  weighed  filter
paper.  Dried  at  100°  C.  (212°  F.),  the  weight  of  organic  matter  thiis
obtained  was  0'54  gramme  (8-3  grains),  which  was  rather  more  than
■s-iTrth  of  the  weight  of  fermentable  matter.


290


STUDIES    OX    FERMENTATION.


conducted  a  similar  one,  which  we  intermitted  after  the  fer-
mentation was  somewhat  advanced,  and  about  half  of  the
tartrate  dissolved.  Breaking  off,  with  a  file,  the  exit  tube  at
the  point  where  the  neck  began  to  narrow  off,  we  took  some  of
the  deposit  from  the  bottom  b}^  means  of  a  long,  straight  piece
of  tubing,  in  order  to  bring  it  under  microscopical  examination.
We  found  it  to  consist  of  a  host  of  long  filaments  of  extreme
tenuity,  their  diameter  being  about  -,  „'ooth  of  a  millimetre
(0  000039   in.) ;  their  length   varied,   in  some  cases  being  as


Fig.  68.

much  as  TrVtb  of  a  millimetre  (O'OOIQ  in.).  A  crowd  of  these
long  vibrios  were  to  be  seen  creeping  slowly  along,  with  a
sinuous  movement,  showing  three,  four,  or  even  five  flexures.
The  filaments  that  were  at  rest  had  the  same  aspect  as  these
last,  with  the  exception  that  they  appeared  punctate,  as  though
composed  of  a  series  of  granules  arranged  in  irregular  order.
No  doubt  these  were  vibrios  in  which  vital  action  had  ceased,
exhausted  specimens  which  we  may  compare  with  the  old
granular  ferment  of  beer,  whilst  those  in  motion  may  be  com-
pared with  young  and  vigorous  yeast.  The  absence  of  movement
in  the  former  seems  to  prove  that  this  view  is  correct.  Both
kinds  showed  a  tendency  to  form  clusters,  the  compactness  of
which  impeded  the  movements  of  those  which  were  in  motion.
Moreover,  it  was  noticeable  that  the  masses  of  these  latter  rested
on  tartrate  not  yet  dissolved,  whilst  the  granular  clusters  of  the
others  rested  directly  on  the  glass,  at  the  bottom  of  the  flask,
as  if,  having  decomposed  the  tartrate,  the  only  carbonaceous
food  at  their  disposal,  they  had  then  died  at  the  spot  where  we


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.  291

captured  them  from  inability  to  escape,  precisely  in  con-
sequence of  that  state  of  entanglement  which  they  combined  to
form,  during  the  period  of  their  active  development.  Besides
these  we  observed  vibrios  of  the  same  diameter,  but  of  much
smaller  length,  whirling  round  with  great  rapidity,  and  darting
backwards  and  forwards  ;  these  were  probably  identical  with  the
longer  ones,  and  possessed  greater  freedom  of  movement,  no
doubt  in  consequence  of  their  greater  shortness.  Not  one  of
these  vibrios  could  be  found  throughout  the  mass  of  the  liquid.

We  may  remark  that  as  there  was  a  somewhat  putrid  odour
from  the  deposit  in  which  the  vibrios  swarmed,  the  action  must
have  been  one  of  reduction,  and  no  doubt  to  this  fact  was  due
the  greyish  coloration  of  the  deposit.  We  suppose  that  the
substances  employed,  however  pure,  always  contain  some  trace
of  iron,  which  becomes  converted  into  the  sulphide,  the  black
colour  of  which  would  modify  the  originally  white  deposit  of
insoluble  tartrate  and  phosphate.

But  what  is  the  nature  of  these  vibrios  ?  We  have  already
said  that  we  believe  that  they  are  nothing  but  the  ordinary
vibrios  of  putrefaction,  reduced  to  a  state  of  extreme  tenuity  by
the  special  conditions  of  nutrition  involved  in  the  fermentable
medium  used  ;  in  a  word,  we  think  that  the  fermentation  in
question  might  be  called  putrefaction  of  tartrate  of  lime.  It
would  be  easy  enough  to  determine  this  point  by  growing  the
vibrios  of  such  a  fermentation  in  media  adapted  to  the  pro-
duction of  the  ordinary  forms  of  vibrio  ;  but  this  is  an  experi-
ment which  we  have  not  ourselves  tried.

One  word  more  on  the  subject  of  these  curious  beings.  In  a
great  many  of  them  there  appears  to  be  something  like  a  clear
spot,  a  kind  of  bead,  at  one  of  their  extremities.  This  is  an
illusion  arising  from  the  fact  that  the  extremity  of  these  vibrios
is  curved,  hanging  downwards,  thus  causing  a  greater  refraction
at  that  particular  point,  and  leading  us  to  think  that  the
diameter  is  greater  at  that  extremity.  We  may  easily  un-
deceive ourselves  if  we  watch  the  movements  of  the  vibrio,
when  we  will  readily  recognize  the  bend,  especially  as  it  is

'  u2


292  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

brought  into  the  vertical  plane  passing  over  the  rest  of  the
filament.  In  this  way  we  will  see  the  bright  spot,  the  head
disappear,  and  then  reappear.

The  chief  inference  that  it  concerns  us  to  draw  from  the  pre-
ceding facts  is  one  which  cannot  admit  of  doubt,  and  which  we
need  not  insist  on  any  further — namely,  that  vibrios,  as  met
with  in  the  fermentation  of  neutral  tartrate  of  lime,  are  able  to
live  and  multiply  when  entirely  deprived  of  air.


§  V, — Another  Example  of  Life  Without  Air —
Fermentation  of  Lactate  of  Lime.


As  another  example  of  life  without  air,  accompanied  by
fermentation  properly  so  called,  we  may  lastly  cite  the  fermen-
tation of  lactate  of  lime  in  a  mineral  medium.

In  the  experiment  described  in  the  last  paragraph,  it  will  be
remembered  that  the  ferment-liquid  and  the  germs  employed  in
its  impregnation  came  in  contact  with  air,  although  only  for  a
very  brief  time.  Now,  notwithstanding  that  we  possess  exact
observations  which  prove  that  the  diffusion  of  oxygen  and
nitrogen  in  a  liquid  absolutely  deprived  of  air,  so  far  from
taking  place  rapidly,  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  very  slow  process
indeed  ;  yet  we  were  anxious  to  guard  the  experiment  that  we
are  about  to  describe  from  the  slightest  possible  trace  of  oxygen
at  the  moment  of  impregnation.

We  employed  a  liquid  prepared  as  follows :  Into  from  9  to
10  litres  (somewhat  over  2  gallons)  of  pure  water  the  following
salts  *  were  introduced  successively,  viz  : —

•  Should  the  solution  of  lactate  of  lime  be  turbid,  it  may  be  clarified
by  filtration,  after  previously  adding  a  small  quantity  of  phosphate  of
ammonia,  which  throws  down  phosphate  of  lime.  It  is  only  after  this
process  of  clarification  and  filtration  that  the  phosphates  of  the  formula
are  added.  The  solution  soon  becomes  turbid,  if  left  in  contact  with  air,
in  consequence  of  the  spontaneous  formation  of  bacteria.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


293


Pure  lactate  of  lime  . .  . .  .  .      225  grammes

Phosphate  of  ammonia  .  .  . .     0*75         ,,

Phosphate  of  potassium         .  ,  .  .       0'4         „

Sulphate  of  magnesium        .  .  . .        0'4         „

Sulphate  of  ammonia  . .  . .        0'2         „

[1  gramme=  15*43  grains.]

On  March  23rd,  1875,  we  filled  a  6  litre  (about  11  pints)
flask,  of  the  shape  represented  in  Fig.  69,  and  placed  it  over  a
heater.  Another  flame  was  placed  below  a  vessel  containing
the  same  liquid,  into  which  the  curved  tube  of  the  flask  was


Fig  69.

plunged.  The  liquids  in  the  flask  and  in  the  basin  were  raised
to  boiling  together,  and  kept  in  this  condition  for  more  than
half-an-hour,  so  as  to  expel  all  the  air  held  in  solution.  The
liquid  was  several  times  forced  out  of  the  flask  by  the  steam,
and  sucked  back  again ;  but  the  portion  which  re-entered  the
flask  was  always  boiling.  On  the  following  day,  when  the  flask
had  cooled,  we  transferred  the  end  of  the  delivery  tube  to  a


294  STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATION.

vessel  full  of  mercury  and  placed  the  whole  apparatus  in  an
oven  at  a  temperature  varying  between  25°  C.  and  30°  C.
(77°  F.  and  86°  F.) ;  then,  after  having  refilled  the  small
cylindrical  tap-funnel  with  carbonic  acid,  we  passed  into  it
with  all  necessary  precautions  10  c.c.  (0"35  fi.  oz.)  of  a  liquid
similar  to  that  described,  which  had  been  ali'eady  in  active
fermentation  for  several  days  out  of  contact  with  air  and  now
swarmed  with  vibrios.  We  then  turned  the  tap  of  the  funnel,
until  only  a  small  quantity  of  liquid  was  left,  just  enough  to  pre-
vent the  access  of  air.  In  this  way  the  impregnation  was  accom-
plished without  either  the  ferment-liquid  or  the  ferment-germs
having  been  brought  in  contact,  even  for  the  shortest  space,
with  the  external  air.  The  fermentation,  the  occurrence  of
which  at  an  earlier  or  later  period  depends  for  the  most  part
on  the  condition  of  the  impregnating  germs,  and  the  number
introduced  in  the  act,  in  this  case  began  to  manifest  itself  by
the  appearance  of  minute  bubbles  from  March  29th.  But  not
till  April  9th  did  we  observe  bubbles  of  larger  size  rise  to  the
surface.  From  that  date  onward  they  continued  to  come  in
increasing  number,  from  certain  points  at  the  bottom  of  the
flask,  where  a  deposit  of  earthy  phosphates  existed ;  and  at
the  same  time  the  liquid,  which  for  the  first  few  days  remained
perfectly  clear,  began  to  grow  turbid  in  consequence  of  the
development  of  vibrios.  It  was  on  the  same  day  that  we  first
observed  a  deposit  on  the  sides  of  carbonate  of  lime  in  crj'stals.
It  is  a  matter  of  some  interest  to  notice  here  that,  in  the
mode  of  procedure  adopted,  everj^thing  combined  to  prevent
the  interference  of  air.  A  portion  of  the  liquid  expelled  at  the
beginning  of  the  experiment,  partly  because  of  the  increased
temperature  in  the  oven  and  partl}^  also  by  the  force  of  the  gas,
as  it  began  to  be  evolved  from  the  fermentative  action,  reached
the  surface  of  the  mercury,  where,  being  the  most  suitable  me-
dium we  know  for  the  growth  of  bacteria,  it  speedily  swarmed
with  these  organisms.*     In  this  way  any  passage  of  air,  if  such

*  The  naturalist  Cohn,  of  Breslau,  who  published  an  excellent  work
on  bacteria  in  1872,  described,  after  Mayer,  the  composition  of  a  liquid


STUDIES    OX    FERMEXTATIOX.  295

a  thing  were  possible,  between  the  mercury  and  the  sides  of
the  delivery-tube  was  altogether  prevented,  since  the  bacteria
would  consume  every  trace  of  oxygen  which  might  be  dissolved
in  the  liquid  lying  on  the  surface  of  the  mercur}^  Hence  it
is  impossible  to  imagine  that  the  slightest  trace  of  oxygen
could  have  got  into  the  liquid  in  the  flask.

Before  passing  on  we  may  remark  that  in  this  ready
absorption  of  oxygen  by  bacteria  we  have  a  means  of  de-
priving fermentable  liquids  of  every  trace  of  that  gas
with  a  facilit}'^  and  success  equal  or  even  greater  than  by  the
method  of  preliminary  boiling.  Such  a  solution  as  we  have
described,  if  kept  at  summer  heat,  without  any  previous  boiling,
becomes  turbid  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours  from  a
spontaneous  development  of  bacteria  ;  and  it  is  easy  to  prove
that  they  absorb  all  the  oxygen  held  in  solution.*  If  we
completely  till  a  flask  of  a  few  litres  capacity  (about  a  gallon)
(Fig.  67)  with  the  liquid  described,  taking  care  to  have  the
delivery-tube  also  filled,  and  its  opening  plunged  under
mercury,  and,  forty-eight  hours  afterwards,  by  means  of
a  chloride  of  calcium  bath,  expel  from  the  liquid  on  the
surface  of  the  mercur}^  all  the  gas  which  it  holds  in  solution,
this  gas,  when  analyzed,  w'ill  be  found  to  be  composed  of  a
mixture  of  nitrogen  and  carbonic  acid  gas,  without  the  least
trace  of  oxygen.  Here,  then,  we  have  an  excellent  means  of
depriving  the  fermentable  liquid  of  air ;    we  have  simpl}'  to

peculiarly  adapted  to  the  propagation  of  these  organisms,  which  it  would
be  well  to  compare  for  its  utility  in  studies  of  this  kind  with  our  solution
of  lactate  and  phosphates.     The  following  is  Cohn's  formula : —
Distilled  water  . .  . .  . .     20  c.c.  (0'7  fl.  oz.)


Phosphate  of  potassium
Sulphate  of  magnesium
Tribasic  phosphate  of  lime
Tartrate  of  ammonia


O'l  gramme  (1'5  grains).

0-1

0-01       ,,         (0-15  grain).

0-2         ,,         (3  grains).


This  liquid,  the  author  says,  has  a  feeble  acid  reaction  and  forms  a  per-
fectly clear  solution.

*  On  the  rapid  absorption  of  oxygen  by  bacteria,  see  also  our  Memoire
of  1872,  sur  les  Generations  dites  Spontanees,  especially  the  note  on  page  7S.


296  STTDIES    ON    FEKMENTATIOX.

completely  fill  a  flask  willi  the  liquid,  and  place  it  in  the  oven,
merely  avoiding  any  addition  of  butyric  vibrios  before  the
lapse  of  two  or  three  days.  "VVe  may  wait  even  longer  ;  and
then,  if  the  liquid  does  not  become  impregnated  spontaneously
with  vibrio  germs,  the  liquid,  which  at  first  was  turbid  from
the  presence  of  bacteria,  will  become  bright  again,  since  the
bacteria  when  deprived  of  life,  or,  at  least,  of  the  power  of
ntoving,  after  they  have  exhausted  all  the  oxygen  in  solution,
will  fall  inert  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  On  several  occasions,
we  have  determined  this  interesting  fact,  which  tends  to  prove
that  the  butyric  vibrios  cannot  be  regarded  as  another  form  of
bacteria,  inasmuch  as,  on  the  hypothesis  of  an  original  relation
between  the  two  productions,  butyric  fermentation  ought  in
every  case  to  follow  the  growth  of  bacteria.

"VVe  may  also  call  attention  to  another  striking  experiment,
well  suited,  to  show  the  effect  of  differences  in  the  composition
of  the  medium  upon  the  propagation  of  microscopic  beings.
The  fermentation  which  we  last  described  commenced  on
March  27th  and  continued  until  May  10th ;  that  to  which  we
are  now  to  refer,  however,  was  completed  in  four  days,  the
liquid  employed,  being  similar  in  composition  and  quantity  to
that  employed  in  the  former  experiment.  On  April  23rd,
1875,  we  filled  a  flask  of  the  same  shape  as  that  represented
in  Fig.  69,  and  of  similar  capacity,  viz.,  6  litres,  with  a  liquid
composed  as  described  at  page  293.  This  liquid  had  been
previously  left  to  itself  for  five  days  in  large  open  flasks,  in
consequence  of  which  it  had  developed,  an  abundant  growth  of
bacteria.  On  the  fifth  day  a  few  bubbles,  rising  from  the
bottom  of  the  vessels,  at  long  intervals,  betokened  the  com-
mencement of  butyric  fermentation,  a  fact,  moreover,  confirmed
by  the  microscope,  in  the  appearance  of  the  vibrios  of  this
fermentation  in  specimens  of  the  liquid  taken  from  the  bottom
of  the  vessels,  the  middle  of  its  mass,  and  even  in  the  layer
on  the  surface  that  was  swarming  with  bacteria.  We  trans-
ferred the  liquid  so  prepared  to  the  6-litre  flask  arranged  over
the  mercury.     By  evening  a  tolerably  active  fermentation  had


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATlOTSr.  297

begun  to  manifest  itself.  On  the  24tli  this  fermentation  was
proceeding  with  astonishing  rapidity,  which  continued  during
the  25th  and  26th.  During  the  evening  of  the  26th  it
slackened,  and  on  the  27th  all  signs  of  fermentation  had  ceased.
This  was  not,  as  might  be  supposed,  a  sudden  stoppage,  due
to  some  unknown  cause ;  the  fermentation  was  actually  com-
pleted, for  when  we  examined  the  fermented  liquid  on  the  28th
we  could  not  find  the  smallest  quantity  of  lactate  of  lime.  If
the  needs  of  industry  should  ever  require  the  production  of
large  quantities  of  butyric  acid,  there  would,  beyond  doubt,  be
found  in  the  preceding  fact  valuable  information  in  devising  an
easy  method  of  preparing  that  product  in  abundance.*

Before  we  go  any  further,  let  us  devote  some  attention  to
the  vibrios  of  the  preceding  fermentations.

On  May  27th,  1862,  we  completely  filled  a  flask,  capable
of  holding  2'780  litres  (about  five  pints),  with  the  solution  of
lactate  and  phosphates. f  We  refrained  from  impregnating  it
with  any  germs.      The  liquid  became  turbid  from  a  develop-

*  In  what  way  are  we  to  account  for  so  great  a  difference  between  the
two  fermentations  that  we  have  just  described  ?     Probablj',  it  was  owing
to  some  modification  eflfected  in  the  medium  by  the  previous  life  of  the
bacteria,  or  to  the  special  character  of  the  vibrios  used  in  impregnation.
Or,  again,  it  might  have  been  due  to  the  action  of  the  air,  which,  under
the  conditions  of  our  second  experiment,  was  not  absolutely  eliminated,
since  we  took  no  precaution  against  its  introduction  at  the  moment  of
filling  our  flask,  and  this  would  tend  to  facihtate  the  multiplication  of
anaerobian  vibrios,  just  as,  under  similar  conditions,  would  have  been
the  case  if  we  had  been  dealing  with  a  fermentation  by  ordinary  yeast.

t  In  this  case  the  liquid  was  composed  as  follows  : — a  saturated  solu-
tion of  lactate  of  lime,  at  a  temperature  of  25°  C.  (77"  F.)  was  prepared,
containing  for  every  100  c.c.  (3|  fl.  oz.)  25-6o  grammes  (394  grains)  of  the
lactate,    CgH^O^GaO    [new    notation,    CgHioCaOg].      This   solution  was
rendered  very  clear  by  the  addition   of  one  gramme  of  phosphate  of
ammonia  and  subsequent  filtration.     For  a  volume  of  8  litres  (14  pints)
of  this  clear,  saturated  solution,  we  used  [1  gramme  =  15 '43  grains]  : —
Phosphate  of  ammonia  . .  . .  . .  . .     2  grammes.

Phosphate  of  potassium         ..  ..  ..  ..1         ,,

Phosphate  of  magnesium       . .  . .  . .  . .      1         , ,

Sulphate  of  ammonia  . .  . .  . .  . .  .  .     0"5     ,,


298  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

nieut  of  bacteria,  and  then  underwent  butyric  fermentation.
By  June  9th  the  fermentation  had  become  sufficiently  active  to
enable  us  to  collect  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours,  over
mercur}^  as  in  all  our  experiments,  about  100  cc.  (about  6  cubic
inches)  of  gas.  By  June  11th,  judging  from  the  volume  of  gas
liberated  in  the  course  of  twenty-four  hours,  the  activity  of  the
fermentation  had  doubled.  We  examined  a  drop  of  the  turbid
liquid.  Here  are  the  notes  accompan3ang  the  sketch  (Fig.  70)
as  they  stand  in  our  note-book  : — "  A  swarm  of  vibrios,  so
active  in  their  movements  that  the  eye  has  great  difficulty  in
following  them.      They  may  be  seen  in  pairs  throughout  the

Fig.  to.

field,  apparently  making  elibrts  to  separate  from  each  other.
The  connection  would  seem  to  be  by  some  invisible,  gelatinous
thread,  which  yields  so  far  to  their  efforts  that  they  succeed  in
breaking  away  from  actual  contact,  but  yet  are,  for  a  while,  so
far  restrained  that  the  movements  of  one  have  a  visible  effect
on  those  of  the  other.  By  and  by,  however,  we  see  a  complete
separation  effected,  and  each  moves  on  its  separate  way  with
an  activity  still  greater  than  it  had  before."

One  of  the  best  methods  that  can  be  employed  for  the  micro-
scopical examination  of  these  vibrios,  quite  out  of  contact  with
air,  is  the  following : — After  butyric  fermentation  has  been
going  on  for  several  days  in  a  flask,  A  (Fig.  71),  we  connect
this  flask  by  an  india-rubber  tube  with  one  of  the  flattened
bulbs  previously  described,  page  156  (Fig.  31),  which  we  then
place  on  the  stage  of  the  microscope  (Fig.  71).  When  we  wash
to  make  an  observation  we  close,  under  the  mercury,  at  the
point  b,  the  end  of  the  drawn-out  and  bent  delivery-tube.
The  continued  evolution  of  gas  soon  exerts  such  a  pressure
within  the  flask,  that  when  we  open  the  tap  r,  the  liquid  is


i


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


299


driven  into  the  bulb  /  /,    until  it  becomes  quite  full  and  the
liquid  flows  over  into  the  glass  Y.     In  this  manner  we  may


Fig.  71.

bring  the  vibrios  under  observation  without  their  coming  into
contact  with  the  least  trace  of  air,  and  with  as  much  success  as
if  the  bulb,  which  takes  the  place  of  an  object  glass,  had  been
plunged  into  the  very  centre  of  the  flask.  The  movements  and
fissiparous  multiplication  of  the  vibrios  may  thus  be  seen  in
all  their  beauty,  and  it  is  indeed  a  most  interesting  sight.  The
movements  do  not  immediately  cease  when  the  temperature  is
suddenly  lowered,  even  to  a  considerable  extent,  15°  C.  (59°  F.)
for  example ;  they  are  only  slackened.  Nevertheless,  it  is
better  to  observe  them  at  the  temperatures  most  favourable  to
fermentation,  even  in  the  oven  where  the  vessels  employed  in
the  experin-ent  are  kept  at  a  temperature  between  25°  C.  and
30°  C.  (77°  F.  and  86°  F.).


300  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATIOX.

We  may  now  continue  our  account  of  the  fermentation  which,
we  were  studying  when  we  made  this  last  digression.  On  June
17th  that  fermentation  produced  three  times  as  much  gas  as  it
did  on  June  11th,  when  the  residue  of  hydrogen,  after  absorption
by  potash,  was  72'6  per  cent. ;  whilst  on  the  17th  it  Avas  only
49*2  per  cent.  Let  us  again  discuss  the  microscopic  aspect  of
the  turbid  liquid  at  this  stage.  Appended  is  the  sketch  we
made  (Fig.  72)  and  our  notes  on  it : — "A  most  beautiful  object :
vibrios  all  in  motion,  advancing  or  undulating.  They  have
grown  considerably  in  bulk  and  length  since  the  11th  ;  many  of
them  are  joined  together  into  long  sinuous  chains,  very  mobile
at  the  articulations,  visibly  less  active  and  more  wavering  in  pro-
portion to  the  number  that  go  to  form  the  chain,  or  the  length  of
the  individuals."  This  description  is  applicable  to  the  majority  of
the  vibrios  which  occur  in  cylindrical  rods  and  are  homogeneous
in  aspect.  There  are  others,  of  rare  occurrence  in  chains,  which
have  a  clear  corpuscle,  that  is  to  say,  a  portion  more  refractive
than  the  other  parts  of  the  segments,  at  one  of  their  extremities.


Fig.  72.

Sometimes  the  foremost  segment  has  the  corpuscle  at  one  end,
sometimes  at  the  other.  The  long  segments  of  the  commoner
kind  attain  a  length  of  from  10  to  30  and  even  45  thousandths
of  a  millimetre.  Their  diameter  is  from  1}  to  2,  very  rarely  3,
thousandths  of  a  millimetre.*

*  [1  millimetre  =  0'039  inch  :  hence  the  dimensions  indicated  will  be —
length,  from  0-00039  to  0-00117,  or  even  0-00176  in.;  diameter,  from
O-0UU0j8  to  0-000078,  rarely  0'000117  in.]


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


301


On  June  28th,  fermentation  was  quite  finished  ;  there  was
no  longer  any  trace  of  gas,  nor  any  lactate  in  solution.  All
the  infusoria  were  lying  motionless  at  the  bottom  of  the  flask-
The  liquid  clarified  by  degrees,  and  in  the  course  of  a  few  days
became  quite  bright.  Here  we  may  inquire,  were  these
motionless  infusoria,  which  from  complete  exhaustion  of  the
lactate,  the  source  of  the  carbonaceous  part  of  their  food,  were
now  lying  inert  at  the  bottom  of  the  fermenting  vessel — were
they  dead  beyond  power  of  revival  ?  *  The  following  experi-
ment leads  us  to  believe  that  they  were  not  perfectly  lifeless,
and  that  they  behave  in  the  same  manner  as  the  yeast  of  beer,
which,  after  it  has  decomposed  all  the  sugar  in  a  fermentable
liquid,  is  ready  to  revive  and  multiply  in  a  fresh  saccharine
medium.  On  April  22nd,  1875,  we  left  in  the  oven,  at  a
temperature  of  25°  C.  (77°  F.),  a  fermentation  of  lactate  of
lime  that  had  been  completed.     The  delivery  tube  of  the  flask,


Fig.  73.

The  carbonaceous  supply,  as  we  remarked,  had  failed  them,  and  to
tliis  failure  tlie  absence  of  vital  action,  nutrition,  and  multiplication  was
attributable.  The  Liquid,  however,  contained  butp'ate  of  lime,  a  salt
possessing  properties  similar  to  those  of  the  lactate.  Why  could  not
this  salt  equally  well  support  the  life  of  the  vibrios  ?  The  explanation  of
the  difficulty  seems  to  us  to  lie  simply  in  the  fact  that  lactic  acid  produces
heat  by  its  decomposition,  whilst  butyric  acid  does  not,  and  the  vibrios
seem  to  require  heat  during  the  chemical  process  of  their  nutrition.


302  STTiniES    ON'    FERMEXTATIOX.

A,  (Fig.  73)  in  which  it  had  taken  place  had  never  been  with-
drawn from  under  the  mercury.  We  kept  the  liquid  under
observation  daily,  and  saw  it  gradually  become  brighter  ;  this
went  on  for  fifteen  days.  We  then  filled  a  similar  flask,  B,
with  the  solution  of  lactate,  which  we  boiled,  not  only  to  kill
the  germs  of  vibrios  which  the  liquid  might  contain,  but  also
to  expel  the  air  that  it  held  in  solution.  When  the  flask,  B,
had  cooled,  we  connected  the  two  flasks,  avoiding  the  intro-
duction of  air  *,  after  having  slightly  shaken  the  flask,  A,  to
stir  up  the  deposit  at  the  bottom.  There  was  then  a  pressure,
due  to  carbonic  acid  at  the  end  of  the  delivery  tube  of  this  latter
flask,  at  the  point  a,  so  that  on  opening  the  taps  r  and  s,  the
deposit  at  the  bottom  of  flask  A  was  driven  over  into  flask  B,
which  in  consequence  was  impregnated  with  the  deposit  of  a
fermentation  that  had  been  completed  fifteen  days  before.  Two
days  after  impregnation,  the  flask  B  began  to  show  signs  of
fermentation.  It  follows,  that  the  deposit  of  vibrios  of  a  com-
pleted butyric  fermentation  may  be  kept,  at  least  for  a  certain
time,  without  losing  the  power  of  causing  fermentation.  It
furnishes  a  butyric  ferment,  capable  of  revival  and  action  in  a
suitable,  fresh,  fermentable  medium.

The  reader  who  has  attentively  studied  the  facts  which  we
have  placed  before  him  cannot,  in  our  opinion,  entertain  the
least  doubt  on  the  subject  of  the  possible  multiplication  of  the
vibrios  of  a  fermentation  of  lactate  of  lime  out  of  contact  with
atmospheric  oxygen.  If  fresh  proofs  of  this  important  proposi-
tion were  necessary,  they  might  be  found  in  t*he  following
observations,  from  which  it  may  be  inferred  that  atmospheric
oxygen  is  capable  of  suddenly  checking  a  fermentation  pro-
duced by  butyric  vibrios,  and  rendering  them  absolutely
motionless,  so  that  it  cannot  be  necessary  to  enable  them  to
live.  On  May  7th,  1862,  we  placed  in  the  oven  a  flask  hold-
ing 2*580  litres   (4|    pints),  and  filled   with   the   solution   of

*  To  do  this,  it  is  sufficient  first  to  fill  the  curved  euds  of  the  stop-
cocked  tubes  of  the  flaslvs,  as  well  as  the  india-rubber  tube  c  c,  which
connects  them,  with  boiling  water  that  contains  no  air.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  303

lactate  of  lime  and  phosphates,  which  we  had  impregnated  on
the  9th  with  two  drops  of  a  liquid  in  butyric  fermentation.
In  the  course  of  a  few  days  fermentation  declared  itself :  on
the  16th  it  was  in  progress,  but  feebly  ;  on  the  18th  it  was
active  ;  on  the  30th  it  was  very  active.  On  June  1st  it  yielded
hourly  35  c.c.  (2'3  cubic  inches)  of  gas,  containing  ten  per  cent,
of  hydrogen.  On  the  2nd  we  began  the  study  of  the  action  of
air  on  the  vibrios  of  this  fermentation.  To  do  this  we  cut  off
the  delivery-tube  on  a  level  with  its  point  of  junction  to  the
flask,  then  with  a  50  c.c.  pipette  we  took  out  that  quantity
(If  fl.  oz.)  of  liquid  which  was,  of  course,  replaced  at  once  by
air.  We  then  reversed  the  flask  with  the  opening  under
the  mercury,  and  shook  it  every  ten  minutes  for  more  than  an
hour.  Wishing  to  make  sure,  to  begin  with,  that  the  oxygen
had  been  absorbed,  we  connected  under  the  mercury  the  beak
of  the  flask  by  means  of  a  thin  india-rubber  tube  filled  with
w^ater,  with  a  small  flask,  the  neck  of  which  had  been  drawn
out,  and  was  filled  with  water ;  we  then  raised  the  large  flask
with  the  smaller  kept  above  it.  A  Mohr's  clip,  which  closed  the
india-rubber  tube,  and  which  we  then  opened,  permitted  the
water  contained  in  the  small  flask  to  pass  into  the  large  one,
whilst  the  gas,  on  the  contrary,  passed  upwards  from  the  large
flask  into  the  small  one.  We  analyzed  the  gas  immediately,
and  found  that,  allowing  for  carbonic  acid  and  hydrogen,  it
did  not  contain  more  than  14*2  per  cent,  of  oxygen,  which
corresponds  to  an  absorption  of  6'6  c.c,  or  of  3*3  c.c.  (0'2  cubic
inch)  of  oxygen  for  the  50  c.c.  (3"05  cubic  inches)  of  air
employed.  Lastly,  we  again  established  connection  by  an  india-
rubber  tube  between  the  flasks,  after  having  seen  by  micro-
scopical examination  that  the  movements  of  the  vibrios  were
very  languid.  Fermentation  had  become  less  vigorous  without
having  actually  ceased,  no  doubt  because  some  portions  of  the
liquid  had  not  been  brought  into  contact  with  the  atmospheric
oxygen,  in  spite  of  the  prolonged  shaking  that  the  flask  had
undergone  after  the  introduction  of  the  air.  Whatever  the
cause  might  have  been,  the  significance  of  the  phenomenon  is


304  STUDIES    OX    FERMENTATION.

not  doubtful.  To  assure  ourselves  further  of  the  effect  of  air  on
the  vibrios,  we  half  filled  two  test  tubes  with  the  fermenting
liquid  taken  from  another  fermentation  which  had  also  attained
its  maximum  of  intensity,  into  one  of  which  we  passed  a
current  of  air,  into  the  other  carbonic  acid  gas.  In  the  course
of  half  an  hour,  all  the  vibrios  in  the  aerated  tube  were  dead,  or
at  least  motionless,  and  fermentation  had  ceased.  In  the  other
tube,  after  three  hours*  exposure  to  the  effects  of  the  carbonic
acid  gas,  the  vibrios  were  still  very  active,  and  fermentation
was  going  on.

There  is  a  most  simple  method  of  observing  the  deadly  effect
of  atmospheric  air  upon  vibrios.  We  have  seen  in  the  micro-
scopical examination  made  by  means  of  the  apparatus  repre-
sented in  Fig.  71,  how  remarkable  were  the  movements  of  the
vibrios  when  absolutely  deprived  of  air,  and  how  easy  it  was  to
discern  them.  "VVe  will  repeat  this  observation,  and  at  the
same  time  make  a  comparative  study  of  the  same  liquid,  under
the  microscope,  in  the  ordinary  way,  that  is  to  say,  by  placing
a  drop  of  the  liquid  on  an  object-glass,  and  covering  it  with  a
thin  glass  slip,  a  method  which  must  necessarily  bring  the  drop
into  contact  with  air,  if  only  for  a  moment.  It  is  surprising
what  a  remarkable  difference  is  observed  immediately  between
the  movements  of  the  vibrios  in  the  bulb  and  of  those  under
the  glass.  In  the  case  of  the  latter  we  generally  see  all
movement  at  once  cease  near  the  edges  of  the  glass,  where  the
drop  of  liquid  is  in  direct  contact  with  the  air  ;  the  movements
continue  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  about  the  centre,  in  pro-
portion as  the  air  is  more  or  less  intercepted  by  the  vibrios  at
the  circumference  of  the  liquid.  It  does  not  require  much  skill
in  experiments  of  this  kind  to  enable  one  to  see  plainly  that
immediately  after  the  glass  has  been  placed  on  the  drop,  which
has  been  affected  all  over  by  atmospheric  air,  the  whole  of  the
vibrios  seem  to  languish  and  to  manifest  symptoms  of  illness —
we  can  think  of  no  better  expression  to  explain  what  we  see
taking  place — and  that  they  gradually  recover  their  activity
about  the   centre,  in  proportion  as  they  find  themselves  in  a


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  305

part  of  the  medium  fhat  is  less  aflfected  by  the  presence  of
oxygen.

Some  most  curious  facts  are  to  be  found  in  connection  with
an  observation,  the  correhitive  and  inverse  of  the  foregoing,  on
the  ordinary  aerobian  bacteria.  If  we  examine  below  the
microscope  a  drop  of  liquid  full  of  these  organisms  under  a
coverslip,  we  very  soon  observe  a  cessation  of  motion  in  all  the
bacteria  which  lie  in  the  central  portion  of  the  liquid,  where  the
0x3' gen  rapidly  disappears  to  supply  the  necessities  of  the  bacteria
existing  there  ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  near  the  edges  of  the
cover-glass  the  movements  are  very  active,  in  consequence  of
the  constant  supply  of  air.  In  spite  of  the  speedy  death  of  the
bacteria  beneath  the  centre  of  the  glass,  we  see  life  prolonged
there  if  by  chance  a  bubble  of  air  has  been  enclosed.  All
round  this  bubble  a  vast  number  of  bacteria  collect  in  a  thick,
moving  circle,  but  as  soon  as  all  the  ox3^gen  of  the  bubble  has
been  absorbed  they  fall  apparently  lifeless,  and  are  scattered  by
the  movement  of  the  liquid.*

We  vaay  here  be  permitted  to  add,  as  a  purely  historical
matter,  that  it  was  these  two  observations  just  described,  made
successively  one  day  in  1861,  on  vibrios  and  bacteria,  that  first
suggested  to  us  the  idea  of  the  possibility  of  life  without  air,
and  caused  us  to  think  that  the  vibrios  which  we  met  so  fre-
quently in  our  lactic  fermentations  must  be  the  true  butyric
ferment.

We  may  pause  a  moment  to  consider  an  interesting  question
in  reference  to  the  two  characters  under  which  vibrios  appear
in  butyric  fermentations.  What  is  the  reason  that  some  vibrios
exhibit  refractive  corpuscles,  generally  of   a  lenticular  form,

*  We  find  this  fact,  which  we  published  as  long  ago  as  1863,  confirmed
in  a  work  of  H.  Hoffmann's  published  in  1869,  under  the  title  Memoire
sur  lea  baderies,  which  has  appeai'ed  in  French  [Annales  cles  Sciences
naturelles,  5th  series,  vol.  xi.).  On  this  subject  we  may  cite  an  observa-
tion that  has  not  yet  been  published.  Aerobian  bacteria  lose  all  power  of
movement  when  suddenly  plunged  into  carbonic  acid  gas  ;  they  recover
it,  however,  as  if  they  had  only  been  suffering  from  anaesthesia,  as  soon
as  they  are  brought  into  the  air  again.

X


306  STUDIES    ox    FERMENTATION.

such  as  we  see  in  Fig.  72  ?  We  are  strongly  inclined  to  believe
that  these  corpuscles  have  to  do  with  a  special  mode  of  repro-
duction in  the  vibrios,  common  alike  to  the  anaurobian  forms
which  we  are  studying,  and  the  ordinary  aerobian  forms  in
which  alsu  the  corpuscles  of  which  we  are  speaking  may  occur.
The  explanation  of  the  phenomenon,  from  our  point  of  view,
would  be  that,  after  a  certain  number  of  fissiparous  generations,
and  under  the  influence  of  variations  in  the  composition  of  the
medium,  which  is  constantly  changing  through  fermentation  as
well  as  through  the  active  life  of  the  vibrios  themselves,  cysts,
which  are  simply  the  refractive  corpuscles,  form  along  them  at
different  points.  From  these  gemmules  we  have  ultimately
produced  vibrios,  read}'  to  reproduce  others  by  the  process  of
transverse  division  lor  a  certain  time,  to  be  themselves  encysted
later  on.  Various  observations  incline  us  to  believe  that,  in  their
ordinary  form  of  minute,  soft,  exuberant  rods,  the  vibrios
perish  when  submitted  to  desiccation,  but  when  they  occur  in
the  corpuscular  or  encj^sted  form  they  possess  unusual  powers
of  resistance,  and  may  be  brought  to  the  state  of  dry  dust  and  be
wafted  about  by  winds.  None  of  the  matter  which  surrounds
the  corpuscle  or  cyst  seems  to  take  part  in  the  preservation  of
the  germ,  when  the  cyst  is  formed,  for  it  is  all  re-absorbed,
gradually  leaving  the  cyst  bare.  The  cysts  appear  as  masses  of
corpuscles,  in  which  the  most  practised  eye  cannot  detect  any-
thing of  an  organic  nature,  or  anything  to  remind  one  of  the
A'ibrios  which  produced  them  ;  nevertheless,  these  minute  bodies
are  endowed  with  a  latent  vital  action,  and  only  await  favourable
conditions  to  develop  long  rods  of  vibrios.  We  are  not,  it  is
true,  in  a  position  to  adduce  any  very  forcible  proofs  in  support
of  these  opinions.  They  have  been  suggested  to  us  by  experi-
ments, none  of  which,  however,  have  been  absolutely  decisive
in  their  favour.  We  may  cite  one  of  our  observations  on  this
subject.

In  a  fermentation  of  glycerine  in  a  mineral  medium — the
glycerine  was  fermenting  under  the  influence  of  butyric  vibrios
— after  we  had  determined  the,  we  may  say,  exclusive  presence


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  307

of  lenticular  vibrios,  with  refractive  corpuscles,  we  observed  the
fermentation,  which,  for  some  unknown  reason,  had  been  very
languid,  suddenly  become  extremely  active,  but  now  through
the  influence  of  ordinary  vibrios.  The  gemmules  with  brilliant
corpuscles  had  almost  disappeared  ;  we  could  see  but  ver}^  few,
and  those  now  consisted  of  the  refractive  bodies  alone,  the  bulk
of  the  vibrios  accompanying  them  having  undergone  some
process  of  re-absorption.

Another  observation  which  still  more  closely  accords  with
this  hypothesis  is  given  in  our  work  on  the  silkworm  disease
(vol.  i.,  page  256).  We  there  demonstrate  that,  when  we  place
in  water  some  of  the  dust  formed  of  desiccated  vibrios,  con-
taining a  host  of  these  refractive  corpuscles,  in  the  course  of  a
very  few  hours  large  vibrios  appear,  well-developed  rods  fully
grown,  in  which  the  brilliant  points  are  absent ;  whilst  in  the
water  no  process  of  development  from  smaller  vibrios  is  to
be  discerned,  a  fact  which  seems  to  show  that  the  former  had
issued  fully  grown  from  the  refractive  corpuscles,  just  as  we  see
colpoda  issue  with  their  adult  aspect  from  the  dust  of  their
cysts.  This  observation,  we  may  remark,  furnishes  one  of  the
best  proofs  that  can  be  adduced  against  the  spontaneous  gene-
ration of  vibrios  or  bacteria,  since  it  is  probable  that  the  same
observation  applies  to  bacteria.  It  is  true  that  we  cannot  say
of  mere  points  of  dust,  examined  under  the  microscope,  that
one  particular  germ  belongs  to  vibrio,  another  to  bacterium  ;
but  how  is  it  possible  to  doubt  that  the  vibrios  issue,  as  we  see
them,  from  an  ovum  of  some  kind,  a  cyst,  or  germ,  of  deter-
minate character,  when,  after  having  placed  some  of  these
indeterminate  motes  of  dust  into  clean  water,  we  suddenly  see,
after  an  interval  of  not  more  than  one  or  two  hours,  an  adult
vibrio  crossing  the  field  of  the  microscope,  without  our  having
been  able  to  detect  any  intermediate  state  between  its  birth  and
adolescence  ?

It  is  a  question  whether  differences  in  the  aspect  and  nature
of  vibrios,  which  depend  upon  their  more  or  less  advanced  age,
or  are  occasioned  by  the  influence  of  certain  conditions  of  the

X  2


308  STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATION.

medium  in  which  they  propagate,  do  not  bring  about  corre-
sponding changes  in  the  course  of  the  'fermentation  and  the
nature  of  its  products.  Judging  at  least  from  the  variations
in  the  proportions  of  hydrogen  and  carbonic  acid  gas  produced
in  butyric  fermentations,  we  are  inclined  to  think  that  this  must
be  the  case ;  nay,  more,  we  find  that  hydrogen  is  not  even  a
constant  product  in  these  fermentations.  ^Ve  have  met  with
butyric  fermentations  of  lactate  of  lime  which  did  not  yield
the  minutest  trace  of  hj'drogen,  or  anything  besides  carbonic
acid.     Fig.  74  represents  the  vibrios  which  we  observed  in  a

Fig.  74.

fermentation  of  this  kind.  They  present  no  special  features.
Butj'l  alcohol  is,  according  to  our  observations,  an  ordinary
product,  although  it  varies  and  is  by  no  means  a  necessary  con-
comitant of  these  fermentations.  It  might  be  supposed,  since
butylic  alcohol  may  be  produced,  and  hydrogen  be  in  deficit,
that  the  proportion  of  the  former  of  these  products  would  attain
its  maximum  when  the  latter  assumed  a  minimum.  This,  how-
ever, is  by  no  means  the  case  ;  even  in  those  few  fermentations
tliat  we  have  met  with  in  which  hydrogen  was  absent,  there
was  no  formation  of  butylic  alcohol.

From  a  consideration  of  all  the  facts  detailed  in  this  para-
graph we  can  have  no  hesitation  in  concluding  that,  on  the
one  hand,  in  cases  of  butyric  fermentation,  the  vibrios  which
abound  in  them  and  constitute  their  ferment,  live  without  air
or  free  oxygen  ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  the  presence  of
gaseous  oxygen  operates  prejudicially  against  the  movements
and  activity  of  those  vibrios.     But  now  does  it  follow  that  the


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  309

presence  of  minute  quantities  of  air  brought  into  contact  with
a  liquid  undergoing  butyric  fermentation  would  prevent  the
continuance  of  that  fermentation,  or  even  exercise  any  check
upon  it  ?  We  have  not  made  any  direct  experiments  upon  this
subject ;  but  we  should  not  be  surj)rised  to  find  that,  so  far  from
hindering,  air  may,  under  such  circumstances,  facilitate  the
propagation  of  the  vibrios  and  accelerate  fermentation.  This
is  exactly  what  happens  in  the  case  of  yeast.  But  how  could
we  reconcile  this,  supposing  it  were  proved  to  be  the  case,  with
the  fact  just  insisted  on  as  to  the  danger  of  bringing  the  butyric
vibrios  into  contact  with  air  ?  It  may  be  possible  that  life  without
air  results  from  habit,  whilst  death  through  air  may  be  brought
about  by  a  sudden  change  in  the  conditions  of  the  existence  of  the
vibrios.  The  following  remarkable  experiment  is  well  known  :
A  bird  is  placed  in  a  glass  jar  of  one  or  two  litres  (60  to  120
cubic  inches)  in  capacity,  which  is  then  closed.  After  a  time
the  creature  exhibits  every  sign  of  intense  uneasiness  and
asphyxia  long  before  it  dies  ;  a  similar  bird  of  the  same  size  is
introduced  into  the  jar ;  the  death  of  the  latter  takes  place
instantaneously,  whilst  the  life  of  the  former  may  still  be  pro-
longed under  these  conditions  for  a  considerable  time,  and  there
is  no  difficulty  even  in  restoring  the  bird  to  perfect  health  by
taking  it  out  of  the  jar.  It  seems  impossible  to  deny  that  we
have  here  a  case  of  the  adaptation  of  an  organism  to  the  gradual
contamination  of  the  medium  ;  and  so  it  may  likewise  happen
that  the  anaerobian  vibrios  of  a  butyric  fermentation,  which
develop  and  multiply  absolutely  without  free  oxygen,  perish
immediately  when  suddenly  taken  out  of  their  airless  medium,
and  that  the  result  might  be  different  if  they  had  been  gradu-
ally brought  under  the  action  of  air  in  small  quantities  at  a
time.

We  are  compelled  here  to  admit  that  vibrios  frequently
abound  in  liquids  exposed  to  the  air,  and  that  they  appropriate
the  atmospheric  oxygen,  and  could  not  withstand  a  sudden
removal,  from  its  influence.  Must  we,  then,  believe  that  such
vibrios  are  absolutely  diflferent  from  those  of  butyric  fermenta-


310  STUDIES    OX    FERMRNTATIOX.

tions  ?  It  would,  perhaps,  be  more  natural  to  admit  that  in  the
one  case  there  is  an  adaptation  to  life  with  air,  and  in  the  other
case  an  adaptation  to  life  without  air  ;  each  of  these  varieties
perishing  when  suddenly  transferred  from  its  habitual  condition
to  that  of  the  other,  whilst  by  a  series  of  progressive  changes
one  might  be  modified  into  the  other.*  We  know  that  in  the
case  of  alcoholic  ferments,  although  these  can  actually  live  with-
out air,  propagation  is  wonderfully  assisted  by  the  presence  of
minute  quantities  of  air ;  and  certain  experiments,  which  we
have  not  yet  published,  lead  us  to  believe  that,  after  having
lived  without  air,  they  cannot  be  suddenly  exposed  with  impu-
nity to  the  influence  of  large  quantities  of  oxygen.

We  must  not  forget,  however,  that  aerobian  torulae  and
anatirobian  ferments  present  an  example  of  organisms  appa-
rently identical,  in  which,  however,  we  have  not  yet  been  able
to  discover  any  ties  of  a  common  origin.  Hence  we  were  forced
to  regard  them  as  distinct  species  ;  and  so  it  is  possible  that
there  may  likewise  be  aerobian  and  anaerobian  vibrios  without
any  transformation  of  the  one  into  the  other.

The  question  has  been  raised  whether  vibrios,  especially
those  which  we  have  shown  to  be  the  ferment  of  butyric  and
many  other  fermentations,  are,  in  their  nature,  animal  or
vegetable.  M.  Ch.  Robin  attaches  great  importance  to  the
solution  of  this  question,  of  which  he  speaks  as  follows  f: —
"  The  determination  of  the  nature,  whether  animal  or  vege-
table, of  organisms,  either  as  a  whole  or  in  respect  to  their
anatomical  parts,  assimilative  or  reproductive,  is  a  problem
which  has  been  capable  of  solution  for  a  quarter  of  a  century.
The  method  has  been  brought  to  a  state  of  remarkable  pre-
cision, experimentally,  as  well  as  in  its  theoretical  aspects,
since  those  who  devote  their  attention  to  the  organic  sciences
consider  it  indispensable  in  every  observation  and  experiment

*  These  doubts  might  easilj'  bo  removed  by  putting  the  matter  to  the
test  of  direct  experiment.

t  EOBIN',  Sur  la  nature  des  fermentations,  &c.  {Journal  ch  V Anatomie  et
(Je  la  Fliysiologie,  July  and  August,  1875,  p.  386).


i


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATlOISr.  311

to  d-etermiue  accurately,  before  anything  else,  whether  the
object  of  their  study  is  animal  or  vegetable  in  its  nature,
whether  adult  or  otherwise.  To  neglect  this  is  as  serious  an
omission  for  such  students,  as  for  chemists  would  be  the  neglect-
ing to  determine  whether  it  is  nitrogen  or  hydrogen,  urea  or
stearine  that  has  been  extracted  from  a  tissue,  or  which  it  is
whose  combinations  they  are  studying  in  this  or  that  chemical
operation.  Now,  scarcely  any  one  of  those  who  study  fermen-
tations, properly  so  called,  and  putrefactions,  ever  pay  attention

to  the  preceding  data Among  the  observers  to  whom

I  allude  even  M.  Pasteur  is  to  be  found,  who,  even  in  his
most  recent  communications,  omits  to  state  definitely  what
is  the  nature  of  many  of  the  ferments  which  he  has  studied,
with  the  exception,  however,  of  those  which  belong  to  the
cryptogamic  group  called  torulacece.  Various  passages  in  his
works  seem  to  show  that  he  considers  the  cryptogamic  organ-
isms called  bacteria,  as  well  as  those  known  as  vibrios,  as
belonging  to  the  animal  kingdom  (see  Bulletin  de  I'Academie
de  Medecine,  Paris,  1875,  pp.  249,  251,  especially  256,  266,  267,
289,  and  290).  These  would  be  very  different,  at  least  physio-
logically, the  former  being  aerobian,  whilst  the  vibrios  are
anaerobian,  that  is  to  say,  requiring  no  air  to  enable  them  to
live,  and  being  killed  by  oxygen,  should  it  be  dissolved  in  the
liquid  to  any  considerable  extent."

We  are  unable  to  see  the  matter  in  the  same  light  as  our
learned  colleague  does;  to  our  thinking,  we  should  be  labour-
ing under  a  great  delusion  were  we  to  suppose  "  that  it  is  quite
as  serious  an  omission  not  to  determine  the  animal  or  vegetable
nature  of  a  ferment  as  it  would  be  to  confound  nitrogen  with
hydrogen,  or  urea  with  stearine."  The  importance  of  the
solutions  of  disputed  questions  often  depends  upon  the  point
of  view  from  which  these  are  regarded.  As  far  as  the  result
of  our  labours  is  concerned,  we  devoted  our  attention  to  these
two  questions  exclusively  : — 1.  Is  the  ferment,  in  every  fermen-
tation properly  so  called,  an  organized  being  ?  2.  Can  this
organized  being  live  without  air  ?     Now,  what  bearing  can  the


312  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

question  of  the  animal  or  vegetable  nature  of  the  ferment,  of
the  organized  being,  have  upon  the  investigation  of  these  two
problems ?  In  studying  butyric  fermentation,  for  example,  ■v\e
endeavoured  to  establish  these  two  fundamental  points: — 1.
The  butyric  ferment  is  a  vibrio.  2.  This  vibrio  may  dispeme  with
air  in  its  life,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  does  dispense  with  it  in  the
act  of  producing  butyric  fermentation.  We  did  not  consider  it
at  all  necessary  to  pronounce  any  opinion  as  to  the  animal  or
vegetable  nature  of  this  organism,  and,  even  up  to  the  present
moment,  the  idea  that  vibrio  is  an  animal  and  not  a  plant  is,
in  our  minds,  a  matter  of  sentiment  rather  than  of  conviction.

M.  Robin,  however,  would  have  no  difficult}'-  in  determining
the  limits  of  the  two  kingdoms.  According  to  him,  "  every
variety  of  cellulose  is,  we  may  say,  insoluble  in  ammonia,  as
also  are  the  reproductive  elements  of  plants,  whether  male  or
female.  Whatever  phase  of  evolution  the  elements  which
reproduce  a  new  individual  may  have  reached,  treatment  with
this  reagent,  either  cold  or  raised  to  boiling,  leaves  them  abso-
lutely intact  under  the  eyes  of  the  observer,  except  that  their
contents,  from  being  partially  dissolved,  become  more  trans-
parent. Every  vegetable,  whether  microscopic  or  not,  every
mycelium,  and  every  spore  thus  preserves  in  its  entirety  its
special  characteristics  of  form,  volume,  and  structural  arrange-
ments ;  whilst  in  the  case  of  microscopic  animals,  or  the  ova  and
microscopic  embryos  of  different  members  of  the  animal  king-
dom, the  very  opposite  is  the  case."

We  should  be  glad  to  learn  that  the  employment  of  a
drop  of  ammonia  would  enable  us  to  pronounce  an  opinion,
with  this  degree  of  confidence,  on  the  nature  of  the  lowest
microscopic  beings ;  but  is  M.  Robin  absolutely  correct  in  his
assumptions  ?  That  gentleman  himself  remarks  that  sperma-
tozoa, which  belong  to  animal  organisms,  are  insoluble  in
ammonia,  the  effect  of  which  is  merely  to  make  them  paler.
If  a  difference  of  action  in  certain  reagents,  in  ammonia,  for
example,  were  sufficient  to  determine  the  limits  of  the  animal
and  vegetable  kingdoms,  might  we  not  argue  that  there  must


STUDIES    ON    PER  MENTATION.  •  313

be  a  very  great  and  natural  difference  between  moulds  and
bacteria,  inasmuch  as  the  presence  of  a  small  quantity  of  acid
in  the  nutritive  medium  facilitates  the  growth  and  propagation
of  the  former,  whilst  it  is  able  to  prevent  the  life  of  bacteria
and  vibrios  ?  Although,  as  is  well  known,  movement  is  not  an
exclusive  characteristic  of  animals,  yet  we  have  always  been
inclined  to  regard  vibrios  as  animals,  on  account  of  the  peculiar
character  of  their  movements,  llow  greatly  they  differ  in  this
respect  from  the  diatomacse,  for  example  !  When  the  vibrio
encounters  an  obstacle  it  turns,  or  after  having  assured  itself
by  some  visual  effort  or  other  that  it  cannot  Overcome  it,  it
retraces  its  steps.  The  colpoda — undoubted  infusoria — behave
in  an  exactly  similar  manner.  It  is  true  one  may  argue  that
the  zoospores  of  certain  cryptogamia  exhibit  similar  movements;
but  do  not  these  zoospores  possess  as  much  of  an  animal  nature
as  do  the  spermatozoa  ?  As  far  as  bacteria  are  concerned,  when,
as  already  remarked,  we  see  them  crowd  round  a  bubble  of  air
in  a  liquid  to  prolong  their  life,  oxygen  having  failed  them
everywhere  else,  how  can  we  avoid  believing  that  they  are
animated  by  an  instinct  for  life,  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which
we  find  in  animals.  M.  Robin  seems  to  us  to  be  wrong  in
supposing  that  it  is  possible  to  draw  any  absolute  line  of
separation  between  the  animal  and  vegetable  kingdoms.  The
settlement  of  this  line,  however,  we  repeat  again,  no  matter
what  it  may  be,  has  no  serious  bearing  upon  the  questions  that
have  been  the  subject  of  our  researches.

In  like  manner  the  difficulty  which  M.  Robin  has  raised  in
objecting  to  the  employment  of  the  word  germ,  when  we  cannot
specify  whether  the  nature  of  that  germ  is  animal  or  vegetable,
is  in  manj;-  respects  an  unnecessary  one.  In  all  the  questions
which  we  have  discussed,  whether  we  were  speaking  of  fer-
mentation or  spontaneous  generation,  the  word  germ  has  been
used  in  the  sense  of  origin  of  living  organism.  If  Liebig,  for
example,  said  of  an  albuminous  substance  that  it  gave  birth  to
ferment,  could  we  contradict  him  more  plainly  than  by  reply-
ing :  "  No  ;  ferment  is  an  organized  being,  the  germ  of  which


314  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

is  alwaj's  present,  and  the  albuminous  substance  merely  serves
by  its  occurrence  to  nourish,  the  germ  and  its  successive
generations.'"'

In  our  Memoir  of  1862,  on  so-called  spontaneous  generations,
would  it  not  have  been  an  entire  mistake  to  have  attempted  to
assign  specific  names  to  the  microscopic  organisms  which  we
met  with  in  the  course  of  our  observations  ?  Not  only  would
we  have  met  with  extreme  difficulty  in  the  attempt,  arising
from  the  state  of  extreme  confusion  which  even  in  the  present
day  exists  in  the  classification  and  nomenclature  of  these
microscopic  organisms,  but  we  should  have  been  forced  to
sacrifice  clearness  in  our  work  besides ;  at  all  events,  we
should  have  wandered  from  our  principal  object,  which  was  the
determination  of  the  presence  or  absence  of  life  in  general,  and
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  manifestation  of  a  particular  kind
of  life  in  this  or  that  species,  animal  or  vegetable.  Thus  we
have  systematical!}''  employed  the  vaguest  nomenclature,  such
as  mucors,  iorulce,  bacteria,  and  vibrios.  There  was  nothing  arbi-
trary in  our  doing  this,  whereas  there  is  much  that  is  arbitrary
in  adopting  a  definite  system  of  nomenclature,  and  applying  it
to  organisms  but  imperfectly  known,  the  differences  or  resem-
blances between  which  are  only  recognizable  through  certain
characteristics,  the  true  signification  of  which  is  obscure.
Take,  for  example,  the  extensive  array  of  widely  different
systems  that  have  been  invented  during  the  last  few  years  for
the  species  of  the  genera  bacterium  and  vibrio  in  the  works
of  Cohn,  H.  Hoffmann,  Hallier,  and  Billroth.  The  confusion
which  prevails  here  is  very  great,  although  we  do  not  of  course
by  any  means  place  these  different  works  on  the  same  footing
as  regards  their  respective  merits.

M.  Robin  is,  however,  right  in  recognizing  the  impossibility
of  maintaining  in  the  present  day,  as  he  formerly  did,  "  that  fer-
mentation is  an  exterior  phenomenon,  going  on  outside  crypto-
gamic  cells,  a  phenomenon  of  contact.  It  is  probably,"  he  adds,
"  an  interior  and  molecular  action  at  work  in  the  inmost  recesses
of  the  substance  of  each  cell."     From  the  day  when  we  first


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  315

proved  that  it  is  possible  for  all  organized  ferments,  properly
so  called,  to  spring  up  and  multiply  from  their  respective  germs,
sown,  whether  consciously  or  by  accident,  in  a  mineral  medium
free  from  organic  and  nitrogenous  matters  other  than  ammonia,
in  which  medium  the  fermentable  matter  alone  is  adapted  to
provide  the  ferment  with  whatever  carbon  enters  into  its  com-
position, from  that  time  forward  the  theories  of  Liebig,  as  well
as  that  of  Berzelius,  which  M.  E-obin  formerly  defended,  have
had  to  give  place  to  others  more  in  harmony  with  facts.  We
trust  that  the  day  will  come  when  M.  Robin  will  likev/ise
acknowledge  that  he  has  been  in  error  on  the  subject  of  the
doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation,  which  he  continues  to
affirm,  without  adducing  any  direct  proofs  in  sujDport  of  it,  at
the  end  of  the  article  to  which  we  have  been  here  replying.

We  have  devoted  the  greater  part  of  this  chapter  to  the
establishing  with  all  possible  exactness  the  extremely  important
physiological  fact  of  life  without  air,  and  its  correlation  to  the
phenomena  of  fermentations  properly  so  called — that  is  to  say,
of  those  which  are  due  to  the  presence  of  microscopic  cellular
organisms.  This  is  the  chief  basis  of  the  new  theory  that  we
propose  for  the  explanation  of  these  phenomena.  The  details
into  which  we  have  entered  were  indispensable  on  account  of  the
novelty  of  the  subject  no  less  than  on  account  of  the  necessity
we  were  under  of  combating  the  criticisms  of  the  two  German
naturalists,  Drs.  Oscar  Brefeld  and  Traube,  whose  works  had  cast
some  doubts  on  the  correctness  of  the  facts  upon  which  we  had
based  the  preceding  propositions.  We  have  much  pleasure  in
adding  that  at  the  very  moment  when  we  were  revising  the
proofs  of  this  chapter,  we  received  from  M.  Brefeld  an  essay,
dated  from  Berlin,  January,  1S76,  in  which,  after  describing
his  later  experimental  researches,  he  owns  with  praiseworthy
frankness  that  Dr.  Traube  and  he  were  both  of  them  mistaken.
Life  without  air  is  now  a  proposition  which  he  accepts  as  per-
fectly demonstrated.  He  has  witnessed  it  in  the  case  of  mucor
racemosus,  and  has  also  verified  it  in  the  case  of  yeast.  ''  If,"
he  says,  "  after  the  results  of  my  previous  researches,  which  1


31G  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

conducted  with  all  possible  exactness,  I  was  inclined  to  consider
Pasteur's  assertions  as  inaccurate,  and  to  attack  them,  I  have  no
hesitation  now  in  recognizing  them  as  true,  and  in  proclaiming
the  service  which  Pasteur  has  rendered  to  science  in  being  the
first  to  indicate  the  exact  relation  of  things  in  the  phenomenon
of  fermentation."  In  his  later  researches,  Dr.  Brefeld  has
adopted  the  method  which  we  have  long  employed  for  demon-
strating the  life  and  multiplication  of  butyric  \dbrios  in  the
entire  absence  of  air,  as  well  as  the  method  of  conducting
growths  in  mineral  media  associated  with  the  fermentable  sub-
stance. We  need  not  pause  to  consider  certain  other  secondary
criticisms  of  Dr.  Brefeld.  A  perusal  of  the  present  work
will,  we  trust,  convince  him  that  they  are  based  on  no  surer
foundation  than  were  his  former  criticisms.

To  bring  one's  self  to  believe  in  a  truth  that  has  just  dawned
upon  one  is  the  first  step  towards  progress ;  to  persuade  others
is  the  second.  There  is  a  third  step,  less  useful  perhaps,  but
highly  gratifying  nevertheless,  which  isj  to  convince  one's
opponents.

"We,  therefore,  have  experienced  great  satisfaction  in  learning
that  we  have  won  over  to  our  ideas  an  observer  of  singular
ability,  on  a  subject  which  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the
physiology  of  cells.


§  VI. — Reply  to  the  Critical  Observations  of  Liebig,
Published  in  1870.*

In  the  Memoir  which  we  published,  in  1860,  on  alcoholic
fermentation,  and  in  several  subsequent  works,  we  were  led  to
a  different  conclusion  on  the  causes  of  this  very  remarkable
phenomenon  from  that  which  Liebig  had  adopted.  The  opinions
of  Mitscherlich  and  Berzelius  had  ceased  to  be  tenable  in  the
presence  of  the  new  facts  which  we  had  brought  to  light.    From

*  Liebig,  Sur  la  fermentation  et  la  source  de  la  force  mvsctdaire
{Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Fhysique,  4th  series,  t.  xxiii.  p.  5,  1S70.)


STLDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  317

tlist  time  we  felt  sure  that  the  celebrated  chemist  of  Munich
had  adopted  our  conclusions,  from  the  fact  that  he  remained
silent  on  this  question  for  a  long  time,  although  it  had  been
until  then  the  constant  subject  of  his  study,  as  is  shown  by  all
his  works.  Suddenly  there  appeared  in  the  Annales  de  Chimie
ct  ch  Physique  a  long  essay,  reproduced  from  a  lecture  delivered
by  him  before  the  Academy  of  Bavaria  in  1868  and  18C9.  In
this  Liebig  again  maintained,  not,  however,  without  certain,
modifications,  the  views  which  he  had  expressed  in  his  former
publications,  and  disputed  the  correctness  of  the  principal  facts
enunciated  in  our  Memoir  of  1860,  on  which  were  based  the
arguments  against  his  theory.

"  I  had  admitted/'  he  says,  "  that  the  resolution  of  ferment-
able matter  into  compounds  of  a  simpler  kind  must  be  traced
to  some  process  of  decomposition  taking  place  in  the  ferment,
and  that  the  action  of  this  same  ferment  on  the  fermentable
matter  must  continue  or  cease  according  to  the  prolongation  or
cessation  of  the  alteration  produced  in  the  ferment.  The  mole-
cular change  in  the  sugar  would,  consequently,  be  brought
about  by  the  destruction  or  modification  of  one  or  more  of  the
component  parts  of  the  ferment,  and  could  only  take  place
through  the  contact  of  the  two  substances.  M.  Pasteur  regards
fermentation  in  the  following  light : — The  chemical  action  of
fermentation  is  essentially  a  phenomenon  correlative  with  a  vital
action,  beginning  and  ending  with  it.  He  believes  that  alco-
holic fermentation  can  never  occur  without  the  simultaneous
occurrence  of  organization,  development,  and  multiplication  of
globules,  or  continuous  life,  carried  on  from  globules  already
formed.  But  the  idea  that  the  decomposition  of  sugar  during
fermentation  is  due  to  the  development  of  the  cellules  of  the
ferment,  is  in  contradiction  with  the  fact  that  the  ferment  is
able  to  bring  about  the  fermentation  of  a  pure  solution  of  sugar.
The  greater  part  of  the  ferment  is  composed  of  a  substance  that
is  rich  in  nitrogen  and  contains  suljDhur.  It  contains,  moreover,
an  appreciable  quantity  of  phosphates,  hence  it  is  difficult  to
conceive  how,  in  the  absence  of  these  elements  in  a  pure  solution


318  STUDIES   ON   FERMENTATION.

of  suffar  undergoing:  fermentation,  the  number  of  cells  is
capable  of  any   increase."

Notwithstanding  Liebig's  belief  to  the  contrary,  the  idea
that  the  decomposition  of  sugar  during  fermentation  is  inti-
mately connected  with  a  development  of  the  cellules  of  the
ferment,  or  a  prolongation  of  the  life  of  cellules  already  formed,
is  in  no  way  opposed  to  the  fact  that  the  ferment  is  capable  of
bringing  about  the  fermentation  of  a  pure  solution  of  sugar.
It  is  manifest  to  any  one  who  has  studied  such  fermentation
with  the  microscope,  even  in  those  cases  where  the  sweetened
water  has  been  absolutely  pure,  that  ferment-cells  do  multiply,
the  reason  being  that  \kiQ  cells  carry  with  them  all  the  food-
supplies  necessary  for  the  life  of  the  ferment.  They  may  be
observed  budding,  at  least  many  of  them,  and  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  those  which  do  not  bud  still  continue  to  live  ;  life
has  other  ways  of  manifesting  itself  besides  development  and
cell-proliferation.

If  we  refer  to  the  figures  on  page  81  of  our  Memoir  of  1860,
Experiments  D,  E,  F,  G,  H,  I,  we  shall  see  that  the  weight  of
yeast,  in  the  case  of  the  fermentation  of  a  pure  solution  of
sugar,  undergoes  a  considerable  increase,  even  without  taking
into  account  the  fact  that  the  sugared  water  gains  from  the
yeast  certain  soluble  parts,  since,  in  the  experiments  just
mentioned,  the  weights  of  solid  yeast,  washed  and  dried  at
100°  C.  (212°  F.),  are  much  greater  than  those  of  the  raw  yeast
employed,  dried  at  the  same  temperature.

In  these  experiments  we  employed  the  following  weights  of
yeast,  expressed  in  grammes  (1  gramme  =  15'43  grains)  —

2-313
2-626
1-198
0-G99
0-326
0-476

which  became   after  fermentation,   we  repeat,  without  taking


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  319

into  account  the  matters  which  the  sugared  water  gained  from
the  yeast —


grammes,     grains

2-486

[Increase  0-173  =  2-65

2-963

„      0-337  =  5-16

1-700

„       0-502  =  7-7

0-712

„      0-013  =  0-2

0-335

„      0-009  =  0-14

0-590

„       0-114  =  1-75

Have  we  not  in  this  marked  increase  in  weight  a  proof  of  life,
or,  to  adopt  an  expression  wliich  may  be  preferred,  a  proof  of  a
profound  chemical  work  of  nutrition  and  assimilation  ?

We  may  cite  on  this  subject  one  of  our  earlier  experiments,
which  is  to  be  found  in  the  Comptes  rendus  de  VAcademie  for
the  year  1857^  and  which  clearly  shows  the  great  influence
exerted  on  fermentation  by  the  soluble  portion  that  the  sugared
water  takes  up  from  the  globules  of  ferment : —

"We  take  two  equal  quantities  of  fresh  yeast  that  have  been
washed  very  freely.  One  of  these  we  cause  to  ferment  in  water
containing  nothing  but  sugar,  and,  after  removing  from  the
other  all  its  soluble  particles — by  boiling  it  in  an  excess  of  water
and  then  filtering  it  to  separate  the  globules — we  add  to  the
filtered  liquid  as  much  sugar  as  was  used  in  the  first  case  along
with  a  mere  trace  of  fresh  yeast,  insufficient,  as  far  as  its  weight
is  concerned,  to  afiect  the  results  of  our  experiment.  The
globules  which  we  have  sown  bud,  the  liquid  becomes  turbid,
a  deposit  of  yeast  gradually  forms,  and,  side  by  side  with  these
appearances,  the  decomposition  of  the  sugar  is  efiected,  and  in
the  course  of  a  few  hours  manifests  itself  clearl3^  These  results
are  such  as  we  might  have  anticipated.  The  following  fact,
however,  is  of  importance.  In  effecting  by  these  means  the
organization  into  globules  of  the  soluble  part  of  the  yeast  that  we
used  in  the  second  case,  we  find  that  a  considerable  quantity  of
sugar  is  decomposed.  The  following  are  the  results  of  our  expe-
riment :  5  grammes  of  yeast  caused  the  fermentation  of  12-9


320  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATIOX.

grammes  of  sugar  in  six  da3's,  at  the  end  of  which  time  it  was
exhausted.  The  soluble  portion  of  a  like  quantity  of  5  grammes
of  the  same  yeast  caused  the  fermentation  of  10  grammes  of
sugar  in  nine  days,  after  which  the  yeast  developed  by  the
sowing  was  likewise  exhausted."

How  is  it  possible  to  maintain  that,  in  the  fermentation  of
water  containing  nothing  but  sugar,  the  soluble  portion  of  the
yeast  does  not  act,  either  in  the  production  of  new  globules  or
the  perfection  of  old  ones,  when  we  see,  in  the  preceding  expe-
riment, that  after  this  nitrogenous  and  mineral  portion  has  been
removed  bj''  boiling,  it  immediately  serves  for  the  production  of
new  globules,  which,  under  the  influence  of  the  sowing  of  a
mere  trace  of  globules,  causes  the  fermentation  of  much
sugar?*

In  short,  Liebig  is  not  justified  in  saying  that  the  solution  of
pure  sugar,  caused  to  ferment  by  means  of  yeast,  contains  none
of  the  elements  needed  for  the  growth  of  yeast,  neither  nitrogen,
sulphur,  nor  phosphorus,  and  that,  consequently,  it  should  not
be  possible,  by  our  theory,  for  the  sugar  to  ferment.  On  the
contrar}^  the  solution  does  contain  all  these  elements,  as  a
consequence  of  the  introduction  and  presence  of  the  yeast.

Let  us  proceed  with  our  examination  of  Liebig's  criticisms  : —

"  To  this,"  he  goes  on  to  say,  "  must  be  added  the  decompos-
ing action  which  yeast  exercises  on  a  great  number  of  substances,

*  It  is  important  that  we  should  here  remark  that,  in  the  fermentation
of  pure  solution  of  sugar  by  means  of  j-east,  the  oxygen  originally  dis-
solved in  the  water,  as  well  as  that  appropriated  by  the  globules  of  yeast
in  their  contact  with  air,  has  a  considerable  effect  on  the  activity  of
fermentation.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  we  pass  a  strong  current  of  car-
bonic acid  through  the  sugared  water  and  the  water  in  which  the  yeast
has  been  treated,  the  fermentation  will  be  rendered  extremely  sluggish,
and  the  few  new  cells  of  yeast  which  f<n-m  will  assume  strange  and
abnormal  aspects.  Indeed  this  might  have  been  expected,  for  we  have
seen  that  yeast,  when  somewhat  old,  is  incapable  of  development  or  of
causing  fermentation,  even  in  a  fermentable  medium  containing  all  the
nutritive  principles  of  yeast,  if  the  liquid  has  been  deprived  of  air ;  much
more  should  we  expect  this  to  be  the  case  in  pure  sugared  water,  like-
wise deprived  of  air.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  321

and  which  resembles  that  which  sugar  undergoes.  I  have  shown
that  malate  of  lime  ferments  readily  enough  through  the  action
of  yeast,  and  that  it  splits  up  into  three  otlier  calcareous  salts,
namely,  the  acetate,  the  carbonate,  and  the  succinate.  If  the
action  of  yeast  consists  in  its  increase  and  multiplication,  it  is
difficult  to  conceive  this  action  in  the  case  of  malate  of  lime
and  other  calcareous  salts  of  vegetable  acids."

This  statement,  with  all  due  deference  to  the  opinion  of  our
illustrious  critic,  is  by  no  means  correct.  Yeast  has  no  action
on  malate  of  lime,  or  on  other  calcareous  salts  formed  by  vege-
table acids.  Liebig  had  previously,  much  to  his  own  satisfac-
tion, brought  forward  urea  as  being  capable  of  transformation
into  carbonate  of  ammonia  during  alcoholic  fermentation  in  con-
tact with  yeast.  This  has  been  proved  by  us  to  be  erroneous.
It  is  an  error  of  the  same  kind  that  Liebig  again  brings  forward
here.  In  the  fermentation  of  which  he  speaks  (that  of  malate
of  lime),  certain  spontaneous  ferments  are  produced,  the  germs
of  which  are  associated  with  the  yeast,  and  develop  in  the  mix-
ture of  yeast  and  malate.  The  yeast  merely  serves  as  a  source
of  food  for  these  new  ferments  without  taking  any  direct  part
in  the  fermentations  of  which  we  are  speaking.  Our  researches
leave  no  doubt  on  this  point,  as  is  evident  from  the  observations
on  the  fermentations  of  tartrate  of  lime  previously  given.

It  is  true  that  there  are  circumstances  under  which  yeast
brings  about  modifications  in  different  substances.  Doebereiner
and  Mitscherlich,  more  especially,  have  shown  that  yeast  im-
parts to  water  a  soluble  material,  which  liquefies  cane-sugar
and  produces  inversion  in  it  by  causing  it  to  take  up  the
elements  of  water,  just  as  diastase  behaves  to  starch  or  emulsin
to  amygdalin.

M.  Berthelot  also  has  shown  that  this  substance  may  be
isolated  by  precipitating  it  with  alcohol,  in  the  same  way  as
diastase  is  precipitated  from  its  solutions.*     These  are  remark-

*  Doebereiner,  Journal  de  CJnmie  de  Schweigger,  vol.  xii.  p.  129,  and
Journal  de  Pharmade,  vol.  i.  p.  342.

Mitscherlich,  Monatsherkhte  d.  Kon.Preuss.  Akad.  d.  JVissen.  zu  Berlin^

Y


322  STUDIES    OS   FERMENTATION.

able  facts,  whicli  are,  however,  at  present  but  vaguely  connected
with  the  alcoholic  fermentation  of  sugar  by  means  of  yeast.
The  researches  in  which  we  have  proved  the  existence  of  special
forms  of  living  ferments  in  many  fermentations,  which  one
might  have  supposed  to  have  been  produced  by  simple  contact
action,  had  established  beyond  doubt  the  existence  of  profound
differences  between  those  fermentations,  which  we  have  dis-

and  Rapports  annuels  de  Berzelius,  Paris,  1843,  3rd  year.  On  the  occasion
of  a  communication  on  the  inversion  of  cane  sugar,  by  H.  Eose,  published
in  1840,  M.  Mitscherlich  observed :  "  The  inversion  of  cane  sugar  in  alco-
holic fermentation  is  not  due  to  the  globules  of  yeast,  but  to  a  soluble
matter  in  the  water  with  which  they  mix.  The  liquid  obtained  by
straining  off  the  ferment  on  a  filter  paper,  possesses  the  property  of  con-
verting cane  sugar  into  uncrystallizable  sugar."

Berthelot,  Comjjfes  rendus  de  V Acadhnie.  Meeting  of  May  28th,
1860.  M.  Berthelot  confirms  the  preceding  experiment  of  Mitscherlich,
and  proves,  moreover,  that  the  soluble  matter  of  which  that  author  speaks
may  be  precipitated  with  alcohol  without  losing  its  invertive  power.

M.  Bechamp  has  applied  Mitscherlich's  obseivation,  concerning  the
soluble  fermentative  part  of  yeast,  to  fungoid  growths,  and  has  made  the
interesting  discovery  that  fungoid  growths,  like  yeast,  yield  to  water  a
substance  that  inverts  sugar.  When  the  production  of  fungoid  growths
is  prevented  by  means  of  an  antiseptic  the  inversion  of  sugar  does  not
take  place.

We  may  here  say  a  few  words  respecting  M,  Bechamp 's  claim  to
priority  of  discovery.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  we  were  the  first  to
demonstrate  that  living  ferments  might  be  completely  developed,  if  their
germs  were  placed  in  pui'e  water,  together  with  sugar,  ammonia,  and
phosphates.  Eelying  on  this  established  fact,  that  moulds  are  capable  of
development  in  sweetened  water,  in  which,  according  to  M.  Bechamp,
they  invert  the  sugar,  our  author  asserts  that  he  has  proved  that,
"living  organized  ferments  may  originate  in  media  which  contain  no
albuminous  substances."  (See  Comptts  rendus,  vol.  Ixxv.  p.  1519.)  To
be  logical,  M.  Bechamp  might  say  that  he  has  proved  that  certain
moulds  originate  in  pure  sweetened  water,  without  nitrogen  or  phos-
phates or  other  mineral  elements,  for  such  a  deduction  might  very  well
be  drawn  from  his  work,  in  which  we  do  not  find  the  least  expression  of
astonishment  at  the  possibility  of  moulds  developing  in  pure  water,  con-
taining nothing  but  sugar  without  other  mineral  or  organic  principles.

M.  Bechamp's  first  Note  on  the  inversion  of  sugar  was  published  in
1855.  In  it  we  find  nothing  relating  to  the  influence  of  moulds.  His
second,  in  which  that  influence  is  noticed,  was  published  in  January,


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  323

tinguished  as  fermentations  proper,  and  tlie  phenomena  con-
nected with  soluble  substances.  The  more  we  advance,  the
more  clearly  we  are  able  to  detect  these  differences.  M.  Dumas
has  insisted  on  the  fact  that  the  ferments  of  fermentation
proper  multiply  and  reproduce  themselves  in  the  process,
whilst  the  others  are  destroyed.*  Still  more  recently  M.
Miintz  has  shown  that  chloroform  prevents  fermentations
proper,  but  does  not  interfere  with  the  action  of  diastase
{Compter  rendus,  1875.)  M.  Bouchardat  had  already  esta-
blished the  fact  that  "hydrocyanic  acid,  salts  of  mercury,
ether,  alcohol,  creosote,  and  the  oils  of  turpentine,  lemon,
cloves,  and  mustard  destroy  or  check  alcoholic  fermentation,
whilst  in  no  way  interfering  with  the  glucoside  fermentations
{Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  3rd  series,  t.  xiv.,  1845.)
"VVe  may  add,  in  praise  of  M.  Bouchardat's  sagacity,  that  that
skilful  observer  has  always  considered  these  results  as  a  proof
that  alcoholic  fermentation  is  dependent  on  the  life  of  the
yeast-cell,  and  that  a  distinction  should  be  made  between  the
two  orders  of  fermentation.  ■

M.  Paul  Bert,  in  his  remarkable  studies  on  the  influence  of

1858,  that  is,  subsequently  to  our  work  on  lactic  fermentation,  which
appeared  in  November,  1857.  In  that  work  we  established,  for  the
first  time,  that  the  lactic  ferment  is  a  living  organized  being,  that  albu-
minoiis  substances  have  no  share  in  the  iiroduction  of  fermentation,  and
that  they  only  serve  as  the  food  of  the  ferment.  M.  Bechamp's  Note
was  even  subsequent  to  our  first  work  on  alcoholic  fermentation,  which
appeared  on  December  21st,  1857.  It  is  since  the  appearance  of  these
two  works  of  ours  that  the  preponderating  influence  of  the  life  of
microscopic  organisms,  in  the  phenomena  of  fermentation,  has  been
better  understood.  Immediately  after  their  appearance  M.  Bechamp,
who,  from  1855,  had  made  no  observation  on  the  action  of  fungoid
growths  on  sugar,  although  he  had  remarked  their  presence,  modified
his  former  conclusions.     {Comptes  rendus,  January  4th,  1858.)

•  "  There  are  two  classes  of  ferments ;  the  first,  of  which  the  yeast  of
beer  may  be  taken  as  the  type,  perpetuate  and  renew  themselves  if  they
can  find  in  the  liquid  in  which  they  produce  fermentation  food  enough
for  their  wants  ;  the  second,  of  which  diastase  is  the  tj^e,  always  sacri-
fice themselves  in  the  exercise  of  their  activity."  (Dumas,  Comptes
rendus  de  V Academie,  t.  Ixxv.  p.  277,  1872.)

y2


324  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

barometric  pressure  on  the  phenomena  of  life,  has  recognized
the  fact  that  compressed  oxygen  is  fatal  to  certain  ferments,
whilst  under  similar  conditions  it  does  not  interfere  with  the
action  of  those  substances  classed  under  the  name  of  soluble
ferments,  such  as  diastase  (the  ferment  which  inverts  cane  sugar)
emulsin,  and  others.  During  their  stay  in  compressed  air,
ferments  proper  ceased  their  activity,  nor  did  they  resume  it,
even  after  exposure  to  air  at  ordinary  pressures,  provided  the
access  of  germs  was  prevented.

"We  now  come  to  Liebig's  principal  objection,  with  which  he
concludes  his  ingenious  argument,  and  to  which  no  less  than
eight  or  nine  pages  of  the  Annales  are  devoted.

Our  author  takes  up  the  question  of  the  possibility  of  causing
yeast  to  grow  in  sweetened  water,  to  which  a  salt  of  ammonia
and  some  yeast-ash  have  been  added — a  fact  which  is  evidently
incompatible  with  his  theorj^  that  a  ferment  is  always  an  albu-
minous substance  on  its  way  to  decomposition.  In  this  case
the  albuminous  substance  does  not  exist ;  we  have  only  the
mineral  substances  which  will  serve  to  produce  it.  We  know
that  Liebig  regarded  yeast,  and,  generally  speaking,  any  fer-
ment whatever,  as  being  a  nitrogenous,  albuminous  substance
which,  in  the  same  wa}^  as  emulsin,  for  example,  possesses  the
power  of  bringing  about  certain  chemical  decompositions.  He
connected  fermentation  with  the  easy  decomposition  of  that  allm-
minous  substance,  and  imagined  that  the  phenomenon  occurred
in  the  following  manner  : — "  The  albuminous  substance  on  its
way  to  decomposition  possesses  the  power  of  communicating  to
certain  other  bodies  that  same  state  of  mobility  by  which  its
own  atoms  are  already  affected ;  and  through  its  contact  with
other  bodies  it  imparts  to  them  the  power  of  decomposing  or  of
entering  into  other  combinations."  Here  Liebig  failed  to  per-
ceive that  the  ferment,  in  its  capacity  of  a  living  organism,
had  anything  to  do  with  the  fermentation.

This  theory  dates  back  as  far  as  1843.  In  1846  Messrs.
Boutron  and  Fremy,  in  a  Memoir  on  lactic  fermentation,  pub-
lished in  the  Annales  de   Chlmie  et  de  Fhysique,  strained  the


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  325

conclusions  deducible  from  it  to  a  most  unjustifiable  extent.
They  asserted  that  one  and  the  same  nitrogenous  substance
might  undergo  various  modifications  in  contact  with  air,  so  as
to  become  successively  alcoholic,  lactic,  butyric,  and  other
ferments.  There  is  nothing  more  convenient  than  purely
hypothetical  theories,  theories  which  are  not  the  necessary  con-
sequences of  facts  ;  when  fresh  facts  which  cannot  be  reconciled
with  the  original  hypothesis  are  discovered,  new  hypotheses
can  be  tacked  on  to  the  old  ones.  This  is  exactly  what  Liebig
and  Fremy  have  done,  each  in  his  turn,  under  the  pressure  of
our  studies,  commenced  in  1857.  In  1864  Fremy  devised  the
theory  of  Jiemi-oygmiism,  which  meant  nothing  more  than  that
he  gave  up  Liebig's  theory  of  1843,  together  with  the  additions
which  Boutron  and  he  had  made  to  it  in  1846  ;  in  other  words,
he  abandoned  the  idea  of  albuminous  substances  being  ferments,
to  take  up  another  idea,  that  albuminous  substances,  in  contact
with  air,  are  peculiarly  adapted  to  undergo  organization  into
new  beings — that  is,  the  living  ferments  which  we  had  dis-
covered— and  that  the  ferments  of  beer  and  of  the  gi-ape  have
a  common  origin.

This  theory  of  hemi-organism  was  word  for  word  the  anti-
quated opinion  of  Turpin,  as  may  be  readily  seen  by  referring
to  Chapter  lY.,  section  III.  of  the  present  work.  The  public,
especially  a  certain  section  of  the  public,  did  not  go  very
deeply  into  an  examination  of  the  subject.  It  was  the  period
when  the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation  was  being  dis-
cussed with  much  warmth.  The  new  word  hemi-organism,
which  was  the  only  novelty  in  M.  Fremy's  theory,  deceived
people.  It  was  thought  that  M.  Fremy  had  really  discovered
the  solution  of  the  question  of  the  day.  It  is  true  that  it  was
rather  difiicult  to  understand  the  process  by  which  an  albumi-
nous substance  could  become  all  at  once  a  living  and  budding-
cell.  This  difiiculty  was  readily  solved  by  M.  Fremy,  who
declared  that  it  was  the  result  of  some  power  that  was  not  yet
understood,  the  power  of  "  organic  impulse."*

*  Fhemy,  Comptes  rendus  de  V Academie,  vol.  Iviii.  p.  1065,  1864.


326  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

Liebig,  who,  as  well  as  M.  Fremy,  was  compelled  to  renounce
his  original  opinions  concerning  the  nature  of  ferments,  devised
the  following  obscure  theory  (Memoir  by  Liebig,  1870,  already
cited)  : —

"  There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  part  which  the  vege-
table organism  plays  in  the  phenomenon  of  fermentation.  It
is  through  it  alone  that  an  albuminous  substance  and  sugar  are
enabled  to  unite  and  form  this  particular  combination,  this
unstable  form  under  which  alone,  as  a  component  part  of  the
mycoderm,  they  manifest  an  action  on  sugar.  Should  the
mycoderm  cease  to  grow,  the  bond  which  unites  the  constituent
parts  of  the  cellular  contents  is  loosened,  and  it  is  through  the
motion  produced  therein  that  the  cells  of  yeast  bring  about  a
disarrangement  or  separation  of  the  elements  of  the  sugar  into
other  organic  molecules."

One  might  easily  believe  that  the  translator  for  the  Auna/es
lias  made  some  mistake,  so  great  is  the  obscurity  of  this
passage.

Whether  we  take  this  new  form  of  the  theory  or  the  old  one,
neither  can  be  reconciled  at  all  with  the  development  of  yeast
and  fermentation  in  a  saccharine  mineral  medium,  for  in  the
latter  experiment  fermentation  is  correlative  to  the  life  of  the
ferment  and  to  its  nutrition,  a  constant  change  going  on
between  the  ferment  and  its  food-matters,  since  all  the  carbon
assimilated  by  the  ferment  is  derived  from  sugar,  its  nitrogen
from  ammonia,  and  phosphorus  from  the  phosphates  in  solution.
And  even  all  said,  what  purpose  can  be  served  by  the  gratuitous
hypothesis  of  contact-action  or  communicated  motion  ?  The
experiment  of  which  we  are  speaking  is  thus  a  fundamental
one ;  indeed,  it  is  its  possibility  that  constitutes  the  most  effec-
tive point  in  the  controversy.  No  doubt  Liebig  might  say,
"  but  it  is  the  motion  of  life  and  of  nutrition  which  constitutes
your  experiment,  and  this  is  the  communicated  motion  that  m}"-
theory  requires."  Curiously  enough,  Liebig  does  endeavour,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  to  say  this,  but  he  does  so  timidly  and
incidentally  :  "  From  a  chemical  point  of  view,  which  point  of


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  327

view  I  would  not  willingly  abandon,  a  vital  action  is  a  pheno-
menon of  motion,  and,  in  this  double  sense  of  life  M.  Pasteur's
theory  agrees  with  my  own,  and  is  not  in  contradiction  with  it
(page  6)."     This  is  true.     Elsewhere  Liebig  says  : —

"  It  is  possible  that  the  only  correlation  between  the  physio-
logical act  and  the  phenomenon  of  fermentation  is  the  production,
in  the  living  cell,  of  the  substance  which,  by  some  special
property  analogous  to  that  by  which  emulsin  exerts  a  decom-
posing action  on  salicin  and  amygdalin,  may  bring  about  the
decomposition  of  sugar  into  other  organic  molecules ;  the
physiological  act,  in  this  view,  would  be  necessary  for  the  pro-
duction of  this  substance,  but  would  have  nothing  else  to  do
with  the  fermentation  (page  10)."  To  this,  again,  we  have  no
objection  to  raise.

Liebig,  however,  does  not  dwell  upon  these  considerations,
which  he  merely  notices  in  passing,  because  he  is  well  aware
that,  as  far  as  the  defence  of  his  theory  is  concerned,  they  would
be  mere  evasions.  If  he  had  insisted  on  them,  or  based  his
opposition  solel}'  upon  them,  our  answer  would  have  been  simply
this  :  "If  you  admit  with  us  that  fermentation  is  correlated
with  the  life  and  nutrition  of  the  ferment,  we  agree  upon  the
principal  point.  So  agreeing,  let  us  examine,  if  you  will,  the
actual  cause  of  fermentation ; — this  is  a  second  question,  quite
distinct  from  the  first.  Science  is  built  up  of  successive  solu-
tions given  to  questions  of  ever-increasing  subtlety,  approaching
nearer  and  nearer  towards  the  very  essence  of  phenomena.  If
we  proceed  to  discuss  together  the  question  of  how  living,
organized  beings  act  in  decomposing  fermentable  substances,
we  will  be  found  to  fall  out  once  more  on  your  hypothesis  of
communicated  motion,  since,  according  to  our  ideas,  the  actual
cause  of  fermentation  is  to  be  sought,  in  most  cases,  in  the
fact  of  life  without  air,  which  is  the  characteristic  of  many
ferments."

Let  us  briefly  see  what  Liebig  thinks  of  the  experiment  in
which  fermentation  is  produced  by  the  impregnation  of  a
saccharine  mineral  medium,  a  result  so  greatly  at  variance  with


328  STUDIES  ON  f?:rmentation.

his  mode  of  viewing  the  question.*  Aftei'  deep  consideration
he  pronounces  this  experiment  to  be  inexact,  and  the  result  ill-
founded.  Liebig,  however,  was  not  one  to  reject  a  fact  without
grave  reasons  for  his  doing  so,  or  with  the  sole  object  of  evading
a  troublesome  discussion.  "  I  have  repeated  this  experiment,"
he  says,  "  a  great  number  of  times,  with  the  greatest  possible
care,  and  have  obtained  the  same  results  as  M.  Pasteur,  except-
ing as  regards  the  formation  and  increase  of  the  ferment."  It
was,  however,  the  formation  and  increase  of  the  ferment  that
constituted  the  point  of  the  experiment.  Our  discussion  was,
therefore,  distinctly  limited  to  this  :  Liebig  denied  that  the
ferment  was  capable  of  development  in  a  saccharine  mineral
medium,  whilst  we  asserted  that  this  development  did  actually
take  place,  and  was  comparatively  easy  to  prove.  In  1871  we
replied  to  M.  Liebig  before  the  Paris  Academy  of  Sciences  in
a  Note,  in  which  we  offered  to  prepare  in  a  mineral  medium,  in
the  presence  of  a  commission  to  be  chosen  for  the  purpose,  as
great  a  weight  of  ferment  as  Liebig  could  reasonably  demand. f
We  were  bolder  than  we  should,  perhaps,  have  been  in  1860 ;
the  reason  was  that  our  knowledge  of  the  subject  had  been
strengthened  by  ten  years  of  renewed  research.  Liebig  did  not
accept  our  proposal,  nor  did  he  even  reply  to  our  Note.  Up  to
the  time  of  his  death,  Avhich  took  place  on  April  18th,  1873,  he
wrote  nothing  more  on  the  subject. +

*  See  oiir  Memoir  of  ISGO  {AnnaJes  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  vol.  Iviii.
p.  61,  and  following,  and  especially  pp.  69  and  70,  where  the  details  of
the  experiment  will  be  found.

t  Pasteur,  Comjdcs  rcndus  de  V Academie  des  Sciences,  vol.  Ixxiii.
p.  1419,  1S71.

J  In  his  Memoir  of  1870,  Liebig  has  made  a  remarkable  admission:
"My  late  friend  Pelouze,"  he  saj'S,  "had  communicated  to  me,  nine
years  ago,  certain  results  of  M.  Pasteur's  researches  on  fermentation.  I
told  him  that,  just  then,  I  was  not  disposed  to  alter  my  opinion  on  the
cause  of  fermentation,  and  that  if  it  were  possible  by  means  of  ammonia
to  produce  or  multiply  the  yeast  in  fermenting  Kquors,  industry  would
soon  avail  itself  of  the  fact,  and  that  I  would  wait  to  see  if  it  did  so  ;  up
to  the  present  time,  however,  there  has  not  been  the  least  change  in  the
manufacture  of  yeast."     We  do  not  know  what  M.  Pelouze's  reply  was ;


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  329

When  we  published,  in  I860,  the  details  of  the  experiment
in  question,  we  pointed  out  at  some  length  the  difficulties  of
conducting  it  successfully,  and  the  possible  causes  of  failure.
We  called  attention  particularly  to  the  fact  that  saccharine
mineral  media  are  much  more  suited  for  the  nutrition  of  bacteria,
lactic  ferment,  and  other  lowly  forms,  than  they  are  to  that  of
yeast,  and  in  consequence  readily  become  filled  with  various
organisms  from  the  spontaneous  growth  of  germs  derived  from
the  particles  of  dust  floating  in  the  atmosphere.  The  reason
why  we  do  not  observe  the  growth  of  alcoholic  ferments,  espe-
cially at  the  commencement  of  the  experiments,  is  because  of
the  unsuitableness  of  those  media  for  the  life  of  yeast.  The
latter  may,  nevertheless,  form  in  them  subsequent  to  this
development  of  other  organized  forms,  by  reason  of  the  modi-
fication produced  in  the  original  mineral  medium  by  the  albu-
minous matters  that  they  introduce  into  it.  It  is  interesting  to
peruse,  in  our  Memoir  of  1860,  certain  facts  of  the  same  kind
relating  to  fermentation  by  means  of  albumens — that  of  the
blood,  for  example,  from  which,  we  may  mention  incidentally,
we  were  led  to  infer  the  existence  of  several  distinct  albumens
in  the  serum,  a  conclusion  which,  since  then,  has  been  confirmed
by  various  observers,  notably  by  M.  Bechamp.  Now,  in  his
experiments  on  fermentation  in  sweetened  water,  with  yeast-ash
and  a  salt  of  ammonia,  there  is  no  doubt  that  Liebig  had  failed
to  avoid  those  difficulties  which  are  entailed  by  the  spontaneous
growth  of  other  organisms  than  yeast.  Moreover,  it  is  possible
that,  to  have  established  the  certainty  of  this  result,  Liebig
should  have  had  recourse  to  a  closer  microscopical  observation
than  from  certain  passages  in  his  Memoir  he   seems  to  have

but  it  is  not  difficult  to  conceive  so  sagacious  an  observer  remarking  to
his  illustrious  friend,  that  the  possibility  of  deriving  pecuniary  advantage
from  the  wide  application  of  a  new  scientific  fact  had  never  been  re-
garded as  the  criterion  of  the  exactness  of  that  fact.  We  could  prove,
moreover,  by  the  undoubted  testimony  of  very  distinguished  practical
men,  notably  by  that  of  M.  Pezeyre,  director  of  distilleries,  that  upon
this  point  also  Liebig  was  mistaken.


330  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

adopted.  "\Ye  have  little  doubt  that  his  pupils  could  tell  us  that
Liebig  did  not  even  employ  that  instrument  without  which  any
exact  study  of  fermentation  is  not  merely  difficult  but  well-nigh
impossible.  AVe  ourselves,  for  the  reasons  mentioned,  did  not
obtain  a  simple  alcoholic  fermentation  any  more  than  Liebig
did.  In  that  particular  experiment,  the  details  of  which  we
gave  in  our  Memoir  of  1860,  we  obtained  lactic  and  alcoholic
fermentation  together  ;  an  appreciable  quantity  of  lactic  acid
formed  and  arrested  the  propagation  of  the  lactic  and  alcoholic
ferments,  so  that  more  than  half  of  the  sugar  remained  in  the
liquid  without  fermenting.  This,  however,  in  no  way  detracted
from  the  correctness  of  the  conclusion  which  we  deduced
from  the  experiment,  and  from  other  similar  ones  ;  it  might
even  be  said  that,  from  a  general  and  philosophical  point  of
view — which  is  the  only  one  of  interest  here — the  result  was
doubly  satisfactory,  inasmvich  as  we  demonstrated  that  mineral
media  were  adapted  to  the  simultaneous  development  of  several
organized  ferments,  instead  of  only  one.  The  fortuitous  asso-
ciation of  different  ferments  could  not  invalidate  the  conclusion
that  all  the  nitrogen  of  the  cells  of  the  alcoholic  and  lactic  fer-
ments was  derived  from  the  nitrogen  in  the  ammoniacal  salts,
and  that  all  the  carbon  of  those  ferments  was  taken  from  the
sugar,  since,  in  the  medium  employed  in  our  experiment,  the
sugar  was  the  only  substance  that  contained  carbon.  Liebig
carefully  abstained  from  noticing  this  fact,  which  would  have
been  fatal  to  the  very  groundwork  of  his  criticisms,  and  thought
that  he  w^as  keeping  up  the  appearance  of  a  grave  contradiction
by  arguing  that  we  had  never  obtained  a  simple  alcoholic  fer-
mentation. It  would  be  unprofitable  to  dwell  longer  upon  the
subject  of  the  difficulties  which  the  propagation  of  yeast  in  a
saccharine  mineral  medium  formerly  presented.  As  a  matter
of  fact,  the  progress  of  our  studies  has  imparted  to  the  question
an  aspect  very  different  from  that  which  it  formerly  wore ;  it
was  this  circumstance  which  emboldened  us  to  offer,  in  our
reply  to  Liebig  before  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in  1871,  to
prepare,  in  a  saccharine  mineral  medium,  in  the  presence  of  a


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  331

commission  to  be  appointed  by  our  opponent,  any  quantity  of
ferment  that  lie  might  require,  and  to  effect  the  fermentation
of  any  weight  of  sugar  whatsoever.

Our  knowledge  of  the  facts  detailed  in  the  preceding  chap-
ters concerning  pure  ferments  and  their  manipulation  in  the
presence  of  pure  air,  enables  us  to  completely  disregard  those
causes  of  embarrassment  that  result  from  the  fortuitous  occur-
rence of  the  germs  of  organisms,  different  in  character  from  the
ferments,  introduced  by  the  air  or  from  the  sides  of  vessels,  or
even  by  the  ferment  itself.

Let  us  once  more  take  one  of  our  double-necked  flasks  (Fig.
22,  p.  110),  which  we  will  suppose  is  capable  of  containing
three  or  four  litres  (six  to  eight  pints).

Let  us  put  into  it  the  following  : —
Pure  distilled  water.

Sugar  candy      .  .  .  .      200  grammes.

Bitartrate  of  potassium . .  1*0     ,,

,,         ,,  ammonia  . .  0'5     „

Sulphate  of  ammonia    ..  1*5     ,,

Ash  of  yeast      ..  ..  1-5     ,,

[1  gramme  —  15'43  grains.]

Let  us  boil  the  mixture,  to  destroy  all  germs  of  organisms
that  may  exist  in  the  air  or  liquid  or  on  the  sides  of  the  flask,
and  then  permit  it  to  cool,  after  having  placed,  by  way  of
extra  precaution,  a  small  quantity  of  asbestos  in  the  end  of  the
fine,  curved  tube.  Let  us  next  introduce  a  trace  of  ferment
into  the  liquid,  through  the  other  neck,  which,  as  we  described,
is  terminated  by  a  small  piece  of  india-rubber  tube  closed  with
a  glass  stopper.

Here  are  the  details  of  such  an  experiment : —

On  December  9,  1873,  we  sowed  some  pure  ferment —
saccharomyces  j^astoriamts.  From  December  11,  that  is,  within
so  short  a  time  as  forty-eight  hours  after  impregnation,  we  saw
a  multitude  of  extremely  minute  bubbles  rising  almost  con-
tinuously from  the  bottom,  indicating  that  at  this  point  the
fermentation  had  commenced.     On  the  following  davs,  several


532  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

patches  of  froth  appeared  on  the  surface  of  the  liquid.  We  left
the  flask  undisturbed  in  the  oven,  at  a  temperature  of  25°  C.
(77°  F.).  On  April  24,  1874,  we  tested  some  of  the  liquid,
obtained  by  means  of  the  straight  tube,  to  see  if  it  still  con-
tained any  sugar.  We  found  that  it  contained  less  than
two  grammes,  so  that  198  grammes  (42  oz.  Troy)  had  already
disappeared.  Some  time  afterwards  the  fermentation  came  to
an  end ;  we  carried  on  the  experiment,  nevertheless,  until
April  18,  1875.

There  was  no  development  of  any  organism  absolutely  foreign
to  the  ferment,  which  was  itself  abundant,  a  circumstance  that,
added  to  the  persistent  vitality  of  the  ferment,  in  spite  of  the
unsuitableness  of  the  medium  for  its  nutrition,  permitted  the
perfect  completion  of  fermentation.  There  was  not  the  minutest
quantity  of  sugar  remaining.  The  total  weight  of  ferment,
after  washing  and  drying  at  100°  C.  (212'  F.),  was  2-56;3
grammes  (39 'O  grains).

In  experiments  of  this  kind,  in  which  the  ferment  has  to
be  weighed,  it  is  better  not  to  use  any  j'east-ash  that  cannot  be
dissolved  completely,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  easy  separation
from  the  ferment  formed.  Kaulin's  liquid,  the  composition  of
which  we  have  already  given  (p.  89,  footnote),  may  be  used
in  such  cases  with  success.

All  the  alcoholic  ferments  are  not  capable  to  the  same  extent
of  development  by  means  of  phosphates,  ammoniacal  salts,  and
sugar.  There  are  some  whose  development  is  arrested  a  longer
or  shorter  time  before  the  transformation  of  all  the  sugar.  In
a  series  of  comparative  experiments,  200  grammes  of  sugar-
candy  being  used  in  each  case,  we  found  that  whilst  saccliaro-
myces  jjastorianus  effected  a  complete  fermentation  of  the  sugar,
the  caseous  ferment  did  not  decompose  more  than  two-thirds,
and  the  ferment  which  we  have  designated  neic  "  /u'gh  "ferment
not  more  than  one-fifth  :  and  keeping  the  flasks  for  a  longer
time  in  the  oven  had  no  cfiect  in  increasing  the  proportions  of
sugar  fermented  in  these  two  last  cases.

We  conducted  a  great  number  of  fermentations  in  mineral


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  333

media,  in  consequence  of  a  circumstance  whicli  it  may  be
interesting  to  mention  here.  A  person  who  was  working  in
our  laboratory  asserted  that  the  success  of  our  experiments
depended  upon  the  impurity  of  the  sugar-candy  which  we
employed,  and  that  if  this  sugar  had  been  pure — much  purer
than  was  the  ordinary,  white,  commercial  sugar-candy,  which
up  to  that  time  we  had  always  used — the  ferment  could  not  have
multiplied.  The  persistent  objections  of  our  friend,  and  our
desire  to  convince  him,  caused  us  to  repeat  all  our  previous
experiments  on  the  subject,  using  sugar  of  great  purity,  which
had  been  specially  prepared  for  us,  with  the  utmost  care,  by  a
skilful  confectioner,  Seugnot.  The  result  only  confirmed  our
former  conclusions.  Even  this  did  not  satisfy  our  obstinate
friend,  who  went  to  the  trouble  of  preparing  some  pure  sugar
for  himself,  in  little  crystals,  by  repeated  crystallizations  of
carefully-selected  commercial  sugar-candy ;  he  then  repeated
our  experiments  himself.  This  time  all  his  doubts  were  over-
come. It  even  happened  that  the  fermentations  with  the
perfectly  pure  sugar  instead  of  being  slow  were  very  active,
when  compared  with  those  which  we  had.  conducted  with  the
commercial  sugar-candy.

We  may  here  add  a  few  words  on  the  non-transformation  of
yeast  into  pou'cillium  glaiicum.

If  at  any  time  during  fermentation  we  pour  oflf  the  ferment-
ing liquid,  the  deposit  of  yeast  remaining  in  the  vessel  may
continue  there,  in  contact  with  air,  without  our  ever  being  able
to  discover  the  least  formation  oi peniciUiuiii  glaiicum  in  it.  "We
may  keep  a  current  of  pure  air  constantly  passing  through  the
flask  ;  the  experiment  will  give  the  same  result.  Nevertheless,
this  is  a  medium  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  development  of  this
mould,  inasmuch  as  if  we  introduce  merely  a  few  spores  of
penicilUum,  an  abundant  vegetation  of  that  growth  will  after-
wards appear  on  the  deposit.  The  descriptions  of  Messrs.
Turpin,  Hoffmann,  and  Trecul  have,  therefore,  been  based  on
one  of  these  illusions  which  we  meet  with  so  frequently  in
microscopical  observations.


334  STUDIES    ox    FERMENTATION.

When  we  laid  these  facts  before  the  Academy,*  M.  Trecul
professed  his  inability  to  comprehend  them  :  f

"According  to  M.  Pasteur,"  he  said,  "the  yeast  of  beer  is
anaerobian,  that  is  to  say,  it  lives  in  a  liquid  deprived  of  free
oxygen  ;  and  to  become  mycoderma  or  peiticUUum  it  is  above  all
things  necessary  that  it  should  be  placed  in  air,  since,  with-
out this,  as  the  name  signifies,  an  aerobian  being  cannot  exist.
To  bring  about  the  transformation  of  the  yeast  of  beer  into
mycoderma  cerevisice  or  into  penicillium  glaucum,  we  must  accept
the  conditions  under  which  these  two  forms  are  obtained.  If
M.  Pasteur  will  persist  in  keeping  his  yeast  in  media  which  are
incompatible  with  the  desired  modification,  it  is  clear  that  the
results  which  he  obtains  must  be  always  negative."

Contrary  to  this  perfectly  gratuitous  assertion  of  M.  Trecul's,
we  do  not  keep  our  yeast  in  media  which  are  calculated  to  pre-
vent its  transformation  into  penicillium.  As  we  have  just  seen,
the  principal  aim  and  object  of  our  experiment  was  to  bring
this  minute  plant  into  contact  with  air,  and  under  conditions
that  would  diWow  ihe  2)eniciUinm  to  develop  with  perfect  freedom.
"We  conducted  our  experiments  exactly  as  Turpin  and  Hoffmann
conducted  theirs,  and  exactly  as  they  stipulate  that  such  ex-
periments should  be  conducted — with  the  one  sole  difference,
indispensable  to  the  correctness  of  our  observations,  that  we
carefully  guarded  ourselves  against  those  causes  of  error  which
they  did  not  take  the  least  trouble  to  avoid.  It  is  possible  to
produce  a  ready  entrance  and  escape  of  pure  air  in  the  case  of
the  double-necked  flasks  which  we  have  so  often  emploj^ed  in
the  course  of  this  work,  without  having  recourse  to  the  con-
tinuous passage  of  a  current  of  air.  Having  made  a  file-mark
on  the  thin  curved  neck  at  a  distance  of  two  or  three  centi-
metres (an  inch)  from  the  flask,  we  must  cut  round  the  neck  at
this  point  with  a  glazier's  diamond,  and  then  remove  it,  taking
care  to  cover  the  opening  immediately  with  a  sheet  of  paper

*  Pasteur,  Comptcs  rendus  de  J' Academic,  vol.  Ixxviii.  pp.  213-216.
t  Teecul,  Comptes  rendus  de  V Acadeniie,  vol.  Ixxviii.  pp.  217,  218.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  OOD

which  has  been  passed  through  the  flame,  and  which  we  must
fasten  with  a  thread  round  the  part  of  the  neck  still  left.  In
this  manner  we  may  increase  or  prolong  the  fructification  of
funffoid  o-rowths,  or  the  life  of  aerobian  ferments  in  our  flasks.

What  we  have  said  of  penicillium  glaucum  will  apply  equally
to  mycoderma  cerevisue.  Notwithstanding  what  Turpin  and
Trecul  may  assert  to  the  contrary,  yeast,  in  contact  with  air
as  it  was  under  the  conditions  of  the  experiment  just  described,
will  not  yield  mycoderma  vini  or  mycoderma  cerevisice  any  more
than  it  will  2)enicillmm.

The  experiments  described  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  on
the  increase  of  organized  ferments  in  mineral  media  of  the
composition  described,  are  of  great  physiological  interest.
Amongst  other  results,  they  show  that  all  the  proteic  matter  of
ferments  may  be  produced  by  the  vital  activity  of  the  cells,
which,  apart  altogether  from  the  influence  of  light  or  free
oxygen  (unless,  indeed,  we  are  dealing  with  aerobian  moulds
which  require  free  oxygen),  have  the  power  of  developing  a
chemical  activity  between  carbo-hydrates,  ammoniacal  salts,
phosphates  and  sulphates  of  potassium  and  magnesium.  It
may  be  admitted  with  truth  that  a  similar  effect  obtains  in  the
■case  of  the  higher  plants,  so  that  in  the  existing  state  of  science
we  fail  to  conceive  what  serious  reason  can  be  urged  against
our  considering  this  effect  as  general.  It  would  be  perfectly
logical  to  extend  the  results  of  which  we  are  speaking  to  all
plants^  and  to  believe  that  the  proteic  matter  of  vegetables,  and
perhaps  of  animals  also,  is  formed  exclusively  by  the  activity
of  the  cells  operating  upon  the  ammoniacal  and  other  mineral
salts  of  the  sap  or  plasma  of  the  blood,  and  the  carbo-hydrates,
the  formation  of  which,  in  the  case  of  the  higher  plants,
requires  only  the  concurrence  of  the  chemical  impulse  of  green
light.

Viewed  in  this  manner,  the  formation  of  the  proteic  sub-
stances would  be  independent  of  the  great  act  of  reduction  of
carbonic  acid  gas  under  the  influence  of  light.  These  substances
would  not  be  built  up  from  the  elements  of  water,  ammonia,


8o6  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

and  carbonic  acid  gas,  after  the  decomposition  of  this  last  ;
they  would  be  formed  where  they  are  found  in  the  cells  them-
selves, by  some  process  of  union  between  the  carbo-hydrates
imported  by  the  sap,  and  the  phosphates  of  potassium  and
magnesium  and  salts  of  ammonia.  Lastly,  in  vegetable  growth,
bv  means  of  a  carbo-hydrate  and  a  mineral  medium,  since  the
carbo-hydrate  is  capable  of  many  variations,  and  it  would  be
difficult  to  understand  how  it  could  be  split  up  into  its  elements
before  serving  to  constitute  the  proteic  substances,  we  may  hope
to  obtain  as  many  distinct  proteic  substances,  and  even  cellulose
substances,  as  there  are  carbo-hydrates.  We  have  commenced
certain  studies  in  this  direction.

If  solar  radiation  is  indispensable  to  the  decomposition  of
carbonic  acid  and  the  building  up  of  the  primary  substances  in
the  case  of  higher  vegetable  life,  it  is  still  possible  that  certain
inferior  organisms  may  do  without  it  and  nevertheless  yield
the  most  complex  substances,  fatty  or  carbo-hydrate,  such  as
cellulose,  various  organic  acids,  and  proteic  matter  ;  not,  how-
ever, by  borrowing  their  carbon  from  the  carbonic  acid  which
is  saturated  with  oxygen,  but  from  other  matters  still  capable
of  acquiring  oxygen,  and  so  of  yielding  heat  in  the  process,  such
as  alcohol  and  acetic  acid,  for  example,  to  cite  merely  carbon
compounds  most  removed  from  organization.  As  these  last  com-
pounds, and  a  host  of  others  equally  adapted  to  serve  as  the
carbonaceous  food  of  mycodenns  and  the  mucedines,  may  be
produced  synthetically  by  means  of  carbon  and  the  vapour  of
water,  after  the  methods  that  science  owes  to  Berthelot,  it
follows  that,  in  the  case  of  certain  inferior  beings,  life  would
be  possible  even  if  it  should  be  that  the  solar  light  was
extinguished.*

*  See  on  this  subject  the  verbal  observations  which  we  addressed  to
the  Academy  of  Sciences,  at  its  meetings  of  April  lOtb  and  24th,  1876.


337


CHAPTER  VII.

Neav  Prookss  for  the  Manufacture  of  Beer.

The  principles  established  in  the  course  of  this  work  implicitly
involve  the  conditions  of  a  new  process  of  manufacture,  the
essential  feature  of  which  would  consist  in  the  production  of  a
beer  of  excellent  keeping  qualities,  we  might  even  say  a  beer
that  could  not  undergo  alteration.  It  will  not  be  difficult  now
to  make  ourselves  clear  on  the  point.

We  have  shown  in  the  first  place,  that  the  changes  which
take  place  in  the  ferment,  the  wort,  and  the  beer  itself,  are
due  to  the  presence  of  microscopic  organisms  of  an  entirely
different  character  to  that  of  the  ferment-cells  properly  so
called,  which  organisms,  by  simultaneously  giving  rise,  in  the
course  of  their  multiplication  in  the  wort,  ferment,  or  beer,  to
other  products,  make  the  materials  difficult  to  keep  or  effect
their  deterioration.  Again,  we  have  seen  that  these  change-
producing  organisms,  the  ferments  of  disease,  never  arise
spontaneously  in  the  wort  or  beer,  but,  whenever  they  make
their  appearance  in  these  fluids,  have  been  imported  from
without,  either  in  company  with  the  yeast,  or  from  accession  of
atmospheric  dust,  or  from  contact  with  the  vessels,  or  from  the
materials  themselves  which  the  brewer  uses  in  his  manufacture.
Moreover,  we  know  that  these  disease-ferments,  or  their  germs,
are  destroyed  when  the  wort  has  its  temperature  raised  to  the
boiling-point.  And,  following  up  the  inferences  from  such
facts,  we  have  seen  that  wort  exposed  to  pure  air,  after  having

z


338  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

been  heated  to  boiling,  remains  absolutely  free  of  any  sort  of
fermentation.

Inasmuch  then  as  the  disease- germs  of  wort  and  beer  are
destroyed  in  the  copper  in  which  the  wort  is  boiled,  and  as,
by  employing  a  perfectly  pure  ferment,  we  guard  against  the
admission  of  any  foreign  ferment  of  an  evil  character,  we  have
it  in  our  power  to  prepare  a  beer  which  shall  be  incapable  of
undergoing  any  pernicious  fermentation  whatsoever.  This  we
shall  have  eflected  provided  we  can  take  the  wort  as  run  oiF
from  the  coppers,  cool  and  manipulate  it  out  of  contact  with
ordinary  air  or  in  contact  with  pure  air,  charge  it  with  a  pure
yeast,  and,  lastly,  store  the  beer  when  the  fermentation  is
complete  in  vessels  thoroughly  purified  from  disease-ferments.*

§  I. — Preliminary  Experiments.

We  may  readily  satisfy  ourselves  as  to  the  truth  of  these
inferences.  The  following  is  one  of  the  earliest  experiments
which  I  devised  with  a  view  to  establish  their  certainty.  Into
a  flask  with  a  straight  neck  of  about  a  litre  (If  pints)  capacity,
a  quantity  of  wort  from  a  brewery  was  introduced  and  there
raised  to  boiling,  and  whilst  the  vapour  still  issued  from  the
neck  of  the  flask,  coijnection  was  made  with  a  two-necked  flask
in  which  the  cultivation  of  pure  yeast  had  been  carried  on.

*  M.  Galland,  a  brewer  in  Maxeville,  near  Nancy,  published  with  his
name,  in  November,  1875,  a  pamphlet,  which  was  reproduced  in  tbe
brewing  journals  of  that  date,  bearing  the  title,  It  is  said,  "  the  air
being  impure,  let  tis  exclude  it  ;  "  I  say,  "  The  air  hcing  impure,  let  us  purify
it."  These  two  aphorisms,  together  or  apart,  constitute  the  essential
novelty  of  my  researches  on  beer,  and  M.  Galland  is  mistaken  in
attempting  to  appropriate  the  merit  of  the  second  alternative  (see  my
note  in  the  Comptes  rendus  of  the  17th  November,  1S73,  and  the  text  of
the  letters-patent  obtained  loth  March  of  that  year).  M.  Galland  has
devised  some  arrangements  for  putting  the  latter  of  these  two  schemes
into  practice ;  but  it  is  possible,  of  course,  to  eflfect  this  in  a  variety  of
ways.  M.  Velten,  a  brewer  in  Marseilles,  had  already  accomplished  this
in  his  eflPorts  to  carry  out  practically  the  procedure  advocated  in  the
present  work.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


339


The  cork  and  glass  tube  used  for  this  purpose  had  previously
been  treated  with  boiling  water.

AVhen  the  wort  had  cooled  down  in  the  flask  and  matters
were  arranged  as  represented  in  Fig.  75,  I  raised  the  two-
necked  flask  so  as  to  cause  a  little  of  the  liquid  and  yeast  to  flow
into  the  wort.  Thereupon  fermentation  was  set  up,  and  the
resulting  carbonic  acid  gas  made  its  escape  by  the  drawn-out
end  of  the  doubled-necked  flask.     The  entire  arrano-ement  with


Fig.  75.

its  supporting  stand  remained  in  this  connection  for  eighteen
months,  sometimes  on  a  stove,  sometimes  in  the  laboratory,
exposed  to  all  the  variations  of  external  temperature.  At  the
end  of  that  time  I  tasted  the  beer  in  the  flask  ;  it  was  perfectly
sound,  and  the  ferment,  submitted  to  the  microscope,  showed  not
the  slightest  trace  of  any  foreign  ferments :  and,  doubtless,  the

z  2


340


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


experiment  might  have  been  protracted  over  any  number  of
years  with  the  same  result.

The  only  change  that  occurs  in  course  of  time  is  the  appear-
ance in  the  neck  of  the  flask  at  the  surface  of  the  beer  of  a
deposit  of  small  prominences  resembling  a  crystallization,  but
which  really  consists  of  those  forms  of  ferment  to  which  in
Chapter  Y.  I  attached  the  name  of  aerobian  ferment.  The  beer,
after  being  transferred  to  a  bottle  that  had  been  washed  with
not  water,  was  kept  for  several  months  in  the  heat  of  summer,
without  exhibiting  the  slightest  trace  of  deterioration.

The   essential   conditions  of  the  preceding  experiment  can


Fig.


Fig.


readily  be  realized  on  the  large  scale.  For  this  purpose  we  may
employ  the  apparatus  in  the  above  sketch  (Figs.  76  and  77)
constructed  of  tin  or  tinned  copper.  As  appears  from  the
sketch,  this  consists  of  a  cylindrical  tub  resting  on  a  support,
and  closed  at  the  top  by  a  cover,  whose  lower  edge  fits  into  a
gutter  containing  water.  The  wort  prepared  in  the  copper  is  led
into  the  cylinder,  a  process  which  does  not  materially  lower  its
temperature.     Now  we  know  that  wort  in  breweries  which  has


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  341

been  cooled  in  contact  with  the  air,  and  so  got  charged  with
disease- germs,  will,  nevertheless,  recover  its  faculty  of  keeping
for  any  length  of  time  in  pure  air,  if  we  again  raise  its  tempera-
ture to  80°  C.  (176°  F.)  or  even  70°  or  75°  C.  {158°,  167°  F.)
Having  filled  the  tub  with  the  hot  wort  and  put  on  the  lid,  wo
then  connect,  by  means  of  a  caoutchouc  tube  c  d,  the  metal  tube
a  c  (which  opens  into  one  of  the  tubulures  projecting  above  the
lid)  with  the  system  of  tubes  cl  e,  f  g,  of  which  d  e  is  fixed  to  the
cylinder ;  e/is  a  caoutchouc  junction  connecting  e  with  the  bent
glass  tube  g.  We  then  dash  over  the  apparatus,  lid,  tubulures,
and  their  corks  a  quantity  of  boiling  water.  This  collects  in  the
gutter  in  which  the  lid  rests,  and  any  excess  overflows  into  a
second  gutter  outside  the  first,  where,  however,  it  cannot
remain,  but  passes  away  by  means  of  a  ring  of  small  holes
between  the  base  of  the  outer  trough  i  i  and  the  cjdiuder.  The
overflow  is  collected  in  a  third  trough  at  the  bottom,  whence  it
can  be  removed  by  a  pipe  M.  T  is  a  bent  thermometer  to  indi-
cate the  temperature  of  the  wort ;  its  bulb  is  protected  by  an
mlet  socket  d  d,  pierced  with  holes  ;  r  is  a  stopcock  for  dis-
charging the  water  in  the  gutter,  which  serves  as  a  hydraulic
junction  between  the  cylinder  and  its  lid;  R,  Y,  are  stopcocks,
or  openings  for  the  discharge  of  the  liquid  in  the  cylinder  and
its  deposit.  The  next  process  is  to  cool  the  vessel,  which  may
be  done  either  by  leaving  it  to  itself,  or  by  introducing  a  cur-
rent of  cold  water  through  the  tubulure  E,  soldered  on  to  the
lid.  This  tubulure  is  of  the  form  of  an  inverted  funnel,  and  is
pierced  at  the  bottom  with  a  close  row  of  holes,  through  which
the  cold  water  issues  in  a  sheet  over  the  surface  of  the  cover.
In  whichever  way  the  cooling  is  efiected,  the  external  air  con-
tinues all  the  time  to  enter  the  vessel  beneath  the  lid  by  way  of
the  long,  narrow  passage  ^/e  r/c  a,  and  must  necessarily  get
purified  by  depositing  in  its  course  all  fungoid-germs,  just  as
happened  in  the  case  of  the  two-necked  flask  of  air  experiments.
This,  however,  may  be  still  further  secured  by  introducing  a
small  plug  of  cotton  wool,  or  asbestos,  into  the  end  of  the  tube  g.
The  experiments  which  we  have  carried  out  with  this  appa-


342  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.

ratus  have  proved  that,  by  adopting  such  an  arrangement,  beer,
a  liquid  peculiarly  liable  to  change,  may  be  kept  as  long  as  we
wish,  for  weeks  or  months,  in  contact  with  air,  since  the  tube  g
is  open,  without  evincing  the  least  symptom  of  disease.  It
matters  litcle  whether  the  leaves  and  strobiles  of  the  hops  are
introduced  with  the  hot  wort  or  strained  off ;  the  result  is  the
same.  On  the  other  hand,  a  leak  in  the  apparatus  from  which
the  wort  gets  mixed  with  ordinary  water  from  outside  during
cooling,  will  speedily  effect  a  change  in  the  wort  and  cause  it
to  swarm  with  vibrios,  or  butyric  ferment,  lactic  ferment,  and
other  germs  of  disease,  whilst  its  taste  will  be  rendered  extremely
naiiseous.  It  can  only  be  through  one's  own  fault,  that  is,  from
want  of  skill  in  carrj'ing  out  the  operation,  that  any  change
can  be  brought  about  by  the  water  in  the  gutter  not  being
kept  out  of  the  fermenting  vessel.  That  water  may  even
become  putrid  without  the  organisms  contained  in  it  being  able
to  reach  the  wort  in  the  fermenting  vessel.  The  apparatus
may  be  of  any  size  whatever;  we  have  worked  with  vessels
containing  12  hectolitres  with  as  much  ease  and  certainty  as
when  we  used  an  apparatus  of  1  hectolitre  (22  gallons).

It  is  eas}"  to  carry  out  the  process  of  cooling  in  the  presence
of  carbonic  acid  gas  if  we  fit  a  bent  tube,  similar  to  a  c  d  e/g,  to
the  second  tubulure  D.  Through  this  tube,  or  its  companion,
the  gas  can  be  passed  as  it  issues  from  an  apparatus  in  which  it
is  generated,  or  from  a  gasometer  filled  with  it,  or  from  a  vessel
of  beer  undergoing  fermentation.

However,  there  is  no  necessity  that  the  cooling  should  take
place  in  the  fermenting  vessel.  It  may  be  effected  scparatelj-,
in  vessels  of  greater  or  less  depth,  in  spiral  coils  surrounded
with  cold  water,  or  in  any  kind  of  refrigerator,  provided  always
that  the  conditions  of  purity  are  satisfied,  and  that  the  flow  of
the  cooled  wort  takes  place  imder  the  same  conditions.  Jets
of  steam,  which  are  already  extensivel}'  used  for  the  cleansing
of  pipes  in  breweries,  may  be  employed  here  with  great
advantage.

The  pitching  may  be  effected  in  various  ways.    A  two-necked


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  343

flask  of  a  capacity  of  from  200  to  300  cc.  (about  7  to  10  fl.  ozs.),
in  which  not  more  than  100  cc.  {oh  fl.  ozs.)  of  wort  has  been
fermented,  will  be  sufficient  for  an  apparatus  of  1  hectolitre
(22  gallons),  although  the  flask  may  not  contain  more  than
1  or  2  decigrammes  {Ih  to  3  grains)  of  yeast.  In  the  manu-
facture of  beer,  as  at  present  conducted,  the  employment  of
so  minute  a  quantity  of  yeast  would  lead  to  most  disastrous
results.  The  fermentation  would  unfailingly  become  lactic
and  butyric,  since  the  foreign  germs  with  which  commercial
worts  and  yeasts  are  always  contaminated  would  have  ample
time  to  develop  during  the  first  twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours,
whilst  the  small  quantity  of  yeast  used  in  the  pitching  could
scarcely  do  more  than  begin  to  develop  during  that  time.  It
is  simply  with  the  object  of  avoiding  these  secondary  fermenta-
tions that  the  brewer  uses  large  quantities  of  yeast  for  pitching.
After  the  wort  and  yeast  have  been  pulled  tip*  a. process  which
every  practical  brewer  adopts  after  pitching,  every  part  of  the
liquid  is  occupied  by  a  multitude  of  yeast-cells,  which  seize
upon  the  oxygen  in  solution,  germinate  with  activity,  turn  to
their  own  account  the  food-supplies  most  easily  assimilated,
and  prevent  the  growth  of  the  germs  of  disease-ferments.  In
the  new  process  which  we  are  now  explaining,  things  happen
quite  difierently.  Our  wort  is  pure,  and  our  yeast  is  pure,  and
if  only  a  single  cell  of  yeast  were  introduced  into  the  wort,
the  vital  activity  of  this  would  be  sufficient  to  bring  about  alco-
holic fermentation,  and  to  transform  the  wort  into  beer,  without
our  having  the  least  reason  to  apprehend  the  simultaneous
development  of  any  other  organisms  whatsoever.  In  short,
the  new  process  enables  us  to  pitch  with  as  small  a  quantity  of
yeast  as  we  like.  It  is,  nevertheless,  inexpedient  to  employ
too  minute  a  quantity,  since  by  doing  so  we  should  retard  the
commencement  of  fermentation .

In  the  case  of  an  apparatus  of  5  hectolitres  (110  gallons)  or
double  that  capacity,  the  pitching  may  be  accomplished  by  means

*  [Non-teclmically,  stirred  about. — Ed.]


344


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


of  flasks  holding  from  4  to  9  litres  (from  7  to  10  or  11  pints),
(Fig.  79),  or  copper  cans,  tinned  inside,  holding  from  10  to  15


Fig.  78.


Fig.  79.


litres  (2|-  to  3^  gallons),  and  provided  at  the  upper  conical  end


STUDIES    OX    FERMENTATION.  345

with  glass  tubes  (Fig.  78).  The  vessel  must  be  half  or  two-thirds
filled  with  wort.  For  this  purpose  it  will  be  well  always  to  em-
ploy wort  that  has  been  preserved  in  bottles  by  Appert's  process.
We  must  use  a  stopper  provided  with  tubes,  as  represented  in
Fig.  79  :  a  bis  a,  glass  stopper  which  closes  the  india-rubber  tube
be;  mnp  is  a  fine  glass  tube,  or,  better  still,  made  of  copper.

The  tap  r  being  closed,  a  long  india-rubber  tube  is  attached
to  the  extremity  of  the  curved  tube,  and  the  flask  is  completely
immersed  in  a  hot-water  bath  ;  the  india-rubber  tube  projects
from  the  bath  and  keeps  the  interior  of  the  vessel  in  commu-
nication with  the  external  atmosphere.  If  the  tube  m  np  is  of
copper,  we  may  avail  ourselves  of  its  flexibility  and  bend  it
upwards,  so  as  to  place  its  open  extremity  outside  the  bath.
The  water  in  the  bath  is  then  gradually  raised  to  a  temperature
of  100°  C.  (212°  F.),  at  which  it  is  kept  for  a  quarter  or  half  an
hour.  In  the  case  of  copper  cans,  it  is  more  convenient  to
place  them  over  a  gas-heater.  They  may  be  treated  in  the
same  manner  as  the  flasks  with  curved  necks.  Vessels  pre-
pared in  this  manner  may  remain  in  a  laboratory,  or  in  any
part  of  a  brewery,  for  an  indefinite  time,  without  the  wort  in
them  undergoing  the  least  change.  It  gradually  darkens  in
colour  through  a  direct  oxidation  of  a  purely  chemical  nature,
but  no  tendency  to  disease  will  manifest  itself.

Some  days  before  we  require  to  pitch  an  apparatus  of  several
hectolitres,  we  impregnate  one  of  these  flasks  or  cans.*  For
this  purpose  we  pass  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp  over  the  tubes
a  b  a  and  m  np,  to  destroy  the  particles  of  dust  that  might  pass
inside  at  the  moment  when  the  stopper  a  h  is  taken  out,  and
then  by  means  of  a  long,  straight  glass  tube  we  take  some  of

*  As  stated  in  the  paragrapli  on  aerobian  ferments,  in  Chapter  V.,
"low"  yeasts,  to  be  preserved  in  their  state  of  "  lowness,"  must  be
submitted  to  often-repeated  growths — every  fifteen  days  in  winter  and
every  ten  days  in  summer,  that  is  to  say,  they  must  be  grown  afresh  after
each  of  these  intervals.  If  this  is  done,  there  will  be  no  reason  to  appre-
hend the  formation  of  aerobian  ferments,  which,  as  we  have  stated
before,  may  embarrass  us  by  transforming  our  "  low  "  yeasts  into  "  high  "
yeasts.


346  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

the  liquid  from  a  flask  or  vessel  containing  pure  beer  in  a  state
of  fermentation,  and  let  a  few  drops  of  this,  with  the  yeast  that
it  holds  in  suspension,  fall  into  the  flask  or  can  ;  the  stopper
a  b  is  once  more  passed  through  the  flame  and  then  replaced ;
generally  in  the  course  of  one  or  two  days  the  jeast  develops  in
the  flask  sufiicientl}'-  for  the  fermentation  to  show  itself.  We
may  shorten  the  operation  still  further  by  emptying  into  the
can  the  contents  of  one  of  those  double-necked  flasks.  To  do
this,  we  have  simply  to  attach  the  straight  tube  of  the  flask  to
the  india-rubber  b  c,  and  pour  the  liquid  in.  In  a  similar
manner  we  introduce,  through  one  of  the  tubulures  surmounting
the  lid  of  the  fermenting  apparatus,  the  contents  of  the  flasks
or  cans,  either  whilst  they  are  still  in  active  fermentation,  or
after  fermentation  is  over.  For  this  purpose,  the  tap  r  is  con-
nected by  means  of  an  india-rubber  tube  (Fig.  79),  with  a  tube
passing  through  a  cork  fixed  in  one  of  the  tubulures  of  the  large
apparatus.  All  this  may  be  done  in  considerably  less  time  than
we  have  taken  to  describe  it ;  and  the  operation  may  be  performed
accurately  and  safely  by  any  one  who  has  witnessed  it  a  few
times,  even  though  he  may  not  be  skilled  in  chemical  manipula-
tions, especiall}^  if  he  takes  care  to  bear  in  mind  the  very  simple
principles  which  we  have  explained.

Since  certain  parts  of  the  apparatus — the  outer  opening  of
the  tap,  or  the  india-rubber  tubing,  for  example — may  contract
particles  of  dust  from  the  air,  those  parts,  before  being  used,
must  be  boiled  in  water,  or  washed  with  boiling  water,  or
passed  through  the  flame  of  a  spirit  lamp,  to  destroy  the  germs
mixed  with  the  particles  of  dust  that  settle  upon  them.

The  method  of  cooling  the  wort  in  contact  with  carbonic
acid  prevents  access  of  oxygen  to  the  latter  up  to  the  time
of  pitching,  so  that  the  development  of  the  yeast  takes  place
apart  from  the  influence  of  oxygen.  Now,  we  know  that  these
conditions  necessitate  the  employment  of  a  ver\^  young  yeast —
a  yeast  that  is  in  course  of  active  germination,  such  as  may  be
taken  from  an  incipient  preparatory  fermentation.  Neverthe-
less, even  with  this,  the  development  of  the  yeast  under  such


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  347

conditions  is  extremely  slow,  and  the  fermentation  takes  from
fifteen  to  twenty-five  days  ;  whilst,  under  the  same  circum-
stances, but  with  an  aerated  wort,  it  would  be  finished  in  from
eight  to  twelve  days.  This  is  a  considerable  drawback,  but,
perhaps,  a  still  more  serious  inconvenience  is  that  the  beer
takes  much  longer  to  clarify,  and  does  so  with  greater  difficulty
than  those  beers  which  are  made  with  aerated  worts.  At  the
same  time,  this  is  largely  compensated  by  the  superior  quality
of  the  beer,  which  is  stronger  and  has  greater  fulness  on  the
palate,  whilst  the  aroma  of  the  hops  is  preserved  to  an  extent
never  found  in  beers  brewed  by  the  ordinary  process.  Besides
this,  the  3'east  deposited  at  the  bottom  of  the  fermenting  vessel
is  much  less  active,  and,  being  of  an  older  type,  is  revived  with
greater  difficulty  than  that  which  forms  in  aerated  worts.  This,
which  might  be  considered  a  disadvantage,  if  we  had  to  employ
the  yeast  afterwards  for  pitching,  has  the  great  advantage  ol'
giving  a  beer  which,  "when  racked,  undergoes  its  secondary
fermentation  only  slowly,  and  with  difficulty.*  A  beer  of  this
kiud  is  better  adapted  than  ordinary  beer  to  stand  a  long
journey  without  developing  great  pressure  inside  the  casks,
and,  if  bottled,  it  will  contain  very  little  deposit,  and  will  not
froth  violently  when  uncorked.  The  reason  is,  that  a  yeast  is
the  more  active,  the  more  ready  to  multiply  rapidlj',  and  to
work  vigorously  the  more  highly  aerated  the  wort  was  in  which
it  was  grown.  On  the  other  hand,  a  yeast  formed  apart  from
air  readily  gets  exhausted,  and  may  even  perish  in  the  liquid  in
which  it  ferments,  when  that  is  kept  out  of  contact  with  air  ;
in  other  words,  the  vital  action  of  yeast  is  more  restricted  when

*  It  has  been  observed  by  brewers  that,  sometimes,  without  any-
apparent  cause,  a  yeast  suddenly  becomes  inactive  and  fermentation
ceases.  Accidents  of  this  kind  may  probably  be  explained  in  the  same-
manner  as  the  facts  of  which  we  are  speaking.  If  a  wort  has  not  been
aerated,  or  if  it  has  been  deprived  of  oxygen  by  a  commencing  develop-
ment of  microscopic  organisms,  the  yeast  formed  in  it  will  be  very
inferior,  and  the  fermentation  may  stop  at  its  commencement  or  soon
afterwards.  In  such  a  case,  an  aeration  of  the  yeast  and  wort  would  be
the  best  remedy.


348  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

it  has  not  been  subjected  to  the  action  of  oxygen  during  its
formation.

If  a  great  depth  of  wort,  the  surface  of  which  alone  is  in
contact  with  atmospheric  air,  is  left  to  cool  down,  it  will  act  in
almost  exactly  the  same  manner  as  that  which  is  cooled  under
an  atmosphere  of  carbonic  acid  gas,  because  the  oxygen  of  the
air  is  very  slow  in  pervading  wort  that  is  undisturbed.  The
gas  will  be  taken  into  solution  by  the  upper  layer  only,  whilst
the  bulk  of  the  liquid  will  remain  unaffected  by  it.  In  some
experiments  which  we  conducted  in  a  vessel  which  contained
wort  to  a  depth  of  70  centimetres  (27'5  inches),  and  which  was
provided  with  a  tap  that  enabled  us  to  draw  off  some  of  the
liquid  every  day,  until  we  had  reduced  the  depth  to  35  centi-
metres, we  found,  at  the  end  of  eight  days,  that  there  was  not
a  trace  of  ox5'gen  in  solution  at  the  latter  depth.  It  is  even
probable  that,  considering  the  slow  diffusion  of  the  oxygen,  on
the  one  hand,  and  the  combination  that  may  take  place  between
it  and  certain  components  of  the  malt,  on  the  other  hand,  it
would  take  a  long  time  for  all  the  wort,  if  undisturbed  and
of  a  certain  depth,  to  become  saturated  with  oxygen.  In  the
vessel  represented  in  Figs.  76  and  77  there  is  a  considerable
depth  of  wort  to  cool  down.  Nevertheless,  the  mere  fact  of  the
possibility  of  an  aeration  from  the  surface,  whilst  the  wort  is
cooling  down  in  contact  with  pure  air,  is  enough  to  account  for
a  certain  effect  that  is  produced  on  the  yeast,  later  on,  for  the
more  youthful  appearance  of  the  yeast  of  the  deposit,  compared
with  that  which  we  find  in  the  case  of  wort  cooled  in  the
presence  of  carbonic  acid  gas.  The  difference  between  the
results  is  particularly  striking  if,  in  both  cases,  we  follow  up
microscopicallj'-  the  development  of  the  yeast  during  the  first
few  davs  succeeding  the  pitching.

The  influence  of  the  air  on  fermentation  is  considerable.  In
the  ordinary  process  of  brewing,  fermentations  would  be  almost
impossible,  and  in  every  case  most  defective,  if  the  wort,  before
being  run  into  the  fermenting  vessels,  were  not  aerated  by  its
passage    over  the   "coolers,"   where  the  aeration   is   more  or


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  349

less  effective,  according  as  the  liquid  is  more  or  less  shallow.
Worts  and  yeasts  being  impure,  that  is  containing  the  germs
of  foreign  ferments,  those  germs  Avould  have  time  to  germinate
in  the  fermenting  vessels  during  the  delay  that  the  want  of
aeration  in  the  wort  would  cause  in  the  development  of  the
yeast.  We  are  aware  that  several  inventions  have  been  pro-
posed to  do  away  with  the  coolers,  and  we  feel  convinced
that  the  object  has  been  to  remedy  irregularities  in  fermenta-
tion. Considei'ing  the  facts  which  we  have  published  *  on  the
development  of  yeast  in  the  presence  of  air,  and  its  inactivity
in  non-aerated  media,  such  inventions  ought  to  be  supplemented
by  some  means  of  further  aeration  for  the  prevention  of  the
mischief  that  they  must  otherwise  cause.  In  the  existing
process  of  brewing,  the  employment  of  coolers  is  a  necessity.

The  influence  of  the  air  on  the  vital  action  of  the  yeast  may
be  proved  in  ways  innumerable.  The  following  is  an  experi-
ment which  we  have  often  carried  out  with  surprising  results.
A  fermentation  is  going  on  ;  we  draw  off  the  liquid  as  rapidl}''
as  we  please,  and  pour  it  back  again  into  the  vessel  immediately.
Within  an  hour  we  find  a  marked  increase  in  the  fermentation,
evidenced  by  the  liberation  of  a  greater  quantity  of  carbonic
acid  gas.  This  experiment  may  be  performed  with  especial
ease  if  we  use  the  fermenting  apparatus  that  we  have  described,
for,  by  fitting  a  gas  measurer  to  the  escape  tube  a  b  c  d  e  f  g,  the
number  of  litres  produced  before  the  drawing  ofi"  of  the  liquid
may  be  compared  with  those  obtained  after.  The  least  physical
change  in  the  running  of  the  fermenting  liquid  whilst  it  is  being
drawn  oft',  modifies  the  efiect  in  question  ;  such  as  change  in
the  diameter  of  the  stream,  the  height  from  which  it  falls,  its
greater  or  less  scattering  in  falling,  all  influence  it.  Again,
as  might  be  expected  from  such  results,  corresponding  modifi-
cations take  place  in  the  cells  of  yeast  which  come  under  the
influence  of  the  air.  They  become  firmer  in  aspect  and  outline,
their   plasma   becomes   fuller,   assumes   a   younger   and  more

*  Pasteur,  Comx^tes  rendun  de  VAcademie  des  Scieiices,  vol.  Hi.  p.  1260,
and  Etudes  sur  le  Yin,  2nd  Edition,  p.  277.


350  STUDIES    OK    FERMENTATION.

transparent  aspect,  and  the  vacuoles  disappear.  The  molecular
granulations,  too,  are  less  apparent.  At  a  certain  focus  they
disappear ;  at  another  they  reappear,  not  as  black  spots,  how-
ever, but  as  brilliant  points  so  small  as  to  be  scarcely
perceptible.  If  germination  has  been  suspended  it  is  resumed  ;
in  short,  everything  tends  to  prove — and  having  the  3-east
actually  under  our  eyes  we  cannot  doubt  the  fact — that  the  life
of  the  cells  is  more  decided,  and  the  work  of  nutrition  more
active  after  they  have  been  brought  into  contact  with  the  oxygen
of  the  air,  and  have  absorbed  a  greater  or  less  quantity  of  that
gas.

Under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  brewing,  the  atmospheric
air  is  present  in  very  varying  quantities,  whether  introduced
by  the  wort  which  holds  more  or  less  in  solution,  or  b}^  diffusion
over  the  surface  of  the  vessels,  so  that  the  same  cells  of  yeast
live  by  turns  without  air  and  with  air.  At  first  they  absorb
all  the  oxygen  held  in  solution,  and  multiply  under  the
influence  of  this  absorption.  Afterwards,  when  the  supply  has
been  exhausted,  and  various  assimilations  have  resulted  from  it,
they  are  deprived  of  it.  Their  life  continues  apart  from
oxygen,  and  if  the  vessel  were  closed,  fermentation  would  be
accomplished  under  these  conditions,  although  more  slowly.
The  vessel  being  open,  a  small  quantity  of  air  diflfuses  continu-
ously through  the  layer  of  carbonic  acid  gas  on  the  surface,
and  supports  the  vitality  of  the  cells.

It  is  interesting  to  observe  that,  in  the  working  of  breweries
there  are  several  empirical  practices  the  explanation  of  which
is  to  be  found  wholly  in  the  fact  that  the  aeration  of  wort  or
beer  exercises  a  great  influence  on  fermentation.  In  many
breweries  we  have  seen  the  pitching  performed  in  the  following
manner  :  the  brewer,  having  mixed  his  yeast  in  many  times  its
volume  of  wort,  pours  all  the  thick  liquid  from  a  height  from
one  bucket  into  another,  and  from  that  back  again  into  the  first,
and  so  on  a  great  many  times,  until  the  two  buckets  are  filled
with  the  froth  enclosing  air.  In  certain  London  breweries  we
have  seen  a  bucket  suspended  by  a  pulley  over  the  fermenting


STUDIES  ON  fer:mentatiox.  351

tun,  whicli  is  3  or  4  metres  (10  or  12  feet)  in  depth  ;  this  the
brewer,  by  means  of  a  cord,  can  lower  into  the  tun  and  pull  up
again  at  will,  giving  it  a  kind  of  see-saw  movement  which
agitates  the  surface  of  the  liquid  and  aerates  it.  The  use  of
the  fermenting  tun  itself  and  the  racking  of  the  wort  from  that
tun  into  casks  have  the  effect  of  aerating  the  beer  and  the  yeast,
and  imparting  to  the  latter  a  greater  vigour  and  activity.

The  resumption  of  fermentation  in  cask,  after  the  beer  has
been  run  out  of  the  tuns  in  "  low  "  fermentation  breweries  is,  in
our  opinion,  principally  due  to  the  aeration  of  the  beer  at  the
moment  when  it  is  racked.  The  brewer  ought  to  bear  in  mind
that,  during  racking,  every  detail  is  of  importance ;  it  makes  a
great  difference  whether  when  the  beer  is  run  into  the  casks  it
falls  from  a  height  or  is  conducted  by  a  tube  to  the  bottom  of
the  casks,  whether  it  passes  directly  into  the  casks,  or  is  poured
into  them  from  buckets,  and  whether  it  runs  in  a  stream  of  small
or  large  diameter,  since  these  different  methods  cause  the  intro-
duction of  corresponding  different  quantities  of  air  into  the  beer.

We  have  devised  a  simple  arrangement  for  bringing  the
fermenting  liquid  into  contact  with  various  proportions  of
atmospheric  air.  Appended  is  a  sketch  of  this  apparatus  (Fig.
80).  Instead  of  one  tube  serving  alike  for  the  entrance  and
escape  of  gas,  there  are  two  similar  ones,  each  of  which  opens  into
one  of  the  tubulures  on  the  cover.  Round  the  other  end  of  one
of  the  tubes  is  fitted  a  kind  of  muff  or  bag,  composed  of  a  cylin-
drical cage  of  metallic  gauze,  over  which  a  layer  of  well-combed
cotton  wool  is  placed,  the  whole  being  covered  with  a  muslin
bag.  The  object  of  this  arrangement  is  to  act  as  an  air-filter  for
retaining  the  particles  of  dust.  When  fermentation  has  com-
menced in  the  apparatus,  we  have  simply  to  press  momentarilj'-
the  india-rubber  connection  between  the  tube  from  the  lid  and
the  tube  with  the  bag.  This  will  at  once  cause  a  regular  stream
of  carbonic  acid  to  issue  from  the  end  of  the  uncovered  tube,
whilst  the  air  will  enter  by  the  filtering  tube  to  take  its  place  ;
and  this  arrangement  will  be  maintained  throughout  the  whole
course  of  the  fermentation,  even  if  we  omit  the  precaution  of


352


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


increasing  the  power  of  the  syphon  by  making  the  tube  for
the  escape  of  this  gas  longer  than  the  other  one.*

It  will   be   readily  understood    how,    whether  by    this   last
method,   or  by  the  diameter  of  the  tubes,  we  may  vary  the


Fig.  80.

conditions  of  this  circulation  of  air  in  the  apparatus,  on  the
surface  of  the  beer.


*  We  may  here  remark  that  the  system  of  gutters  in  the  above
apparatus  is  much  simpler  than  that  described  in  connection  with  Figs.
76  and  77.  The  water  which  falls  on  the  cover  is  carried  oflF,  when  the
gutter  is  full,  by  a  circle  of  grooves,  inclined  so  that  the  streams  running
from  them  meet  and  form  more  readily  a  sheet  of  water,  which  flows  over
the  exterior  surface  of  the  cvlindrical  vessel.


STUDIES   ON"    FERMENTATION.  353

S^  II. — Method  of  Estimating  the  Oxygen  held  in  Solution

IN  "Wort.

The  use  of  carbonic  acid  gas  and  the  cooling  of  the  wort,
in  contact  with  that  gas  or  in  contact  with  very  limited  quan-
tities of  pure  air,  are  by  no  means  necessary  to  the  application
of  the  new  process.  There  is  only  one  thing  that  is  absolutely
essential — which  is,  the  purity  of  the  gases  in  the  presence
of  which  the  wort  is  cooled  and  treated.  If,  therefore,  it  is
well  to  aerate  our  wort,  either  before  or  during  fermentation,
this  may  be  done,  on  the  sole  condition  that  the  air  employed
does  not  introduce  any  germs  of  disease  that  are  likely  to
develop  in  the  beer  during  fermentation  or  afterwards.  The
question  of  aerating  the  wort  is  not,  however,  so  simple  a
matter  as  it  seems  at  first  sight.  A  very  simple  observation
will  show  that  wort  cannot  be  safely  oxygenated  by  exposure,
without  precaution,  to  the  air,  even  leaving  out  of  account
the  germs  of  disease  which  that  air  may  contain.  It  is  easy
to  show  that  finished  wort  has  a  decided  flavour  and  aroma
of  hops,  as  well  as  a  sweet  taste,  and  that  it  leaves  a  certain
pleasant,  bitter  after-taste  on  the  palate.  When  we  taste  it
in  this  condition  we  cannot  help  thinking  that  a  liquor
of  the  kind,  after  fermentation,  ought  to  constitute  a  very
valuable  beverage,  as  wholesome  as  it  is  pleasant.  Now  all
this  pleasant  and  refreshing  sensation  that  the  wort  leaves  on
the  palate,  which  is  due  as  much  to  the  aroma  as  to  the  bitter-
ness of  the  hop,  disappears  absolutely,  we  may  say,  if  the  wort
is  left  exposed  to  contact  with  air  for  a  sufiicient  time,  and  that
whether  the  air  be  warm  or  cold.  We  may  easily  perform  the
experiment  in  one  of  our  two-necked  flasks,  in  which  we  can
preserve  the  wort,  in  contact  with  pure  air,  without  any  fear  of
change.  The  oxygen  of  the  air  enters  into  combination  with
the  substances  that  the  hop  introduces  into  the  wort,  and  the
wort,  in  conseqiience  of  this  oxidation,  gradually  becomes
transformed  into  a  saccharine  decoction,  without  odour,  in  which
even  the  bitter  flavour  is  destroyed  or  hidden.  In  other  words,
the  wort  grows  weak  and  flat,  in  just  the  same  way  that  beer

A    A


354  STUDIES   ON    FERMEXTATION.

and  wine  do,  as  well  as  all  the  various  natural  or  artificial  worts
which  serve  to  produce  them.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  consider-
able care  is  necessary  in  subjecting  wort  and  beer,  whether  in
course  of  manufacture  or  finished,  to  the  action  of  atmospheric
air.  If,  therefore,  it  is  a  good  thing  to  supply  wort  with
oxygen,  as  we  have  already  pointed  out,  in  order  to  facilitate
the  fermentation  and  nourish  the  yeast,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,
important  that  the  quantity  supplied  to  it  should  not  be  too.
great,  otherwise  we  may  injure  the  quality  of  the  beer,  and  par-'
ticularly  its  fulness  on  the  palate,  that  is  its  apparent  strength,
which  has  very  little  to  do  with  the  proportion  of  alcohol  in  it.
The  strength  of  a  beer  is  intimately  connected  with  those  sub-
stances introduced  by  the  hops  into  the  wort  and  thus  into  the
beer,  to  which  we  previously  alluded,  and  of  which  too  little  is
known ;  their  properties  and  the  palatableness  resulting  from
them  are  very  readily  affected  by  the  oxygen  of  the  air.*

We  have,  therefore,  to  ascertain  the  measure  in  which  air
occurs  during  the  process  of  brewing,  and  whether,  in  the
actual  process,  there  may  not  be  too  great  a  proportion  of  active
oxygen  present.  The  study  of  this  subject  requires  that  we
should  know  what  quantities  of  oxygen  may  be  held  in  solution
in  the  wort  or  absorbed  by  direct  combination.  Fortunately
this  has  been  rendered  a  comparatively  easy  matter  by  a  rapid
method  of  estimating  the  oxygen  held  in  solution  in  liquids  of
various  kinds,  devised  by  M.  Schiitzenberger  in  1872.  As  soon
as  this  method  was  made  known,  we  requested  M.  E,aulin,
who  was  attached  to  our  laboratory  as  assistant-director,  to
apply  it  to  the  determination  of  oxygen  in  wort.  This  he  did
with  his  accustomed  skill,  devising  certain  alterations  of  details

*  [It  will  be  well  for  the  reader  to  bear  in  mind,  that  the  word
"  strength,"  used  by  Pasteur  many  times  in  this  chapter,  has  a  different
meaning  to  that  which  attaches  to  it  in  the  minds  of  English  brewers,
who  in  nearly  every  case  use  it  in  reference  to  origival  gravity,  while  the
author  employs  it,  in  this  chapter,  at  any  rate,  to  denote  the  palate
cltnracteristic  of  strength,  in  oih.Qv  vfoxds  paJnte-fulness.  For  this  reason
wo  have  thought  it  best  in  many  cases  to  actualh'  substitute  the  term
"  palate-fulness,"  or  "body,"  for  the  littrai  translation  of  the  Frencti
word  "force."— F.  F.]


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  3-j5

wliich  I'enclerecl  tlie  method  at  the  same  time  surer  and  more
expeditious.

The  principal  feature  in  M.  Schiitzenberger's  process  consists
in  the  employment  of  a  salt,  the  properties  of  which  that
chemist  was  the  first  to  recognize  ;  he  has  named  ii  hydrosulphite
of  soda,  and  it  is  obtained  by  the  action  of  zinc  filings  on  a
solution  of  bisulphite  of  soda,  out  of  contact  with  air.

Hydrosulphite  of  soda  S-0~,NaO,HO,  which  is  isomeric  with
hyposulphite  of  soda,  only  differs  from  the  bisulphite  by  two
equivalents  of  oxygen.*  When  brought  into  contact  with  free
oxygen,  it  absorbs  that  gas  instantaneously  and  becomes  con-
verted into  bisulphite ;  similarl}^  when  mixed  with  water,  it
immediately  absorbs  the  oxygen  held  in  solution.  Again  there
are  colouring  matters,  such  as  M.  Coupler's  soluble  aniline  blue,
that  are  instantaneousl}^  decolourized  by  hydrosulphite  of  soda,
whilst  they  resist  the  action  of  the  bisulphite.  If,  taking  care  to
avoid  the  access  of  air,  we  add  hydrosulphite  of  soda  to  a  certain
volume  of  water — a  litre,  for  example — that  has  been  deprived  of
air  and  faintly  coloured  with  Coupler's  blue,  we  shall  see  that
a  few  drops  will  be  sufiicient  to  effect  the  decoloration.  If,  on
the  contrary,  the  water  is  aerated,  the  decoloration  will  not  be
effected  before  a  sufiicient  quantity  of  the  hydrosulphite  has

*  [As  some  confusion,  has  existed  in  tlie  nomenclature  of  these  salts,  it
may  be  as  well  to  offer  some  explanation.

The  salt  here  used  for  absorbing  oxygen  was  discovered  by  Schiitzen-
berger,  and  named  by  him  hydrosulphite  of  soda.  It  no  longer  now  goes
by  that  name,  being  called  hyposulphite  of  soda,  NaHSOj.

The  salts  formerly  known  as  hyposulphites  are  now  called  thiosulphates,
as  Na^SoOg.

Thus  to  put  them  together  we  have  : — ■

Hyposulphite  (Hydrosulphite)     . .  . .         NaHS02

Bisulphite NaHSOs

Thiosulphate  (Hyposulphite)        . .  . .         NasSoOa

The  thiosulphates  were  formerly  regarded  as  containing  the  elements  of
water  in  their  composition,  thus : — Na2HoS204,  which  being  halved  would
give  NaHSOo,  isomeric  with  hyposulphite,  as  Pasteur  says.  It  is
further  to  be  observed  that  Pasteur  uses  the  old  notation,  in  which
the  number  of  atoms  of  sulphur  and  oxygen  are  the  double  of  what
they  are  in  the  new. — D.  C.  E.]

A    A   2


356  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

been  added  to  absorb  tbe  oxygen  in  solution,  and  the  volume
of  the  reagent  required  is  in  proportion  to  the  quantity  of
oxygen  in  solution  in  the  water.  To  render  the  process
sensitive,  we  must  dilute  the  hydrosulphite  to  such  an  extent
that  10  c.c,  for  example,  may  correspond  very  nearly  with
1  c.c.  of  oxygen.  If  the  reagent  would  keep  we  should  only
have  to  determine  directly,  once  for  all,  the  volume  of  oxygen
that  a  known  volume  of  the  liquid  could  absorb  ;  but,  in  con-
sequence of  its  extreme  liability  to  change  through  contact
with  air,  it  is  necessary  to  titrate  the  liquid  every  time  before
using  it.     This  is  easily  done  in  the  following  manner  : —

Accordino;  to  the  observations  of  Messrs.  Schiitzenberorer  and
Lalande,  the  hydrosulphite  decolourizes  an  ammoniacal  solution
of  sulphate  of  copper,  reducing  the  copper  to  a  lower  state  of
oxidation  ;  the  sulphite  and  bisulphite  having  no  action  as  long
as  there  is  an  excess  of  ammonia.  We  prepare  a  strongly
ammoniacal  solution  of  sulphate  of  copper,  containing  such  a
quantity  of  copper  that  10  c.c.  of  the  liquid  will  correspond,  as
far  as  action  on  the  hydrosulphite  is  concerned,  with  1  c.c.  of
oxygen.  Calculation  by  equivalents  gives  us  the  correct  value
verified  by  direct  experiment*

The  object  of  the  modification  which  M.  Raulin  has  intro-
duced, is  to  avoid  the  loss  of  time  thus  occasioned  by  the  changes
which  take  place  in  the  titrated  liquids  by  long  keeping,
as  well  as  certain  errors  which  may  arise  from  the  acidity  of
the  wort.  On  this  latter  point  M.  Schlitzenberger  has  remarked
that  the  quantities  of  hydrosulphite  of  soda  corresponding  with
one  and  the  same  volume  of  oxygen  vary  with  the  acidity  of  the
liquid  operated  upon,  a  phenomenon  which  that  skilful  chemist
explains  by  the  formation  of  oxygenated  water,  of  varying
stability  in  media  of  different  acidity.

Instead  of  determining  the  strength  of  the  titrated  solution
of  hydrosulphite  before  each  operation,  we  take  the  solution  as
it  happens  to  be,  and  determine  its  strength  b}^  causing  it  to

*  SchCtzenberger,  Comptes  rcndus  de  VAcademie  dea  Sciences,  vol.
Ixxv.,  p.  880.


STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATION.  357

act  on  a  known  volume  of  pure  water  saturated  with  oxygen
at  a  certain  temperature.  The  tables  of  solubility  of  oxygen  in
water  give  the  exact  volume  of  oxygen  on  which  the  measured
volume  of  hydrosulphite  used  has  acted.  According  to  Bunsen,
about  one  minute's  brisk  shaking  in  a  closed  bottle,  with  excess
of  air,  will  be  sufficient  to  effect  the  maximum  saturation  of
the  water  at  the  temperature  at  which  we  operate.
For  experiments  on  wort  we  require : —

1.  A  2-litre  (3i  pints)  flask,  A,  containing  saturated  hydro-
sulphite  of  soda,*  of  such  strength  that  2"5  c.c.  will  be  sufficient
to  absorb  almost  all  the  oxygen  in  50  c.c.  of  water  saturated
with  air  at  the  ordinary  temperature  (that  is,  1  volume  of  hypo-
sulphite must  equal  20  volumes  of  water).

2.  A  2-litre  flask,  B,  containing  a  solution  of  indigo-carmine,
50  c.c.  of  which  will  be  decolourized  by  about  20  c.c.  of  the
hydrosulphite.  This  solution  contains  about  20  grammes  (30'7
grains)  of  commercial  indigo-carmine  per  litre  (1'76  pints).

3.  An  apparatus,  C,  for  the  production  of  hydrogen.

4.  An  experimental  apparatus  composed  of  a  burette,  D,
graduated  in  tenths  of  a  cubic  centimetre,  and  a  three-necked
Wollf's  bottle,  E.

5.  A  flask,  F,  holding  about  100  c.c.  provided  with  a  straight
tube  divided  into  tenths  of  a  cubic  centimetre,  and  containing  a

*  M.  Schlitzenberger  ajiplies  the  term  saturated  to  a  solution  of  hydro-
sulph-ite  prepared  thus,  or  very  nearly  so :  a  current  of  sulphurous  acid
is  passed  through  a  solution  of  commercial  bisulphite  of  soda,  to  excess  ;
100  c.c.  (3^  fl.  oz.)  of  this  solution  and  30  grammes  (46  grains)  of  zinc
filings  are  put  into  a  small  flask,  so  as  to  completely  fill  it ;  the  bottle  is
corked  up  and  the  mixture  is  shaken  briskly  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.
Lastly,  the  contents  of  this  flask  are  poured  into  a  large  2-litre  flask,
with  water  and  containing  milk  of  lime,  prepared  by  mixing  100  grammes
(3"2  troy  oz.)  of  quicklime  in  the  water  just  before  it  is  used.  The  whole
is  shaken  briskly  for  some  minutes  and  then  left  to  settle.  The  super-
natant liquid  soon  becomes  bright.  This  is  the  hydrosulphite;  but  in
this  state  it  is  too  concentrated ;  and  should  be  syphoned  into  another
2-litre  flask  half  full  of  water.  In  the  alkaline  condition  this  salt
absorbs  gaseous  oxygen  much  less  rapidly  than  in  the  acid,  so  that  the
liquids  will  retain  their  strength  much  longer,  if  they  are  kept  in  well-
corked  bottles.


358


STUDIES   ON    FERMEXTATIOX.


solution  of  ammonia  of  sucli  strength  that  about  ten  drops  of  it
will  neutralize  the  acidity  in  50  c.c.  (1-76  fl.  oz.)  of  wort.

To  perform  the  operation  we  shake  about  150  c.c.  (5'3  fl.  oz.)
of  distilled  water,  at  the  existing  temperature,  in  a  1-litre  flask
for  a  minute  or  so ;  this  saturates  it  with  air,  and  we  must  at
the  same  time  note  the  temperature.  To  be  extremel}'  precise,
Ave  should  note  also  the  barometrical  pressure.

Into  the  bottle  E  we  introduce  about  50  c.c.  of  the  indigo
solution,  and  200  c.c.  of  water  at  about  60°  C.  (140°  F.),  and


Fig.  si.


fill  the  tube  e  to  the  point  h  with  water  saturated  with  air ;  we
then  expel  the  air  from  the  bottle  E  by  a  current  of  hydrogen.


STUDIES   ON   FERMENTATION.  359

The  blue  colour  of  the  liquid  in  the  bottle  is  then  very  carefully
broug-ht  to  a  yellow  tint,  by  running  in,  drop  by  drop,  the
hydrosulphite  with  which  the  burette  D  is  filled.

We  next  pour  50  c.c.  of  distilled  water  saturated  with  air
into  the  funnel  a,  and  pass  it  into  the  flask  ;  the  blue  colour
reappears.  We  must  then  bring  back  the  colour  to  exactly  the
same  tint  of  yellow.  Let  n  represent  the  number  of  divisions
on  the  burette  denoting  the  volume  of  hydrosulphite  employed
for  this  purpose.

We  repeat  this  last  operation  immediately,  taking  50  c.c.  of
the  wort,  the  oxygen  of  which  we  wish  to  determine,  having
first  introduced  into  the  funnel  a  a  sufficient  number  of  drops
of  the  ammoniacal  solution  to  neutralize  the  acidity  of  the
woi't.  Let  n  represent  the  number  of  divisions  of  hydrosulphite
employed  to  restore  the  yellow  tint  in  the  case  of  the  wort.

We  once  more  perform  the  experiment  with  50  c.c.  of  satu-
rated water  ;  let  n"  be  the  number  found.*

The  ratio  which  the  quantity  of  oxygen  held  in  solution  in
the  wort  bears  to  the  quantity  of  oxygen  contained  in  the  same
volume  of  water  saturated  with  air,  at  the  temperature  t,  and

under   the  pressure  H,  will  be ^;  it  will  be   sufficient  in

n   +    n

2

most  cases  to  bear  in  mind  this  ratio.

When  we  want  to  deduce  the  absolute  quantity  of  oxygen
held  in  solution  in  a  volume  V  of  the  wort,  we  have  merely  to
multiply  this  ratio  by  the  quantity  of  oxygen  contained  in  the
same  volume  of  water  saturated  with  air,  at  the  temperature  t
and  under  the  pressure  H,  a  very  simple  problem  if  we  know
the  coefficients  of  the  solubility  of  oxygen  in  water  at  difierent
temperatures.  These  coefficients  are  given  for  ordinary  tem-
peratures in  the  following  table,  which  was  compiled  by  Bunsen.
We  have  restricted  the  numbers  to  three  places  of  decimals  : —

*  The  numbers  n  and  n"  will  vary  as  the  wort,  or  liquid  which  we  have
to  test,  is  perfectly  neutral  or  otherwise.  Should  it  be  acid  n  ^n,  should
it  be  alkaline  n  /_  n".  This  would  be  a  very  exact  method  of  estimating
the  acidity  or  alkalinity  of  any  coloured  liquid.


360  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.


Temperatures.      Coefficients.

Temperatures.      Coefficients,

0°  C.  (32°  F.)

0-040

11°  C.  (51-8°  F.)

0-032

1°C.  (33-8°  F.)

0-040

12°  C.  (53-6°  F.)

0031

2°  C.  (35-6°  F.)

0-039

13°  C.  (55-4°  F.)

0-031

3°  C.  (37-4°  F.)

0-038

14°  C.  (57-2°  F.)

0-030

4°  C.  (39-2°  F.)

0-037

15°  C.  (59-0°  F.)

0-030

5°C.  (41-0°  F.)

0-036

16°  C.  (60-8°  F.)

0-029

6°C.  (42-8°  F.)

0-035

17°  C.  (62-4°  F.)

0-029

7°C.  (44-6°  F.)

0-035

18°  C.  (64-4°  F.)

0-029

8°  C.  (46-4°  F.)

0-034

19°  C.  (66-2°  F.)

0-028

9°  C.  (48-2°  F.)

0-033

20°  C.  (68-0°  F.)

0-028

10°  C.  (50-0°  F.)

0-033

The  primary  condition  which  enables  us  to  rely  on  the  exact-
ness of  this  method  is  the  fact  which  we  have  mentioned  above,
that  a  liquid  if  shaken  up  with  air  for  one  minute  will  become
perfectly  saturated  with  oxygen.  Substantially  this  is  the  case.
In  estimating  the  oxygen  in  different  parts  of  a  liquid  treated
thus,  we  have  invariably  obtained  the  same  figures  to  within
about  vTjt^-

It  is  true  that  the  variable  quantity  of  the  oxygen  held  in
solution  in  the  liquid  contained  in  the  part  of  the  tube  cb,  as
well  as  the  oxygen  absorbed  during  the  treatment  of  the  liquid
in  contact  with  air,  constitute  causes  of  error.  Experience,
however,  proves  that  these  causes  of  error  are  insignificant,  as
long  as  we  have  to  deal  with  a  liquid  the  aeration  of  which  is
not  very  far  removed  from  the  point  of  saturation,  and  whose
solubility-coefficient  for  oxygen  is  not  widely  difierent  from
that  of  water  for  the  same  gas.  Under  such  conditions  we  have
always  found  a  constant  ratio,  to  within  about  ^V^^j  between  the
same  liquid  and  air-saturated  distilled  water,  placed  under  the
same  circumstances.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  to  deal  with  a  liquid  which
holds  but  a  minute  quantity  of  oxj'gen  in  solution,  the  causes  of
error  mentioned  may  very  seriously  aficct  our  results,  and  it
will  be  absolutely  nccessar}^  to  avoid  them.     The  liquid  experi-


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  361

merited  on  must  be  treated  out  of  contact  with  air,  by  aspirating
it  directly  from  tlie  vessel  that  contains  it  into  the  pipette  H,
which  is  graduated  for  50  c.c,  and  causing  it  to  pass  thence
into  the  flask  E,  by  substituting  the  pipette  for  the  funnel  a.
Finally,  before  arranging  the  pipette,  we  cause  a  small  quantity
of  the  liquid  in  the  flask,  which  has  been  previously  brought  to
the  exact  yellow  tint,  to  pass,  by  pressure,  through  the  tube  eb,
so  as  to  avoid  the  cause  of  error  that  is  likely  to  result  from  the
air  held  in  solution  in  the  liquid  of  that  tube.

The  liquid,  the  ox3'gen  of  which  has  to  be  determined,  may
also  be  passed  directly  from  the  vessel  containing  it  into  the
flask  E  ;  the  rest  of  the  operation  being  performed  as  already
described.

It  was  by  this  method  that  the  oxygen  held  in  saturate  solu-
tion in  wort  was  determined.  The  following  are  the  principal
results  obtained  by  M.  Raulin  : —

1.  At  difierent  pressures  the  ratio  between  the  quantities  of
oxygen  held  in  solution  in  water  and  in  wort  is,  all  other  con-
ditions being  similar,  constant.  This  ratio  has  been  found  equal
to  1*20  in  the  case  of  wort  and  water  saturated  with  air  at  the
ordinary  pressure,  and  1*24  in  the  case  of  wort  and  water
saturated  with  pure  oxygen.

2.  The  ratio  between  the  coefficient  of  the  solubility  of
oxygen  in  water  and  that  of  its  solubility  in  wort  is  very  nearly
constant  at  different  temperatures,  increasing,  however,  slightly
as  the  temperature  diminishes.

This  ratio  has  been  found  to  be —
Temperatures.

26°  C.      (78-8°  F.) 1-20

19-5°  C.  (67-1°  F.) 1-25

4°  C.     (39-2°  F.) 1-37

Another  wort  gave  the  following  results  : —
Temperatures.

9°C.      (48-2°  F.) 1-15

21°  C.      (69-8°  F.) 1-10

25°  C.     (77-0°  F.) 1-07


362


STUDIES   OlS^   FERMENTATION.


3.  The  ratio  between  the  quantities  of  oxygen  held  in  solu-
tion in  water  and  those  held  in  solution  in  wort  increases  with
the  concentration  of  the  wort.  By  evaporating  the  same  wort
to  diiferent  degrees  of  concentration,  and  afterwards  saturating
it  with  air,  at  the  same  temperature,  we  obtained  the  following
figures  for  the  ratio  in  question : —


"Weak  wort

.  .     1-06

The  same  evaporated  to  half     .  .

.  .     115

J)                            JJ                     >>          i               •    •

.  .     1-27

3
»                              J>                       >J         I  0              •    •

.  .     1-45

1

. .     1-96

4.  "Worts  of  different  origin,  but  of  the  same  density  and
temperature,  when  saturated  with  oxygen,  always  contain  very
nearly  the  same  quantity  of  that  gas.

Two  portions  of  the  same  wort,  shaken  up  with  air,  one  being
hot  the  other  cold,  then  left  to  themselves  for  some  time,  and
afterwards  saturated  with  air,  at  the  same  temperature,  gave
the  figures  1*22  for  the  ratio  between  the  oxygen  in  the  water
and  that  in  the  wort.

Different  worts  of  the  same  density,  saturated  at  a  tempe-
rature of  15°  C.  (59°  F.),  gave  the  following  ratios  : —

"Wort  kept  in  a  bottle  with  air  for  19  months  1-140

Wort  recently  prepared  .  .  .  .  .  .  1'142

"Wort   kept   in   a   bottle    without    air  for  20

months,  aerated  for  18  days  .  .  .  .  1'142

"Wort  evaporated  to  dryness  and  made  up  with

water.  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  ri26


5.  The  solubility  of  oxygen  in  wort  differs  very  little  from
the  solubilit}'-  of  oxygen  in  sweetened  water  of  the  same
density.

An  experiment  was  made  with  a  solution  of  sugar  on  the
one  hand,  and  with  wort  more  or  less  diluted  with  water  on  the


I


STUDIES    ON    FERMEXTATICN.  363

other  hand,  at  the  same  temperature  of  11°  C.  (51"8°  F.).
The  following  fio-ures  were  obtained  for  the  ratios  of  solu-
bility : —


Solution  of  Sugar.

Wort.

Marking  17-9°  Balling*

.  .     1-278

1-27

14-0°

.  .     1-190

1-15

7-0°

.  .     1-092

1-OG

6.  From  the  preceding  results  it  is  easy  to  deduce  a
general  formula  which  shall  give  the  coefficient  of  solubility
of  oxygen  in  any  wort,  marking  B°  by  Balling,  and  at  tem-
perature t°.

From  the  figures  of  (2)  it  follows  that  aboTe  and  below  the
temperature  of  15°  C.  (59°  F.),  the  ratio  which  the  coefficient
of  solubility  of  oxygen  in  water  bears  to  that  of  the  solubility
of  the  same  gas  in  wort  varies  about  O'OOG  for  each  degree  of
the  thermometer.  From  the  figures  of  (3)  it  follows  that  the
same  ratio  varies  about  0'002  for  each  degree  of  Balling  above
and  below  the  15th  degree  on  the  instrument.

By  taking  c  for  the  coefficient  of  solubility  of  oxygen  in
water  at  f  C,  and  c  for  that  of  oxygen  in  wort  also  at  f  C,
and  having  a  density  B,  by  Balling  at  15°  C. ;  and  taking  X

for  the  ratio  -at  15°  C.  and  15°  Balling,  we  shall  have

-,  =  X  +  (B-15)  0-022-(/-15)  0-006.
c


By  carefully  ascertaining  the  ratio  -  for  different  worts,  and.


c

c

adopting  the  preceding  formula,  we  have  found,  for  X  a  mean
value  of  1-16.


*  [The  Balling  saccharometer  being  almost  unknown  in  England,  we
may  explain  that  its  indications  are  for  percentages  of  sugar  in  saccharine
solutions,  or  of  extract  in  worts  ;  17"9°  Balling,  therefore,  means  17'9  per
cent,  of  sugar  or  extract  in  the  respective  liquids. — P.  F.]


364  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

The  definitive  formula,  therefore,  is :

(1)  ^=1-16  +  (B-15)  0-022-(/;-15)  0-006,
or  again,

(2)  -  =0-86-(B-15)  0-016+ (^-15)  0-004.

The  coefficient  c  of  the  solubility  of  oxygen  in  water  will  be
found  in  the  table  given  a  few  pages  back.

§  III. — On  the  Quantity  of  Oxygen  existing  in  a  state
OF  Solution  in  Brewers'  Worts.*

The  wort,  when  it  comes  from  the  copper  in  which  it  is
boiled  with  the  hops,  remains  exposed  upon  the  coolers  for  a
time,  the  length  of  which  varies  according  to  circumstances,
the  most  important  of  which  is  the  exterior  temperature.  The
average  time  is  from,  seven  to  eight  hours,  during  which  the
volume  of  the  wort  diminishes,  whilst  its  density  increases  ;  at
the  same  time,  it  deposits  its  proteinaceous  matters  and  absorbs
oxygen  from  the  air,  either  by  way  of  solution  or  of  combination.

In  the  present  paragraph  we  shall  confine  ourselves  to  the
uncombined  oxygen  held  in  a  state  of  solution  in  Avort,  recog-
nizable by  the  change  of  colour  produced  by  its  action  on  M'hite
indigo.

The  use  of  the  coolers  enables  the  brewer  to  obtain  his  wort  in
two  distinct  states  of  limpidity — filtered  wort  and  unfiltered
wort.  At  the  same  time  there  is  a  further  difference  between
these  worts,  namely,  in  the  quantity  of  oxygen  held  in  solution.
The  unfiltered  wort  comes  direct  from  the  coolers  ;  the  wort  to
be  filtered,  mixed  with  a  part  of  the  deposit,  is  run  into  a
special  vessel,  from  which  it  is  distributed  over  the  filtering
surfaces,  which  are  generally  of  felt ;  filtered  bright,  it  is  then
received  in  a  reservoir,  from  which  it  is  distributed  amongst
special  fermenting  vessels.  Falling  through  the  air  in  a  thin
stream  of  drops,  it  must  necessarily  have  become  charged  with

•  Experiments  made,  at  our  request,  by  MM.  Calmettes  and  Oreuet,  at
Tantonville,  in  Tourtel's  brewery.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.  365

a  greater  quantity  of  oxygen  than  ordinary  wort.  In  good
bre\yeries  it  is  put  apart  by  itself  to  ferment,  and  the  yeast
which  it  yields  is  firmer  and  deposits  more  easily  than  that  of
unfiltered  wort.  As  for  the  fermentation,  it  is,  under  similar
conditions,  quicker  by  a  day  or  a  day  and  a  half  than  in  the
case  of  ordinary  wort.  The  difference  in  the  quantity  of
oxygen  held  in  solution  in  the  two  kinds  of  wort  is  greater  in
proportion  as  the  external  temperature  is  lower ;  in  winter  it
may  be  twice  as  great  as  in  summer.  The  reason  is  that  in
summer  a  boiling  wort  does  not  obtain  a  minimum  temperature
of  20°  C.  (68°  F.),  on  the  best  coolers,  in  less  than  six  or
seven  hours.  After  leaving  the  coolers  it  is  passed  over  a  refri-
gerator. In  winter  it  attains  that  temperature  in  about  three
hours,  or  less,  which  then  goes  on  sinking  on  the  coolers.
During  the  last  two  or  three  hours  which  are  employed  in
bringing  the  temperature  still  lower,  as  also  during  the  running
off,  the  wort  absorbs  an  appreciable  quantity  of  oxygen.  In
other  words,  wort  in  winter  remains  for  a  longer  time  at  low
temperatures,  in  free  contact  with  air.

Another  circumstance  unites  with  this  exposure  upon  the
coolers  to  increase  the  aeration  of  the  wort ;  the  wort  is  run  into
the  fermenting  tuns  through  pipes  of  large  sectional  area,  more
or  less  bent,  and  carries  with  it  by  suction  considerable  quan-
tities of  air,  which,  from  the  continual  agitation,  gets  well
Inixed  with  it.  The  effect  of  this  mixing  in  the  pipes  is  to
considerably  increase  the  proportion  of  air  in  solution  in  the
wort,  especially  in  winter,  when  the  temperature  of  the  wort  is
lower ;  and  from  the  figures  given  below  we  may,  althouo-h  it
is  very  variable,  put  the  average  increase  at  a  quarter  of  the
whole  amount.  The  calculation  has  been  made  by  comparing
the  quantities  of  air  held  in  solution  in  two  samples  of  the  same
wort,  one  of  which  was  taken  from  the  coolers  at  the  moment
of  "turning  out,''*  and  the  other  from  the  fermenting  vessel
after  it  was  filled.

*  See  foot-note,  page  367.


366  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

Let  us  call  the  ratio  between  the  quantity  of  oxygen  held  in
solution  by  a  wort,  and  that  which  the  same  wort  would  hold  in
solution  if  saturated  at  the  same  temperature,  the  degree  of
saturation  of  that  wort  at  the  temperature  t.

The  determination  of  degrees  of  saturation  is  reduced  to  a
comparison  of  the  number  of  divisions  of  hj^drosulphite  w
which  satisfies  the  wort  in  the  first  case,  with  the  number  n'
corresponding  with  the  same  wort  saturated  at  the  same  tem-

perature.    The  ratio  -—  gives  the  degree  of  saturation  at   the

temperature  t.

In  experiments  made  with  a  wort  at  14'5°  Balling  as  mean
density,  we  found  the  following  results  : —

In  summer,  in  the  case  of  worts  reduced  to  the  temperature
of  5°  C.  (41°  F.)  by  a  refrigerator,  the  degrees  of  saturation
may  be  set  down  as —

For  unflltered  worts  .  .  . .      0*500

For  filtered  worts     .  .  .  .  .  .      0"800

In  winter,  in  the  case  of  some  worts  w^hich  were  racked  at  a
temperature  of  from  3°  to  4°  C.  (37-4°  to  39-2°  F.),  without  the
use  of  a  refrigerator,  we  found  the  saturation  complete  in  both
worts.     In  the  case  of  a  very  low  external  temperature,  how-
ever ( — 10°  C,  14^  F.),  we  have  failed  to  determine  the  satura-
tion in  an  unfiltered  wort.    As  regards  the  mean  winter  figures,
in  the  case  of  worts  racked  at  a  temperature  of  5°  C.  (41°  F.),
they  may  be  fixed  at  these  : —

For  unfiltered  wort  .  .  .  .  .  .     0"850

For  filtered  wort      .  .  .  .  .  .     0  950

In  autumn  and  spring  we  find  the  mean  figures  to  be  inter-
mediate between  those  given  above  : —

For  unflltered  wort       . .  .  .     0-500  to  0-850

For  filtered  wort  .  .  .  .     0-800  to  0-950

From  these  ratios  it  is  easy  to  find  the  quantity  of  oxygen
contained  in  brewers'  worts,  if  we  also  refer  to  Buusen's  Tables


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION,  367

and  the  formula  (2)  given  in  the  preceding  section.  At  the
temperature  of  5°  C.  (41°  F.),  at  which  the  above  worts  were
"  gathered,"*  and  not  taking  into  account  the  very  small  cor-
rection that  should  be  made  for  the  difference  of  half  a  degree
on  Balling,  we  find,  by  this  formula,  as  the  ratio  of  the
coefficients  of  the  solubility  of  oxygen  in  saturated  wort  and  in
water —

c

-  =  0-82
c

Now,  at  the  temperature  of  5°  0.,  the  quantity  of  oxygen
held  in  solution  in  1  litre  of  water  is,  according  to  Bunsen,
0'036  litre,  at  the  atmospheric  pressure,  and  therefore  at  the
pressure  of  yth  atmosphere,  which  is  that  of  the  oxygen  in
atmospheric  air,  it  will  be —

— F —  litre  =:  7'2  c.c. — [that  is,  2  cubic  inches  per  gallon.]

And,  consequently,  in  the  case  of  saturated  wort,  it  will  be —

7'2  c.c.  X  0'82  =  5'904  c.c. — [that  is,  1"62  cub.  inches  per  gall.]

Multiplying  this  last  number  of  c.c.  by  the  different  degrees
of  saturation  found,  we  shall  obtain  the  volumes  of  oxygen  held
in  solution  in  1  litre  of  different  worts  : —


r  Unfiltered  0-500  x  5-904  c.c.  =  2-952  c.c.
Summer  worts  |  j,.^^^^^^      ^^.g^^  ^  ^.^^^  ^^   ^  4..23  ^^

^^  f  Unfiltered  0-850  x  5-904  „   =  5-018  „

Winter  worts  [^-^^.^^^^      0950  x  5-904  „   =  5-609  „

It  is  important  to  notice  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  wort
taken  from  the  fermenting  vessel  just  before  it  was  pitched ;

*  [For  non-teclinical  readers  we  may  explain  the  expressions
•'  gathered,"  here  used,  and  "  turning  out,"  used  on  page  365.  "  Turn-
ing out "  describes  the  operation  of  emptj'ing  the  cupper  contents  into
the  hop-back,  or  the  Jwp-iack  contents  on  to  the  coohrs.  "Gathering"
refers  to  the  time  when  the  worts  are  finally  intermixed  and  tveigJud,
prior  to  the  commencement  of  vinous  fermentation. — F.  F.]


368


STUDIES    ON    FRRMENTATION.


that  is  to  say,  when  the  quantity  of  oxygen  held  in  solution
was  as  large  as  the  treatment  to  which  it  had  been  subjected
allowed  of  its  being.  The  mode  of  taking  it  for  examination
is  as  follows : — A  burette,  H  (Fig.  81),  is  plunged  into  the
fermenting  vessel,  the  temperature  of  which  at  the  time  is
ascertained  very  exactly,  the  upper  part  of  tlie  burette  being
fitted  with  an  india-rubber  tube,  a  h,  longer  than  itself  The
liquid  is  then  sucked  up  the  tube,  and  soon  completely  fills  the
apparatus  and  runs  out  at  h  (Fig,  82).  B}'-  lowering  the  tube
the  whole  arrangement  thus  forms  a  syphon,  and  enables  us  to
let  the  wort  that  we  are  experimenting  on  flow  for  some
minutes ;  when  every  trace  of  air  has  been  thus  expelled,  the
lower  tap  is  closed  and  the  liquid  is  introduced  into  Schiitzen-
berger's  apparatus.


Fig.  82.


As  for  the  saturated  wort,  the  value  of  which  in  oxj-gen
serves  to  determine  one  of  the  elements  of  the  degree  of  satu-


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  369

ration,  it  is  readily  obtained  by  introducing  a  volume  of  from
100  c.c.  to  150  c.c,  of  wort  into  a  2-litre  or  3-litre  flask,  and
shaking  it  briskly  so  as  to  saturate  it  with  air ;  it  is  then  poured
into  a  settling-glass,  to  separate  it  from  the  great  quantity  of
froth  formed  in  the  shaking,  and  then,  by  means  of  a  graduated
pipette,  50  c.c.  is  taken  for  examination.

We  have  spoken  of  the  influence  that  oxygen  has  on  the
activity  of  yeast,  on  its  development  and,  consequently',  on  the
progress  of  fermentation.  Moreover,  we  know,  from  experi-
ments already  mentioned,  which  we  communicated  to  the
Academy  and  the  Chemical  Society  in  1861,  that  the  rapid
development  of  yeast  in  contact  with  air  is  in  reciprocal  relation
to  the  disappearance  of  the  oxygen  from  the  air.  Knowing
the  conditions  of  the  aeration  of  wort  from  the  moment  when  it
arrives  on  the  coolers  until  the  moment  when,  in  the  fermenting
tun,  it  is  about  to  be  pitched,  it  would  be  interesting  to  ascer-
tain what  happens  to  the  oxygen  dissolved  in  the  wort  at  the
moment  of  pitching,  how  yeast  is  affected  when  suddenly
brought  into  contact  with  that  oxygen ;  what  part,  in  short,
that  gas  plays  in  fermentation.

Let  us  therefore  follow  up,  hour  by  hour,  the  degree  of  satu-
ration after  pitching,  in  Tourtel's  brewery.  On  November  4th,
1875,  some  wort  at  14°  Balling  was  pumped  on  to  the  coolers  at
7  p.m.,  and  at  4  a.m.  went  down  to  a  32-hectolitre  (700  gallons)
tun,  its  temperature  then  being  6°  C.  (42'8°  F.)  The  pitching,
in  which  about  100  grammes  (3*2  oz.  troy)  of  pressed  yeast  was
used  per  hectolitre  (22  gallons),  took  place  at  5  a.m.  The
following  is  the  curve  of  the  degrees  of  saturation  of  the
oxygen,  as  drawn  by  Messrs.  Calmettes  and  Grenet.

The  abscissae  represent  the  time  expressed  in  hours,  and  the
ordinates  give  the  degrees  of  saturation  of  the  wort  with
oxygen.  It  will  be  seen  that  about  twelve  hours  after  the
pitching,  and  at  a  temperature  of  6°  C,  all  the  oxygen  had
disappeared,  absorbed  by  the  yeast.  We  shall  find  that  wort
by  itself,  unassociated  with  yeast,  would  also  have  combined
with  oxygen  ;  but  in  the  course  of  twelve  hours,  at  6°  C,  this

B    B


370


STUDIES   ON   FERMENTATION.


combination  would  have  been  scarcely  appreciable  in  absence
of  yeast.  It  follows,  therefore,  that  the  oxygen  in  solution  is
taken  up  by  the  yeast,  under  the  conditions  of  which  we  are
speaking.     This  has  been  proved  directly  by  an  experiment.


Ch  1f.  i


A  double  quantity  of  j'^east  was  employed  for  a  tun  similar  to
the  preceding  one,  and  it  was  found  that  the  oxygen  in  solution
disappeared  completely  in  less  than  half  the  time  that  it  took
to  disappear  in  the  first  case.*  It  is  very  important  to  notice
that  in  our  32-hectolitre  tun,  at  the  moment  when  we  deter-
mined the  complete  disappearance  of  the  oxygen  in  solution,
the  cells  of  yeast  had  assumed  a  younger  and  fuller  appearance
than  they  had  at  first ;  but  they  had  not  multiplied  at  all  up  to

*  Wo  kuow  also  from  the  direct  experiments  of  M.  Schiitzenberger,
performed  on  aerated  -n'ater  with  which  yeast  had  been  mixed,  that  yeast
causes  all  the  oxygen  in  solution  to  disappear  very  quicklj-,  so  that
hydrosulphite  gives  no  evidence  of  a  trace.  (See  ScnuxzENBERGER,
Eevue  scientijique,  vol.  iii.  (2),  Aj-iril,  1874).


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  371

that  time,  nor  were  tliere  even  any  buds  then  visible  on  them.
The  oxygen,  therefore,  must  be  stored  up  somehow  in  the  cells,
taken  up  by  their  oxidizable  matters  to  be  brought  into  work
subsequently,  or  to  act  as  a.  primum  movensoi  life  and  nutrition,
spreading  its  influence  over  several  successive  generations  of  cells.

§  IV. — On  the  Combination  of  Oxygen  with  Wort.

The  atmospheric  oxygen  is  not  merely  taken  into  solution  by
wort ;  it  also  combines  with  it,  as  a  very  simple  experiment  will
suffice  to  show.  If  we  place  in  a  tinned  iron  vessel  some  boiling
wort,  separated  from  the  hops  in  the  copper,  and  cool  it  sud-
denly by  plunging  it  into  iced  water,  and  after  having  cooled
it  down  in  this  manner  to  15°  or  20°  C.  (59°  or  68°  F.),  saturate
it  with  oxygen,  by  shaking  it  briskly  in  a  large  flask,  and  then
completely  fill  a  vessel  with  it  and  close  it  up  for  twelve  hours,
we  shall  find  at  the  end  of  that  time,  if  we  test  it  with  the
hydrosulphite  of  soda,  as  we  have  described  in  §  II.,  that  it
does  not  contain  a  trace  of  free  oxygen.  The  whole  of  the  gas
which  was  originally  held  in  solution  will  have  entered  into
combination,  that  is  to  say,  the  liquid,  first  coloured  blue  with
the  indigo-carmine,  and  then  brought  to  a  yellow  tint  by  means
of  the  hydrosulphite  of  soda,  will  not  regain  its  original  blue
colour  through  the  action  of  this  wort.  The  following  experiments
were  undertaken  with  the  object  of  studying  this  property  of
wort,  and  in  order  that  we  might  form  some  idea  of  its  import-
ance, and  of  the  total  quantity  of  oxygen  that  wort  can  absorb
under  certain  special  circumstances.  The  experiments  were
performed  in  our  own  laboratory  on  wort  from  Tourtel's
brewery,  which  M.  Calmettes  had  forwarded  to  us  in  bottles
prepared  in  the  brewery  at  Tantonville,  in  the  following  man-
ner :  Each  bottle  was  filled  with  boiling  wort  taken  from  the
copper  and  closed  with  a  bored  cork,  through  which  the  neck
of  a  funnel  passed  ;  the  funnel  also  was  filled  with  the  wort,  and
the  whole  preserved  from  contact  with  air  by  a  layer  of  oil.  The
next  day  the  bottles  were  corked  full  by  the  help  of  a  bottling

B  B  2


372  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

needle,*  previously  heated,  with  perfect  corks  that  had  been
passed  through  the  flame.  The  bottles  arrived  in  Paris  in  very-
good  condition,  quite  full  of  the  liquid  up  to  the  corks.  They
were  left  undisturbed  for  one  or  two  days  at  the  same  tempe-
rature as  that  to  which  they  had  been  exposed  during  the
corking  and  the  journey.  The  object  of  this  was  to  afibrd  time
for  a  deposit  of  the  wort  to  form  at  the  bottom  of  each  bottle.
As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  know  that  wort  boiling  in  the  copper
is  charged  with  proteinaceous  matters  and  other  floating  and
insoluble  substances.  The  wort  above  the  deposit  was  turbid
and  opaline  ;  it  was  in  this  state  when  we  used  it  for  our  expe-
riments. It  may  be  taken  for  granted,  without  risk  of  appre-
ciable error,  that  the  wort  had  been  absolutely  deprived  of  oxygen
in  solution,  inasmuch  as  it  had  been  bottled  when  boiling,  and
had  cooled  down  out  of  contact  with  air.  As  for  the  quan-
tity of  oxygen  that  it  might  have  held  in  combination,  this
must  have  been  insignificant,  although  there  must  have  been
some,  since  the  wort  had  been  exposed  to  the  air  in  the  copper  ;
the  oxygen  in  combination,  however,  could  have  had  no  appre-
ciable influence  on  the  results  which  we  obtained.  Let  us  call
this  wort  boiled  loort.

First  Experiment. — Into  a  straight-necked  flask  we  introduced
a  certain  measured  quantity  of  this  wort  by  means  of  a  syphon,
taking  care  that  the  syphon  should  only  act  on  the  opaque  wort,
and  should  not  reach  the  deposit  at  the  bottom  of  the  bottle.
We  then  drew  out  the  neck  to  a  fine  tube  in  the  flame  and

[*  The  bottling  needle  {foret  d  aiguille)  is  a  contrivance  for  permitting  a
cork  to  be  di'iven  into  a  bottle  completely  filled  with,  liquid,  without  burst-
ing the  bottle.  It  consists  of  a  slightly-tapering  iron  pin  about  -^th  inch
in  diameter  and  2  inches  in  length,  somewhat  flattened,  and  slightly
curved  throughout  its  entire  length,  with  a  groove  running  down  one  side
from  end  to  end,  the  pin  being  jointed  with  a  ring,  like  a  common  ring
cork-screw.  In  using  it  the  pin  is  driven  into  the  bottle  alongside  the
cork,  thus  allowing  the  excess  of  liquid  to  escape  as  the  cork  advances.
When  the  cork  is  completely  home,  the  needle  is  withdi-awn,  and  the
elasticity  of  the  cork  enables  it  to  fill  up  the  space  left,  so  that  we
have  the  bottle  corked  air-tight,  and  no  air  left  between  the  cork  and
liquid.— D.  C.  E.]


STUDIES   ON    FERMEKTATION.  373

boiled  the  wort ;  and  during  ebullition  we  sealed  the  end  of  the
fine  tube.  After  it  had  cooled,  we  arranged  that  pure  air
should  enter  the  flask.  To  do  this  we  made  a  file  mark  near
the  fine  closed  point  of  the  flask,  and  connected  the  point  by  a
piece  of  india-rubber  tubing  with  a  glass  tube  containing  a
column  of  asbestos,  which  we  heated.  We  then  broke  ofi"  the
point  of  the  flask  inside  the  india-rubber  tube,  so  that  the  air
entered  the  flask  after  being  filtered  through  the  asbestos.  We
removed  the  india-rubber  tube  and  sealed  up  once  more  the
fine  end  of  the  neck  at  the  point  where  we  had  broken  it  ofi".
Finally,  to  aerate  the  wort  to  saturation,  we  shook  the  flask
briskly  for  some  minutes,  and  then  placed  it  in  a  hot-water
bath,  where  we  left  it  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  We
afterwards  removed  it  to  an  oven  at  25°  (77°  F.).  We  repeated
the  same  operation  next  day  and  the  four  succeeding  days.

The  wort,  which  at  first  was  scarcely  coloured,  gradually
assumed  a  reddish-brown  tint,  and  deposited  an  amorphous
matter,  but  without  brightening.  It  became  clear,  however,
when  filtered,  which  was  not  the  case  with  the  turbid,  opaline
wort  in  the  bottles  when  they  arrived.

The  following  is  an  analysis  of  the  air  in  the  flask,  made
immediately  after  a  renewed  and  vigorous  shaking,  the  object
of  which  was  to  saturate  the  wort  with  air  before  analyzing  the
supernatant  air : —

November  29tli.

Temperature  at  whichi
the  flask  was  refilled

with  air 4°  C.        (29-2°  F.)

Atmospheric  pressure .     7ol  mm.     (29'6ins.)

Total  volume  of  flask       333  c.c.    (20-32  cub.  in.)

Volume  occupied  by  the  wort        ..      ..     120  ,,         (7*32      ,,        )

December  8th.

Volume  of  gas  analyzed     27'6  c.c.      (1"68  cub.  ins.)

After  treatment  with  potash 27*4  c.c.     (1'67      ,,        )

pyrogallol    .  .      .  .      22-4  „       (1-36      „        )


Oxygen o-O  c.c.    (0- 305  cub. in.)


374  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

Composition  of  the  gas  : —  Per  cent.

Oxygen     .  .         . .  . .  . .  . .     18'25

Nitrogen 81-57

The  formula  which  we  deduced  above  (§  II.)  allows  us  to
conclude  that  at  the  temperature  of  8°  C.  (46'4°  F.),  which  was
the  temperature  at  which  the  wort  was  saturated  before  the
analysis  given  above,  the  quantity  of  oxygen  in  solution  in  the
120  c.c.  (4-2  fl.  oz.)  of  wort  was  0'84  c.c.  (0-051  cub.  in.).

At  the  moment  when  the  flask  was  closed,  the  total  volume
of  oxygen,  calculated  to  zero  and  760  mm.  (30  in.)  pressure,
was  44-73  c.c.  (2-729  cub.  in.).

At  the  moment  when  the  analysis  was  finished,  the  volume
of  oxygen  was  calculated  to  the  same  conditions  of  temperature
and  pressure,  38"86  c.c.  (2-355  cub.  in.)  ;  5-87  c.c.  (0-374  cub.
in.)  has,  therefore,  disappeared.  Now,  as  there  is  0-84  c.c.
(0-051  cub.  in.)  in  solution,  there  has,  consequently,  been  an
absorption,  by  combination  with  120  c.c.  of  wort,  of  5-03  c.c.
(0-32  cub.  in.)  of  oxygen,  or  41-7  c.c.  per  litre  (ll'G  cub.  ins.
per  gallon).

Second  Experiment. — In  a  similar  experiment,  in  which,  how-
ever, the  flask  was  kept  for  five  days  at  a  rigorously  constant
temperature  of  55°  C.  (131°  F.),  day  and  night,  and  in  which
the  supernatant  air  was  not  shaken  up  with  the  wort,  we
found —

Volume  of  gas  analyzed     .  .  28-5

After  treatment  with  potash         .  .  .  .     28-3

„  „  „     pyrogallol   .  .  . .      23-0


Oxygen  . .  . .  . .  . .      5*3

Composition  of  the  gas  : —  Per  cent.

Oxygen   .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .         18*6

Nitroo-en .         81'4


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  375


Total  oxygen  at  first

remainino:


that  has  disappeared
in  sohition

in  combination    .  .


cc.
29-40
26-04

3-36
0-54

2-82


Or  per  litre,  35*2  cc.  (9"8  cub.  ins.  per  gallon).

The  colour  of  the  wort  in  this  experiment  had  become  sen-
sibly similar  to  that  of  the  wort  in  the  preceding  experiment.

Third  Experiment. — In  another  experiment  we  left  the  flask,
for  the  same  length  of  time  again,  after  it  had  been  refilled
wich  air  and  reclosed,  at  a  temperature  which  varied  between
2°  and  4°  C.  (35-6°  and  39-2°  F.).     In  this  case  we  found-
Volume  of  air  analyzed      . .  .  .     27 '8

After  the  action  of  potash  .  .  .  .  .  .     27*8

After  pyrogallic  acid         .  .  .  .  . .      22*3

Oxygen   . .  . .  . .  .  .       b'5

Composition  of  the  gas  : —  Per  cent.

Oxygen  . .  . .  . .  .  .  .  .  19'7

Nitrogen 80-3


cc.

Total  oxygen  at  first 29*40

remainins:  .  .  .  .       27'58


that  has  disappeared      .  .         1\S2
in  solution  .  .  .  .  0'44


,.  „       in  combination    .  .  .  .         1"38

Or  per  litre,  17"20  cc  (4'8  cub.  ins.  per  gallon).

In    this  last    experiment  the  wort  was   scarcely  darker  in


376  STUDIES    ON    FEKMENTATION.

colour.  Its  colour,  compared  with  that  of  wort  cooled  on  the
coolers  in  the  brewery,  was  slightly  darker ;  but  the  difference,
although  it  existed,  was  scarcely  appreciable.  We  shall  revert
to  this  fact,  Avhich  is  of  importance,  presently.

Foui'tli  Experiment. — The  following  series  of  experiments
were  undertaken  to  enable  us  to  form  some  idea  of  the  rapidity
with  which  oxygen  is  absorbed  by  wort.

We  employed  three  flasks,  A,  B,  C,  of  the  following  capa-
cities : —

A  =  234

B  -214

C  =  203


hich  we    introduced   the    following   quantities  of  wort
wort,  without  air)  : —


into    w
(boiled


Into  A         96  c.c.

„     B         84  „

„     C         .  .         .  .         .  .         . .  .  .      84  ,,

The  necks  of  the  flasks  were  then  drawn  out  and  sealed  in  a
flame,  the  liquid  being  at  a  temperature  of  5°  C.  (41°  F.).  The
flasks  were  then  placed  in  a  hot-water  bath  and  kept  at  100'  C.
(212"  F.)  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  The  flask  A  was  repeatedly
shaken  during  cooling,  as  also  was  the  flask  B,  this  being
omitted  in  the  case  of  the  flask  C

The  contents  of  flask  A  were  submitted  to  analysis  as  soon  as
it  was  quite  cooled — that  is  to  say,  in  about  three  hours.  The
analysis  of  contents  of  B  and  C  was  delayed  for  about  twenty-
four  hours.  We  took  the  precaution  of  not  commencing  the
analysis  before  we  had  shaken  the  flasks  for  a  few  minutes,  so
that  the  wort  in  all  of  them  might  be  saturated  at  a  flxed
temperature,  and  thus  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  exact  quantity
of  oxygen  in  solution.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATIOX.  377

The  analyses  showed  that  the  worts  in  the  three  flasks  con-
tained : —

Flask  A,  oxygen  in  combination,  per  litre     20     c.c.
„       B,         „  „  „  21-4  c.c.

„       C,         „  „  „  16-8  c.c.

Several  facts  may  be  deduced  from  these  experiments :  the
shaking  up  of  the  wort  with  air  has  a  marked  effect  on  the
absorption  ;  a  very  appreciable  absorption  immediately  follows
the  shaking  up  of  the  wort  when  warm ;  whereas,  in  the  case
of  cold  wort  that  has  remained  undisturbed,  the  absorption
takes  place  slowly.

The  results  of  the  preceding  experiments  plainly  show  that
the  wort,  which  is  very  hot  when  it  comes  on  to  the  coolers,
where  it  remains  for  several  hours,  must  absorb  an  ap-
preciable quantity  of  oxygen  by  combination  ;  but  these  same
experiments  teach  us  nothing  definite  concerning  the  volume  of
oxygen  that  is  actually  absorbed.  We  can  only  gather  from
the  remark  which  concludes  the  third  experiment  given  above,
that  the  total  quantity  of  oxygen  absorbed  by  the  wort  in
Tourtel's  brewery,  during  the  time  that  it  remains  on  the
coolers,  must  be  less  than  17  c.c.  per  litre  (4-7  cubic  inches
per  gallon),  inasmuch  as  the  coloration  effected  by  combined
oxygen  in  the  proportion  of  17  c.c.  per  litre  was  considerably
greater  than  that  of  the  wort  taken  from  the  backs  in  the
brewery.

If  we  knew  the  curve  of  cooling  on  the  Tourtonville  coolers
we  might  easily,  in  experiments  conducted  in  our  laboratory,
assimilate  the  conditions  of  our  experiments  to  those  of  the
oxidation  of  the  wort  in  the  brewery,  by  exposing  wort  in  con-
tact with  air  in  closed  flasks  to  temperatures  varying  according
to  the  indications  of  the  curve  in  question.  For  this  purpose,
we  induced  M.  Calmettes  to  study  the  process  of  cooling  upon
the  coolers  at  Tantonville.  In  Fig.  84  the  figures  found  in  one
of  that  gentleman's  experiments  are  given.


378


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.


The  abscissae  represent  the  time  expressed  in  hours  ;  the  or-
dinates,  the  degrees  of  temperature.  The  exterior  temperature
was  0°  C.  (32°  F.) ;  the  atmosphere  was  calm.  The  wort  was
jDumped  on  to  the  coolers  at  5.20  p.m.,  its  temperature  then
being  85°  C.  (185°  F.),  and  the  operation  of  pumping  lasted
from  5,20  to  5.30  p.m.  The  first  determination  was  made  at
5.30  p.m.,  and  was  repeated  every  ten  minutes  until  7.30  p.m.


sh^a  6 A-  7^


9  A  iqA  l\h  j_2''l

Fig.  84.


2h.


Curve  of  cooling  of  the  wort  on  the  coolers  (December  ISth,  1875).

Between  7.30  and  8.30  p.m.  it  was  repeated  every  twenty
minutes ;  after  that,  it  was  repeated  every  half-hour  until
2  a.m.,  when  the  wort  went  down  to  the  fermenting  vessels.
The  mean  depth  of  the  wort  was  8'5  centimetres  (3'1  inches).

Having  determined  the  rate  of  cooling  in  the  brewery,  we
made  the  following  experiment :  a  known  quantity  of  wort
from   the  copper — deprived,  consequently,   of  oxygen — in  the

['  The  corresponding  Fahrenheit  degrees  are,  proceeding  from  5'"30
downwards  to  2'',  107%  ISV,  100-4%  82-8°,  72%  64-4%  58-l%  53-1%  50%
47-7%— D.  C.  R.]


I


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  379

same  condition  as  when  it  comes  on  the  coolers,  was  put  into  a
graduated,  cylindrical  vessel,  which  was  then  closed  with  an
india-rubber  cork,  and  placed  immediately,  without  being
shaken,  in  a  hot  water  bath  at  85°  C.  (185°  F.).  Another
vessel  similar  to  the  preceding  one,  and  having  a  thermometer
passed  through  the  cork,  and  immersed  in  the  wort,  enabled  us
to  observe  the  temperature.  The  temperature  was  gradually
reduced,  in  exact  accordance  with  the  data  of  the  preceding
curve,  until  the  water,  in  the  course  of  eight  hours  and  a  half,
was  brought  down  to  10°  C.  (50°  F.).  It  is  true,  that  we  can-
not pretend  to  have  realized  all  the  conditions  of  the  coolers,  in
this  manner,  but  we  approached  them  very  nearly  ;  moreover,
it  was  an  approximation  rather  than  a  rigorous  determination
that  we  desired  to  obtain.  We  then  collected  over  mercury  the
air  which  remained  in  the  flask,  and  analyzed  it  very  carefully ;
at  the  same  time,  with  Schiitzenberger's  apparatus,  we  deter-
mined the  oxygen  held  in  solution  in  the  wort  so  treated.
From  the  results  thus  obtained  we  easil}^  found  the  quantity  of
oxygen  that  had  disappeared — that  is,  the  oxygen  which  the
wort  had  acquired  from  the  atmosphere  of  the  flask,  and  which
had  combined  with  the  oxidizable  matters  of  the  wort.

The  volume  of  the  flask  being  815  c.c,  that  of  the  wort
391  CO.,  and  the  depth  of  the  liquid  8  cm.,  we  found  an  absorp-
tion by  combination  of  9'49  c.c.  of  oxygen  per  litre  of  wort
(2"63  cub.  ins.  per  gallon).  Another  flask  treated  in  the  same
manner  gave  us  similar  results.

As  the  oxygen  in  solution  has  so  great  an  influence  on  fer-
mentation, it  is  important  that  we  should,  likewise,  know  the
efiect  produced  by  the  oxygen  in  combination.  The  following
considerations  and  experiments  may  throw  some  light  on  this
subject : —

We  have  already  remarked  that  natural  saccharine  worts
oxidize,  and  acquire  colour  in  contact  with  air,  and  that  this
coloration  disappears  when  these  worts  are  caused  to  ferment.
This  furnishes  one  presumption,  that  the  oxygen  in  combination
disappears  then,    from,  being  abstracted   by  the   ferment.     A


380  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

similar  phenomenoii  is  observable  in  the  case  of  wort.  After
having  acquired  a  marked  dark  shade  by  remaining  in  contact
with  pure  air,  it  loses  this  colour  very  appreciably  during
fermentation ;  and  if  the  wort  does  not  quite  regain  the
colour  which  it  originally  had  when  it  came  from  the  copper,
this  circumstance  is  probabh'  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  quan-
tity of  oxygen  in  combination  with  the  wort  is  larger  than  that
which  is  abstracted  b}^  the  yeast.  We  have  seen  that  yeast
absorbs  oxygen,  since,  in  the  case  of  a  saccharine  wort,  more  or
less  saturated  with  oxygen  in  solution,  when  fermentation  com-
mences, the  first  efiect  of  the  ferment  is  to  cause  that  oxygen
to  combine  with  its  own  substance.  We  should,  therefore,
expect  to  find  the  oxygen  in  combination,  as  well  as  that  held
in  solution,  in  wort,  abstracted  by  the  yeast  and  contributing
to  the  activity  of  fermentation.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  is
proved  by  direct  experiments,  for  the  fermentation  of  a  wort
that  has  oxidized  in  contact  with  air,  or  of  one  from  which  all
the  oxygen  that  was  held  in  solution  in  it  has  disappeared  by
direct  combination,  is  much  more  easy,  rapid,  and  complete  than
the  fermentation  of  the  same  wort  when  it  contains  no  oxygen,
whether  free  or  combined.  These  experiments  were  as  follows  :
we  boiled  some  copper  wort  in  a  large  double-necked  flask,  like
those  shown  in  Fig.  73  :  all  the  air  being  expelled,  pure  air
was  allowed  to  enter  the  flask  ;  and  when  the  wort  was  cool  it
was  saturated  with  this  air,  by  being  shaken  briskly  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour.  The  wort  was  then  forced  by  a  pressure  of
air,  applied  to  the  extremity  of  the  S-shaped  tube,  into  smaller
flasks,  similar  to  the  preceding  ones  ;  these  we  filled  completely,
and  then  plunged  the  end  of  their  sinuous  tubes  under  mercury.
After  waiting  for  two  or  three  days,  a  longer  time  than  was
required  for  the  oxj-gen  in  solution  to  enter  into  combination —
a  fact  which  we  confirmed  by  means  of  a  similar  flask,  whicli
served  as  a  standard — we  caused  the  wort,  so  prepared,  to  fer-
ment in  the  flasks,  and  side  by  side,  for  the  sake  of  comparison,
some  copper  u-ort  that  contained  no  air  in  solution  or  combination.
In  other  experiments  we  operated  on  pure  wort,  saturated


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  381

with  oxygen  in  combination,  by  being  allowed  to  remain  for  one
year  in  an  open  flask  in  contact  with  pure  air.  This  wort  was
deprived  of  air  in  solution  by  a  protracted  boiling  over  mer-
cury. It  was  then  pitched,  out  of  contact  of  air,  with  an  old
yeast.  The  yeast  underwent  no  development  at  all,  a  proof
that  oxygen  in  combination  cannot  act  like  oxygen  that  is  free,
or  simply  in  solution,  in  effecting  the  revival  of  the  yeast ;
nevertheless,  after  the  revival  has  been  once  started  by  means
of  a  small  quantity  of  air,  fermentation  declares  itself  with
much  greater  facility  than  in  the  case  of  copper  wort,  placed
under  the  same  conditions,  but  deprived  of  oxygen  in  com-
bination.


§  V.  Ox  THE  Influence  of  Oxygen  in  Combination  on  the
Clarification  of  Wort.

Oxygen  in  combination  has  another  effect  which  it  is
essentially  important  to  point  out,  for  it  concerns  the  clarifi-
cation of  beer.  One  of  the  most  valued  properties  of  this
beverage  is  its  limpidity  and  brilliancy.  We  know  from  the
results  of  the  fourth  experiment  in  the  preceding  paragraph
that  in  the  case  of  a  wort  shaken  up  when  hot  with  air,  and
examined  as  soon  as  cold,  that  is,  after  an  interval  of  only  three
hours,  we  find  a  notable  volume  of  oxygen  to  have  been  absorbed
by  combination ;  in  the  experiment  to  which  we  allude,  this
volume  was  not  less  than  20  c.c.  of  oxygen  per  litre  of  wort.
The  shaking  up  of  the  wort  when  cold  with  air  saturated  it  with
oxygen  in  solution,  but  the  quantity  of  oxygen  which  under
these  conditions  entered  into  combination,  in  the  course  of  three
hours,  is  insignificant,  although  saturation  by  solution  may  be
attained  in  the  course  of  one  minute's  shaking.  If  two  samples
of  the  same  wort  are  shaken  up  with  air,  one  of  them  being  hot
and  the  other  cold,  and  both  filtered  after  having  been  left
xmdisturbed  for  twenty-four  hours,  or_  even  immediately  after
the  agitation,  we  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the  great  differ-


382  STUDIES   ON   FERMENTATION.

ence  that  they  will  present  in  point  of  brightness.  The  wort
that  was  shaken  up  hot  will  have  more  colour,  and  will  be
brilliant ;  the  other  will  be  turbid,  and  will  not  become  clear
for  five  or  six  days,  when  left  to  itself  in  contact  with  air  and
filtered  again.  This  explains  a  fact  that  may  be  easily  verified
in  practice :  Boiled  wort,  if  cooled  down  suddenly,  or  slowly
but  out  of  contact  with  air,  or  shaken  up  cold  in  contact  with
air,  is  opaque  when  filtered ;  whilst  the  same  wort,  cooled
down  on  the  coolers  where  it  has  taken  a  certain  quantity  of
oxygen  into  combination,  generally  passes  through  the  filter
very  bright.  The  intelligent  brewer  is  uneasy  when  this  is  not
the  case,  for  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  easy  clarification  of
wort  has  a  favourable  influence  on  the  easy  clarification  of
beer.

It  would,  nevertheless,  be  a  grave  error  to  suppose  that  the
clarification  of  beer  must  necessarily  folloAV  that  of  wort,  and
we  may  be  permitted  to  make  a  digression  here  on  the  subject,
to  prove  this  statement.

On  February  3rd,  1874,  we  brewed  2  hectolitres  (44  gallons)  of
beer.  The  boiling  wort,  hops  and  all,  was  run  into  a  vessel  like
that  represented  in  Fig.  80,  but  provided  in  addition  with  a  false
bottom,  pierced  with  holes  and  fixed  at  1  centimetre  (0"39
inch)  above  the  true  bottom  of  the  vessel ;  this  was  meant  to
retain  the  spent  hops.  The  temperature  of  the  wort  in  the  vessel
after  it  was  filled,  February  3rd,  4  p.m.,  was  90°  C.  (194°  F.),
that  of  the  room  was  10°  C.  (50°  F.).  We  permitted  the  wort
to  cool  down  gently,  without  running  cold  water  over  the
vessel.     The  wort  indicated  a  density  of  14°  Balling.

The  following  temperatures  Avere  taken  : —


Temperatiu'e

Temperature

of  Wort.

of  Eoom.

,  4,  11  a.m.  .

.  38°     C.     (100-4°  F.)

9=C.    (48-2°  F.)

7  p.m.  .

.  30°    C.      (86°     F.)

9°C.    (48-2°  F.)

11.30  p.m.

26-3°  C.      (79-3°  F.)

9°C.    (48-2°  F.)

STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION,  383

Temperature  Temperature

of  Wort.  of  Eoom.

Feb.  5,    9  a.m.  .  .     21°       C.    (69-8°  F.)  8°     C.  (46-4°  F.)

12  a.m.  .  .     19-75°  C.    (66-6°  F.)  8°    C.  (46-4°  F.)

4  p.m...     18°       C.    (64-4°  F.)  8-5°  C.  (47-3°  F.)

Feb.  6,  11  a.m.  .  .     14°       C.    (57-2°  F.)  8°    C.  (46-4°  F.)

Feb.  7,    2  p.m.  .  .     11°       C.    (51-8°  F.)  7°     C.  (44-6°  F.)


At  the  end  of  this  time  the  wort  drawn  from  the  smaller
tap  half-way  up  the  vessel  had  already  become  very  bright^
although  it  was  taken  from  the  bulk  of  the  liquid  above  the
deposit  of  hops.

On  February  8th  the  temperature  of  the  wort  was  9 '5°  C,
(49-1°  F.),  and  that  of  the  room  5°  C.  (41°  F.)  ;  the  wort  was
again  very  bright.  Taken  from  the  small  tap  and  tested  b}^
Schlitzenberger's  process  it  gave  no  evidence  of  free  oxygen
in  solution,  although  its  surface  was  in  contact  with  air.  It
continued  absolutely  pure,  the  arrangements  of  our  vessel,  as
we  have  already  explained,  allowing  only  such  air  to  enter  as
was  first  dejDrived  of  its  disturbing  germs.

Not  till  February  12th,  after  we  had  again  determined  the
purity  and  brilliant  clearness  of  the  wort,  a  brilliancy  which  we
can  compare  with  nothing  so  well  as  Cognac,  without  the
faintest  trace  of  cloudiness,  did  we  set  it  to  ferment  in  a  vessel
similar  to  that  in  which  it  had  cooled,  but  without  the  false
bottom.  In  the  process  of  transfer  we  effected  its  aeration  by
causing  it  to  fall  on  a  small  inverted  tinned  iron  capsule  some
4  or  6  centimetres  (IJ  to  2  inches)  in  diameter.  By  this
arrangement  the  wort  took  up  air  to  the  extent  of  rather  more
than  a  third  of  its  saturate  capacity,  that  is  to  say,  by  spreading
over  the  capsule,  and  falling  from  it  in  a  kind  of  sheet,  it
absorbed  a  volume  of  oxygen  more  than  a  third  of  the  total
amount  of  oxygen  which  it  was  capable  of  absorbing  at  the
existing  temperature  ;  this  was  12°  C.  (53'6°  F.)  at  the  moment
when  the  wort  was  drawn  off.     The  pitching  was  accomplished


384  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

with  a  6-litre  flask  containing  about  4  litres  (7-04  pints)  of  beer
that  had  been  in  "  low  "  fermentation  from  February  Srd.  The
beer  was  cleansed  on  February  24th,  and  had  a  density  of  5|°
Balling.  We  collected  2'345  kilos  (75'39  oz.  troy)  of  yeast,
containing  56  per  cent.,  that  is,  1*313  kilos  (42"21  oz.  troy)  of
pressed  yeast,  containing  36-7  per  cent,  of  yeast  dried  at  100°  C.
(212°  F.),  that  is  482  grammes  (15-49  oz.  troy)  for  the  brew,
which  would  give  241  grammes  (7*748  oz.  troy)  of  yeast  formed
per  hectolitre  (22  gallons).

The  beer  was  turbid  when  drawn  off,  and  the  small  glassful
that  we  removed  did  not  brighten  in  twenty-four  or  even  forty-
eight  hours.  The  samples  for  some  days  previously  had  been
in  the  same  condition.  The  yeast  existed  as  a  fine  deposit
without  any  straggling  yeast  about  the  sides.  The  want  of
brightness  was  dependent  rather  on  spurious  colour  than  on
any  actual  turbidity.  "We  may  here  remark  that  if  in  the
preceding  experiment  the  wort  had  taken  up  oxygen  into  com-
bination as  well  as  into  solution  at  the  time  that  it  was  aerated,
the  other  conditions  being  the  same,  the  beer  would  have
been  bright  and  better.

It  follows  from  this  experiment  that  a  wort  may  be  perfecthj
bright  at  the  moment  when  it  is  pitched,  yet  fail  to  produce  a
beer  which  shall  be  bright  when  racked,  or  one  that  will  brighten
subsequently  otherwise  than  with  great  difficult3^  We  may
add  that  when  we  repeated  this  same  experiment,  cooling  the
wort,  however,  as  rapidly  as  the  conditions  of  our  apparatus
permitted,  and  employing  iced  water,  the  beer  appeared  very
nearly  bright  when  it  was  racked,  and  brightened  pretty  quickly
in  cask  and  in  bottle.  The  total  duration  of  cooling  was  not
longer  than  two  hours.

The  question  here  arises  what  part  does  the  oxygen  combined
with  wort  play  in  the  clarification  of  the  latter,  or  in  the  clari-
fication of  beer  ?  Although  it  may  be  difficult  to  give  a  definite
answer  to  this  question,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  in  cases
where  the  beer  brightens  best,  if  we  examine  it  under  the
microscope  during  fermentation,  M'e  see,  besides  the  clusters  of


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATTON.  385

yeast-cells,  floating  amorphous  particles,  whicli  are  larger  and
more  compact  than  those  to  which  the  turbidity  of  worts  and
muddy  beers  is  due,  a  circumstance  which  should  lead  us  to
suppose  that  the  oxygen  in  combination  with  the  wort  has  the
efi'ect  of  modifying  the  nature  of  the  amorphous  deposit  which  is
produced  during  the  fermentation  of  the  wort.  During  boiling,
the  hop  yields  to  the  wort  a  variety  of  resinous,  odorous,  and
astringent  substances,  which,  for  the  most  part,  are  held  in
solution  by  the  presence  of  sugar  and  dextrin.  At  the  moment
when,  under  the  influence  of  the  yeast,  which  is  itself  more  or
less  oxidized,  the  sugar  becomes  transformed  into  alcohol  and
carbonic  acid,  a  portion  of  the  bitter  and  resinous  matters  of
the  hop  becomes  insoluble  and  remains  in  a  state  of  suspension
in  the  liquid.  It  is  ver}'  probable  that  at  this  point  it  is  when
the  combined  oxygen  assumes  its  function  of  modifying  the
physical  structure  of  these  insoluble  particles,  agglomerating
them,  so  that  they  become  more  easily  deposited.*

Moreover,  oxidation  tends  to  form  a  special  precipitate  in  the
wort,  which  precipitate  contributes  towards  the  collection  and
deposition  of  the  very  fine  particles  suspended  in  the  wort,  by  a


*  We  have  remarked  in  our  observations  on  No.  6  of  Plate  I.  (p.  6)
tliat  amongst  the  amorphous  granular  deposits  of  wort  and  beer  vre  often
find  minute  balls  of  resinous  and  colouring  matter,  perfectly  spherical
and  very  dense,  which  if  the  liquids  be  shaken  up  will  render  them  very
turbid,  but  which  readily  and  rapidly  deposit  again,  without  remaining
in  suspension  in  the  least.  Such  then  is  the  form  in  which  the  deposits
of  wort  in  course  of  fermentation  are  precipitated,  when  the  wort  has
been  freely  exposed  to  oxygen.  One  day  in  the  laboratory  we  were
desirous  of  starting  a  fermentation  in  a  vessel  capable  of  holding  12
hectolitres  (264  gallons).  But  as  we  only  had  at  our  disposal  a  copper
capable  of  holding  2J  hectolitres,  we  procured  the  wort  from  a  neighbour-
ing brewery  in  two  barrels  of  6  hectolitres  each.  This  wort  we  re-heated,
in  portions,  in  oui-  2|  hectolitre  copper,  a  treatment  which  had  the  efi'ect
of  oxidizing  the  wort  more  than  it  would  have  been  in  the  brewery.  In
this  case  the  beer  fell  remarkably  bright,  and  the  cells  of  yeast  were
accompanied  by  the  deposit  of  minute  agglomerations  sketched  in  Plato  I,
No.  6.  We  have  repeated  this  experiment  on  a  smaller  scale  and  ha's  e
obtained  the  same  result.

C   C


386  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATIOX.

mechanical  action,  similar  to  that  which  we  notice  in  fining
operations.     On  the  coolers  an  effect  of  this  kind  is  produced.
The  wort  in  the  copper  contains  insoluble  matters  which  pass  on
to  the  coolers.     Very  bright  when  boiling,  it  grows  turbid  as  it
cools,  and  then  contains  two    kinds    of   insoluble    substances  :
I.  Substances  insoluble  alike  in  the  hot  and  cold  liquid,  some
of  which  even,  as  we  have  just  seen,   are  formed  under  the
influence  of   heat  and  air :    all  these  substances  precipitating
rapidly  to  the  bottom  of   the  vessels.     2.  Very  fine  particles
insoluble  in  the  cold,  but  soluble  in  the  hot  liquid,  appearing  as
tlie  wort  cools  down,  and  giving  it  a  milky  appearance.     If  the
air  does  not  come  into   play  the}^  remain  in  suspension  for  an
indefinite  time,  so  to  say.     Wort  taken  boiling  from  the  copper
and  cooled  down,  therefore,  forms  a  considerable  deposit  at  the
bottom  of  the  bottles.     Now,  if  we  put  this  wort  into  bottles
without   filling  them,  putting  into  some   only  the  milky  wort
from  above  the  deposit,  and  into  others  the  same  wort  along  with
some  of  the  deposit,  then  raise  it  to   100°  C.  (212°  F.),  and
before  it  has  time  to  cool  down  shake  it  up  with  air  a  good  many
times,  it  will   be  readily  seen  that  the  wort  in  the  bottles  con-
taining the  deposit  will  brighten  more  rapidly  and  satisfactorily
than   those  in  the  bottles  without  the  deposit.     The  deposits
which  are  insoluble  in  the  copper  have,  therefore,  an  influence
on  the  clarification.     We  must  add,  however,  that  this  influence
cannot  be  compared  with  that  of  direct  oxidation.

The  "  turning  out "  of  the  wort  and  its  stay  upon  the  coolers
to  a  certain  extent  exhibit  the  difierent  conditions  which  take
part  in  its  clarification,  inasmuch  as  the  wort  charged  with  its
insoluble  matters  is  run  off*  very  hot,  and  with  more  or  less
violence  against  the  external  air.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  387


§  YI. — Application  of  the  Principles  of  the  New  Process
OF  Brewing  with  the  Use  of  Limited  Quantities  of
Air.

We  have  now  an  idea  of  the  quantities  of  ox5'gen  which
occur,  free  or  combined,  in  the  actual  processes  of  manufacture.
We  know,  moreover,  that  an  excess  of  air  may  be  injurious,
especially  to  the  aroma  of  the  beer,  and  to  that  quality  which
consumers  prize  so  highh^  which  goes  by  the  name  of  bouche.
It  must,  therefore,  be  important  to  ascertain  whether  in  existing
processes  the  proportion  of  active  oxygen  may  not  be  excessive.

The  best  practical  means  of  determining  this  would  consist
in  comparing  the  products  of  different  processes  with  progres-
sively increasing  access  of  air,  starting  from  none  at  all,  as  in
the  ease  of  cooling  in  the  presence  of  an  atmosphere  of  carbonic
acid  gas.  The  following  arrangement  (Fig.  85)  permits  us  to
realize  these  conditions  : —

The  wort  brought  to  a  temperature  between  75°  and  80°  C.
(167°  and  176°  F.)  in  the  double-bottomed  vessel  C,  passes  by
the  tube  a  h  into  a  refrigerator,  such  as  Bandelet's,  for  example,
but  acting  in  an  inverse  manner  to  the  ordinary  mode  of  using
Baudelot's  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  wort  is  made  to  circulate  inside
the   tubes,  whilst  the  cold  water  plays  on  the  outside.*     The

*  It  is  evident  that  this  arrangement  may  be  modified  in  many
ways.  Any  of  the  ordinary  worms,  or,  generally  speaking,  any  of  the
more  modern  refrigerators  invented  during  the  last  few  years,  may  be
adopted.  The  only  point  that  is  of  importance  is  the  preservation  of  the
purity  of  the  wort  during  cooling.

The  Baudelot  refrigerator  is  extensively  adopted  in  France ;  for  this
reason  we  used  it  in  our  experiments  at  Tantonville.  We  might  equally
well,  by  enclosing  the  worm  in  a  casing  of  sheet  iron  or  tinned  copper,
pass  our  wort  over  the  exterior  of  the  tubes,  the  cold  water  passing
through  them.  The  wort  would  cool  quicker  in  this  way  than  with  the
arrangement  described  in  the  text,  and  if  we  arrange  to  admit  only  pure
air  into  the  case,  always  under  conditions  of  purity.  The  aeration,
moreover,  could  be  made  as  much  as  we  wished.

cc2


388  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

wort  when  cooled,  its  temperature  being  indicated  by  a  ther-


Jb'u..  tJ.
mometer  c,  passes  down  by  the  tube  cDD  to  fill  the  fermenting


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  389

vessel  A.  This  vessel  is  made  of  tinned  iron,  or,  better  still,
tinned  copper,  and  has  a  cover  provided  with  a  man-hole  and
eye-hole  ;  m  n  is  one  of  the  tubes  for  the  circulation  of  air
during  fermentation  ;  its  connecting-tube  is  not  represented,  it
would  be  behind  the  vessel.

At  the  point  d  there  is  a  pipe  for  admission  of  pure  air  ;
this  is  represented  on  a  larger  scale  at  T.  The  wort,  as  it  runs
through  the  large  tube,  carries  with  it  air  from  outside,  and
this  air  is  calcined  on  its  way  in  by  means  of  a  flame  which
plays  on  the  copper  tube  through  which  it  passes.  This  arrange-
ment supplies  a  third  or  more  of  the  total  quantity  of  oxygen
that  the  wort  is  capable  of  acquiring  by  solution  at  the  tempe-
rature at  which  we  work.

r  represents  the  arrangement  of  the  reversed  funnel  in  which
the  tube  m  n  terminates.  Its  mouth  is  closed  with  cotton- wool
held  in  place  between  two  pieces  of  wire  gauze,  for  the  pur-
pose of  purifying  the  air  that  enters  by  it  into  the  fermenting
vessel  during  fermentation.

V  is  an  entrance  tap  for  steam,  by  means  of  which  the  vessel  and
refrigerator  are  cleansed  from  all  extraneous  germs  before  each
fermentation,  and  before  the  wort  passes  into  the  refrigerator.

"When  the  fermenting  vessel  A  is  at  work,  we  may  start  a
fermentation  in  a  second  vessel  in  the  following  manner  :  open-
ing a  small  tap  situated  at  about  a  third  of  the  height  of  the
vessel,  we  pass  a  few  litres  of  the  fermenting  beer  into  a  can  of
tinned  copper,  previously  purified  b}^  a  current  of  steam,  and
filled  with  pure  air.  This  can  is  then  emptied  into  the  fresh
vessel,  an  operation  of  no  difiiculty,  since  we  have  merely  to
connect  the  tap  of  the  can  with  the  small  tap  of  the  vessel,
and  lastly,  the  vessel  is  filled  with  wort,  which  then  mixes
with  the  fermenting  liquid.  These  various  manipulations,  it
is  evident,  are  performed  under  conditions  of  complete  purity,
without  the  slightest  contact  of  the  liquids  either  with  the  ex-
terior air  or  with  utensils  contaminated  by  disturbing  germs.*

*  This  arrangement  limits  the  proportion  of  oxygen  that  may  be  intro-
duced into  the  wort  by   direct   oxidation.      But  it  would  be  easy  to


390  STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.

It  is  seldom  that  an  industry  adopts  at  once  in  their  entirety
new  practices  which  would  necessitate  a  re-arrangement  of
plant,  and  the  process  of  which  we  are  speaking  would  require
such  re-arrangement,  as  far  as  the  fermenting  vessels  and  the
method  of  cooling  the  wort  are  concerned.  The  new  process
would,  however,  be  of  great  value  if  once  introduced,  simply
for  the  manufacture  of  pure  ferment  and  pure  wort,  or  even  for
that  of  pure  ferment  alone.  In  other  words,  we  might  retain
the  ordinary  methods  employed  in  low  fermentation,  use  the
same  method  of  cooling  or  the  new  one,  the  same  fermenting
vessels,  and  the  process  of  fermentation  at  low  temperatures  ;
the  yeast,  however,  would  be  prepared  in  a  state  of  purity  in
the  closed  vessel  which  we  have  described,  collected  in  those
vessels,  aerated,  and  then  employed  after  the  old-established
custom  ;  better  still,  the  pitching  might  be  performed  with  beer
in  the  act  of  undergoing  pure  fermentation.

Above  the  fermenting-stage  there  might  be  arranged  a  room
for  the  vessels  used  in  the  new  process,  from  which  the  pure
beer  could  be  run  for  pitching  purposes  into  the  large  tuns  in
the  brewery  below.  It  is  true  that  beer  prepared  in  this  manner
would  not  be  perfectly  pure,  but  from   the  results  which  have

increase  this  at  will,  by  causing  the  wort  as  it  comes  from  the  copper  and
the  hop-back  to  pass  into  a  cylinder  turning  horizontally  on  its  axis  and
furnished  with  blades  fixed  inside,  so  as  to  divide  the  wort  and  bring  it
better  into  contact  with  the  air  in  the  cylinder.  Instead  of  a  revolving
cylinder  we  might  use  a  fixed  vessel,  in  which  the  wort  could  be  stirred
up  by  some  arrangement  outside.  In  either  case  we  should  have  to
take  care  that  the  air  was  pure  when  it  came  into  contact  with  the  wort,
but  this  would  be  a  matter  of  no  difficulty ;  we  would  simply  have  to
make  communication  with  the  outer  air  by  means  of  a  tube  filled  with
cotton  wool.  Any  air  that  might  bo  in  the  vessel  at  the  moment  when
the  wort  was  introduced  would  be  purified  by  the  high  temperature  of
the  wort  coming  from  the  copper.  We  should,  moreover,  gain  the  great
advantage  of  being  able  to  bring  oxygen  to  bear  on  our  wort  in  deter-
minate amounts.  From  this  vessel  it  would  pass  on  to  the  refrigerator.
We  might  again  raise  the  wort  oxidized  on  the  coolers  to  a  temperature
of  75"  C.  (107^  F.),  to  recool  it  in  this  manner  and  aerate  it  by  means  of
the  pure- air  pipe.


STUDIES    ON    FERMENTATION.  391

been  obtained  by  working  on  this  system,  there  is  no  doubt  that
it  would  possess  keeping  qualities  far  superior  to  those  of  beer
made  with  ordinary  yeast,  even  supposing  that  beer  to  have
been  treated  with  every  possible  precaution,  and  to  be  as  pure
as  any  produced  in  the  best  regulated  breweries.

In  the  month  of  September,  1874,  we  conducted  an  experi-
ment at  Tantonville,  in  a  closed  vessel  capable  of  holding  6
hectolitres  (132  gallons).  The  deposit  of  yeast  served  to  pitch
an  open  vessel,  the  wort  of  which  had,  moreover,  been  cooled
under  conditions  of  purity.  The  cooling  bad  been  effected  by
means  of  the  Baudelot  refrigerator,  represented  in  Fig.  85,  the
wort  in  the  closed  vessel  having  been  similarly''  treated.  For
shortness  sake,  we  may  designate  the  closed  vessel  and  its  beer
by  the  letter  K,  and  use  the  letter  M  for  the  open  vessel  and  its
beer,  and  T  for  the  corresponding  beer  of  the  brewery.  The
vessel  K  was  pitched  on  September  4th,  and  racked  on  Sep-
tember 17th,  the  beer  then  showing  a  density  of  S'S""  Balling.

The  beers  K  and  M  were  sent  to  Paris  at  the  same  time  as
some  barrels  of  the  beer  T,  brewed  by  the  ordinary  process  ;
and  samples  of  these  different  beers,  which  arrived  on  October
22nd,  were  procured  from  five  different  cafes  for  purposes  of
examination.

The  beer  M  did  not  suffer  by  comparison  with  the  beer  T.
The  similarity  between  the  flavours  of  these  two  was  so  close  as
to  puzzle  even  experienced  judges.  In  both  cases  the  beer  was
brilliantly  clear.  In  two  cafes  the  beer  M  was  even  preferred
to  T,  being  considered  softer  on  the  palate  {moellense)  and  of
more  decided  character  [corsee)  than  T,  a  circumstance  which
may  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  its  wort  had  been  less
aerated.

The  beer  K,  although  very  clear  and  bright,  was  considered
inferior  to  M,  but  the  sole  reason  of  this  was  that  at  the  date
when  it  was  tasted — November  3rd — it  did  not  froth.  As  we
have  already  remarked,  a  peculiarity  of  the  beers  made  in  closed
vessels  is  that  their  secondary  fermentation  takes  a  longer  time
to  develop.     The  yeast  held  in  suspension  in  the  beer,  at  the


392  STUDIES   ON    FKRMENTATION.

moment  when  it  is  drawn  off,  is,  in  the  case  of  all  beers,  the
yeast  of  a  supplementary  fermentation,  if  we  may  use  that
expression.  In  the  ordinary  process  of  brewing,  this  yeast,  in
consequence  of  the  greater  aeration  of  the  wort  at  the  com-
mencement of  fermentation,  is  more  active,  or,  rather,  more
ready  to  revive  and  multiply  than  is  that  which  develops  in
closed  vessels.  If  the  barrels  of  the  K  beer  had  been  tapped
on  the  12th  or  15th  of  November,  instead  of  on  the  3rd,  it  is
probable  that  they  would  have  contained  as  much  carbonic  acid
gas  as  the  beer  M  contained  at  the  earlier  date.  This  delay  in
the  resumption  of  fermentation,  which  characterizes  beer  made
in  closed  vessels,  is  an  advantage,  inasmuch  as  it  facilitates  the
transmission  of  the  beer  to  long  distances,  besides  giving  us  the
smallest  deposits  of  yeast  in  cask  or  bottle,  as  we  have  already
pointed  out.

In  comparing  the  keeping  qualities  of  the  beer  M  and  the
beer  T  (the  latter  being  the  brewery  beer),  we  made  the  follow-
ing observations : — *

On  November  25th  we  began  to  detect  in  the  brewery  beer
an  unsound  flavour ;  a  large  deposit,  too,  had  formed ;  the  beer
had  lost  its  brilliancy,  and  frothed  enormously.  The  deposit
swarmed  with  diseased  ferments,  especially  those  represented  in
Nos.  1  and  7  of  Plate  I.  The  beer  M,  on  the  contrary,  was  in
brilliant  condition,  with  an  insignificant  deposit,  and  an  ordi-
nary froth,  if  anything,  rather  small,  and  beautifully  bright.

On  December  3rd  the  beer  M  was  still  good,  very  clear,  and
in  excellent  preservation  ;  it  was  considered  by  professional
brewers  as  remarkably  sound.

December  22nd,  the  same  beer  M  was  still  very  bright  and
good.

January  20th,  the  beer  was  still  bright ;  for  the  first  time,
however,  we  detected  in  the  deposit  in  the  bottles,  which  was
otill  small,  the  filaments  of  turned  beer.     This  unsoundness  was


*  One  of  the  barrels  of  the  brewery  beer  was  bottled  about  the  end  of
October,  at  the  same  time  that  a  barrel  of  M  was.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  393

in  its  earliest  stage.  Now,  comparing  the  relative  unsoundness
of  the  two  beers,  we  see  that  M  kept  at  least  two  months
longer  than  the  corresponding  brewery  beer.  This  example
shows  us  that  as  far  as  the  keeping  powers  and  the  quality  of
beer  are  concerned,  the  existing  process  would  gain  consi-
derably by  the  employment  of  pure  wort  and  pure  ferment ;
and,  indeed,  it  seems  likely  that  the  new  process  may  be  intro-
duced into  breweries  with  this  object  in  view.

In  the  course  of  the  summer  of  1875  we  made  the  following
observations  on  the  keeping  qualities  of  a  beer  brewed  on  the
new  system,  all  the  details  of  which  had  been  rigorously  carried
out.  The  beer  brewed  at  Tantonville  during  the  months  of
June  and  July,  at  a  temperature  of  13°  C.  (5 5 "4°  F.),  in
50-litre  and  80-litre  casks  (11  and  18-gallon),  had  been  sent  by
slow  trains  to  Arbois  (Jura),  where  we  were  staying  for  a  time.
The  temperature  of  the  wine  cellars  in  which  these  barrels  were
stored  was,  on  June  1st,  125°  C.  (54*5°  F.) ;  this  rose  gradually
until  September  1st,  when  it  attained  18°  C.  (64-4°  F.).  la
this  cellar  the  brewery  beer,  brewed  in  the  ordinary  way,
underwent  change  in  the  course  of  fifteen  daj's  or  three  weeks,
whilst  the  beer  brewed  on  the  new  system  remained  sound  for
several  months.  It  is  true  that  some  of  the  barrels  lost  their
frothiness,  and  that  the  beer  in  them  underwent  a  peculiar
vinous  change,  but  these  efiects  in  no  way  depend  on  the
conditions  peculiar  to  the  new  process.

Comparing  the  beers  K,  M,  T,  of  which  we  have  been
speaking,  we  see  that,  however  useful  the  aeration  and  oxida-
tion of  the  wort  may  be  in  quickening  fermentation  and  facili-
tating clarification,  yet  it  is  by  no  means  indispensable  to  the
success  of  our  operations  that  we  should  introduce  into  our
worts  large  quantities  of  oxygen,  whether  by  solution  or  com-
bination. Beyond  a  certain  limit — a  limit  which  is  undoubtedly
overstepped  in  the  existing  process — oxygen  is  injurious  to  the
palate  characteristics  and  aroma  of  beer.

These  comparisons  have  proved  to  us  that  the  new  process
can  be  applied  to  wort  aerated  to   the  third  of  its  saturate-


394  STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.

capacity  for  oxygen,  and  pitched  with  a  good  "  low  "  yeast,  taken
from  the  fermentation  of  a  wort  aerated  in  the  same  way,  and
that  the  beers  thus  obtained  not  only  possess  vastly  superior
keeping  properties,  but  are  equal  in  quality  and  superior  in
palate- fulness  to  beers  brewed  with  the  same  wort  on  the  existing
system.  We  should  be  perfectly  justified  in  forming  this  con-
clusion as  to  the  strength  *  of  the  beer  furnished  by  the  new
process,  even  if  on  tasting  it  we  found  that  the  new  beer  M  was
merely  equal  in  strength  to  Tourtel's  beer  brewed  in  the  or-
dinary manner,  since  the  wort  in  the  new  process,  other  con-
ditions being  the  same,  is  weaker  than  the  same  wort  treated
in  the  usual  way,  from  not  having  undergone  that  evaporation
on  the  coolers  which  concentrates  it.  If  we  were  to  restore  to
the  concentrated  wort  of  ordinary  brewing  all  the  water  lost  by
it  through  evaporation,  the  beer  that  we  should  obtain  would
be  sensibly  weakened. f

One  thing,  however,  is  that  we  must  employ  good  varieties  of
"  low  "  yeast.  We  have  seen  how  the  employment  of  certain
forms  of  yeast  renders  the  clarification  of  beers  difficult,  as  well
as  extremely  slow,  and  almost  prevents  their  falling  bright  at
the  end  of  fermentation.  These  yeasts,  moreover,  frequently
impart  to  beer  a  peculiar  yeast-bitten  flavour,  which  does  not
disappear  even  after  a  prolonged  stay  in  cask.  Even  repeated
growth  of  these  yeasts,  whether  in  closed  or  in  open  vessels,
and  no  matter  what  quantity  of  air  we  may  supply  them  with

*  Eefer  foot-note,  page  354.

t  The  evaporation  on  the  coolers  varies  according  to  the  arrangements
in  different  breweries  ;  but  in  no  case  is  it  less  than  several  hundredths
of  the  total  volume.  One  special  advantage  of  the  new  process  is  that  it
gives  us,  ceteris  paribus,  a  volume  of  beer  that  is  5,  6,  or  7  per  cent,
greater  than  that  which  we  should  obtain  by  the  old  process,  without  in
any  way  affecting  the  strength  of  the  beer.  It  is  easy  to  ascertain  the
quantity  that  evaporates  on  the  coolers,  by  determining  the  quantity  of
water  that  must  be  added  to  a  known  volume  of  wort  coming  from  the
coolers  to  bring  its  density  back  exactly  to  that  of  the  original  wort,  both
being  calculated  to  the  same  temperature.  Bate's  English  saccharometer,
which  shows  differences  of  nearly  yo\3oth  in  density,  may  be  employed
with  advantage  in  this  determination.


STUDIES   ON    FERMENTATION.  395

before  fermentation,  seems  to  tiave  no  effect  in  changing  their
character.  The  only  thing  we  can  do  with  these  varieties  of
yeast  is  to  get  rid  of  them  with  all  speed,  and  to  replace  them
with  others.

Notwithstanding  the  comparative  success  that  has  attended
various  trials  of  the  new  process  on  the  commercial  scale,
that  process  has  not  yet  been  practically  adopted  :  and  here  we
must  bear  in  mind  that  we  have  not  to  deal  with  any  casual
invention  or  mechanical  improvement  that  could  be  introduced
all  at  once  into  the  working  of  a  brewery  ;  we  are  dealing  with
operations  of  considerable  delicacy,  which  necessitate  the  adop-
tion of  a  special  plant  to  carry  them  out.  Under  such  con-
ditions time  and  labour  are  required  to  effect  a  change  in  the
established  processes  of  a  great  industry.  This,  however,  can-
not diminish  the  confidence  that  we  have  in  the  future  of  our
process,  and  it  is  our  hope  that  the  same  confidence  will  be
shared  in  by  all  those  who  may  give  this  work  an  attentive
perusal.


396


APPENDIX.


"Whilst  this  work  was  passing  through  the  press  there  ap-
peared two  small  works  on  the  subject  of  the  generation  of
inferior  organisms.

One  of  them  was  by  M,  Fremy.  The  author's  object  seems
to  have  been  merely  to  give  an  account,  under  a  new  form,  of
the  part  which  he  took  in  the  discussion  on  the  origin  of  fer-
ments that  was  carried  on  before  the 'Academy  of  Sciences  in
1871-1872.  In  the  course  of  that  discussion  M.  Fremy  had
announced  his  intention  of  publishing  an  extensive  Memoir,  full
of  facts,  bearing  on  the  subject.  The  perusal  of  the  promised
work  gave  us  much  disappointment.  Not  only  were  our  experi-
ments, and  the  conclusions  which  we  drew  from  them,  given
there,  for  the  most  part  in  a  manner  which  we  could  not  possibly
accept,  but,  moreover,  M.  Fremy  had  confined  himself  to
deducing,  by  the  help  of  his  favourite  hj'pothesis,  a  series  of  d
priori  opinions  based  on  half-finished  experiments,  not  one  of
which,  in  our  opinion,  had  been  brought  to  the  state  of  demon-
stration. To  tell  the  truth,  his  work  was  the  romance  of
hemi-organism,  just  as  M.  Pouchet's  work  of  an  earlier  date  was
the  romance  of  heterogenesis.  And  yet,  what  could  be  clearer
than  the  subject  under  discussion?  We  maintain,  adducing  in-
contestable experimental  evidence  in  support  of  our  theory,  that


APPENDIX.  397

living,  organized  ferments  spring  only  from  similar  organisms
likewise  endowed  with  life ;  and  that  the  germs  of  these
ferments  exist  in  a  state  of  suspension  in  the  air,  or  on  the
exterior  surface  of  objects.  M.  Fremy  asserts  that  these
ferments  are  formed  by  the  force  of  hemi-organism  acting  on
albuminous  substances,  in  contact  with  air.  We  may  put  the
matter  more  precisely  by  two  examples  : —

Wine  is  produced  by  a  ferment,  that  is  to  say,  by  minute,
vegetative  cells  which  multiply  by  budding.  According  to  us,
the  germs  of  these  cells  abound  in  autumn  on  the  surface  of
grapes  and  the  woody  parts  of  their  bunches  ;  and  the  proofs
which  we  have  given  of  this  fact  are  as  clear  as  any  evidence
can  be.  According  to  M.  Fremy,  the  cells  of  ferment  are  pro-
duced by  spontaneous  generation,  that  is  to  say,  by  the  trans-
formation of  nitrogenous  substances  contained  in  the  juice  of
the  grape,  as  soon  as  that  juice  is  brought  into  contact  with
air.

Again,  blood  flows  from  a  vein  ;  it  putrefies,  and  in  a  very
short  time  swarms  with  bacteria  or  vibrios.  According  to  us
the  germs  of  these  bacteria  and  vibrios  have  been  introduced  by
particles  of  dust  floating  in  the  air  or  derived  from  the  surface
of  objects,  possibly  the  body  of  the  wounded  animal,  or  the
vessels  employed,  or  a  variety  of  other  objects.  M.  Fremy,  on
the  other  hand,  asserts  that  these  bacteria  or  vibrios  are  pro-
duced spontaneously,  because  the  albumen,  and  the  fibrin  of
the  blood  themselves  possess  a  semi-organization,  which  causes
them,  when  in  contact  with  air,  to  change  spontaneously  into
these  marvellously  active  minute  beings.

Has  M.  Fi-emy  given  any  proof  of  the  truth  of  his  theory  '^
By  no  manner  of  means ;  he  confines  himself  to  asserting  that
things  are  as  he  says  they  are.  He  is  constantly  speaking  of
hemi-organism  and  its  efiects,  but  we  do  not  find  his  affirmations
supported  by  a  single  experimental  proof.  There  is,  neverthe-
less, a  very  simple  means  of  testing  the  truth  of  the  theory  of
hemi-organism ;  and  on  this  point  M.  Fremy  and  ourselves  are
quite  at  one.    This  means  consists  in  taking  a  quantity  of  grape


398  APPENDIX.

juice,  blood,  wine,  &c.,  from  tlie  very  interior  of  the  organs
which  contain  those  liquids,  with  the  necessary  precautious  to
avoid  contact  with  the  particles  of  dust  in  suspension  in  the  air
or  spread  over  objects.  According  to  the  hypothesis  of  M.
Fremy,  these  liquids  must  of  necessity  ferment  in  the  presence
of  pure  air.  According  to  us,  the  very  opposite  of  this  must
be  the  case.  Here,  then,  is  a  crucial  experiment  of  the  most
decisive  kind  for  determining  the  merits  of  the  rival  theories,
a  criterion,  moreover,  which  M.  Fremy  perfectly  admits.  In
1863,  and  again  in  1872,  we  published  the  earliest  experiments
that  were  made  in  accordance  with  this  decisive  method.  The
result  was  as  follows  : — The  grape  juice  did  not  ferment  in
vessels  full  of  air,  air  deprived  of  its  particles  of  dust — that  is
to  say,  it  did  not  produce  any  of  the  ferments  of  wine ;  the
blood  did  not  putrefy — that  is  to  say,  it  yielded  neither  bacteria
nor  vibrios  ;  urine  did  not  become  ammoniacal — that  is  to  say,
it  did  not  give  rise  to  any  organism ;  in  a  word  the  origin  of
life  manifested  itself  in  no  single  instance.

In  the  presence  of  arguments  so  irresistible  as  these,  M.  Fremy,
throughout  the  250  pages  of  his  work,  continues  to  repeat  that
these  results,  which,  he  admits,  seem  subversive  of  his  theory,
are,  nevertheless,  explicable  by  the  circumstance  that  the  air  in
our  vessels,  although  pure  at  first,  underwent  a  sudden  chemical
change  when  it  came  in  contact  with  the  blood,  or  urine,  or
grape  juice ;  that  the  oxygen  became  converted  into  carbonic
acid  gas,  and  that,  in  consequence,  hemi-organism  could  no
longer  exercise  its  force.  We  are  astonished  at  this  assertion,
for  M.  Fremy  must  be  aware  that,  since  J  863,  we  have  given
analyses  of  the  air  in  our  vessels  after  they  had  remained  sterile
for  several  days — for  ten,  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty  days — at  the
highest  atmospheric  temperatures,  and  that  oxygen  was  still
present,  often  even  in  proportions  almost  identical  with  those
to  be  found  in  atmospheric  air.*  Why  has  M.  Fremy  made  no
allusion  to  these  analyses  ?     This  was  the  chief,  the  essential

*  See  Covtptes  rendus,  vol.  Ixi.,  p.  734,  1863.


APPENDIX,  399

point  in  question.  Besides,  if  M.  Fremy  had  wished  to  test  the
truth  of  his  explanation,  there  was  a  very  simple  means  of
restoring  the  purity  of  the  air  in  contact  with  the  liquids  open
to  him  ;  he  might  have  passed  through  his  vessels  a  slow  and
continuous  current  of  pure  air,  day  and  night.  We  have  done
this  a  hundred  times,  and  we  have  always  found  that  the
sterility  of  the  putrescible  or  fermentable  liquids  remained
unaffected.

The  hemi-organism  hypothesis  is,  therefore,  absolutely  un-
tenable, and  we  have  no  doubt  that  our  learned  friend  will
eventually  declare  as  much  before  the  Academy,  since  he  has
more  than  once  publicly  expressed  his  readiness  to  do  so  as
soon  as  our  demonstrations  appear  convincing  to  him.  How
can  he  resist  the  evidence  of  such  facts  and  proofs  ?  Persistence
in  such  a  course  can  benefit  nobody,  but  it  may  depreciate  the
dignity  of  science  in  general  esteem.  It  would  gratify  us
extremely  to  find  the  rigorous  exactness  of  our  studies  on  this
subject  acknowledged  by  M.  Fremy,  and  regarded  by  that
gentleman  with  the  same  favour  bestowed  upon  it  everywhere
abroad.  It  may  be  doubted  if  there  exists  at  the  present  day  a
single  person  beyond  the  Rhine  who  believes  in  the  correctness
of  Liebig's  theory,  of  which  M.  Fremy's  hemi-organism  is
merely  a  variation.  If  M.  Fremy  still  hesitates  to  accept  our
demonstrations,  the  observations  of  Mr.  Tyndall  may  effect  his
conversion.

The  other  publication  to  which  we  alluded  was  the  work  of
the  celebrated  English  physicist,  John  Tyndall.  It  was  read
before  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  at  a  meeting  held  on
January  13,  1876.

The  following  letter  explains  how  the  illustrious  successor  of
Faraday  at  the  Royal  Institution  came  to  undertake  these
researches : —

''  London,  February  16,  1876.

"  Dear  Mr.  Pasteur, —

"  In  the  course  of  the  last  few  years  a  number  of  works


400  APPENDIX.

bearing  such  titles  as  "The  Beginnings  of  Life";  ''Evolution  and
the  Origin  of  Life/'  &c.,  have  been  published  in  England  by  a
young  physician,  Dr.  Bastian.  The  same  author  has  also  pub-
lished a  considerable  number  of  articles  iu  different  reviews  and
journals.  The  very  circumstantial  manner  in  which  he  describes
his  experiments,  and  the  tone  of  assurance  with  which  he  ad-
vances his  conclusions,  have  produced  an  immense  impression  on
the  English  as  well  as  the  American  public.  But  what  is  more
serious  still,  from  a  practical  point  of  view,  is  the  influence  that
these  writings  have  exercised  on  the  medical  world.  He  has
attacked  your  works  with  great  vigour,  and,  although  he  has
made  but  slight  impression  on  those  who  know  them  thoroughly,
yet  he  has  succeeded  in  producing  a  very  great  and,  I  may  add,
a  very  pernicious  one  on  others.

"  The  state  of  confusion  and  uncertainty  had  come  to  be  so
great  that,  about  six  months  ago,  I  thought  that  I  should  be
rendering  a  service  to  science,  and  at  the  same  time  performing
an  act  of  justice  to  yourself,  in  submitting  the  question  to  a
fresh  investigation.  Putting  into  execution  an  idea  which  I
had  entertained  for  some  six  years,  the  details  of  which  were
set  forth  in  an  article  in  the  British  Medical  Jourmd,  which  I
had  the  pleasure  of  sending  you,  I  have  gone  over  a  great  deal
of  the  ground  on  which  Dr.  Bastian  had  taken  his  stand,  and,  I
believe,  refuted  many  of  the  errors  by  which  the  public  had
been  misled.

"  The  change  which  has  taken  place  since  then  in  the  tone  of
the  English  medical  journals  is  quite  remarkable,  and  I  am
inclined  to  think  that  the  general  confidence  of  the  public  in
the  exactness  of  Dr.  Bastian^s  experiments  has  been  considerably
shaken.

"  In  taking  up  these  researches  again,  I  have  had  occasion  to
refresh  my  memory  by  another  perusal  of  your  works  ;  they
have  revived  in  me  all  the  admiration  which  I  experienced
when  I  first  read  them.  It  is  my  intention  now  to  pursue
these  researches  until  I  have  dissipated  any  doubts  that  may  be


APPENDIX.  401

entertained  in  respect  to  the  unassailable  exactness  of  your
conclusions.

"  For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  science,  we  are  justified
in  cherishing  confidently  the  hope  that,  as  far  as  epidemic
diseases  are  concerned,  medicine  will  soon  be  delivered  from
empiricism,  and  placed  on  a  real  scientific  basis ;  when  that
great  day  shall  come,  humanity  will,  in  my  opinion,  recognise
the  fact  that  the  greatest  part  of  its  gratitude  will  be  due  to
you.

"  Believe  me,  ever  very  faithfully  yours,

"JOHN   TYNDALL."

"We  need  scarcely  say  that  we  read  this  letter  with  the
liveliest  gratification,  and  were  delighted  to  learn  that  our
studies  had  received  the  support  of  one  renowned  in  the  scientific
world  alike  for  the  rigorous  accuracy  of  his  experiments  as  for
the  lucid  and  picturesque  clearness  of  all  his  writings.  The
reward  as  well  as  the  ambition  of  the  man  of  science  consists  in
earning  the  approbation  of  his  fellow-workers,  or  that  of  those
whom  he  esteems  as  masters.

Mr.  Tyndall  has  observed  this  remarkable  fact,  that  in  a  box,
the  sides  of  which  are  coated  with  glycerine,  and  the  dimensions
of  which  may  be  variable  and  of  considerable  size,  all  the
particles  of  dust  floating  in  the  air  inside  fall  and  adhere  to  the
glycerine  in  the  course  of  a  few  days.  The  air  in  the  case  is
then  as  pure  as  that  in  our  double-necked  flasks.  Moreover,  a
transmitted  ray  of  light  will  tell  us  the  moment  when  this
purity  is  obtained.  Mr.  Tyndall  has  proved,  in  fact,  that  to
an  eye  rendered  sensitive  by  remaining  in  darkness  for  a  little,
the  course  of  the  ray  is  visible  as  long  as  there  are  any  floating
particles  of  dust  capable  of  reflecting  or  difl'using  light,  and
that,  on  the  other  hand,  it  becomes  quite  obscure  and  invisible
to  the  same  e3'"e  as  soon  as  the  air  has  deposited  all  its  solid
particles.    When  it  has  done  this,  which  it  will  do  very  quickly

D    D


402  APPENDIX.

— in  two  or  three  days,  if  we  employ  one  of  the  boxes  used  by
Mr.  Tyndall — it  has  been  proved  that  any  organic  infusions
whatever  may  be  preserved  in  the  case  without  undergoing  the
least  putrefactive  change,  and  without  producing  bacteria.

On  the  other  hand,  bacteria  will  swarm  in  similar  infusions,
after  an  interval  of  from  two  to  four  days,  if  the  vessels  which
contain  them  are  exposed  to  the  air  by  which  the  cases  are
surrounded.  Mr.  Tyndall  can  drop  into  his  boxes,  at  any  time
he  wishes,  some  blood  from  a  vein  or  an  artery  of  an  animal,
and  show  conclusively  that  such  blood  will  not,  under  these
circumstances,  undergo  any  putrefactive  change,

Mr.  Tyndall  concludes  his  work  with  a  consideration  of  the
probable  application  of  the  results  given  in  his  paper  to  the
etiology  of  contagious  diseases.  We  share  his  views  on  this
subject  entirely,  and  w^e  are  obliged  to  him  for  having  recalled
to  mind  the  following  statement  from  our  Studies  on  the  Silkicorm
Disease  : — "  Man  has  it  in  his  power  to  cause  parasitic  diseases
to  disappear  off  the  surface  of  the  globe,  if,  as  we  firmly  believe,
the  doctrine  of  spontaneous  generation  is  a  chimera."


THE    END.


1  N  D  E  X.


Absorption  of  gases  by  air-free  liqiiids,
292
oxygen  by  blood,  50 ;    by  urine,
50
from  sohitions  by  bacteria,  295
Acidity,  natural,  of  ■wine  a  preserva-
tive, 2,  and  footnote
of  beer  heated,  20
action  on  ferments,  35
Acetate  of  lime  from  fermentation  of

tartrate,  288
Acid,  sulphuric,  facilitating  fUtration,

250
Acid,  carbonic,  v.  carbonic  acid
Adaptability    of    liquids    to     certain
growths,  36,  73,  85
(supposed)  of  vibrios  to  aerobian
or  anaerobian  conditions,  309,
310
Aeration,  reviving  influence  of,  138
adoption  by  brewers  of,  253
tardy,  of  wort  in  deep  vessels,  348
on    "  coolers,"     its    importance,
348,  349
Aeration-conditions  in  ordinary  brew-
ing process,  350,351,  364,  365
Aeration  of  wort,  apparatus  for  regu-
lating, 352


Aeration,  influence  on  clarification  of
worts,  381
experiments   on   its  influence  on
growth,  107,  130
Aerobian,  definition,  116

ferment,  growth  of,  208,  209
ferments,  general  characteristics,
210;    origin    of,    210    (foot-
note) ;    cultivation    of,    2l1  ;
aspects  of,  212 — 217  ;  distin-
guishing features  of,  218
life  in  ferments  overlooked,  260
"  Age,"  as  applied  to  a  ferment,  169
Age  of  cells,  246
Aged  aspect  of  exhausted  cells,  133,

147
Air,  influence  on  ferment-life,  242
renewal   of,    in    brewers'    yeast,

246,  247
mode  of  expulsion  from  growing-
media,  285
unnecessary  to  life  of  vibrios,  292
injimous  to  life  of  vibrios,  304
Air,  compressed,  and  fennent-life,  324
composition  imaffected  by  contact
with  blood,  &c.,  398
Albumen-transformation  theory  of  fer-
mentation, 273
Albuminous  liquids,  growth  of  yeast
in,  265

D   D


9.


404


INDEX.


Alcohol,  percentage  in  heated  beer,  20

Alcoholic  ferment,  minute  species  of,  71

Alcohol,  detection  in  minute  quantity,

78,  79  (footnote)

produced  by  penicillium,  99,   and

following  pages

by  aspergillus  glaucus,  101,  and

following  pages
by  mycoderma  rini,  111,  113
explanation  of,  114
Alcoholic  fermentation,  general  expla-
nation of,  114,  115
Alcohol,    proportion     of,    to     mucor  .
forming  it,  134,  and  following
pages
Alcohol    produced    by    moulds,    258
(footnote)
production  of,  within  fruits,  267
Alcoholic      fermentation,      restricted
meaning,  275  (footnote)
necessary    relation     with    yeast -
cells,  275
Alternaria  tenuis,  157
Ammonia,  a  test  for  vegetable  organ-
isms (Robin),  312
Ammoniacal  urine,  45,  46
Anaerobian,  definition,  116

growth   of    yeast,    239,   and   fol-
lowing pages
precaiitions  to  be  observed  in,  248
life  of  fruit-cells,  272
growth  of  vibrios,  302
Animal  or  vegetable  nature  of  organ-
isms, 312,  and  following  p;)ges
Auti- ferments,  45

Apparatus  for  sterilizing  liquids,  27
for  producing  pure  beer,  340,  &c.
for  pure  pitching,  344
for  pure  aeration,  352
for   cooling    beer  with   regidated
supply  of  pure  air,  388,  389
Appert's  experiment,  62
Aroma  of  beer  destroyed  by  excess  of

air,  353
lAsbestos,   useful  plug,  27,  and  foot-
note, 30
Ascosporcs  of  yeast,  150  (footnote)
Aspect  of  yeast  variable,  37


AspcrffiUus  gUiucits,  functioning  as  fer-
ment,    101,     and     following
pages
different  aspects  of,  105
Atmospheric  germs,  6,  26,  38

variety  of,  39,  76,  87  (footnote)
Autonomy  of  organisms,  84  (footnote)


B


Bacteria,  35,  30  ;  medium  for  growth
of,    294 ;    absorption   of    air
from  solutions  bj-,  295
Bacteria    and    but}Tic    vibrios,    how
related,  296
influence  of  oxygen  upon,  305
Bail  mentioned,  92,  93,  127
Balling  saccharometer  explained,  363

(footnote)
Barley-wine,  1  (footnote),  230
Barley    decoctions,     experiments     on
development   of  ferments  in,
(Fremy)  273  (footnote)
Bary,  De,  mentioned,  92  ;  on  relations
of  yeast  to  other  organisms,
180, 181
Bastian's  experiments,  403
Baudelot  refrigerator,  387  (footnote)
Bavarian  beer,  10
Bechamp's  microzyma  theory,  121

influence  of  aii-  on  fermentation,

178  (footnote)

Beer,  definition,  1 ;  difference  between

it  and  wine,  1

changeable    natiu'e     of :      effects

upon  brewing  purposes,  2,  3

two    kinds     only,     "high"    and

"low:  "  difference,  7
samples  of  bottled,  examined,  222
general  precautions  for  pui"e  mauu-

factui'e  of,  338
improved     apparatus     for    com-
mercial production,  340,  and
following  pages
Beet    root   preservation    in    pits,  269

(footnote)
Berkeley  mentioned,  92


INDEX.


405


Bellamy's  researches  on  fermentation

in  fiTiits,  270
Berard  on  fenuentation  of  fruits,  270,

271
Berthelot's  mode  of  isolating  inverting

constituent     of     yeast,    322

(footnote)
Bert,  action  of  compressed  air  on  fer-
ments, 324
Bii'ds,    experiment    upon,    described,

309
Bistoxrmage,  43  (footnote)
BisulpMte  of  lime   used  by  bottlers,

15
Blood,  study  of  sterilized,  49,  50
Blood-crystals,  50  (footnote)
Boiling  sterilizes  liquids,  34
Bottling  needle,  372  (footnote)
Bottled  beer,  treatment  of,  16
Bouche     influenced     by   pre.sence     of

oxygen,  387
Boucliardat,  323
Brefeld,  strictures  on  Pasteur's  theory

criticised,  280
convinced  of  truth  of  Pasteur's

theory,  315,  316
Breweries,  statistics  of,  10
Brewing,  change  in  processes  of,  7
practices  largely  empirical,  222
Brewing  processes  under  conditions  of

purity,  390
Budding,  rate  of,  experiment  on,  145

process  of,  146
Buff  on' s  hypothesis  mentioned,  121
Bulbs,   glass,    for  study  of  growth.?,

156  (footnote)
for  vibrios,  298
Bunsen,  tables  of  solubility  of  oxygen

in  water,  360
Butyric  vibrios  in  must,  65  ;  in  wort,

70
Butyric  acid  from  fermentation  of  lac-
tates, 297
not  a  suitable  food  for  vibrios,

why?  301  (footnote)
Butyric  fermentations  yield   variable

products,  308


C


Cagniard  Latour,  on  cause  of  fennen-
tation,  60

Calmettes,  M.,  369,  371 ;  experiments
on  the  curve  of  cooling  of  wort,
377,  378

Carbolic  acid  for  purifying  yeasts,  232

Carbonate  of  Kme  crystals  formed  in
fermentation  of  lactate,  294

Carbonic  acid,  influence  on  preserva-
tion    and     fermentation     of
fruits,  268
evolution    from  fermentation    of
tartrate  of  lime  by  vibi-ios,  287
amount  of  evolution,  288
mode  of  collection  of,  288
influence    on  bacteria,  305  (foot-
note)

Caseous  fei-ment,  occurrence,  200;
aspect,  201 ;  endurance  of
heat,  203  (footnote)  ;  mean-
ing of  title,  202 ;  origin  of  in
brewers'  high  yeast,  203,  204  ;
origin  of  in  English  pale  ale,
204, 224;  aerobian  form  of,  21.)

Cells,  power  of  endurance,  1 34
aspect  of  dead,  139  (footnote)

Cells,  glass,  for  study  of  growths,  155
(footnote)

CeUs,  probable  ftmction  in  elaborating
proteic  matter,  335

Cellulose,  not  soluble  in  ammonia
(Robin),  312

Change  of  yeast,  usual  remedy  for
disease,  22

Chauveau  on  castration,  43

Circumstances  modifying  nature  of
germs  present  in  atmosphei'e,
73,  87  (footnote)

Cladosporium,  55  (footnote)

Clarification  of  liquids  by  fungi,   66
(footnote)
of  wort,  381,  and  following  pages
of  a  wort  and  its  beer  not  always
con-elated,  382,  383

Cohn's  medium  for  growth  of  vibrios,
294  (footnote)


406


INDEX.


Colour  darkened  by  oxidation  in  piire
liquids,  57

Coloration  of  \ibrio-fermented  liquors,
291

Colpoda,  39,  40

Composition  of  medium,  influence  on
life,  296

Conidia,  definition,  137

Conditions  afPecting  the  ferment  cha-
racter of  cells,  266

Consumption  of  beer  in  France,  sta-
tistics, 17  (footnote)

Contagion  and  fenuents,  41,  and
following  pages

Continuity,  non-,  of  germs  in  air,  62

Continuous  vital  activity  of  cells,  278

Contact-action,  theory  of,  326

"Coolers,"  importance  in  aeration  of
■svort,  348,  349
influence  on  worts,  364

Cooling  of  wort  must  be  rapid  in  ordi-
nary brewing,  2
artificial  of  "low"  beers,  12

Cooling  of  wort  in  presence  af  carbonic
acid,  342 ;  difficulties  of  the
process,  346,  and  following
pages

Corpuscles  on  grapes  and  stalks,  54

Corpuscles  refractive  in  bodies  of
vibrios,  300,  i\.  also  cysts

Correlation    of     special     germs    with
special  fruits,  61
of  special  ferment  and  fermenta-
tion product,  277

Cotze  and  Feltz,  43

Crushers  for  the  vintage,  268  (footnote)

(Jream  of  tartar,  v.  tartrate

Cultivation  of  yeast  under  conditions  of
purity,  29—32
of  piire  penicQlium,  mode  of,  88,

and  following  jiagcs
of   aerobian    ferments,   211,    and
following  pages

Cysts  of  vibrios,  306,  307


D


Davainne,  on  splenic  fever,  «S:c.,  42


Daughter-cells,  146
Dead  cells,  aspect  of,  139  (footnote)
Declat's   treatment  of  infectious  dis-
eases, 44
Dematium,  167 ;    resemblance  to  Sac-
eharmnyces   jmstorianus,    179,
180,  181,  214
resemblance  to  "caseous"  yeast,
201
Degrees,  Balling,  v.  Balling
Deposits,  amor^Dhous,  of  wort,  6,  193,

385,  and  footnote
Deterioration  of  beer  coii'elated  with
presence  of  foreign  organisms,
26,  32
DifPerential     %atality,     a    means     of

separating  ferments,  226
Difficulty  of  expei'iments  on  growths,

63,  85
Disease-ferments,  what  they  are,  why
so  called,  4
classification  and  account  of,  5,  6
origin  of,  6

inactive  at  low  temperatures,  14
often  found  only  in  deposits,  24
not  everywhere  in  atmosphere,  3 1
Disease -germs  usually  latent,  220

development  in  bottled  beer,  222

Diseases   of  wort   and  beer,  meaning

of,  19

mode  of  proving  the  cause  of,  19,

20

Diseased  beer  always  result  of  disease

ferments,  26
Distribution  of  gemis  limited,  61
Division,  fissiparous,  of  vibrios,  299
Dried  yeast,  81
Dryness    decreases     sensitiveness    of

moulds  to  heat,  35
Dumas,  distinction  between  organized
and  unorganized  ferments,  323
Dust,   atmospheric,  contains   disease-
germs,  6,  26
on  fruits,  experiments  with,  153,
and  following  pages
when  fertile,  157,  and  following
pages
Dutch  yeast,  200


INDEX.


407


Duval,  Jvdes,  experiments  on  transfor-
mation of  ferments  illusory,
37


E


Efflorescence  of  fermented  liquors,  108,

117
Egg-albumen,  experiments  on,  51
Egypt,  beer  first  brewed  in,  17
Empiricism  in  ordinary  brewing,  222
Energy  stored  by  cells,  133,  134
Endogenous  sporidation  of  yeast,  150

(footnote),  172
English  beers  all  "  high,"  7

temperatui-es  and  yeast  employed,

8  (footnote)
breweries,  usages  of,  8  (footnote),
14
Errors,    causes     of,    v.    experimental

eiTors
Equations  of   fermentations  variable,

276,  277
Examination  of  deposits,  mode  of,  21

(footnote)
Exhaustion, definition  of,  171  (footnote)
Exhausted  vibrios,  290
Experimental  eiTors,  63,  85,  92

avoided  by  use  of  double-necked
flasks,  120
Experiments,  exactness  of  Pasteur's,
95  (footnote)
to    prove      connection     between
quality  of  ferment  and  quality
of    beer,    26,   and    following
pages
on  living  fluids,  47,  and  following

pages
comparative,  on  pure   must    and
must  with  corpuscles   boiled
and  unboiled,  54,  and  follow-
ing pages
by  Gay-Lussac  on  must,  62,  63
by  Pasteur  after  Gay-Lussac,  64
on  distribution   of  ferments,  65,

and  following  pages
on  distribution  of  fungus-spores,


Experiments   in  wide  shallow  dishes,
69,  and  following  pages

comparative  on  germs  in  air,  72,
and  following  pages

with  non-fermentative  species  of
torula,  78

on  spontaneous  impregnations,  65,
66,  69,  73,  79,  87  (footnote)

on  spontaneous  fermentation,  184

on  di'ied  yeast,  81,  and  following
pages

on  influence  of  aeration  on
growths,  107

on  aeration  and  its  absence,  130,
and  following  pages

on  function  of  oxygen  on  ferment -
life,  238,  and  following  pages

on  the  capacity  of  yeast  for
oxygen,  255

on  influence  of  carbonic  acid  on
fruits,  268

on  growth  of  vibrios  apart  from
air,  285

on  fermentation  of  lactate  of  lime
apart  from  aii",  292,  and  fol-
lowing pages

on  influence  of  air  on  vibrio-life,
303,  304

on  influence  of  air  on  bacterium-
life,  305

on  gradual  adaptability  of  organ-
isms to  adverse  life-con-
ditions, 309

on  influence  of  au"  on  f  ennentation,
349

on   solubUity-coefficients  of  wort
for  oxygen,  361 — 3
of    brewers'    worts,    366,    and
following  pages

on  combination  of  oxygen  with
worts,  371,  and  following
pages

on  the  rapidity  of  the  combination,
376

on  amount  of  combination,  379

on  non-transformation  of  mijco-
derma  vini,  110,  and  following
pages,  113  (footnote)


408


INDEX.


Experiments    on    non-transfoi-mation
of  mycoderma  aceii,    124,  and
follo'wdng'  pages
of    mucor    raccmostis,   128,    and
following  pages

on  non-transformation  of  yeast
into  penicilUimi,  333 — 335

on  cultivating  pure  ^;e««Vi7^JK»i,  88,
and  following  pages

on  its  transformation  into  yeast,  91

transfoi-mation,  Trecul's,  details
of,  98

with   submerged  aspergillux,   101,
and  following  pages
penicillium,  99

in  disproof  of  the  hem'i-organlsm
theory,  273  (footnote)

on  gi'owth  of  mixed  moulds,  112

on  pxirification  of  mixed  ferments,
22G,  and  following  pages

on  growth  of  mucor  mueedo,  140,
141

on  proportion  between  weights  of
mucor  and  alcohol  formed,
134,  and  following  pages

on  the  anaerobian  cultivation  of
yeast,  239,  and  following  pages

on  variation  of  proportion  of  sugar
used  to  yeast  formed,  249

on  gro-ni;h  of  yeast  in  sugar  solu-
tions, 318,  and  following
pages,  331—333

on  dust  on  fruits,  153,  and  follow-
ing pages

on  seasonal  influences  on  fertility
of  dust-germs,  157,  and  fol-
lowing pages

on  exhaustion  of  yeast,  169,  and
following  pages
of  "high"  yeast,  189,  190

on  revival  of  yeast,  207,  208

on  cultivation  of  aerobian  ferment,
211,  and  following  pages

on  gradual  senescence  of  yeast,  245

on  production  of  a  pure  beer,  338,
and  following  pages

on  clarification  of  worts  and  beers,
382,  and  following  pages


Experiments,    comparative,     on     the
qualities  of  beers  brewed  by
different  processes,  391
on  rate  of  budding,  145

Exportation  of  "high"  beers  xmsatis-
factory,  16


Ferment,  v.  also  yeast
Ferments  of  disease,  v.  disease-ferments
Ferments,  special,  14,  15
Ferments  and  animal  diseases,  41,  and
following  pages
butyric,  lactic,  alcoholic,  72
moidds  functioning  as,  100,  101,
and  following  pages,  111,  1 1  .J,
129,  133
general  character  of  a,  115
of  grape,  varieties,  origin,  150,  and

following  pages
alcoholic,  summary  of,  196
intermixture  of,  224,  225
mode  of  separation  of  mixed,  226

and  following  pages
succession  of,  in  must,  227
exceptional  vital  processes  of,  230,
237
Ferment  power  in  relation  to  time  dis-
cussed, 252
character,  how  related  to  heat,  270
and  fermentation  correlated,  277
a  chemical  substance  existing  in
cells  (Traube),  283  (footnote)
of  tartrate  of  lime,  290
Ferments,  two  classes,  distinctive  cha-
racteristics, 323
Fez-mentation,  rapid,  inexpedient,  3
spontaneous,  in  case  of  must,  4
"top"  and  "bottom,"  v.  "high"

and  "low  "
masked    by    moulds    in    shallow

vessels,  75  (footnote)
hy  penicillium  (Trecul)  94
hy  mycoderma  rini,  111,  113
by  mucor  racemosus,  129,  139
alcoholic,  general  explanation  of,
114,  115


INDEX.


40'.)


Fennentation,      conditions       of,      in
sweetened  mineral  liquids,  211
without  air,  242
with    and    without    air,    results

compared,  243,  244
a  cell-life  without  air,  259
a  general  phenomenon,  266,  267
of  fruits  not  truly   "alcoholic,"

276
not       definable,      according       to
Brefeld,as  life  without  air,  280
of  lactate  of  lime,  294
Fermentative  energy,  252

character  dependent  on  conditions,
266
Filamentous  tissue  (Turpin),  123
Fitz  on  fermentation,  142
Fissiparous  division  of  vibrios,  299
Flask  sterilizing,  27,  29
Flasks  with  double  necks,  advantage

of,  120
Fluid,  Raulin's,  88  (footnote)
Flavour  dependent  on  ferment  species,

230
Foreign  organisms  correlated  with  un-
sound beer,  26,  32
greatly    promoted    by   adapta-
bility of  liquids,  36
Furmiila   for    solubility- coefficient   of

any  wort  for  oxygen,  364
Fremy's  statement  of  hemi-organism,  52
answer  to  Pasteur's  facts,  58
explanation  of  vintage  fermenta-
tion, 272
"organic  impulse,"  325
latest  assertions,  396 — 399
Fruits,  ferment  organisms  on  surface
of,  153,  and  following  pages
internal  fei-mentation  of,  267,  and

following  pages
yeast  cells  not  present  within,  267

(footnote)
influence  of  carbonic  acid  gas  on

preservation  of,  268
respiratory  processes  of,  according

to  B^rard,  270
fermentation    within,    Lechartier
and  Bellamy,  270


Fruits,  crushed  and  uncrushed,  fermen-
tation of,  274
Fruit-cells,  anaerobian  life  of,  272
Fungi,  wide  distribution  of  spores,  68
absorption  of  oxygen  by,  257
production    of    alcohol     by,    258
(footnote)
Fungoid  manner  of   growth  of  wcll-
aerated  yeast,  251


G


Galland's  claims  of  priority,  338  (foot-
note)
Gay-Lussac's  experiments  on  grape -

juice,  59,  60
Gayon's  experiments  on  egg-albumen,

51
"Gathered,"  367  (footnote)
Generation,  theories  of,  contrasted,  397
Germs  of  femients  in  air,  &c.,  6,  26,
38
brought  by  other  matters,  38
absent  from  finiits,  when  ?  58,  59,

157,  and  following  pages
not  universally  distributed,  61,  63,

181  (footnote)
distribution  experiments,  65,  and
following  pages,  87  (footnote)
and  their  correlated  fruits,  61
of  disease  latent,  220
Germ,  use  of  term  by  Pasteur,  313
Gei-m  theory  of  disease  discussed,  46,

47
Globuline  tissue  (Tm-pin),  123
Globulines,  punctiform,   121,  and  fol-
lowing pages
Globules,  275  (footnote)
Glycerine,  fermentation  of,  by  vibrios,

306,  307
Gosselin,  M.,  report,  44

and  Robin  on  ammoniacal  ■urine,45
Gramme,  value  in  grains,   135  (foot-
note)
Granules  in  wort,  explanation  of,  95
Graham's,  Dr.,  criticisms  of  Pasteur,
13  (footnote),  196  (footnote)
D   D    3


410


INDEX.


Graham,  Dr.,  on  asj^ect  of  bottom
yeast,  194  (footnote)

Grape  juice,  experiments  on,  57,  59

Grape-ferments,  v.  ferments

Grapes,  do  they  contain  cells  of  yeast  P
267

Greasiness  of  mycoderma  vini,  80,  and
footnote


H


Hullicr  mentioned,  92

Hard   water,   influence   on   aspect  of

yeast,  194  (footnote)
Head  of  vibrio,  292

Heating  sufficient  as  pi-eventing  dete-
rioration of  liquids,  20
influence  on  beer,  20
Heat,  production   of,  its   relation   to

ferment-power,  270
Hemi-oi-ganisin,    chimerical,    53,     162,
399,  273  (footnote)
latest  assertions  by  Fremy  on  sub-
ject of,  396—399
theory    of    vintage-fermentation,
272,  273
Heterogenesis,  facts  against,  51
' '  High  ' '   fermentation,  meaning   of,
8,  9
beers,  disadvantages  of,  12,  13
ferment,  aspect  of,  188,  189
characteristics  of,  summary,  191
ferment  (new),  occurrence,  198
aspect    and    characteristics   of,

199
aerobian  form  of,  216
High  yeast,  aerobian  foim,  aspect  of,

214
Hoffmann,  H.,  transformation  of  fer-
ment, 92,  93
Hop-oil  as  a  beer-antiseptic,  16,  and

footnote
Hopping  influence    on    growths    qua

temperatui-e,  96
Hot  countries,  absence  of  breweries  in,

16
Hydrogen  from  vibriouic  life,  300


Hydrogen,     occasional     absence      in

butyric  fermentations,  308
Hydrosulphite   of   soda,   composition,
use     in     determinations     of
oxygen,  355,  and  footnote
preparation  of  saturated  solution,

357  (footnote)
alterability  of  solutions  of,  356
improved  method  of  M.   Raulin,
356,  and  foUo\\ing  pages


Ice,   quantities   consumed   in    ' '  low  ' '

breweries,  11
Illusions   as    to    absence    of    foreign

organisms,  36,  85,  92
Impregnations,  spontaneous,  65,  66,69,

73,  79
Impregnation,    mode    of    {penicillium

(jlaucuni),  86
Impurity  of  ferments,  soui'ce  of  experi-
mental errors,  37
of  yeast  masked  for  a  time,  220
Increase  of  yeast  disproportionate  to

sugar  used,  237
Infusions,  nature  of  organisms  in,  39
Infusoria,  35

Insoluble  substances  in  wort,  386
Inverting  constituent  of  yeast,  321 ,  and

footnote
Isolation  of  ferment,  77


Lactic  ferments,  5,  36

transformation  from  and  into  other
ferments  (Duval),  37
Lactate  of  lime,  fermentation  of,  292
Lechartier  and  Bellamy,  researches  on

fermentation  in  fruits,  270
Leptothrix,  36

Liebig's  views   of  fermentation,   317,
and  following  pages
on  fermentation  of  malate  of  lime,

321
detiuition  of  a  ferment,  324


INDEX.


411


Liebig's  modified  theory,  326  ;  answer
to,  by  Pasteur,  326,  327
neglect  of  microscopical  observa-
tions, 329,  330
Lime,  bisulphite,  use  of,  by  bottlers,
15
carbonate    steiilized,    use    of    in

growths,  126
dextro- tartrate,  284
acetate  and  metacetate,  288
lactate,  fenneutation  of,  292
Lister's,  Prof.,  letter  on  germ- theory,

43
Loudon  breweries,  usages  of,  8  (foot-
note)
Pasteur's  visit  to,  22 — 24
"Low"  fermentation,  meaning  of,  9,
10;  advantages,  12
beer  breweries,  statistics  of,  10
properties  of,  according  to  Dr.
Graham,  13
yeast  and  "high"  yeast  distinct,

192,  193
yeast,    aspect    of,    193;    charac-
teristics, 105
aerobian  fonn  of,  215
Low      temperatures     prejudicial     to
disease-ferments,  14


M


Malignant  pustule,  42

Mashings,  3

Medium,  mineral,  for  growing  lactic

vibrios,  293,  297  (footnote)
Cohn's  formula,  294  (footnote)
for  growth  of  bacteria,  294
Medimn,  composition  of,  influence  on

life,  296
Microscopical  study  of  yeast   impor-
tant, 23
formerly  neglected  in   English

breweries,  22 — 24
Microscopical  examination  of  vibrios,

298,  299
Microzyma,  121  ;   sotu'ce  of  niycoderma

aceti  according  to  Bechamp,

124


Milk,  temperature  of  sterilization  of  ,34
Milk-sugar,  growth  of  yeast  iu,  265
Mother  of  vinegar,  v.  mycoderma  aceti
Moulds  thrive  in  acid  liquors,  36

functioning  as  ferments,  100,  101,
and  following  pages.  111,  113,
129,  133
growth    of,    and    prodviction    of

alcohol,  257,  258  (footnote)
suggested  employment  of,  indus-
trially, 261
Mucedines,  36,  40
Mucor  niucedo  and  racemosus  on  must,

66
Mucor  racemosus,  different  aspects  of,
105
pure  growth   of,  128,  and  fol-
lowing pages
Mucor  normal,  growth  of,  132

weight  of  to  alcohol  formed,  134,

and  following  pages
morphology  of  abnormal  growth,
137
Mucor  mucedo  distinguished  from  race-
mosHs,  140
growth  in  double -necked  flasks,
140,  141
Muntz,  323

Must,  fermentation  t>f ,  always  regular,
3
pure    fermentation    of,    54,    and

following  pages
succession   of    ferments   in,    227,
228
Mycelium  and  mycoderma  vinl  on  wine,

56,  65
Mycoderma  in  wort  experiments,  70
Mycoderma  rlni,  arborescent  foiTn  of,  77
growth  of  piu"e,  experiments  on,
110,  and  following  pages,  120
growth  with  jJOficillmm,  112

with  mucor,  112
endogenous     sporulation,     151
(footnote)
Mycoderma  aceti  transfoiTnations  (Be-
champ), 124
piu-e  growth  of,  124,  and  follow-
ing pages


412


INDEX.


N


Nageurs  used  in  low  ferraeiitation,  9

Nature  of  liquids,  influence  on  growths,
36,  73,  85

Natural  liquids  for  pure  growths,  use
of,  40,41
experiments  on,  47,  and  follow-
ing pages

Neutrality,  conditions  of,  as  affecting
sterilization  of  liqixids,  34 ;
explanation  of  fact,  35

Neutralization  of  acidity  in  pure
growths,  mode  of,  126

New  high  ferment,  v.  high

New  process  of  brewing,  391 — 393

Nitrogenous  soluble  parts  of  yeast,  319,
320

Nomenclatiu-e  used  by  Pasteur  pur-
posely vague,  314

Normal  growth  of  mucor,  1 32

O

Organic    substances,  have    they   any
tendency  to   become   organ-
ized ?     33
Organic  liquids  sterilized  by  boiling,

34
Organizable  globulines  (Turpin),  133
Organisms  and  animal  diseases,  42
Ouillage,  2

Oxidation  of  germ-free  liquids,  57
processes  of  fungi,  261,  and  foot-
note
of  wort,  excessive,  injm-ious,  353,
354
Oxygen  absorbed  by  blood,  50
by  urine,  50
and   fermentation,    accoi'ding    to

Gay-Lussac,  60
store-energy  imparted  to  cells  by,

134
no  influence   upon   fermentation,

(Bechamp),  178  (footnote)
function  in  fennentation,  experi-
ments on,  238,  and  following
pages


Oxygen,  influence  on  fermentation
(Schiitzenberger  and  Pasteur) ,
253,  254

amount  absorbable  by  yeast,  255

deficiency  of,  function  in  fermen-
tation, 259
influence  on  products,  100,  108,

113
influence     on    morphology     of
moulds   and    ferments,     105,
106,  133,  137,  262

necessity  of,  to  growth  of  yeast
discussed,  280

unnecessary  and  adverse  to  vibrio-
nic  life,  284,  and  following
pages

necessary  to  bacterial  life,  305

removal  from  solutions  by  bacteria,
295

gi'owth  of  vibrios  apart  from,  302

compressed,  influence  on  ferment
life,  324

determination  of,  in  worts  (Schiit-
zenberger), 355,  and  follow-
ing pages

solubility- coefiicients  in  water
(Bunsen),  360

usual     amounts     in    solution    in
brewers'  worts,  366,  367
changes     in     amounts     during
brewing  processes,  369,  370

combination  of,  with  hopped  wort,
371,  and  following  pages

experiments  on  rapiditj-  of  combi-
nation, 376
on  amount  of,  under  brewing
conditions,  379

in  combination  with  wort  not
available  for  yeast,  380,  381

clarification  of  wort  by,  385


Palate-fulness  definition,  354,  and  foot-
note

impaired  by  oxidation,  354
Parasites  and  their  germs,  40

influence  on  animal  diseases,  4 1


INDEX.


413


Pasteur's  repetition  of  Trecul's  experi-
ments, 98,  99
subject    of    liis   inquiries   stated,

311
experiments,  exactness  of,  95  (foot-
note)
Pasteurization,   meaning  and  use,  15

(footnote)
Patches  of  froth  in  growth  of  pure

yeast,  31
Fenkillium  glaucum  on  must,  66

growth  of  pm-e,  86,  and  follow-
ing pages
precaution,  89
transformed       into        ferment

(Trecul),    94
spores,  varieties  of,  97
production  of  alcohol  by,  99,  and

following  pages
transformation  intomycodei-ma,
109
Phenol  for  purifying  yeasts,  232
Pitching,  mode  of,  for  pure  beer,  342,
and  following  pages
flasks,  344

peculiar  in  London  breweries,  ex-
planation, 350,  351
Plaster  of  Paris  and  yeast  powder,  81,

and  following  pages
Floussard  grapes,  experiments  on,  161
Polymorphism  of  organisms,  84  (foot-
note), also  V.  transformation
Precautions  for  pure  fermentation  of
must,  64
brewers',  to  check  disease-germs,

220,  and  following  pages
for    pui-e   anaerobian   growth   of
yeast,  248
Preservation  of  yeast,  207
Preoccupation  of  Liquids  by  organisms,

36,  109,  220
Products  of  fermentation  variable,  276,

277
Price  of  beer  as  afPected  by  losses  from

disease,  24
Proliferovas  pellicles,  121
Proportions  of  alcoholic  products  vari-
able, 276,  277


Proportions  of  products  diagnostic  of

the  fermentation,  279
Proteic  matter  elaborated  by  cells,  335
''Pulling  up,"  343

Pure  growth  of  yeast,  precautions  for,
29—32
growths  in  natural  liquids,  40,  41
wort  and  ferment,  advantages  of,
391—393
Purification  of  mixed  ferments,  226,
and  following  pages
practical     methods,     growth     in
sweetened  water,  230
shallow  basins,  231
in    acid  and  alcoholic    liquids,

231
with  aid  of  carbolic  acid,  232
Putrid  wort,  ferments  of,  5
Putrefaction     prevented     by    use    of
sterilizing  flask,  27
of  yeast,  cause  of,  221
of  tartrate  of  lime,  291


Q


Qualities  of  "high"  and  "low"
beers,  12,  13,  19,  196

Quality  of  beer  dependent  on  kind  of
fei-ment,  26,  and  following
pages


R


Eacking,  222

precautions  necessary  in,  351
Raulin's  fluid,  88  (footnote)

improvement  on  Schiitzenberger's
oxygen     process,     3o6,    and
following  pages
experiments     on     solubility     of
oxygen  in  worts,  361 — 363
Eayer  on  splenic  fever,  &c.,  42
Eeducing  action  of  vibrios,  291
Rees,  Dr.,  150  (footnote)
Refrigerator,    Baudclot's,    387    (foot-
note)


414:


INDEX.


Eevival  of  mould-colls  by  aeration,  130,

131  (footnote),  138
Revival  of  starved  yeast,  148,  208

vibrios,  301,  302
Ripening  of  fraits,  270,  271
Robin,  Ch.,  mentioned,  93;  strictures
onPasDenr,  310,  311
recantation  of  views  on  ferment-
action,  314


Saceharomyces  apiculatiis,  71,  and  foot-
note, 150
exiguus,  185,  eUqJsoideus,  1G5
2}astorianus,  151;  mode  of  growth

of,  167
two   aspects,    globular   and    fila-
mentous, 1G8,  169
exhaustion  and  revival  of,  aspects,

172,  and  following  pages
occurrence   as  impurity  in   most

ferments,  225
most  suitable  for  growth  experi-
ments in  sugar  solutions,  332
Saceharomyces  pastorianus,  ellipsoidens,
apieulatus  in  must,  227,  and
following  pages
Sang  de  rate,  43
Schiitzenbergcr  on  budding  of  yeast,

146,  and  footnote
Schiitzenberger's    strictures    on   Pas-
teT.u''s   views  answered,   252,
and  following  pages
process  for  determining  oxygen  in
solutions,  355
Seasons,  influence  on  success  in  brew-
ing, 25
at    which   germs  are   absent  on
fruits,  58,  59
Secondary    fermentation    in    English

beers,  224
Senescence  of  yeast  cells,  208

gradual  of    yeast   cells,    experi-
ments on,  245
Shallow    basins     for    purification    of
yeasts,  231


Sodium  hydrosulphite,  v.  hj'drosulphitc
Solubility-coefficients    of    oxygen    in
water  (Bunsen),  3G0
in  worts  (Raulin),  361—363
Sour  beer,  ferments  of,  5
Soundness  of  beer  always  dependent

on  purity  of  yeast,  26,  32
Specialization   of    ferment -variations,

197
Specimens,  necessary  precautions  for

taking,  126  (footnote)
Splenic  fever,  42

Spontaneous    fermentation    used     in
must,  not  in  beer,  4
fermentation  or  putrefaction  pre-
vented by  use  of   steiilizing
flask,  28
ferment,   definition  of,  182  ;    ex-
periment on,  184
generation,  facts  against,  51,52,57
supported      by      experimental

errors,  62,  63
(Trecul's  theory  of),  94,  95
impregnations,  65,  66,  69,  73,  79
use  in  isolating  fei-ments,  77
Spores  on  grapes,  gooseberries,  &c.,54

of  fungi  widely  distributed,  68
Statistics  of  breweries,  10

of  French  beer  consvunption,    17
(footnote)
Starved  yeast,  appearance  of,  148
Stability  of  sterilized  liquids,  286
Stemphylimn  spores,  55  (footnote)
Sterilizing     apparatus,     27,    29,    285

flask,  28
SterUization-temperature    of     various

liquids,  34
Stock  beer,  223

Stoi'e  beer,  must  besiuToundedby  ice,  16
Straw  wine,  peculiar  fermentation  of,

166
Strength,  Pasteur's  use  of  word,  354

saving  by  the  new  process,  394
Submerged  pen  iciUUim ,  99

««/;«-(7iW«s,  101  ,andfoUowingpages
myeoderma,  111,  113,  and  follow-
ing pages
mucor^  1 29,  andf  oUowingpages,  133


INDEX.


415


Submerging  growths,  precautions  for,

91  (footnote)
Succession  of  transfonnations  (Trecul's

scheme),  93,  94
Sugar    decomposition    by   submerged
cells,  114
different  modes  of,  by  different
ceRs,  115
decomposed    di-spi*oportionate     to
yeast  formed,  237,  and  follow-
ing pages
variation  of  disproportion  in  dif-
ferent cases,  249
amount  decomposed    in   a   given
time,  as  an  index  of  fermen-
tative     energy      (Schiitzen-
berger's  views),  25'2
solutions  pure  with  mineral  salts,
growth  of  yeast  in,  317,  and
following  pages
denial   of  the    fact   by   Liebig
and   reply  by  Pasteiu",    328,
329
Surface  growth  of  yeast  in  pure  cul-

tm'e,  31
Sweetened  water  for  exhatisting  yeast,
169, 170, 190
for  purification  of  yeasts,  230


Tartrate-acid  of  potash  for  pm-ifying
yeasts,  231
-dextro  of  lime,  fermentation  of,
284,  and  following  pages
products  of,  288
ferment  of,  290
Temperatures     in     use     in     London
breweries,  8  (footnote)
high,    prejudicial    to   quaKty    of

"low"  beer,  19
at  which  disease -fexTnents  perish,
20;  differs  in  different  liquids,
34,  96
influence  on  fermentation,  129


Temperatiu-es  suitable  for  "  high  "  or
"low"  yeasts  respectively,  192

influence   of  on  mixed    "high"
and  "  caseous  "  yeasts,  203

for     observing      active     vibrios,
299
Tlieories  of  generation  opposite  stated,

397
Tieghem,  Van,  on  ammoniacal  urine,

45
Torida,  sense  in  which  used,  73  (foot-
note)

varieties  of,  77

non-fermentative  species,  78
Transformation  of  fennents,  according
to  Duval,  37

of  non-fermentative  to  fermenta-
tive impracticable,  80

of  penicilKum  into  yeast  imprac-
ticable, 91

of   ferment    into   moulds    (Hoff-
mami),  92

series,    Trecul's    scheme    of,    93,
94

of  pcnicillmm   to  mycoderma  (Ch.
Robin),  109  (footnote)

ef    mycoderma    vini    refuted,    113
(footnote)

Turpin's  system  of,  122,  and  fol-
lowing pages

of    mycoderma    aceti     (Bechamp),
124

historical  accoimtof  views  on,  128
(footnote)

of  miicor  (Ban),  127

of  filamentous  into  globular  yeast,
1G9

of  yeast  into  pemcillium,  &c.,  im-
practicable, 333 — 335

mutual   of  low   and  high  yeast,
discussed,  192,  193

of  "high "  yeast  into  "  caseous  "
ferment  illusory,  203

of  albumen,  theory  of  the  vintage,
272,  273
theory  disj^roved  generally,  273
(footnote)
Traube,  Dr.,  on  ammoniacal  urine,  46


416


INDEX.


Traube,  Dr.,  researches  on  fermenta-
tion, 282
theory  of  fermentation,  283  (foot-
note)

Treciil  and  Fremy,  v.  Fremy

Treciil's  theory  of  successive  transfor-
mations, 93,  94
details  of  transformation  experi-
ments, 98
theory  refuted,  99

Trousseau  grapes,  experiments  on,
162

"  Turned"  beer,  ferments  of,  5  ;  fila-
ments of,  23

"Turning  out,"  3G7  (footnote)

Turpin,  M.,  mentioned,  92

Turpin's  system  of  transformations,
122,  and  following  pages,  113
(footnote)

Tyndall,  letter  to  Pasteur,  399—401


U


Unsoundness  of  beer  correlated  with
disease-organisms,  26,  32

(Jrea-ferment,  the  transformation  of
(Duval),   37

Urine,  ammoniacal,  45,  46

Urine,  sterilized,  study  of,  49,  50


Variability  of  fermentation  products,
277

Variations  of  ferment  strengthened
and  established,  197

Varieties  of  yeast,  149,  and  following
pages

Vaureal,  De,  budding  of  yeast,  146
(footnote)

Vegetable  distinguished  from  ani-
mal organisms  by  ammonia
(Robin),  312

Vesicular  tissue  (Turpin),  123


Vibrio,  36  ;  butjTic,  65,  70

also    an  example   of    anUerobian

life,  282,  284
active  and  exhausted,  290
reducing  action  of,  291
Vibrionic  ferment  of  tartrate  of  lime,

290
Vibrios,  head  of,  292  ;  supposed  repro-
ductive corpuscles,  306
growth  of,  in  lactate  media,  293
medium  for  gi-owth  of,  according

to  Cohn,  294  (footnote)
not  genetically  related  to  bacteria,

296
of  butyric  fennentation,  descrip-
tion of,  298,  300
mode   of   examining  microscopi-
cally, 298
fissiparous  division  of,  299
measurements  of,  300
cannot     live    on    butyrates,    301

(footnote)
revival  of,  301,  302;    anaerobian

growth  of,  302
life  of,  destroyed  by  oxygen,  303,
304
Vigour  of    ordinary  brewer's    yeast,

246
Vin  de  paille,  166
"Vinegar,  temperature  at  which  it  is

sterilized,  34
Vinous  flavour  in  stock  beer,  224
Vintage,    varied    conditions    of,    268
(footnote)
fermentation,  theorj'  of,  according
to  Fremy,  272,  and  following
pages
Viscous  wort,  ferments  of,  5
Visit  to  London  brewery  by  Pasteur,

22—24
Vital  processes  of  ferment  exceptional,
237
activity  of  yeast  apart  from  air,
259
potential  in  cells,  278
Vitiation  of  experiments,  causes  of,  63,
85,  92


INDEX.


417


w

Wad-dressing,  antiseptic,  44

Water,  hard,   influence  on   aspect   of

yeast,  194  (footnote)
Weights  of  mucor  and  alcohol,  propor-
tion of,    134,  and  following
pages
Weight  of  yeast  grown,  what  due  to,

257  (footnote)
Wide  dishes,  experiments  on  fermen-
tation in,  69,  70
favoui-able    to  mould   develop-
ments, 75  (footnote)
Wine,  less  liable  to  deteriorate   than
beer,  2
temperature  of  sterilization,  34
Wort,    definition,    2 ;    cooling    of,    3,
4
temperature  of  sterilization,  34
solubility  of  oxygen  in,   361,  and
following  pages
formula   for  solubility  in    any
wort,  364
Worts,    brewers',   usual    amounts    of
oxygen  in  solution,  366,  367
experiments  on  amounts,  379
Wort,  hopped,  its  affinity  for  oxygen,
371,  and  following  pages
mode  of  transmitting   it   free  of

oxygen,  371,  372
insoluble  substances  in,  386


Yeast,  V.  also  ferment,  germs,  torulfe
nature  and  properties  of,  143,  and

following  pages
starved  and   well-nourished,  ap-
pearances    contrasted,      147,
148
varieties  of,    149,    and    following

pages
commercial  origin  of,  where  ?  187
relations  to  other  organisms,  180,
181


Yeast,  commercial  mixtures,  224,  225
practical  purification  of,  230-233

impurities  in  masked  for  a  time,
220

exceptional  characteristics  of,
237

growth  of  in  sterilizing  flasks,  29
—32

not  transformable  into  any  other
organism,  37

aspect  may  change  under  modi-
fied circumstances,  37

non-transformation  of  mycoderma
vini  into,  120
miicor  into,  132

non-fei-mentative  species  of,  79,
80,  206,  207

"high,"  characteristic  aspect  of,
188—192

well  aerated,  fungoid  mode  of
growth,  251

anaerobian  gro-ivth,  cause  of  fer-
mentation, 259

growth  of,  in  solutions  of  sugar,
318,  and  following  pages

growth  in  relation  to  proportion
of  sugar  used,  237,  and  fol-
lowing pages

difficult  propagation  in  saccha-
rine mineral  media,  329,  330

growth  of,  without  producing
alcohol,  265

capacity  of  absorbing  oxygen,
255

necessity  of  oxygen  for  its  growth
discussed,  280

incapable  of  using  oxygen  in
combination  in  worts,  380,
381

soluble  nitrogenous  part  of,  320,
321,  79  (footnote)

dried  into  dust  still  active,  81,  and
following  pages

does  not  perish  at  temperatures  at
which  disease -ferments  do,
20

sudden  inactivity  of,  cause  and
cure,  347    footnote)


418


INDEX.


Yeast,    change    of,    a  trade    custom,

22
reason  of  addition  of  yeast  to  -wort,

3
proportion  commonly  added,  3
reason  of    the    large   proportion

used,  343
Yeast-cells     abundant     in      brewing

laboi-atories,  75
gradual  senescence  of,  245


Yeast-cells,  mode  of  examining  fruits
for,  267  (footnote)
necessary  relation  to   "  alcoholic
fermentation,"  275
Yeast-water,  definition,  79  (footnote)
exhaustion  of  yeast  by,  171
use    of    in  pure    growths   (peni-
cillium),  88
"Youth"  of  ceUs,  246


I^ardon  tt  Sons,  Pi-intei'S,  Fattrnoster  Jiotv,  London.


WITH    NUMEROUS    ILLUSTRATIONS.

WINE  :

A    TREATISE   ON  ITS  ORIGIN,   NATURE,
AND     VARIETIES.

BEING   A

COMPLETE    MANUAL    OF     VITICULTURE    AND     (ENOLOGY.


BY


J.    L.    W.    THUDTCHUM,    M.D.,

AND

AUGUST    DUPKE,    Ph.D.

Medium  8vo.    i5s.

«  A  treatise  almost  unique  for  its  usefulness  to  either  the  gi'ower  the  vendor,
ortht     «  of  wine.  \he  analyses  given  are  the  most  co^^ete  ^  hav
yet  seen,  exlubiting  at  a  glance  the  constituent  prmcxples  of  nearly  all  the  wines
known  in  this  coimtry."-  7r*«e;  Trade  Review.

<' We  have  little  doubt  that  this  volume  will  be  regarded  as  the  standax-d
EngUsh  work  on  the  subject  by  those  whose  business  is  connected  with  wine.  -
Chemist  and  Druggist.

"  A  perfect  magazine  of  information,  procured  from  first  ^^^''^^f'^}^}^^
.f   A-   o=f.,q  This  exhaustive  treatise  deserves  a  cordial  welcome

fS!LtCwine;.;ow;r^t;rwine  merchant,  and  t^^^^^^^^  of  whom

cannot  fail  to  consult  it  with  advantage.  "-^n^..A  Trade  Jo^u-nal.


ON   THE

USES  OF  WINE  IN  HEALTH  AND  DISEASE,

BY

F.    E.    ANSTIE,    M.D.,   E.E.C.P.

Crown  8uo.     2s.


MACMILLAN   &    CO.,    LONDON.


MACMILLAN     &      CO.'S      PUBLICATIONS,


By    H.    CHAJRLTON    BASTIAN,   M.D.,   F.R.S.
THE  BEGINNINGS  OF  LIFE:    Being  some  Account

of  the  Nature,  Modes  of  Ori<,'-m,  and  Transformatious  of  Lower  Organisms.
In  Two  Volumes.     With  upwards  of  100  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     28*.

EVOLUTION      AND      THE      ORIGIN      OF      LIFE.

Crown  Svo.      6s.   Qxl.


A    TREATISE    ON     CHEMISTRY.      By     Professors

RoscoE  and  Schorlemjtek.

Vol.  I.,  The    Non-metallic   Elements.     "With   numerous   Illustrations,    and
Portrait  of  Dalton.     Medium  Svo.     21s.

Vol.  II.,  Metals.     Part  I.     With  Illustrations.     Svo.     18s.     (Part  II.  in  the

Press.)

LESSONS    IN    ELEMENTARY    CHEMISTRY,    IN-

ORaANIC  AND  ORGANIC.  By  Professor  H.  E.  Roscoe,  F.R.S.
With  numerous  Illustrations,  and  Chromo-litho  of  the  Solar  Spectrum,  and
of  the  Alkalis  and  Alkaline  Earths.     New  Edition.     Fcap.  Svo.     4s.  Qd.

A     MANUAL     OF     THE     CHEMISTRY     OF  THE

CARBON    COMPOUNDS,     OR    ORGANIC     CHEMISTRY.  By   C.

ScHOELEMME^  F.R.S.,  Lecturer  in  Organic  Chemistry  in  Owens  College,
Manchester.     Svo.     14s.

A    SYSTEM    OF    VOLUMETRIC    ANALYSIS.      By

Dr.  E.  FLEiscnER.  Translated  from  the  Second  German  Edition  by  M.  M.
Pattison  Muu-,  with  Notes  and  Additions.    Illustrated.    Crown  Svo.    7s.  Qd.

PRACTICAL    CHEMISTRY    FOR    MEDICAL    STU-
DENTS.   By  M.  M.  Pattison  Muir,  F.R.S. E.    Fcap.  Svo.     Is.  6d.

A    COURSE    OF    PRACTICAL    INSTRUCTION    IN

ELEMENTARY  BIOLOGY.  By  T.  H.  Huxley,  LL.D.,  Sec.  R.S.,
assisted  by  H.  N.  Martin,  B.A.,  M.B.,  D.Sc,  Fellow  of  Christ's  College,
Cambridge.     Crown  Svo.     Gs.


MACMILLAN   &   CO.,    LONDOX.


^.^


>.


P


>ii^'


s<?.


>■  ,vvi


V'-^jf^'


^4i


.%;'


mi:^
