THE SEVEN BOOKS OF PAULUS AEGINETA
Vol. III of III

Paulus Aegineta (c. 625-690)
Translated from the Greek, with a commentary embracing a complete view of the knowledge possessed by the Greeks, Romans, and Arabians on all subjects connected with medicine and surgery, by Francis Adams.
London: Printed for the Sydenham Society, 1847.

Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier sevenbooksofpaul03pauluoft (University of Toronto Library copy).
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

THE SEVEN BOOKS
OF
PAULUS AEGINETA.
TRANSLATED FROM THE GREEK.
WITH
A COMMENTARY
EMBRACING A COMPLETE VIEW OF THE KNOWLEDGE POSSESSED BY THE GREEKS, ROMANS, AND ARABIANS ON ALL SUBJECTS CONNECTED WITH MEDICINE AND SURGERY.
BY FRANCIS ADAMS.
IN THREE VOLUMES.
VOL. III.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE SYDENHAM SOCIETY.
MDCCCXLVII.

"MULTUM EGERUNT QUI ANTE NOS FUERUNT, SED NON PEREGERUNT. SUSPICIENDI TAMEN SUNT, ET RITU DEORUM COLENDI." (SENECA, EPIST. LXIV.)

ADVERTISEMENT TO THE THIRD VOLUME.

I THINK it necessaiy to say a few words in explanation of
the reason why the reader will find in the Commentary con-
tained in this, my concluding volume, some deviation from the
plan upon which the Commentaries in the two preceding
volumes were executed.

In the Advertisement to the First Volume it is stated that,
by the advice of the Council of the Sydenham Society, I had
restricted the history which I gave of professional opinions on
the various subjects treated of in the course of my work to
what is properly called the period of ancient literature, and to
this rule it will accordingly be observed that I have generally
adhered, except in a few instances, where a departure from it
^eemed to be demanded for the sake of illustration, or for some
other special object. But in dealing with the subject-matter
of the present volume, namely, the Materia Medica and Phar-
macy of the ancients, it became apparent to me from the first
that a different plan of proceeding was indispensable, otherwise
the usefulness of the whole work to the ordinary reader would
be very much impaired. It is well known how frequently the
nomenclature of the sciences connected with these subjects has
changed, and what differences of opinion have prevailed with
regard to many of the substances used in the practice of medi-
cine by. the ancients. In order, therefore, to render the in-
formation contained in this and the preceding volumes of ready
access for practical purposes, it appeared to me necessary to
bring down the annotations to modern times, so that one
might see at once what is the exact import of the ancient
terms of art, and what the medicinal substances mentioned in
the course of the work actually were, according to the nomen-

clature of the present age. Accordingly it will be found that
the Commentary in this volume abounds in references to
modern authorities^ and contains a variety of materials col-
lected, not only from the earlier herbalists and commentators
on Dioscorides, Theophrastus, and other ancient authors, but
likewise from recent writers on Botany, Mineralogy, and the
Materia Medica, in illustration of the various articles which
are treated of in this work. And I have much satisfaction in
ha^dng it in my power to state that the plan now described
has the authority and sanction of the Council, who gave it
their entire approval. To Dr. Pereira I owe my grateful ac-
knowledgment for much valuable advice and assistance received
from him on this part of my work ; but at the same time it is
fair to him to state I have no right to make him in anywise
responsible for opinions herein advanced which may turn out
to be erroneous.

And now, having brought my laborious undertaking to a
conclusion, I would embrace the present opportunity of re-
turning my most sincere expression of thanks to the Council
for the honour which they conferred upon me in selecting my
work for publication, and for the very flattering terms in
which they speak of the first volume in the Annual Report of
their proceedings for 1845. I trust that whatever degree of
merit they discovered in it will be found not to be wanting in
the succeeding parts, and that, taken together, the three
volumes will be acknowledged to constitute a more copious
repertory of ancient opinions on professional subjects than is
to be found elsewhere. If such be the judgment which the
intelligent members of the Sydenham Society shall generally
pronounce on my work, 1 shall certainly never regret the time
and exertions which I have bestowed upon it.

Toiov B' a7ri/3»j ToSf irpayna,

F. A.

Banchory, June 21st, 1847.

CONTENTS

OF

THE THIRD VOLUME.

SEVENTH BOOK.

SECT.

1. On the Temperaments of Substances as indicated by their Tastes

2. On the Order and Degrees of the Temperaments

On the powers of simple medicines ....

3. On the Powers of Simples individually
Appendix to the Third Section — On the Substances introduced into

the Materia Medica by the Arabians

4. On Simple Purgative Medicines ....

On those things which evacuate bile . . .

Medicines which evacuate black bile

Medicines which evacuate phlegm ....

Medicines which evacuate water ....

On cholagogues ......

On melanogogues ......

On phlegm agogues ......

On hydragogues ......

.1. On Compound Purgatives .....

6. On the Management of those who take Purgative Medicines ; and

what is to be done to those who are not purged by a pi'oper
dose of Purgatives ......

7. On the Treatment of Hypercatharsis . . . . .

8. On the Antidotes called Hiera; . . . . .

9. On Liniments to be applied to the Anus, and purgative Applications

to the Navel . . .

10. On Emetics ........

Modes of administering hellebore

PAGE
1

424
480
481
48.3

ib.
484
489
491
492

ib.
493

497
499
500

502
503
.504

Vlll

SECT.

11. On the different kinds of Antidotes ....

12. On Trochisks, or Troches .....

13. On Dry Applications and Abstergents (Smegmata)

14. On Liniments to the Mouth and Throat

15. On Delicious and Officinal Potions ....

16. On Collyria and Agglutinative Applications .

17. On Plasters, and those things which are added to the boiling of them,

from the Works of Antyllus, and on the proportion of wax to oil

18. On Emollient Plasters and Epithemes . . . .

19. On Restorative Ointments (Acopa), Liniments, Calefacient Plasters

(Dropaces), and Sinapisms . . . . .

20. On Different Preparations of Oil and Ointments

21. On ffinantharia . . . . . . . .

22. On Perfumes and Cyphi ......

23. On the Preparations of Masucha, which some call Masuaphium

24. On Pessaries, from the Works of Antyllus . . . .

25. On Medicines which may be substituted for one another, from the

Works of Galen . . . . . . .

26. On Weights and Measures ......

PAGE
510

528
536
541
544

558
576

581
589
598
599
601
ib.

604
609

General Index

PAULUS JIGINETA.

BOOK SEVENTH.

In this book, being tbe seventh and last of the whole work^
we are to treat of the properties of all Medicines, both Simple
and Compound, and more especially of those mentioned in the
six preceding books.

SECT. I. ON THE TEMPERAMENTS OF SUBSTANCES AS

INDICATED BY THEIR TASTES.

It is not safe to judge from the smell with regard to the
temperament of sensible objects ; for inodorous substances con-
sist indeed of thick particles, but it is not clear whether they
are of a hot or cold nature ; and odorous substances, to a cer-
tain extent, consist of fine particles and are hot ; but the de-
gree of the tenuity of their parts, or of their hotness, is not
indicated, because of the inequality of their substance. And
still more impracticable is it to judge of them from their colours,
for of every colour are found hot, cold, drying, and moistening
substances. But in tasting, all parts of the bodies subjected to
it come in contact Avith the tongue and excite the sense, so that
thereby one may judge clearly of their powers in their tem-
peraments. Astringents, then, contract, obstruct, condense,
dispel, and incrassate ; and, in addition to all these properties,
they are of a cold and desiccative nature. That which is acid,
cuts, divides, attenuates, removes obstructions, and cleanses

2 SIMPLES. [book vii.

witliout heating ; but that which is acrid, resembles the acid
in being attennant and purging, but differs from it in this, that
the acid is cokl, and the acrid hot ; and, further, in this, that
the acid repels, but the acrid attracts, discusses, breaks down, and
is escharotic. In like manner, that which is bitter cleanses the
pores, is detergent and attennant, and cuts the thick humours
without sensible heat. "What is watery is cold, incrassate, con-
denses, contracts, obstructs, mortifies, and stupefies. But that
which is salt contracts, braces, preserves as a pickle, dries,
without decided heat or cold. "VMiat is sweet relaxes, concocts,
softens, and rarefies : but what is oily humectates, softens, and
relaxes.

SECT. II. ox THE ORDER AND DEGREES OF THE TEMPERAMENTS.

A moderate medicine which is of the same temperament as
that to which it is applied, so as neither to dry, moisten, cool,
nor heat, must not be called either dry, moist, cold, or hot ;
but whatever is drier, moister, hotter, or colder, is so called
from its prevailing power. It will be sufl&cient for every useful
pru'pose to make four ranks according to the prevailing tem-
perament, calling that substance hot, according to the first rank,
when it heats, indeed, but not manifestly, requiring reflection
to demonstrate its existence : and in like manner with regard
to cold, dry, and moist, when the prevailing temperament
requires demonstration, and has no strong nor manifest virtue.
Such things as are manifestly possessed of drying, moistening,
heating or cooling properties, may be said to be of the second
rank. Such things as have these properties to a strong, but
not an extreme degree, may be said to be of the thu'd I'ank.
But such things as are naturally so hot as to form eschars
and burn, are of the fourth. In like manner such things as
are so cold as to occasion the death of a part are also of the
foui'th. But nothing is of so drying a nature as to be of the
fourth rank, without burning, for that which dries in a great
degi'ee burns also ; such are misy, chalcitis, and quicklime.
But a substance may be of the third rank of desiccants without
being caustic, such as all those things which are strongly
astringent, of which kind are the unripe juice of grapes, sumach,
and alum.

SECT. II.] SIMPLES. 3

Commentary. The following is a list of the ancient au- Comm.
thorities on the Materia ]\Iedica and Pharmacy : Hippocrates ' * '
(pluries) ; Dioscorides (de Materia Medica) ; Celsus (v) ; Scribo-
nius Largus (pluries) ; Marcellus Empiricus ; Pliny (H . N.
pluries) ; Rei Rusticse Scriptores ; Apuleius (de Herbis) ;
Antonius Musa (de Herba Betonica) ; Macer Floridus ; Galenus
(de Simpl. ; de Comp. Med. sec. loc. ; de Comp. Med. sec.
gen.) ; Aetius (i and ii) ; Oribasius (jNIed. Collect, xi et seq.) ;
Sextus Platonicus (de Med. ex animal.) ; Zosimus Panopolita
(de Zythorum confectione) ; Actuarius (Meth. Med=) ; INIyrepsus
(plm-ies) ; Psellus (de Lapidibus) ; llhases (Contin. liber ult. ; ad
Mansor. iii) ; Avicenna (ii, et alibi) ; Serapion (de Simpl. ; de
Antidot.) ; ]Mesue (de Simpl.) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii and x) ;
Averrhoes (Collig. v) ; Albengnefit (Libellus de Simpl. med.
virt.) ; Geber (Chemia) ; Servitor (de Prsepar. Med. i. e.
xxviii Albucasis) ; Baitharis Prsefatio ap. Casiri Biblioth. Arab.
Kisp. p. 276 ; Ebn Baithar (Uebersetz von Sontheimer) ; Rei
Rusticpe Scriptores Arabici ap. Casiri B. A. H. ; Alchindus
(Libellus de Med. compos, grad.)

Hippocrates, althovigh he appears to have been familiarly
acquainted with the properties of most of the vegetable sub-
stances of the Old World, still employed in the practice of medi-
cine, has left no regular treatise on the Materia IMedica and
pharmacy of his time. Theophrastus has treated more fully and
ingeniously of botany and vegetable physiology than any other
Greek Avriter ; but except in two or three instances he scarcely
alludes to the medicinal powers of the articles which he
describes. In short, Dioscorides is the first and great autho-
rity on the Materia IMedica, — his contributions to which can
never be too highly appreciated ; for, as Alston justly remarks,
the science in ancient times remained ever after in nearly the
same state as he left it. The genius of Galen, it is true, shed
a considerable degree of lustre over the subject by his philo-
sophical theory regarding the general actions of medicines ;
but his descriptions of particular substances, and even his de-
tail of their properties, are mostly borrowed from Dioscorides.
The Greek authors, subsequent to his time, can scarcely be
said to have added one single article to the list of medicinal
substances described by him. Aetius, however, although he

4 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. can advance no great claim to originalitj^ lias given, as we
shall see presently, a remarkably lucid exposition of the
Galenical principles of therapeutics. Of Pliny's great work,
so replete with the most rare and curious information on
almost every department of ancient literature, we feel reluctant
to speak otherwise than in terms of unqualified eulogy, and
yet candour obliges us to admit that on all medical subjects
this writer is but a very indifferent authority. For, being
evidently possessed of no practical acquaintance with profes-
sional matters, he appears to have been wholly incapable of
discriminating real from pretended facts in medicine, and has
accordingly jiimbled important and useless nifitter together in
many instances with very little judgment, nor can his opinions
be much relied upon except when he copies closely from
Dioscorides. The same objection cannot be made to his
countiyman Celsus ; but the plan of his work being limited,
the account which he gives of these matters is confined to a
classification of simple substances, and a few formulae for the
formation of the more important pharmaceutical compounds.
The Arabians added camphor, senna, musk, nux vomica,
myrobalans, tamarinds, and a good many other articles to the
^Materia Medica; but, upon the whole, they transmitted the
science to us in much the same shape as regards arrangement
and general principles as they received it from their Grecian
masters. At the same time it is impossible to take even a
cursory view of the great work of Ebn Baithar, now for-
tunately rendered accessible to many European scholars by
Dr. Sontheimer^s translation of it into German, without
being struck with the amazing industry, enterprise, and talent
displayed by that wonderful people in this department of
medical science. In this collection, more than 1400 medicinal
and dietetical articles are described, manv of them no doubt
in nearly the same terms as they had been noticed by
Dioscorides and Galen, but of original matter relative to sub-
stances then for the first time introduced into the practice of
medicine, there is no lack ; and it is only to be regretted that a
proper key to these stores is still a desideratum which it is to
be feared will not soon be supplied. Ebn Baithar's list
of medicinal substances, however, is far more copious than

SECT. II.] SIMPLES. 5

those of the other Arabians, who in general follow closely in the Comm.
footsteps of the Greek authorities, and seldom supply anything ' "
very original of their own. For example, the Materia Medica of
Rhases contains only 765 articles, and that of Avicenna only
747, which it is to be remarked, is a smaller number than is
contained in the work of Dioscorides, wherein Alston states that ,
he counted above 90 minerals, 700 plants, and 168 animal sub-
stances, making 958 in all. This is nearly triple the number of
simples contained in the Materia Medica of the Edinburgh Dis-
pensatory at the present day, whicli amount only to S^l ai'ticles;
so that if this branch of medical science has received any material
improvement in modern times, it must arise principally from oui
superior accuracy in estimating the \drtues of the substances now
in use, or in making more ingenious compositions of their ele-
mentary ingredients. At all events, it is quite clear that tlie
Greek, Roman, and Arabian physicians were amply provided
with medicines of every possible character, and there is no
reason to suppose that they were in anywise behind us in the
skilful management of them. It has been affirmed, indeed,
in some late publications which Ave have seen, that the ancients
had never classified the articles in the Materia INIedica accord-
ing to the nature of their actions ; but this we need scarcely
assure the reader is a very erroneous account of the matter :
and in proof of this we could have wished, if our limits had
permitted us, to have introduced here some of the classified
lists of medicinal substances as given by the ancient authori-
ties, and more especially those of Aetius and Serapion.

Verum hsec ipse equidem, spatiis inclusus iniquis
Praetereo, atque aliis post me memoranda relinquo.

We have mentioned above that Aetius's account of the
general principles of the Materia ]\Iedica is particularly excellent,
and we have now to add, that as it is sufficiently explicit to
convey a distinct idea of the Galenical system, and is contained
within moderate limits when compared with the full and
lengthy exposition of it given by* Galen himself, we shall give
that of Aetius entire, and confine our annotations almost
solely to it in the present instance : —

SIMPLES. [book VII.

" On the Poioers of Simple Medicines^

" There are differences in the particular actions of medi-
cines, arising from each of them being to a certain degree
hot, or cold, or dry, or humid, or consisting of subtile or of
gross particles, but the degree in which each of them is
possessed of the above-mentioned properties cannot be truly
and accurately determined. We have endeavoured, however,
to define them in such a manner as will be sufficient for all
practical piu'poses, laying it down that there is one class of
medicines possessed of a similar temperament to our bodies,
when they have received a certain principle of change and
aliation from the heat in them, and that there is another which
is of a hotter temperament than we. Of this temperament I
have thought it right to make four orders, the first being
imperceptible to the senses, and only to be inferred from re-
flection ; the second being perceptible to the senses ; the third
strongly heating but not burning; and the fourth, or last, caustic.
In like manner of frigorific or cooling things, the first order
requii'es reflection to demonstrate its coldness : the second
consists of such things as are perceptibly cold; the third is
perceptibly cold, but does not occasion mortification ; the fourth
produces mortification. So it is in like manner with humec-
tating and desiccant articles. Let such an order of degrees
be laid down to render cleai'er the course of instruction, rose
oil or the rose itself being placed in the first order of coohng
things ; the juice of roses in the second, and in the third and
fourth those things which are extremely cold, such as cicuta,
meconium, mandi'agora, and hyoscyamus. In regard to hot
things, dill and fenugreek belong to the first order; those
which are next to them, to the second ; and so of the third
and fourth, until we come to the caustic. In like manner,
respecting moistening and desiccant medicines, beginning with
those of a moderate degree, we may arrange them until we
come to their extremes. Such knowledge is of no small im-
portance for the purpose of medical instruction. One ought
also to exercise the sense of taste, and remember the peculiar
qualities of juices ; as, for example, that such a substance when

SECT. II.] SIMPLES. 7

applied to the tongue dries strongly, contracts, and ronghens
it to a considerable depth, such as unripe wild pears, cornels,
and the like ; everj'' such thing that is intensely austere is called
soiu'. Such things, as when applied to the tongue, do not
constringe and contract it like astringents, but, on the con-
trary, appear to be detergent and cleansing, are called salt.
Such things as are more detergent and also rougher in a pain-
ful degree, are called bitter. Those things which are biting
and corrosive with a strong heat, are called acrid ; and such as
are biting without heat, are called acid, and these have the
power of causing a fermentation when poured upon earth. Of
those which lubricate, fill, remove asperities, and, as it Avere,
erosions of the tongue, such as do so with sensible delight, are
called sweet ; but such as do this without sensible delight, are
called fat. If, then, you wish to form a judgment of acrimony,
you may learn to do so from garlic, onions, and the like, which
are to be frequent^ tasted and long masticated, in order that
the sensation thereby imparted may be fixed in the memory.
But if you wish to acquii'e the perception of astiingeucy, you
may do so from galls, sumach, and the like ; if of bitterness,
from natron and bile ; and if of sweetness, from rob and
honey. Fm'ther, if you would wish to judge of such things
as are devoid of all quahties, or of an intermediate quality as
to taste, take water, and having tasted it, retain the percep-
tion in your memory ; but see that it be the purest water, and
that it contain none of the aforesaid qualities ; neither sweet-
ness, acidity, acrimony, nor bitterness ; and, in addition, that
it be neither very hot nor very cold. Proceeding from this,
you may the more readily perceive the obscure taste of certain
juices which I call moderately sweet, but which others call
watery ; such as the juice of green reeds and of grass, of wheat
and of barley, and of moderately sweet things, as resembling
what I have described to be of all other things the most devoid
of qualities, I mean water, which is in an intermediate state be-
tween heat and cold, or inclines a little to cold. .If being
endowed with such a taste, it have not a liquid but a dry
consistence, it must necessarily be terrene and desiccative
without pungency. These things are called emplastic, such as
starch, and most of the thoroughly-washed metals, as pom-
pholyx, ceruse, calamine, Cimolian earth, Samian earth, and

8 SIMPLES. [book vii.

tlie like. Some are not only terrene^ but also watery in their
nature ; and some contain no little air in them : sucli are
viscid and therefore emplastic. There are two kind of emplas-
tic medicines, the one very terrene and dry, and the other
altogether viscid, being composed of water, earth, and, for the
most part, of air, such as sweet oil. The white of an egg is
similar to oil, but more terrene. The cheesy part of milk is
einplastic, and so also the fat of swine. The fat and suet of
a bull and a buck-goat are acrid, and more terrene than that of
swine. That of a goose or a cock is hotter and drier than
that of swine ; but of subtile parts, and by no means terrene.
The fats then, if they have no acrimony, are emplastic, or ob-
struent of the pores, more especially if of a drier and more
terrene nature, such as well-washed wax. Emplastic medicines
then are of such a nature. But astringents are terrene, and
with regard to the composition of their particles are thick ;
but in their qualities they are cold. Acids in composition are
attenuating, but cold, like astringents. The terrene particles
contained in the juices, which, when melted, contract and dry
the humidity of the sentient parts of the tongue, if particu-
larly rough, are called sour ; but if less so, austere ; and we
properly call the temperament of such juices cold. But
since they are unequally desiccative — for in this consists their
asperity — they are likewise terrene ; for every watery sub-
stance permeates the body evenly, and when removed it
easily coalesces ; but what is terrene when removed does not
readily coalesce again. And the peculiarity of the sensation,
if you will recollect the impression, will testify to the same
effect j for the passage of acid juices, in the organs of sensa-
tion, appears quick ; but that of sour, slow ; and acids exert
their actions more on the deep-seated parts, whereas sour sub-
stances act more superficially. When you wish to ascertain
the action of a truly sour substance, if that which is made
trial of appear at the same time sour and pungent, I would
recommend you to lay that species aside, and to have re-
course to something which is sour without being pungent, and
neither acid, sweet, nor bitter, but as much as possible having
no one quality or power mixed up with its astringency ; for
it is useless and foolish to make trial of such a medicine, as it
cannot be ascertained whether it be by its astringency, or by

SECT. II.] SIMPLES. 9

any of the qualities mixed witli it, or by a combination of
both, that the substance which is made trial of exerts its
action. Therefore, chalcitis, misy, copperas, the flakes of
copper, sori, and, in addition to them, the armeniacum pictorium
(Armenian pigment), mercury, and other astringent sul)stances
which are also at the same time pungent, act by both their
properties upon the bodies to which they are applied ; but we
are not thereby informed whether they burn by their astrin-
gency or by their acrimony ; for such substances, when taken
into the body, being composed of gross particles, and rather
hot in their powers, having become ignited in the course of
time, according to the change which they undergo in the body
of the animal, ulcerate and burn the parts about the stomach
like heated stones or irons ; and owing to their weight they
are incapable of being distributed over the body. It is better,
therefore, after much observation, to look out for something
that is purely astringent, and when you have found such a
substance, make haste to try it in the manner you have
formerly heard described ; such as having tasted the flowers
of the Avild pomegranate, galls, or the flowers of the cultivated
pomegranate, hypocistis, acacia, sumach, or the like, if the
substance appear intensely sour, and it is manifest that it
contains no other quality, you must prove the action of
astringency from it. A sour substance then is terrene and
cold, and its quality may necessarily be removed in three ways ;
either by being heated, or moistened, or by undergoing both
these changes at the same time. If only heated, it will
neither become more humid nor softer ; but becoming harder
it will have acquired sweetness, as is the case with acorns and
chesnuts, as they are called. But if only moistened, and if
the humidity is of a thick nature and watery, it becomes
austere ; for the astringent part being dissolved renders the
juice austere, it being the property of a watery fluid to obtund
the powers of every juice. If a subtile and airy fluid be super-
added, it will become acid, for coldness being attenuating
will render the former quality acid. When moistened and
heated at the same time, if with a watery humidity, it will
occasion a change to sweetness ; but if with an airy, to fatness;
for the fruits of such trees as appear sweet to us wlien
ripened, are, when newly foi'ined, .sour and dry in their con-

10 SIMPLES. [book VII.

sistence, eacli according to the nature of the tree which
produced it ; but in process of time, they become more humid
or juicy ; and some get acidity superadded to their sourness,
which latter quality when they have laid aside they become
again sweet as they arrive at maturit3^ Some do not acquire
sweetness at all while upon the trees, but after a time, when
separated from them. Some without the intermediate acidity
pass from sourness to sweetness, as the fruit of the olive. All
things are concocted by heat, which is of a twofold nature,
the one proper and innate, and the other supplied from without
by the sun. But, since being sour at first, they become sweet
when ripe, their sweetness is occasioned by heat; but their
acidity and sourness by cold. And it has already become
obrious that as fruits being sour at first, in process of time
become, some sweet, some acid, some austere, and some remain
sour, that great variety will arise from a mixture of these
qualities. Wherefore, the fruit of the ilex, the cornel, and
other such things, are sour to the last, because they remain
cold and dry as at the beginning, being only increased in size,
but acquiring no other internal change. The fruits of the
myrtle, the wild pear, and the oak are sweet and sour at the
same time; but the fruit of Aminaean vines, wine, and such
like things, are only austere. The fruit of the palm tree, and
of wines, the Surrentine, and such as have sweetness joined to
astringency, are at the same time austere and sweet. The
Thersean wine, the Scybelitic, boiled must called rob, and
other such like things, are only sweet. The fruit and juice of
the olive in particular, but also of all other such things from
which oil is formed, are fatty. And as a sour juice in pro-
cess of time, becoming at first sweeter, and afterward turning-
more acrid and bitter, ends in becoming wholly bitter ; so in
like manner, a cold juice becomes at first more acid, and if
wholly congealed it turns entirely acid ; and such fruits as at
gathering are filled with much humidity, and such as other-
wise acquire much water, readily become acid from very slight
causes. For if the unripe grape is acid, but the ripe sweet,
and if all fruits are ripened by the solar heat, it is obvious
that what is more imperfect and colder is acid; whereas, what
is more perfect and hotter is sweet. When wine, therefore,
from refrigeration becomes acid, it is clear that it returns

SECT. II.] SIMPLES. 1 1

again to the same juice from which it was formed, I mean
that of the unripe grape. But vinegar differs thus far in
power from the juice of the unripe grape, that the \inegar has
acquired a certain degree of acrimony from the putrefactive
heat {" fermentation ?^') ; but the juice of the unripe grape has
no acquired heat, and therefore none of the acrimony of vine-
gar ; wherefore, vinegar is more attenuating than the juice of
the unripe grape, as the sensation bears testimony to the truth
of what has been said ; but the acrimony of the vinegar is not
sufficient to overcome the coldness arising from its acidity ; it
serves, however, to make it more penetrating ; for inasmuch as
heat is more penetrating than cold, so does the acrimony of
vinegar the more readily pass the pores of sensible bodies,
and thus acrimony takes the lead, but coldness follows at no
great interval. And it is this mixed and almost indescribable
sensation which prevents us from calling vinegar simply cold ;
for we perceive in it a certain fiery acrimony. But the cold-
ness, from the accompanying acidity, straightway obtunds and
extinguishes the acrimony, and therefore there is a much
greater sensation from the coldness than from the heat ; for
some persons by drinking oxycrate in the summer season are
sensibly cooled, and remain free from thirst. But since thirst
arises from two distinct causes, either from a deficiency of
moisture or an excess of heat, that arising from dryness is not
cured, but that occasioned by heat is removed by it ; for
vinegar by itself does not moisten, but is decidedly refrige-
rant. Thirst, therefore, arising from a hot intemperament, or
from a hot and dry one, is not to be cured by drinking
vinegar ; but when humidity and heat meet together, the
proper cure of such a kind of thirst is Adnegar ; but otherwise
in the case of those who are thirsty in ardent fevers and all
other hot diseases, and in those during summer and hot
weather, their state is a compound of heat and diyness, so that
the proper cure for it is a composition of vinegar and water ;
for the vinegar is decidedly refrigerant, and by its tenuity
readily diffusible, and the water, in addition to its property of
cooling, is the most moistening of all substances, for nothing is
more moistening than water. But as an external application
for heat of the hypochondrium, the juice of unripe grapes is
preferable to vinegar, because it has no violent and oftensive

12 SIMPLES. [book vii.

coldness, nor any pungent heat mixed witli it ; for in such
affections persons require to be soothed without violence by
an application which will not induce externally any pungent
acrimony. The juice of the unripe grape, then, is not only
acid but sour ; for, as mentioned before, almost all the fruits
of trees are at first sour to the taste ; and not only are acids
cold, but so also are sour and austere things. And if any one
will taste quinces, myrtles, or medlars, he will perceive clearly
that there is one sensation from acids, and another from sour
and austere things; for sour things seem to propel inwards
the part which they touch, everywhere equally squeezing,
constricting, and contracting, as it were ; but the austere seem
to penetrate deeply, and to induce a rough and unequable sen-
sation, so that by drying they expel the humidity of the parts
of sensation. Thus, between sour and austere juices, there is
a certain peculiar difference of sensation not easily to be
described, but which everybody must understand from what
has been said. Every sour substance, then, when free from all
other qualities, I have upon trial always found to be cold ;
but every sweet substance is hot, and does not greatly exceed
the heat in us ; and as we are delighted, more especially if we
are cold, with the touch of warm water, until it expand the
parts congealed by the cold, and as it heats us, and does not
dissolve nor break the continuity of the parts, it is very
pleasant and useful ; so all sweet food is hot, and yet it is not
possessed of such a degree of heat as to be unpleasant, but re-
mains within the limits of those things which expand, soften,
and are demulcent : for all nutritive food is allied to, and
agrees with, the whole substance of the bodies which it
nourishes ; it requires, therefore, to be moderately hot, so as
to agree with the bodies which are nourished ; and hence one
kind of food and medicine does not agree with all men ; for
according to his peculiar substance and affection is every one
delighted and benefited. And such being the nature of
things those kinds of food which are less sweet are less hot,
and their heat is proportionate to their sweetness ; but these
things, when they get to an immoderate degree of heat, are no
longer sweet, but appear bitter, such as honey which is old
and much boiled, and so also with all other sweet things ; for
such things as without boiling or preparation are allied to the

SECT. TT.] SIMP1.E8. 13

temperaments of the bodies which tliey nourish^ appear already
sweet ; but all such as are not allied appear unsavoury until
prepared, for those which are hot require to be corrected by
cold, and those which are sufficiently cold by the mixture of
calefacient food and by heat. In like manner such things
as are terrene and drier than proper, are to be corrected by
humidity ; and those things which are humid and watery, by
drying ; that which is sweet therefore, in addition to being
more or less hot, is necessarily more or less humid. But
when this bitterness arises from being over-roasted, as in lime
and ashes, it is necessarily rendered dry and hot. For this
reason every bitter thing is of such a nature as to prove
detergent, and is calculated to break down and to cut viscid
and thick humours, and such are ashes and natron ; but that
bitter sap is dry and terrene, may be collected from the cir-
cumstance, that bitter things are of all others the least prone
to putrefaction, and do not engender worms nor other animals
such as are usually formed in roots, herbs, and fruits when
they become putrid ; for we see that such animals and putre-
factions take place in humid bodies. Those things which are
intensely bitter (I call those things such which have no other
manifest quality) are uneatable, not only by men, but by
almost all animals, because every living creature is more or
less humid, and bitter things are dry in like manner as ashes
and cinders. As, therefore, that which is truly sweet is
nutritive, and that which is purely bitter iunutritive, so those
things which are intermediate are nutritive indeed, but less so
than the sweet. The salt juice is allied to the bitter, for both are
terrene and hot ; but they differ from one another perceptibly
in this, that the bitter is more attenuated and wrought by the
heat and dryness ; and thus, too, of salts, such as are hard,
denser, and more terrene (as are almost all the fossils), are
less calefacient and attenuating ; but such as arc brittle and
porous are at the same time more attenuating and hotter ; and
some of them are bitterish, being intermediate between the hard
salts and aphronitrum ; and if you will warm any saltish thing
to a great degree it will straightw-ay become bitter. Thus, the
water of the Lake Asphaltitis, which they call the Dead Sea,
Ijeing contained within a hollow and hot place, and overheated
by the sun, becomes bitter, and for this reason it becomes more

14 SIMPLES. [book VII.

bitter in summer than in winter. And if you will draw some
of it, and put it into a hollow vessel in a place exposed to the
sun during the summ^' season it will straightway become more
bitter than it generally is. For no animals aj)pear to be found in
such water_, neither plants ; and although the rivers which fall
into it contain many large fishes, more especially the river
near Jericho called Jordan, none of the fishes pass the mouth
of the river, and if you will catch some and throw them into
the Lake, you will see that they die immediately, and hence
it is called the Dead Lake or Sea. Thus, that which is in-
tensely bitter is inimical to all plants and animals, and is of a
parched and dry nature, becoming like soot from roasting.
Having, therefore, settled the powers of bitter juices, and said
that they are cutting, detergent, attenuant, and decidedly hot,
to such a degree only as not to burn, we shall next proceed to
the acrid ; and first we may say of them that they are truly hot,
then corrosive, caustic, escharotic, and of a dissolvent natiu'e,
when applied externally to the skin ; but when taken inter-
nally, those which, in their whole substance are adverse to certain
animals, are all septic and destructive to them, as the cantharis
and buprestis are to men. But such as are distinguished only by
excess of their heating powers, if thicker and terrene, as
arsenic, sandarach, and the like, we call ulcerative of the
internal parts ; but if they consist of subtile parts, such as the
common seeds, carrot, anise, and the like, they are diuretic,
diaphoretic, and, in a word, cutting and discutient ; and some
are also useful in expectorations from the chest and menstrual
discharges. But acrid juices would seem to differ from bitter,
not only in possessing strong heat, but also in this, that all
bitter things are not only hot but of a dry temperament like
ashes, while in such acrid substances as are not bitter, there
is often much humiditv mixed, and therefore we use no few
acrid things as articles of food. But since enough has been
said respecting all the juices, it still remains to treat of the
vapours. ]Most of the vapours, then, afi'ect us similarly to the
juices ; for all acids, and likewise ^"inegar itself, move the senses
of smell and taste in like manner ; and acrid things, as garlic,
onions, and the like, are pungent and offensive to the smell,
no less than to the taste ; so that, Avithout tasting certain
things, such as dung, we are confident that we know its

SECT. II.] SIMPLES. 15

quality, and therefore at once we abstain from them, because
Ave repose confidence in tlie sense of smell. And of fragrant
tilings, sucli as have become putrid and offend the smell, we
straightway throw away, and do not attempt to taste ; and in
short, with regard to almost all things, the smell and taste are
found to agree ; and we refer each of them to two classes,
calling the most of those substances which have smell, odorous,
and fetid, and considering the odorous analogous to sweet
things, and the fetid to such as are not sweet to the tongue,
it would appear that from bodies which have no smell
there is but little emitted, or at least that it is disproportionate
to their bulk, as is the case with salt and sour things in par-
ticular ; for the substance of sour things is of a dense aud
cold nature, so that it is natural that what is emitted from
them should be small in quantity, thick, and terrene in its
parts, so as not to reach the brain in respiration. Hence it is
not safe to judge of their temperament from the smell as it is
from the taste : for we know that things which are inodorous
consist of thick particles, but it is not apparent how they are
as to heat and cold ; and that fragrant things consist of subtile
particles, and are hot in their nature ; but it is not shown by
the smell but by the taste what is the degree of their tenuity
and heat. The inequality of their substance is the cause why
fragrant things give no certain indication of temperament ; and
therefore it is not safe to judge of all the qiialities of the rose
from its smell ; but in taste all the parts of the bodies which
are tasted fall equably upon the tongue, and each excites a
sensation agreeably to its nature, namely, the sour part in it
which is terrene consists of thick particles and is cold ; the
bitter, which consists of subtile parts and is hot ; and third,
the waterv, which is necessarily cold. It is not safe then, as
has been said, to form a judgment of all the powers of simple
substances from the smell ; but it is still more impracticable
to estimate simple medicines from their colours ; for hot, cold,
dry, and humid substances are found of every colour. And
yet from the colour of every kind of seeds, roots, or juices it
is possible to derive a certain indication of their temperament.
For example, onions, squills, aud wine, the Avhiter they are,
are the less hot : but such as are of a yellowish and interme-
diate colour are hotter. And wheat, vetches, and kidney-

16 SIMPLES. [book VII.

beans, and chick-peas, the root of iris, that of kingspear,
and many others, are similarly affected. In each genus, for
the most part, such things as are gold coloured, red, and of a
bright yellow, are hotter than the white, so that if any con-
jecture can be formed therefrom of the powers of medicines,
it is so far well. It is best then, as has been often said and
demonstrated, to determine the powers of each by exact expe-
riment, for by this you cannot be deceived ; but before
ascertaining their powers by experiment, the taste will give
many indications, in which it will be assisted in a small
degree by the smell.'^ [Prasfatio in Aetium.)

For a fuller account of the subject, the reader is referred to
the first five books of Galen's work 'On the Powers of Simples;'
to the first tractate of the Second Book of Avicenna; and to
the introductory part of Serapion's work ' On Simples.' A
useful abstract of the ancient opinions is given in the small
tract of Albengnefit. The nature of the tastes is ingeniously
discussed in the ' Timajus' of Plato, and by Theophrastus (de
Causis Plantarum, vi.) Alkhendi's theory of the action of com-
pound medicines appears to be ingenious ; but it is complex
and difficult to explain, being founded upon the principles of
geometrical properties and musical harmony. The ' Chemia' of
Geber contains a very interesting abstract of the knowledge
possessed by the ancients regarding the recondite nature of
substances, that is to say, on alchemy, but supplies little or
no information on the Materia Medica or Pharmacy.

Before concluding our present commentary, it may be
proper to remark, as tending to show the importance of the
Galenical theory of the action of medicines in the literature
of medicine, that not only was it generally ado]3ted by most
of the Greek and Arabian authorities subsequent to Galen,
but it prevails in the works of all our old herbalists, as,
for example, Gerarde, Parkinson, Culpeper, and of the other
writers on the Materia Medica, down to the days of Quincy.
We may also take the present opportunity to state that in
the works of the ancient authorities, we have detected a
few traces of the singular doctrine of signatures, as it has
been called, but that with the exception of Geber, who
can scarcely be held to be a medical writer, we have

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 17

found no allusion to alchemy or astral influence, as having any- Comm.
thing to do with the operation of medicines. The first ancient
writer who notices alchemy, we believe, is Firmicus (iii.) Though
the Arabians were much given to this superstitious conceit, it
would appear from what we have mentioned that their medical
authoritieshadkept their minds free from the contamination of it.

SECT. III. ON THE POWERS OF SIMPLES INDIVIDUALLY.

Commentary. The part of our task upon which we are now Comm.
entering is at once so arduous and important, that we cannot ' " '
but feel diffident of our abilities to execute it properly. We
may venture, however, to assure the reader that we have spared
no pains as far as lay in our power to unravel the intricacies
with which this department of ancient science is involved,
and that, with this intention, upon eveiy article we have care-
fully compared the descriptions of the ancient authors, and have
likewise availed ourselves of the learned labours of modern
commentators on Theophrastus, Pliny, and Dioscorides. We
may mention that those we have generally reposed most con-
fidence in are INIatthiolus, Dodonteus, HarcTuin, Stackhouse,
Schneider, Sprengel, and Sibthorp. It will also be seen that
we have paid a good deal of attention to the works of our
English herbalists, the study of whose works we consider highly
important, as reflecting much light on the ancient literature
of this subject. We have further culled freely from a variety
of other soui'ces. As our limits prevent us from entering into
the discussion of controverted points, we are under the neces-
sity of merel}'^ giving the result of our own investigations in
each case. Those who wish to see the commentator's opinions
more fully on these matters are referred to the Appendix to
Dunbar's ' Greek Lexicon,' which was written exclusively by
him.

'A/3ooro»'0)',
Abrotonum, Southermoood, warms and dries in the third de-
gree, being of a discutient and cutting nature, for it is possessed
of a very small degree of sourness, and if rubbed with oil pver
the whole body, it cures periodical rigors. But it is prejudicial
to the stomach ; and the burnt being more desiccative than the
unburnt, cures alopecia, along with some of the finer oils.
III. 2

18 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides and most of the subsequent
' — " ' authorities^ with the exception of Paulus, describe two species,
the mas. and the femina. The one without doubt is the
Artemisia Abrotanum ; the other probably the Santolina Cha-
mcecyparissus. The use of southernwood is as ancient as
Hippocrates, but Galen is the ancient author who has treated
of its faculties most elaborately. He recommends it strongly
both externally in fomentations, and internally as an anthel-
minthic. For the latter purpose it is praised by the natural
historian iElian (H. A. ix, 33), and by most of the medical
authorities on the Materia Medica, both ancient and modern.
As an application in ophthalmy, along with the pulp of a roasted
quince, it is highly spoken of by Galen and the others. Galen
says, that friction with the oil of southernwood is useful in
intermittents, and this character of it is confirmed by all the
authorities down to recent times. Avicenna joins Dioscorides
in praising it as an emmenagogue, and says, that it produces
abortion, (ii, 266.) Aetius is fuller than the others on the vir-
tues of the lixivial ashes of southernwood, recommending them
particularly in diseases of the anus and in alopecia. Celsus ranks
it among the cleansing medicines (v, 5.) Pliny makes mention
of a vinous tincture (xiv, 19.) See also Dioscorides (v, 49.)
MacerFloridus, a comparatively modern authority, joins the more
ancient authorities in commending it as an antidote to narcotic
poisons. He also says, that a vinous tincture of it is useful in
sea-sickness. Serapion, after quoting freely from Dioscorides
and Galen, under this head adds, upon "an unknown authority,"
that, when boiled with oil and rubbed over the stomach, it cures
coldness of the same. (De Simpl. 317.) In the modern Greek
Pharmacopoeia (Athens, 1837), the two species of wormwood
are described by the names of Artemisia Abrotonum and Ai-te-
misia contra. See further Pereira (M. M. 1356.)

'A'yaXXo^oi',
Agallochum, is an Indian wood resembling the thyia, of an
aromatic nature. When chewed it contributes to the fragrance
of the mouth. It is also a perfume. Its root, when drunk
to the amount of a drachm weight, cures waterbrash and loss
of tone in the stomach, and agrees with hepatic, dysenteric,
and pleuritic complaints.

SECT. iiT.] SIMPLES. 19

Commentary. It is probably the lignum aloes or Aloe xy I on Comm.
AgaUoclmm, Lour., although there has been considerable dif- " ' '
ference of opinion on this point. See Gerarde^s ' Herbal' and
the commentators on Dioscorides and Mesue. Our author's
description of it is taken from Dioscorides (i, 21.) The
Arabian authorities and Simeon Seth describe several varieties
of it ; the most excellent of which is said to be the Indian.
At all times it has been much used in India as a perfume.
See in particular Avicenna, who gives an elaborate dissertation
on the different kinds of agallochum or xylaloe, found in India,
and the modes of preparing it (ii, 2, 733.) See also Sera-
pion (De Simpl. 197) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 224) ; and Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 27.) It does not occur in the Hippocratic
treatises, nor in the works of Celsus. Although not retained
in our Dispensatory, it is still kept in the shops of the apothe-
caries, and has the reputation of being cordial and alexiterial.
See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 91.)

Agaricum, Agaric, is a root or an excrescence from the
trunk of a tree, of a porous consistence, and composed of aerial
and terrene particles. It is of a discutient nature, cuts thick
humours, and clears away obstructions, of the viscera particularly.

Commentary. It appears to have been the same as the q
Boletus igniarius {touchwood or spunk), which is still retained in
our modern Dispensatories. It is a fungous excrescence which
grows on the trunk of the oak, larch, cherry, and plum.
Dioscorides and most of the ancient authorities speak highly
of it as a styptic. Dioscorides also commends it irl stomach
complaints, but Aetius maintains that it is prejudicial to the
stomach. Galen calls it cathartic, and speaks highly of its
virtues in the cure of jaundice and other hepatic aft'ectioas.
(De Simpl. v.) For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2) ;
Serapion (De Simpl. 78) ; Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 28.) They
recommend it in jaundice, like Galen, and in complaints of
the lungs, melancholy, protracted fevers, and in other cases.
It is now seldom used, being found to act harshly both as
an emetic and a cathartic. We have treated of the poisonous
agarici in another place (v, 64.) The Boletus Lmncis occurs
in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia. (Athens, 1837.)

OMM.

20 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Ayrjparov,
Ageratum, Maudlin, is possessed of discutient and slightly
anti-inflammatory powers.
CoMM. Commentary. Our modern herbalists are generally agreed
' " ' that this is our maudlin, that is to say, the Achillea Afferatum,
and the commentators on INIesue hold that it is his eupa-
torium. From Dioscorides down to modern times it has
been commended as a diuretic medicine and an emollient of
the uterus. Dioscorides, however, seems to say that it is
heating, whereas Galen represents it as mildly anti-inflamma-
tory. Perhaps there is some error in the text of the former,
(iv, 59.) We do not find it in the works of Hippocrates, nor
in those of Celsus, nor have we found it treated of by any of
the Arabians, except Ebn Baithar, who merely gives extracts
from Dioscorides and Galen (ii, 57.)

' A.yi'og T] \vyoQ,

Yitex, the C/taste-tree, heats and dries in the third rank.

It consists of fine particles and dispels flatulence, whence it is

believed to contribute to chastity, not only when eaten and

drunk, but also when strewed under one. Its seed also, when

drunk, acts as a deobstruent of the liver and spleen. When

toasted it is less flatulent and more distributable.

CoMM. Commentary. The anaphrodisiacal powers of the VitCcV

' ' ' Agnus Castus, or chaste-tree, are noticed by most of the medical

authorities, and by iElian (H. A.ix,36.) But modern authorities

question its claims to this character. Until lately, however,

it held a place in our Pharmacopoeia. Oui" author abridges

Dioscoridiss (1, 134), and Galen (De Simpl.) For the Arabians,

see particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 4-3), and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 31.)

It occurs in the works of Hippocrates.

' AypwoTiC)

Gramen, Grass, that of Parnassus is particularly useful ; it

is desiccative, moderately cooling, consists of fine particles,

and is somewhat sour ; it, therefore, is an agglutinant of bloody

Avounds, and its decoction is lithontriptic.

CoMM. Co:\iMENTARY. Dioscorldcs treats separately of the agrostis,

' — ' — ' which probably is our couch-grass, or Triticum repens, and of

the agrostis in Parnasso, which has been very doubtfully referred

SECT. III.] ■ SIMPLES. 21

to the Parnassia palustris. (iv, 30.) Our author would appear Comm.
to have coufouuded these two articles together, and to have ^ ' '
applied to the latter the characters which Dioscorides gives to
the other. The modern herbalists agree with the ancients
in commending the couch-grass as being diuretic aiM lithon-
triptic. None of the commentators or herbalists have given
a satisfactory account of the esculent grass of Galen. The
Arabians treat of the grasses very confusedly. See in parti-
cular AWcenna (ii, 2, 704) ; Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. iii, 50);
Serapion (c. 119.) In the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia the
Ttiticum repens stands for the a. (p. 72.) Apuleius says "Grseci
agrostem Latini gramen appellant."

Anchusffi, Alkanet ; there are four varieties, all of which are
not possessed of the saine powers. For that which is called
onoclea has a root which is astringent and somewhat bitter;
whence it is useful in splenitic and neplu'itic cases. It is a
suitable remedy for erysipelas when applied with polenta. The
leaves are less cooling and desiccative than the root, and,
therefore, they are also drunk for diarrhcea. The lycapsos
being more astringent, agrees in like manner with erysipelas.
The onochilos (or alcibiadios) being possessed of stronger
medicinal properties than these, is beneficial for the bites of
vipers, when applied as a cataplasm, as an amulet, and when
eaten. The fourth variety being smaller than the others, has
scarcely got a name : but being more bitter than the alcibia-
dios, it is applicable in cases of the broad lumbricus when
taken in a draught to the extent of an acetabulinn.

Commentary. The first species is either the Anchusa tine- Comm.
toria L., or the Litkospermum tinctorhim ; the lycapsos, the ' ' '
Echium italicwn L. ; the alcibiadios, the Echiinn diffiisum, and
the fourth species the Lithospermum fruticosum. There is con-
siderable difficulty, however, in determining the alkanets of the
ancients. Our author, in his account of them, follows Galen,
who, in his turn, copies from Dioscorides. AA'icenna, Rhascs,
and Haly Abbas borrow all they say of them from Dioscorides
and Galen. The only one of these substances that is retained
in our modern Pharmacopoeias is the Anchusa tinctoria, and it
is used only for colouring. The medicinal virtues of the

22 SIMPLES. • [book VII.

CoMM. Lithospermum, or of any species of EcMum, are scarcely recog-
' ' ' iiized. Indeed, as the Ancliusa tiuctoria is retained in the
modern Greek Pharmacopceia, and as it is there stated to be
a common plant in Greece, we need have no hesitation in ad-
mitting it to be the common anchusa of the ancients.

Adarce is a sort of froth of salt water, collecting abont
rubbish and weeds. It is veiy acrid, and heating almost to
burning when applied externally with other things ; for it
cannot be taken internally.
CoMM. Commentary. The description of this substance given by
" * ' Dioscorides, Galen, and the other authorities is substantially
the same as our author's, from which all we can gather is that
it was a saline concretion formed about reeds and herbs in
salt lakes. But even jNIatthiolus confesses that he never could
satisfy himself that he had found the substance in question,
and no modern authority on the Materia ]Medica has treated
of it. Dioscorides compares it to the alcyonkim, from which
we think it probable that the adarce may have been applied to
some species of this zoophyte. See Alcyonium. Dioscorides
recommends it for the cure of lepra and sciatica (v, 136.) The
Arabians borrow from him under this head. See in particular
A^icenna (ii, 2, 17) ; Serapion (c. 378.) It is not mentioned
by Celsus.

''A.^'iavTov,
Adiantum, Maiden-hair, is desiccative, attenuant, and mode-
rately discutient ; and with regard to heat and cold, it holds
an intermediate place. It, therefore, cures alopecia, discusses
swellings, proves lithoutriptic when taken in a draught, di'ies
up expectorations from the lungs, and stops defluxions of the
belly.
CoMM. Commentary. Theophrastus says that it derives its name
* from its property of not being wet in rain. He adds, that it
promotes the growth of the hair. (H. P. vii, 13.) Nicander
says the same of it. (Ther. 846.) According to Apuleius, it is
the same as the callitrichon, polytrichon, and asplenon. There
can be no doubt that it is the A. CapiUus Veneris L. Dioscorides
describes another species by the name of rpt^oVmi^cc, which

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 23

Sprengel and Schneider agree in referring it to the Aspleniuin Comm.
Trichomanes L. Stackhouse agrees with them respecting both " ' '
these species. The syiaip of capillaire, which still holds its
place in the shops as a favorite domestic medicine, is prepared
from the Adiantum.

Sempervivum, TFaU-pepper (or House-leek ?), of which there
are two varieties. It cools in the thii'd degree, is moderately
desiccative and astringent, and is applicable for erysipelas,
herpes, and inflammations from a defluxion.

Commentary. Our author, coppng from Galen andAetius, Comm.
describes two species which seem to be the Sempervivum arbo- '
reum and Sedum rupestre. Dr. Lindley, however, refers the
latter to S. ochroJeuciim. Dioscorides has a third species,
which may be referred to the Sedum stellatum. The greater
house-leek is praised by Dioscorides as an application for head-
ache, for the bites of venomous spiders, diarrhoea, and dysen-
tery ; as an anthelminthic when di'unk with wine ; for stopping
the fluor of women in a pessary, and as an application to the
eyes in ophthalmy (iv, 88, 89.) Macer Floridus commends it in
menorrhagia. He calls it acidula. Serapion, Avicenna, Rhases,
and Haly Abbas merely copy from the Greeks. Even Ebn
Baithar has nothing original under this head. These plants,
although not retained in our Dispensatory, are still allowed to
possess medicinal properties. See Lindley (^'^eg. Kingd. 345.)
It is still retained in some of the foreign Dispensatories, and
is held to be refrigerant and astringent.

^Etonychon will be treated of under the head of Stones.

A07joa,

Pulticula, Pap, is a kind of puis fit for being supped, which
is prepared from ground spelt or from any corn, and agrees
with children. It answers also for cataplasms.

Co.MMENTARV. Dioscoridcs gives the same account of it. Lomm.
It is the Puis fritilla of Pliny. ^Matthiolus says it is called ' ' '
bouiUie in French, i. e. pup. Hcsychius speaks of its being
prepared from wheat, and Pliny from rice.

24 SIMPLES. [BOOK vii.

Atyt'Awi/',
-^gilops, Cockle, is possessed of discutient poTvers, wlience
it cures indurated inflammatious and segilops (fistula lachiy-
malis.)
CoMM. Commentary. There is great difficulty in determining tlie
" '' ' grasses of the ancients. This may be seen by consulting the
' Herbar of Gerarde on this subject. The present article was
probably the JEgilops ovata. Dioscorides gives nearly the
same account of it as our author, ^yho copies Galen. He
further mentions that the juice of it, mixed up with flour and
dried, was laid up for use (iv, 136.) The Arabians borrow
closely from Dioscorides. See in particular Aviceuna (ii, 2,
211), and Serapion (c. 25.)

' Atyf {ooc,
Populus nigra, the Black Poplar ; it is heating in the first
degree, moderately desiccative, and consists of fine particles.
Its leaves, when applied with vinegar, remove gouty pains ;
but the resin of it being hotter than the leaves, is mixed with
restorative ointments and emollient plasters. But its fruit,
when drunk with vinegar, is beneficial to epileptics.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be no doubt that it is the
' " ' Populus nigra. Our author and all the other authorities,
both Greek and Arabian, copy closely from Dioscorides (i, 110.)
We will have occasion to treat of its gum or resin afterwards.
See Karabe. Celsus does not mention the black poplar. The
ai-ynooq Kpr]TiKi] of Hippocrates was no doubt a variety of
Populus nigra. For the Arabians, consult in particular
Avicenna (ii, 2, 333, 340, 364) -, Serapion (c. 266) ; and Ehases
(Cent-. 1. ult. i, 165.)

AtSotoi',
Testiculus, the testicle of a stag, when dried and triturated
with wine and drunk, is a remedy to those who have been
bitten by vipers. It is also mixed ^vith compound medicines.
CoMM. Commentary. Sextus Platonicus in like manner recom-
" ' ' mends the privy parts of a stag as an antidote for poisons.
All copy from Dioscorides (ii, 46.)

'MQu\n and Xiyvvq will be treated under A.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 25

AlOlOTTiq,

Salvia ^tliiopis^ Ethiojnan Sage, has leaves like tlie petty-
nmllein; aud the decoction of its root, when drunk, relieves
ischiatic and pleimtic diseases, hsemoptj'sis, and asperity of the
trachea, when taken with honey.

Commentary. It may be set down as being the Salvia Comm.
^tkiopis, to which our English herbalist Gerarde gives the ' ^
English name of mullein of ^Ethiopia. Neither Galen nor
Aetius has treated of it. Our author has borrowed from Dios-
corides (iv, 193.) We do not find it in the Materia jMedica
of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who
merely gives an extract from Dioscorides under this head. .

' Aifxa,
Sanguis, Blood ; no kind of it is of a cold nature, but that
of swine is liquid and less hot, being very like the human in
temperament. That of common pigeons, the wood pigeons,
and the turtle, being of a moderate temperament, if injected
hot, removes extravasated blood about the eyes from a blow;
and when poured upon the dura mater, in cases of trephining,
it is anti-inflammatory. That of the owl, when drunk with
wine or water, relieves dyspnoea. The blood of bats, it is said,
is a preservative to the breasts of virgins, and, if rubbed in,
it keeps the hair from growing ; and in like manner also that
of frogs, and the blood of tlie chamseleon and the dog-tick.
But Galen, having made trial of all these remedies, says that
they disappointed him. But that of goats, owing to its dry-
ness, if drunk with milk, is beneficial in cases of dropsy, and
breaks down stones in the kidneys. That of domestic fowJs
stops hemorrhages of the membranes of the brain, and that of
lambs cures epilepsies. The recently coagulated blood of kids,
if drunk with an equal quantity of vinegar, to the amount of
half a hemina, cures vomiting of blood from the chest. The
blood of bears, of wild goats, of buck goats, and of bulls, is
said to ripen apostemes. That of the land crocodile pro-
duces acuteness of vision. The blood of stallions is mixed
with septic medicines. The antidote from bloods is given for
deadly poisons, and contains the blood of the duck, of the
stag, and of the goose.

26 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. Our author abridges this article from Galen.
"~^^' See also in particular Serapion (De Simpl, ex Animalibus.)

* A.ipa,
Loliunij Darnel, is heating and drying, almost in the third
degree, being equal in power to the iris.
CoMM. Commentary. This, which is the Zizanien of the Arabians,
' ' ' may be set down as the Lolium temulentum. Dioscorides gives
the fullest account of its medicinal faculties ; he recommends
it along with radishes and salt as an application to gangrenous
and spreading sores, and with sulphm' and vinegar for lichen
and lepra ; when boiled with pigeon^s dung and linseed in
wine for discussing strumous and indolent tumours; for
ischiatic disease boiled with mulse and applied as a cataplasm;
and used in a fumigation with myrrh, saffron, and frankin-
cense, he says it promotes conception (ii, 122.) Aetius says,
it is more acrid but less attenuant than iris. We have not
been able to find it noticed in the works of Hippocrates nor
in those of Celsus. The Arabians merely copy Dioscorides
and Galen. See Serapion (c. 70) ; and Avicenna (ii, 2, 658.)
Our old English herbalists repeat the ancient characters of
this plant.

A/caXAic
is the fruit of a shrub growing in Egypt, the decoction of
which is an ingredient in the Collyria, for promoting acute-
ness of ^-ision.
CoMM. Commentary. Galen and Aetius have not treated of this
" * ' article. Our author copies from Dioscorides, who, under the
name of aKaKouCiq, describes it as an Egyptian plant, resem-
bling the myrica (i, 118.) We may therefore conjectm-e,
with considerable probability, that it is merely some species
or variety of the tamarix. It does not appear that it is
treated of by the Arabians, nor have we found it in the works
of Hippocrates or Celsus.

'A/ca/c/a,
Acacia is of the third order of desiccants, and of the first of
coohng medicines ; but if washed, of the second. It is sour
and terrene.

SECT. in.J SIMPLES. 27

Commentary. Dioscoricles describes the acacia as beino- Comm.
a tliorny tree or shrub, not erect, having a white flower and ' * '
fruit hke lupine, inclosed in pods, from which is expressed the
juice that is afterwards dried in the shade (i, 133.) It was
much disputed among the older commentators on Dioscorides
whether or not this description applies to the Acacia vera ;
but since the time of Prosper Alpinus, it has been generally
decided in the affirmative by all scholars, with the exception
of Dierbach, who contends in favour of the A. Senegal, with-
out any good reason, as far as we can see. This gum was
used medicinally by the authors of the Hippocratic collection,
who prescribe it as an astringent in hemorrhages, for which
purpose it is also recommended by Celsus (v. 1.) Serapion and
the others merely copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See in
pai'ticular Avicenna (ii, 2, 3.)

Urtica, the Nettle ; the fruit and leaves are composed of
, fine particles, and are desiccative without pungency ; they dis-
pel and cleanse swellings, loosen the bowels, are moderately
flatulent, and therefore incite to veneiy.

Commentary. This article is either the Urtica dioica, or Comm.
the pilulifera ; or both species were comprehended under it. ' — ^~''
In the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia, the jnlulifera stands
first (p. 164<.) Galen, like our author, calls it aphrodisiacal.
Macer Floridus recommends it strongly as being calefacient
and stimulant. Both Dioscorides and Galen agree in com-
mending it as an expectorant when the chest is loaded with
thick humours. The Arabians treat of it at considerable
length. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 714) ; Serapion (c. 150) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. ; 152.)

' A.Kau9oq,

Acanthus, Bears-breech (called also Melamphyllon and
Paideros), has discutient and desiccative powers.

Commentary. It is the plant which our English herbalists Comm.
describe by the name of Bears-breech, now called the ' * '
Acanthus mollis by botanists. Dioscorides recommends it as
being diuretic, and astringent of the bowels (iii, 17.) Our
author follows Galen. Whether " gummi acanthinum" of

28 SIMPLES. [book vit.

CoMM. Celsus (v, 2) belong to this place, or not rather to the acacia,

' ' ' as ^lilligan suggests, -^ve cannot determine for certain. Modern

authorities have confirmed the chai-acters which the ancients

ascribed to it. (See Ruttr, M. M. p. 70) ; Gray (Suppl. to

Pharmacop. p. 45.)

A/cai'0(oi',
Acanthium, is composed of fine particles, and has heating
powers, therefore it is a remedy for convulsions.
CoMM. Commentary, Gerrard and our other herbalists delineate and
' " ' describe this plant under the name of the cotton-thistle, meaning
either the Onojwrdon acanthium or 0. lUijrkii.m, cotton-thistle.
Dioscorides affirms that it is of sernce to persons affected with
tetanus, and upon his authority all the others, both ancient
and modern, ascribe virtues to it in this case. The reader
may be amused by comparing what Gerarde and Culpeper
have written of it with the ancient descriptions of Dioscorides
and Pliny. The cotton-thistle was long used as a potherb.
See Beckmann (History of luA-entions, under Artichoke) ;
and Loudon (Encycl. of Garden, p. 736.)

A.KavBa XtvKTj,
Spina alba, the IVhite-thorn. Its root is desiccative and
moderately astringent, therefore it relieves stomachic complaints,
haemoptysis, and toothache ; but its seed, consisting of fine
particles, and being of a hot nature, when drunk relieves con-
■vailsions. Acantha yEgyptia, or Arabica, the Egyptian or
Arabic thorn, is possessed of very astringent and desiccative
powers. Whence it restrains a flow of blood and other dis-
charges.
CoMM. Commentary. Respecting the two thistles here described,
^^^ we may refer the former, with Sibthorp, to the Cirsium Acarna,
and the latter, or Arabian, to the Onopordon acanthium. All
the authorities follow Dioscorides in giA'ing its characters, (iii,
12.) See Avicenna (ii, 2, 671-3) ; Serapiou (c. 130) ; Averrhoes
(CoUig. \, 42) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 670.)

' A.KIVOQ,

Acinus; it resembles basil, and is moderately astringent,
therefore it restrains aMne and uterine discharges, when

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 29

taken in a draught ; and when applied as a cataplasm, is of use
for erysipelas and pliygethlon.

Commentary. Oui* old herbalists describe it under the Comm.
name of wild basil, meaning perhaps the Ocimum pilosum, and ' ' '
there seems little reason to question their authority in this
instance. Neither Galen nor Serapion has described it. In-
deed we are not aware that anv of the Arabians has described
it except Ebn Baithar (ii, 254) ; neither have we found it in
the Hippocratic collection, nor in the works of Celsus.

A/vOi'trov or Wa^ca\iayyi^Q,

Aconitum, Wolfsbane, is possessed of septic and deleterious
properties ; it is, therefore, not to be taken internalh', but
externally it may be applied to flesh requiring erosion. The
lycoctonon, being possessed of the same properties as the
former, is pai'ticularly fatal to wolves, as the other is to
panthers.

Commentary. The two species of aconite described by Comm.
Dioscorides (iv, 77), and the other authorities, are generally ' — * — '
supposed to be the Doronicum Parclaliandtes and the Aconitum
Napellus. In the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia, the Neo-
montamim is substituted for the former of these. The
Koiufxaoov of Hippocrates would seem to be the latter. It has
been already treated of among the poisonous substances in the
Fifth Book (§45.) It was used only as an anodyne, and
principally in complaints of the eyes. Avicenna in treating
of the aconites, borrows closely from Dioscorides (ii, 2, 361,
C)76.) He says of the lycoctonon, that it is not administered
either internally or externally. Bliases says of the aconite,
that it was used to reheve pains of the eyes. (Cont. 1. ult. i,
20.)

' A/copov,

Acorum, Siveet Flag, heats and diies in the third degree. We
use its root for a diuietic, and for scirrhus of the spleen. It
also attenuates a tliickened cornea.

Commentary. It appears indisputably to be the Acorus Comm
psendacorus, as even Gerarde the old herbalist has clearly ' *
stated, and not the Acorus verus, as Dr. Hill and others have
maintained. All the ancient authorities ascribe much the

30 SIMPLES. [book vii,

CoMM. same virtiies to it as our author. See particularly Dioscorides
* ' (i^ 2) ; A"\dcenna (ii, 2, 45) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 21) ;
Serapion (c. 269.) lu the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia it is
identified with the KoXa/nog a^oj/naTLKog (p. 32.)

Locustse^ Grasshoppers, in fumigations relieve dysuria^ espe-
cially of women. The wingless grasshopper, when drunk in
wine, relieves the bite of scorpions.
CoMM. CoMMEXTAKY. It is quitc certain that the 'A/cpig of the
' ' ' Greeks, and the Locusta of the Romans was a species of locust
or grasshopper. See Harduin (ad Phn. H. N. xi, 35.) Without
doubt, then, it was the GryUus migratorius L. The wingless
locusta mentioned by our author is the insect in its larvous
state. Our author copies from, and abridges, Dioscorides
(ii, 56) ; and A%dcenna does the same (ii, 2, 388.) Celsus
treats of the locusta only as an article of food (ii, 28.) In
this wav, as is well kuovm, the locusts were much used bv the
ancients. They are not noticed, however, either as an article
of food or of medicine in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

Afcrrj fuieyaXri,
Sambucus, the Elder-tree, and ^a/xaiaKTr], Sambucus humilis
vel Ebulus, Dwarf-elder, are possessed of desiccative, moderately
discutient and agglutinative powers. Allien eaten or drunk
they occasion a discharge of water from the bowels.
CoMM. Commentary. The two species of elder, namely, the Sa?yi-
' " ' bucus nigra and Ebulus, are much commended by the ancients
for the cure of dropsy. As Dioscorides states, the elder is
hydragogue, but disagrees with the stomach. He further
recommends a hip-bath made of water in which elder has been
boiled, for obstructions and hardness of the uterus (iv, 161.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it in general
terms like Paulus. The Arabians in treating of it generally
borrow from Dioscorides and Galen. See particularly Serapion
(c. 284.) It appears to be the acte of Rhases (Cont. 1, ult. i,
23) ; and is the alctha of Ebn Baithar, according to his
German translator. Dr. Sontheimer, in which opinion we fully
agree with him. The Sambucus of A^icenna (ii, 2, 611) is

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 31

not the elder, but the jasmine. ^Ye have not been able to Comm.
detect the other in his Book on the Mat. Med., but can ' " '
scarcely suppose that he has entirely overlooked it.

"AX.c,

Sales, Salts, have desiccant and astringent powers. TMiere-
fore they consume whatever humours are in the body, and also
contract by their astringency. Whence they form pickles, and
preserve substances from putrefaction. Eoasted salts are more
discutient.

Commentary. For an account of the factitious salts of the Comm.
ancients, see in particular Pliny (H. N. xxxi, 39.) Sprengel ' ^ '
remarks that the aXog ayrvr^, or spuma maris, is merely the
skum or down of salt, which sticks to rocks in such situations
as salt is usually formed in. The a'Aoc avOog, or JIos salis,
he adds, is a very different substance, being a native, impure
carbonate of soda ; containing also magnesia, lime, and some
terrene admixtm'e, to which it owes its colour. "When de-
prived of its carbonic acid it becomes caustic, and was then
called a^poc virpov by the ancients (v. a^povtr|Ooi'.) The sal
ammoniac of the Greeks was a native fossil salt, and consider-
ably different from ours. Geoffrey seems to agree with
Salmasius, that it was the sal gem. Dr. Hill also maintains
that it was only a peculiar form of the sal gem. See also
Jameson^s ' Mineral.' (iii, 15.) In fact, from Dioscorides' de-
scription of the ammoniac salt, nobody can avoid seeing that it
was merelv a varietv of the common fossil salt. He treats of the
medicinal faculties of the salts at so great length that we dare
not venture to copy his account of them. It is literally trans-
lated by Pliny (xxxi, 45.) He recommends them internally
by the mouth and in clysters, and externally in fomentations,
baths, and fumigations. Serapion quotes the whole of Dios-
corides' chapter on Salts without supplying much additional
information of his own. He describes minutely the process
of roasting salts in an earthen vessel, and covering them up
with coals, and thus applying heat to them. The sal ammo-
niac he describes, from Arabian authorities, as being a white
red salt, extracted from hard clear stones, and being saltish,
with much pungency (c, 409.) We never could altogether
satisfv ourselves whether or not this be the same as the sal

32 " SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. ammoniac of tlie Greeks. Rliases (Cont. 1. ult. 600) and
' — " — ' A^dcenna (ii^ 2, 608) are brief and indistinct in describing tlie
sal ammoniac, but probably refer to the true sal ammoniac.
Ebn Baithar minutely describes several kinds of it. Pliny
also lias a description of a factitious salt, whicli it would
appear could be nothing else than our sal ammoniac. (N. H.
xxxvi, 45.) Still, liowever, we need have no hesitation in
setting down the ammoniac salt of the Greek medical authors
as being a variety of the sal gem. This is the conclusion
which Beckmann arrives at regarding it : he holds, however,
that Geber and Avicenna were certainly acquainted with our
ammoniac salt. (History of Inventions.)

'A\9aia Jf E/3t'(r/coc,
Althsea or Ebiscus, Marsh-mallows, is a species of wild mal-
lows. It is discutient, relaxant, anti-inflammatory, soothing,
and ripens tumours (phymata). But the root and seed have
all the other properties in a more intense degree, and are also
detergent of alphos. The seed is lithontriptic.
CoMM. Commentary. This must either be the Lavatera arborea or
" '^ ' Althcea officinalis. Dioscorides is much fuller than our author
in enumerating its properties, but upon the whole they agree
very well as to its general character. Besides the cases in'
which our author recommends it, Dioscorides speaks highly of
the decoction of it when drunk with Avine in dysuria, the
grievous pains of calculus, dysentery, and other acute affec-
tions. He also advises the mouth to be rinsed with it in
cases of toothache (iii, 153.) It would be useless to go over
the other authorities, who supply no new views. Even our
modern herbalists all agree in repeating the praises of the
marsh-mallow as delivered bv Dioscorides. For the Arabians,
see Avicenna (ii, 2, 72) ; Serapion (c. 76) ; Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. i, 26) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) This genus of the
Malvacece does not seem to be noticed either by Hippocrates or
Celsus. The Althaa officinalis occurs in the modern Greek
Phai-macopoeia, pubhshed at Athens in 1837.

' AXt/iiov,
Halimon consists of heterogeneous particles, being saltish
and sub-astringent. But the greater part of it is of a hot

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 33

temperament, mth an undigested sap. It therefore promotes
the formation of milk and semen.

Commentary. Our author abridges the characters of this Comm.
substance, which probably is the Atriplex Halhnus, from Galen ' ' '
or Dioscorides (i, 126.) It is the sea-purslane of our English
herbalists. For the Arabians, see particularly Avicenna (ii, 2,
470.)

AXKciia,

Alcaea, Vervain-mallow, is a species of wild mallows. When
drunk with wine it removes dysenteries and gnawing pains of
the belly, more particularly its root.

Commentary. All the authorities agree in gi^dng this Comm.
article, which evidently is the Malva Alccea, Yervain-mallow, the
general characters of the mallow. See particularly Dioscorides
(iii, 154.) It does not occur in the works either of Hippo-
crates or Celsus, nor, as far as we know, in those of the
Arabians.

AX/cvovm,

Alcyonia ; they are detergent and discutient of all matters,
being possessed of an acrid quality ; but the kind called mile-
sium (it is vermiform and purple) is the best : wherefore,
when biu-nt, it cures alopecia, and cleanses lichen and alphos.
That which has a smooth sui'face is most acrid, proving not
only detergent, but likewise excoriating; but that which re-
sembles unwashed wool is the weakest of all.

Commentary. For an account of the alcyonia, see Aristot. Comm.
(Hist. Anim. ix, 15) ; Pliny (N. H. x, 47, and xxxii, 27.) ^ ' '
According to Sprengel, the A. consisted of the bones of fishes
which the kingfishers had swallowed and vomited up. The
term, however, was also applied to a kind of zoophytes, five
species of which are described by Dioscorides and Pliny. The
1 st species is the Alcyonium cotoneum, Pall. ; the 2d, the
A. papillosum ; the 3d, the A. palmatum ; the 4th, the Spongia
stuposa, Ellis, or Spongia panicea, Pall. ; and the 5th, the
A. aurantium, Pall. (Mat. Med. v, 135.) GeofFroy says that
the alcyonia " are of a substance much like gum tragacanth,
and when mixed in broth of warm milk they swell and make
a rich soup." The zoophytes called alcyonia are a kind of
spongy substances, containing a sort of living jelly in their
interior. Our author abridges Dioscorides^ account of the
III. 3

34 SIMPLES. [book vir.

CoMM. alcyonia, as likewise do Aviceuna (iij 2, 605) and Rhases (Coiit.
' 1. ult. \, \, 677.) Celsus prescribes it several times as a cor-
rosive^ caustic_, and cleansing medicine, (v^ 6, 7, 18.) We
believe it does not occur in the Hippocratic treatises.

Muria, Brine; tbat "which is unmixed with other matter has
properties like salts, only weaker from the mixture with water.
But the bi"ine of pickled fish and of pickled olives is possessed
of very detergent powers, and therefore is injected in ischiatic
and dysenteric complaints.
CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. Regarding the nature of this article, there can
' " ' be no doubt. Galen recommends the brine from pickled fish
as a wash for putrid ulcers both of the mouth and rectum.
Dioscorides, in addition, recommends it for such cases as sea-
water is useful in, when poured upon the part, (v, 126.)

'AXojj,
Aloe, Aloes, is heating in the first degree, and desiccative in
the third. It is stomachic, detergent, discutient, and ecco-
protic. ^^^len washed it is less detergent, but more stomachic;
it is anti-inflammatory, and promotes the cicatrization of ulcers,
especially those about the anus and pudendum.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides is the first author who gives a
' " distinct account of this important article. He describes two
vai'ieties of the juice (gum -resin), namely, the arenaceous and
the hepatic. He says that it closes up the mouths of veins in
hemorrhoids ; but, according to A^dcenna and Mesne, it pro-
duces the contrary eflPect. Hence, says Mesne, it is hurtful in
hemorrhoids and affections of the. fundament. (De Sim pi. i.)
Galen properly remarks that it is at the same time stomachic
and eccoprotic. Didymus mentions the hepatic aloe (Geopon.
vi, 6), as do several of the medical authorities. It is marked
b}^ Dr. Pereira as being the Aloe hepatica vera and Aloe inclica
(Ph. Ed.), being the liver-coloured socotorine aloe. That is to
say, the hepatic is merely a variety of the socotorine aloe. See
also Dr. Royle (M. M. 598.) Isidorus says of aloes : " In India
et Arabia giguitur, arbor odoris suavissimi et summi." (Orig.)
Averrhoes says it is an excellent purgative which evacuates
the stomach and liver. He commends it as an application to

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 35

apostemes, (CoUig. v^ 42.) Aloe was used in stimulant appHca- CoMAf.
tions to ill-conditioned sores. See Aetius. Avicenna forbids " ' '
us to administer it diu'ing the prevalence of severe cold, (ii, 2,
64.) It was used in eye-washes (Cels. vi), as it is by the native
doctors in India to this day. (Ainslie's Mat. Ind. i, 10.) The
aloe is not found in the Materia jSIedica of Hippocrates.

'AXoc auOog,
Flos sails, the Flower of Salt, is a humid medicine, consisting
of more subtile particles than burnt salts, and is moderately
acrid and discutient.

AAoc «)(vj/,

Spuma maris; this is a frothy efflorescence of salts, but con-
sists of more subtile particles than salts^ and discusses more,
but contracts less.

Commentary. ('AXog avOog and 'AAoc a^v>;, see '^AXeg.) Comm.

AXatVjj, or Mi/og oucj

Alsine, or Auricula muris, Chickiveed, has powers like the
pellitory of the wall, namely, cold and diluent. Wherefore it
is apphcable to hot inflammations.

Commentary. This has been generally set down as the Comm.
Stellaria media, but doubtfidly. Dioscorides describes it as
a Myosotis. (ii^ 214.) See also Pliny (H. N. xx\ai, 8), and
Avicenna (ii, 2, 18.)

Our old herbalists give a confused account of the chick-
weed. In fact, this is one of the articles in the Materia
Medica of the ancients which we must set down as lost, from
our inability to determine what it was. It seems to have
been looked upon by the Arabians as an important article.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 18) ; Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 99.) Like
our author, they copy closely from Dioscorides. We have not
detected it in the works either of Hippocrates or Celsus. It
does not occur in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

'AXuTTOV,

Alypon; the seed of it purges black bile downwards when
taken in the same quantity as dodder of thyme, with salts and
vinegar ; but it occasions slight ulceration of the intestines.

36 SIMPLES. [book vir.

CoijiM. Commentary. Many of tlie older commentators supposed
' ' ' this to be the plant which produces turbit, but we shall have
occasion to discuss this question when treating of the additions
to the Materia Medica made by the Arabians. What this
article really was is very uncertain. Pliny and all the medical
authorities mention its purgative powers. See in parti-
cular Dioscorides (iv, 177), from whom our author evidently
copies.

' AXvaaov,
Alysson, Madivort, is so called because it is of use to those
who have been bitten by mad dogs. Being possessed of dis-
cutient, detergent, and desiccative powers, it removes obstruc-
tions of the kidneys, and cleanses ephelis.
CoMM. Commentary. It was supposed by the earlier herbalists
' " ' and commentators that the A. of Galen is a different substance
from that of Dioscorides. The former (which is also our
author's) is a species of horehound, to which the herbalists
give the distinctive name of Galen's madwort. It is the
Marrubium Ahjssum. That of Dioscorides has been conjec-
tured to have been some species of Veronica, but, in fact, there
is no certainty on this point, and Ave must own our inability
to perceive the difference between it and the A. of Galen.
Dioscorides recommends his plant in ephelis and hydrophobia,
(iiij 95.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 26.)

Vulpes, tJie Fox ; the whole animal, if boiled alive or dead,
renders the oil discutient, when it attracts the deep-seated
fluids to the surface. Wherefore, when arthritic patients are
put into a hip-bath of this oil for a considerable time it re-
moves the complaint entirely, if at its commencement, and
moderates it if protracted.
CoMM. Commentary. Galen and Serapion give nearly the same
" * ' account of the medicinal properties of the Canis vuljpes as our
author.

A/iopoKOC)
Amaracus, Marjoram ; it is calefacient in the third degree,
and desiccative in the second.
CoMM. Commentary. That it was some species of marjoram
' * ' appears quite certain from the ancient descriptions of it ; but.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 37

otherwise, it cannot be satisfactorily determined. Most pro- Comm.
bably, it was the same as the sampsuchus, namely, the Origa- ' * '
num Marjorana. Dioscorides strongly recommends the ointment
as an emmenagogue, and for various other purposes, (i, 78.)
For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 466) ; Serapion (c. 286);
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 439.)

A^topai'roi',

Amarantum, Amaranth, is attenuant and incisive, and there-
fore when taken with wine it promotes the menstrual discharge,
and dissolves coagulated blood when taken with wine and
honey. It dries up all defluxions, and is bad for the stomach,

CoMMEXTARY. The old herbalists describe a plant under Comm.
the English name of Flower-gentle, which they represent to be ' '
this article, but it cannot be satisfactorily determined. Our
author borrows from Galen and Aetius his account of its
medicinal properties, Avhich certainly appears rather contradic-
tory. How a plant, which they represent as being of a drying
nature, should at the same time act as an emmenagogue, does
not well appear. Om* English herbalist Gerarde sagaciously
remarks that it has probably got the character of stopping
bleeding solely from its ears being red, as if, forsooth, all red
things must act in this way ; although, as he adds, Galen had
laid it down as a rule (Simpl. 2, 4) that no inference with
regard to the virtues of substances can be drawn from their
colours. But see under helicrysus, which Dioscorides holds
to be the same plant.

Ambrosia; when applied as a cataplasm it has astringent and
repellent powers.

Commentary. Ambrosia, as Pliny remarks (H. N. xxvii, 11), Comm.
is a vague name which has been applied to various plants.
Our old herbalists describe a plant under the English name of
Oak of Cappadocia, which they represent as the A. of Dioscorides.
He gives it the same medicinal character as our author (iii.)
Galen and Aetius do the same. It probably is the Ambrosia
maritima, a plant not yet wholly unknown to the shops. See
Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 70.) We have not found it
described by any of the Arabians except Ebn Baithar (i, 80.)

S8 SIMPLES, [booktii.

"A/H/LU,

Ammij Bishop's Weed, is of the third order of calefacieuts
and desiccantSj being composed of subtile particles, discutient
and diuretic ; but the seed of it is particularly useful.
CoMM. Commentary. The Ammi copticum, or Bishop's weed, has
' • ' long held a place in the Materia ]\Iedica, and yet it is now
scarcely recognized. See Dioscorides (iii, 63) ; Galen (De
Simpl. v) ; Avicenna (ii, %, 60) ; Serapion (c. 297.) It is now
ranked as one of the four lesser hot seeds, and is held to be
attenuantj aperient, and carminative. In a word, all the
authorities, ancient and modern, agree in giving it the charac-
ters bestowed upon it by Dioscorides and Galen.

AytUOlTOl',

Lapis Amiantus, is formed in Cyprus, being like stone-
alum, aud is so called because when put into the fire it is not
bui'nt. Some use it in desiccative depilatories.
CoMM. Commentary. This is generally confounded with the
Ahimen plumosum, with which it is compared by Dioscorides,
but it is in fact a different substance, being a variety of asbestus.
Dioscorides does not mention any medicinal properties of which
it is possessed, but states that garments were made out of it,
which resisted the force of fire. (M. M. v, 155.) See also
Pliny (H. N. xix, 4.)

''A^^UOC:,

Arena, Sand; that on the sea-shore is sufficiently desiccative.

Wherefore when heated by the sun it dries up all humid bodies

which have been buried in it ; and when roasted it forms a

dry fomentation instead of millet or salts.
CoMM. Commentary. The Sand of the Sea-shore. We have often
" • ' had occasion, in the course of this work, to mention the use of

heated sand as a diT fomentation.

AjniLi(i)i'iaKoi' Ovpia/Lia,

Ammoniacum thymiama. Ammoniac Perfume, is a juice of

intense emollient powers, so as to dissolve scii*rhous tumours

and tofi.

CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides describes the ammoniac as being

the juice of a Ferula growing near Cyrene, and mentions after-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 39

wards that an inferior kind is also obtained from a tree of the Comm.
reed tribe in Lybia, near Amnion. The reed -which produces " • '
the better kind is now called the Ferula tingitana. ^^hether the
infezior kind be the commercial ammoniacum of the present
day, which is procured from the Dorema ammoniacum, does not
appear certain. Dr. Hill holds that the ancients were ac-
quainted with the two kinds which we have. In the modern
Greek Pharmacopoeia it is questioned whether it is the
product of the Heracleum gummiferum, or Ferula orientalis.
The thymiama, or svffimentum, was the finest kind of ammo-
niac, and was so called from being used in religious rites.
Dioscorides recommends ammoniac for many medicinal pur-
poses, both internally and externally ; as for loosening the
bowels when taken in a draught ; for asthma and other affec-
tions of the chest when given as a linctus with honey ; for
indurations of the spleen and liver when applied in the form
of a cataplasm; and for nebulae of the cornea, (iii, 88.)
Galen gives nearly the same characters of it. Serapion quotes
Dioscorides and Galen, and adds a few other particulars of not
much importance from Arabian authorities, such as that it is
diuretic and emmenagogue, and expels humours from the body.
(c. 268.) Rhases, Avicenna, Ebn Baithar, and Haly -Abbas
supply no additional^ information of any interest under this
head. Averrhoes commends it as a medicine which softens
and dissolves hard tumours. (Collig. v, 42.)

'A^to'pyr?,

Amurca, the Lees of Oil, is of the second order of intensely
calefacient, and desiccative medicines. By these means it
cures ulcers in dry bodies, but increases and exasperates those
in others.

Co:m:mentary. The amurca, as Dioscorides states, is the Comm.
sediment of strained oil. Celsvis mentions it often as a strong ' * '
external application, in which form it is greatly commended by
Dioscorides in various affections. He says it is an article in
collyria and plasters. He also speaks of its being used as an
injection into the rectum, the m-ethra, and the vagina, in diseases
of these parts.

40 SIMPLES. [bookvii.

A/LiTreXoTrpacfoi',
Ampeloprasum^ Vine-leek, being a species of wild leek^ is
most acrid and liot according to the last degree : hence it
proves deleterious. It is incisive, deobstruent, and hurtful to
the stomach.
CoMM. Commentary. The Allium Ampeloprasum L, is recom-
" ' ' mended by Dioscorides as being more powerfully calefacient
and emmenagogue than the leek {Allium Porrum) ; and when
given in food, beneficial to persons stung by venomous animals.
Our author follows Galen.

'AyitTTfAoc ay^ia,
Yitis sylvestris, the Wild Vine; its grapes and tops are pos-
sessed of detergent powers, but have also some astringency.
The powers of the cultivated vine are hke those of the wild,
but weaker. The shoots of the ivhite vine (called also bryonia
and psilothrum) are eaten as stomachics, and prove diuretic.
The root is detergent, attenuant, and moderately hot. Where-
fore it melts down the spleen when drunk or applied externally
as a cataplasm with figs ; and it cures itch and leprosy. The
black vine, also called bryony, is like the aforementioned, only
weaker.
CoMM. Commentary. The wild vine is evidently the Tamus com-
" "" ' munis ; the white the Bryonia dioica ; and the black the
Bryonia alba. Gerarde, om* old herbalist, says that the reason
why the bryony and the wild \ine are confounded together,
is that Pliny could not sufficiently expound them (xxiii, 1),
and made them all one, in which error are all the Arabians.
Dioscorides treats of them at considerable length, and more
especially of the white, which he commends in the strongest
terms, as an application to mahgnant and ill-conditioned sores,
(iv, 180.) He and Oribasius take notice of its purgative
powers. Our modern herbalists and older writers on the
Materia Medica, all treat of the biTonies in the same terms as
the ancient authorities. See Bryonia.

AfivycaXa,
Ajuygdalse, Almonds; the bitter are possessed of powers
which are attenuant and deobstruent of deep-seated viscid and

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 41

thick humours, aud detergent of those lodged in the skin.
The wood has tlie same powers. The sweet are moderately-
hot.

Commentary. Respecting this article there can he no Comm.
difference of opinion. Plutarch and many of the ancient ' '
authorities take notice of the powers of almonds in resisting
intoxication. Dioscorides states that a cataplasm formed from
almonds, with vinegar or rose oil, and applied to the forehead
or temples relieves headache. Taken internally, he says, they
are laxative, soporific, and diuretic, (i, 186.) Serapion gives
nearly the same account of them. (c. 82.) Dioscorides greatly
commends almond oil as a demulcent in various complaints,
such as pains, inflammation, aud displacement of the uterus,
also in headache and earache, in nephritic, calculous, and other
diseases, (i, 38.) AA^cenna gives it the same character, and
otherwise enlarges very fully in recapitulating the virtues of
almonds. As an article of food, he says, bitter almonds are
stomachic, and sweet almonds are fattening. He recommends
them as an application to herpes and other diseases of the
skin. Bitter almonds he speaks highly of in obstructions of
the kidneys. Altogether the account which he gives of this
article is most interesting, (ii, 257.) See also Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. i, 45) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) The latter recommends
them as powerful deobstruents of the liver.

' AftvXoj',

Amylum, Starch, is formed from clean wheat moistened with
water during the heat of the dog-days, which water is to be
poured off five times in the day. TN'hen it becomes very soft,
it is to be strained and the water poured off, and the bran
separated ; and it is to be di'ied quickly in the sun before it
become sour. Its powers are moderately cooling, desiccant,
and emollient of acrid humours.

Commentary. Om* author's account of the mode of pre- Comm.
paring starch is mostly taken from Dioscorides (ii, 123.) ' ^ '
Pliny describes the process in nearly the same terms. He
says, it may be prepared from wheat or spelt. (H. N. xx-\-iii,
17.) He calls it astringent, and recommends it in haemoptysis.
Serapion also recommends it in this complaint, (c. 29.) Celsus

SIMPLES. [book yii.

CoMM. ranks it among the " res boni succi/' (ii, 20.) It is men-
" — ' — ' tioned by Hippocrates, who recommends it as an apphcation
to the mouth of the womb. (De Mulieb. ii.)

' A.IX(s)fXOV,

Amomum ; its powers are hke those of the sweet-flag ; but
the former is the di-ier, and the latter more digestive.
CoMM. Commentary. For the general literature of this subject,
"~^' — ' we would beg to refer to what we have said in the Appendix
to the Greek Lexicon. Notwithstanding all the illustration
which it has received, it must be admitted that now we have
no practical acquaintance with the article in question, unless
we agree with Dr. Pereira in setting it down as the Amomum
Cardamomum. This opinion, however, which had been pre-
viously started by Feseus (Flor. Virg. xvi, 199), is controverted
by the learned Sprengel. (ad Dioscor. i, 14.) But still if
the cardamom be not exactly the amomum of the ancients,
there can be no doubt that these two substances must have
been very similar to one another. Dioscorides treats more
fully of this article than Galen, Aetius, Oribasius, or our author,
describing it as being calefacient, astringent, desiccative, sopo-
rific, and anodyne when applied in a plaster to the forehead,
and stating that it ripeus and discusses boils and meliceris,
proves useful to persons stung by scorpions, in a cataplasm
with basil; relieves gouty persons, soothes inflammations of
the eyes, and those in the bowels, with raisins ; that it is useful
in female complaints, in the form of a hip-bath, and that the
decoction of it is fitting in cases of nephritis, hepatitis, and
gout, (i, 14.) Serapion quotes the descriptions of it given
by Dioscorides and Galen, and adds, upon the authority of
Humaim, the son of Isaac, that it is possessed of inebriating
and soporific powers, (c. 279.) Avicenna's account of it is made
up from Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion (ii, 251.) Haly
Abbas recommends the decoction of it [hamama) in diseases
of the liver and kidneys. Celsus includes both the amomum
and cardamomum (Avhich, by the way, seems decidedly to
prove that they were not exactly the same thing) among the
ingredients of an emollient plaster [mcdagma) which he de-
scribes, and which he recommends as an excellent application

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 43

to abscesses^ and various schirroiis tumours, (v^ 18, 7.) It does Comm.
not occur, we believe, in the Materia Medica of Hippocrates ; " * '
at least we bave failed to detect it Avbile writing tbis article.

A-vayaWiQ,

Anagallis, Pimpernel; botb kinds are of sufficiently deter-
gent powers, having some hottish and attractive properties,
so that they extract thorns ; and the juice of it purges by
the nose.

Commentary. These two well-known plants, namely, the Comm.
AnagaUis arvensis and ccerulea, are included in all the ancient ' * '
lists of medicinal herbs, and were only of late excluded from
our British Pharmacopoeias. All the authorities, ancient and
modern, give them the same characters as Dioscorides, to whom
oui' author is principally indebted, (ii, 209.) He says they are
useful in diseases of the kidneys and liver. (1. c.) The ana-
gallis does not occur in the works of Celsus. For the Arabians,
see Serapion (c. 155) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 32.) They all copy
from Dioscorides and Galen. Even Ebn Baithar supplies
nothing of much consequence, (i, 90.)

KvayvooQ,

Anagp'us, Stinking-bean Trefoil; is a strong-scented and
acrid shrub of hot and discutient powers, but the seed con-
sists of more subtile particles, and is emetic.

Commentary. Dioscorides and Pliny recommend the Ana- Comm.
gyris fatida for promoting the pains of labour, and the expul-
sion of the placenta after delivery. It is curious to remark
that our old herbalists ascribe the same virtues to it. It was
therefore to our forefathers in the profession what the ergot
of rye is to the present generation ; being, according to Galen,
an acrid, diaphoretic, and heating substance, its action must, in
many respects, have resembled the ergot. With the exception
of Oribasius, who merely copies Dioscorides, we are not aware
of any ancient writer that treats of it, with the exception of
Ebn Baithar, and he also merely copies the descriptions of it
given by Dioscorides and Galen. Though excluded from our
Dispensatory, this article is not wholly unknown to the shops.
See Gray (Suppl. to Pharra. 93.)

44 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Ai'opa/vjj,
Portulaca, Purslain, is cooling in the third degree, but
humectates in the second ; aud by these powers it relieves heat
of the stomach when applied to the abdomen, and dispels
defluxions. By its Adscidity it smooths the teeth when set on
edge by acids ; and by its astringency it relieves dysentery
and hemorrhages.
CoMM. Commentary. Aetius, like our author, describes the purs-
' ' ' lane {Portulaca oleracea) as a cooling and sub -astringent herb.
Both he and our author copy from Galen, who writes earnestly
in commendation of this plant, which retained its place in our
English Dispensatories down to a late date. Dioscorides like-
wise writes fully on its \drtues, recommending it as a cooling
and astringent medicine, externally, in pains of the head, in-
flammations of the eyes &c., and internally, for inflammations
of the bowels, intestinal worms, hsemoptysis, hemorrhoids, and
various other cases, (ii, 150.) Celsus also calls it an astrin-
gent and cooling herb, (ii.) For the Arabians, see Serapion
(c. 349) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 534) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 563) ;
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) They treat of it in nearly the same
terms as the Greeks.

Androssemum, Tutsan, or Park-leaves, (or St. John's wort ?) ;
there are two varieties of it, the one of which is called ascyrron
and ascyrroides, being a species of hypericon, but the other is
named dionysias. Their fruit is purgative, but their leaves
more desiccant.
CoMM. Commentary. Our Tutsan or Park-leaves has been gene-
" ' ' rally set down as this plant, but Sibthorp, who viewed the
plants of classic lands on the spot, inclines to the Htjpericum
ciliatum. The truth of the matter we believe to be that as
the Hypericum is a numerous genus, and the species have a
close resemblance to one another, they were often confounded
together by the older authorities. Both Culpeper the herbalist
and Rutty have expressed then' wonder that so important an
article as the androscemum should have been lost sight of in
recent times. Pliny, and all the medical authorities, recom-
mend it strongly as an application to burns and ulcers, and

■i

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 45

ascribe cholagogue powers to it when administered internally. Comm.
See Dioscorides (iii, 163) ; Galen (De Simpl. v) ; Aetius (i) ; ' " '
Oribasius (Med. Coll. xiii) ; Ebn Baitliar (ii, 579) ; Rliases
(Cent. 1. ult. i^ 59.) The last two merely give extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen.

Androsaces, is a bitter and acrid herb, discutient and desic-
cative. It and its fruity when drunk, are diuretic.

CoMMEiNTAUY. Tliis is a Syrian plant^ which, although Comm.
both Matthiolus and Gerarde pretend to give figures of it, " ' '
has never been satisfactorily determined. Serapion and Avi-
cenna have completely omitted treating of it, and Rhases
merely says of the androsafes, by which he probably meant
the androsaces, that it is decidedly heating with moderate
astringency. (Cont, 1. ult.) Our author seems to copy from
Dioscorides (iii, 140.)

'a '

Anemone, Wind-jfoivei' ; all the varieties of it have powers
which are acrid, detergent, epispastic, and open the mouths of
vessels : whence they increase phlegm, remove leprosy when
applied, and attract milk.

Commentary. The wind-flowers, so celebrated in ancient Comm.
poetry, being a numerous genus, there has been some difficulty ' ' '
in determining exactly the species described by Dioscorides.
He mentions two, the cultivated and the wild, and divides
each into two varieties, according to the diff^erence of colour
in their flowers. The former may be set down as the A.
coronai'ia, and the other as the A. nemorosu. The latter only
is indigenous in this country, but the other is commonly cul-
tivated in gardens. He recommends them principally as
external applications, as for foul ulcers, in collyria for inflam-
mation of the eyes, and in pessaries to promote menstruation,
(ii, 207.) Galen and the succeeding authorities follow him.
The anemone is not to be found in Celsus. For the Arabians,
see Avicenna (ii, 2, 655) ; Serapion (c. 72) ; Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. iii, 48) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 1 00.) They do little more than
copy from Dioscorides. The A. prateasis occurs in the modern
Greek Pharmacopoeia (132.)

46 SIMPLES. [book vii.

' Avr]9ov,
Anetlium, Dill; it warms in the second degree intensely,
and dries in nearly tlie same degree. When boiled in oil it
is diaplioretic, anod}Tie, and soporific ; and concocts crnde
swellings. But when burnt it becomes of the third order of
heating and drying medicines, and is useful when sprinkled
upon foul ulcers. But the green is more humid, and less hot
and digestive.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author condenses and abridges the
account of the dill [Anethum graveolens) giA^en by Galen.
Dioscorides, in his usual empirical style, recommends it for
various pm'poses, such as promoting the flow of milk, stopping
slight vomiting, opening the bowels, increasing the urine,
proving useful to hysterical women in a hip-bath, and so forth,
(iii, 60.) The Arabians as usvial copy from both. See Avi-
cenna (ii, 2, 69.)

' AvBvXkiQ,
Anthyllis ; there are two varieties, both of which are desic-
cant applications to ulcers ; but that resembling the ground-
pine consists of more subtile particles, so as to be beneficial in
epileptic cases. It is also more detergent.
CoMM. Comment AKY. The former species, which Dioscorides de-
" " scribes and recommends for the cure of wounds, we would
willingly refer to the Anthyllis vulneraria, but the predomi-
nance of authority is against it, and in favour of the Cressa
cretica. The other is probably the Ajiiga Iva. Avicenna
joins Dioscorides in commending it as a Aulnerary herb (ii, 2,
744), for which virtue the anthyllis was long celebrated, as its
scientific name implies.

A.V1](J0V

Anisum, Anise; the seed is particularly acrid, eating, and

drying in the thu'd degree. Hence it is diuretic and dispels

flatus.
CoMM. Commentary. Serapion and Avicenna, like the Greek
" " ' authorities, call the Pimpinella anisum diuretic and emmena-

gogue. It is now reckoned the first of the four hot seeds, the

other three being carui, cumin, and fennel.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 47

'A.i>Tippivov or ' Avappii'ov,

Antirrinoiij or Anarriuon, Snapdragon, has properties re-
sembling those of the bubonium, but weakcrj whence you
may learn its properties.

CoMMEXTARY. Galcu writcs of this article, Antirrinum Comm.
Orontium, or Calfsnout, as being of no use in medicine. (De ' ' '
Simpl. V.) Dioscorides, also, mentions it only as an amulet
and external application, (iv, 131.) It is scarcely noticed by
the other authorities. According to Pliny, it is emmenagogue.
Serapion has omitted it.

' KvtoviQ or ' Q,i'(ji)viQ,

Anonis, or Ononis, Rest-harrow, has heating powers, especially
in its root. Its juice, when drunk with wine, promotes the
secretion of urine, is lithontriptic, breaks eschars, and soothes
pains of the teeth.

Commentary. Our author abridges his account of the Comm.
Ononis antiquorum from Galen. All in fact borrow from ' * '
Dioscorides, who further mentions of it, that it was sometimes
used as a pickle (iii, 18.) It would appear to be the Onobes
of Rhases (Cont. i, 520), who gives the characters of it from
Galen. Serapion and Avicenna have omitted it. Modern au-
thorities enumerate it among the five aperient roots. It is
only of late years that it has been expelled from our Pharma-
copoeias. Even yet it is not wholly unknown to our apothe-
caries. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 94.) Two species
of the Anonis, the antiquorum and spinosa, occur in the modern
Greek Pharmacopoeia (p. 119.)

ATTapivT),

Lappa, Cleavers (which some call philanthropon, others
oraphalocarpou), is moderately detergent and desiccativc; it also
consists of subtile particles.

Commentary. All the herbalists and best commentators Comm.
agree that it is the Galium aparine. (See Gerarde, Sprengel, " * '
and others.) According to Dioscorides a decoction of its
leaves is useful to persons bitten by phalangia and vipers, when
drunk with wine ; an injection of the same into the cars
cures earache ; and when mixed up with axunge it dis-
cusses scrofulous tumours. Galen and the subsequent autho-

48 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM, rities seem to attach less importance to it. (iii, 94.) We

" cannot find it in Serapion^ Rhases, Avicenna, nor Haly Abbas ;

but it is treated of by all our older herbalists, and has found

a place in many modern pharmacopoeias. It is not contained,

however, in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

' Attiov,
Pyrum, the Pear, is unequal as to temperament, consisting
partly of terrene and partly of watery matter. When eaten,
therefore, it is stomachic, and quenches thirst. When applied
as a cataplasm it dries and cools moderately.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author copies the characters of the
' " ' Pyrus commwiis from Galen and Aetius. We have treated
of it as an article of food in the First Book. Both Dioscorides
and Pliny make mention of perry. Dioscorides says, that
pears prove prejudical to hungry persons when eaten, (i, 167.)

Attokvvov or J^vvoK^a/nj^i],
Brassica canina, Dog's-bane ; it is also called cynomoron, be-
cause it proves quickly fatal to dogs. But it is also deleterious
to men, being very fetid and hot, without being desiccant.
Hence, when applied externally as a cataplasm it is discutient,
CoMM. Commentary. Our author borrows his account of this
' " ' article very closely from Galen. It is clearly a poison rather
than a medicine. In fact, it is classed by Schulze among the
ancient poisons. (Toxicol, veterum.) Orfila also treats of it
among the acrid poisons (p. 82, Eng. ed.) It seems doubt-
ful whether it be the Periploca Graca, as we formerly stated it
to be (II, 242) ; the Cynanclms erectus, as Sprengel supposes ;
or one of the species of Apocynum. Having no practical ac-
quaintance with these herbs, we cannot pretend to give any
decided opinion on the subject.

A.7royryfjia,

Apochyma, is the old pitch scraped from ships. It is

solvent, desiccant, and discutient of tumours.

CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides calls it also Xu)Triaaci. It con-

' * ' sists, as he explains, of the wax and pitch of ships which

had been macerated in salt water. Pliny saj^s of it, " Zopissam

eradi navibus diximus cera marino sale macerata. Optima haec

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 49

a tirocinio na\dum. Adclitur autem in malagmata ad dis- Comm.
cutiendas collectiones.^^ (H. N. xxiv, 26.) " " '

'Apay^vr],

Aranea, the Spicier, when softened into a plaster, and ap-
plied to the forehead and temples, is said by Dioscorides to
remove the periodical attacks of tertians. Its web, when ap-
plied, stops hemorrhage, and presences superficial sores from
infliimmation.

Commentary. Dioscorides describes two species, which Comm.
probably are the Aranea retiaria, and the Aranea domestica. ' " '
Serapion gives the same account of their medicinal properties.
They appear to have been principally used externally, as an
anti-inflammatory application.

A^yefX(i)vr],

Argemone, Prickly Poppy, is possessed of detergent and
discutient powers.

Commentary. Of the two species described by Dioscorides, comm.
the former, which is the Papaver argemone, is recommended "^ " '
bv him in nebulae and albugo of the eve, and its leaves as a
soothing cataplasm for inflammations. The other, which may
be the Geum iirbanvm, or avens, he also recommends principally
as an external application in sores and aff"ections of the eyes ;
but adds of it, that when drunk with wine it is useful in the
case of persons stung by venomous animals, (ii, 208.) Galen
and the succeeding authorities treat of it more cursorily ; and
the Arabians would seem not to treat of it at all, with the ex-
ception of Ebn Baithar, who merely gives translations of what
Dioscorides and Galen had written of it. (i, 28.)

Apt(70pOl',

Arisarum, Friar's Cowl, is smaller than the wakerobin,
but much more acrid ; and has a root of the size of an olive.

Commentary. Our herbalists give the name of Friar's Cowl Comm.
to this plant, which even they admit to be possessed of insig- " " '
nificant powers. It is the aris of Pliny. (H. N. xxiv, 16.) Its
botanical name is Arum arisaron. Dioscorides calls it an acrid
medicine, and recommends it solely in collyria. (ii, 198.) The
Arabians appear to have confounded it with the arum, under

III. 4

50 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. the name of Luf. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 132) ; and Ebn

""^^ Baithar (ii, 449.)

A.oit7To\oyria,
Aristolocliia, Birthwort ; all kinds of it are liot, consist
of subtile particles, and are detergent, bitter and subacrid ;
and are most useful remedies. The round consists of more
subtile particles, and is every way more drastic. The clematitis
is fragrant but weaker. The long is, in other respects, inter-
mediate between these, but no less hot than the round.

CoMM. CoMMENTAKY. Thrcc specics of the Birthwort, the Aris-
tolochia longa, rotunda, and clematis, have been described by
the authorities from Diosoorides downwards. The first two
still retain their places in our Pharmacopoeias, but are seldom
used. Dioscorides recommends them, especially as uterine
medicines, for promoting menstruation, the lochial discharge,
and the expulsion of the foetus. He also says it is useful in
afi'ections of the chest, the spleen, and in other diseases, (iii, 4, 5.)
The toxicologists from Nicander downwards recommend the
birthwort as an antidote to poisons. See also Theophr. (H. P.
ix, 15) ; and Apuleius (De Herbis.) Mesue describes it as being
phlegmagogue, cliolagogue, and emmenagogue. He also re-
commends it in a fumigation along with arsenic for asthma.
(De Simpl. ii, 27.) Avicenna treats of it at great length, re-
commending it strongly as an uterine and alexipharmic medi-
cine, (ii, 2, 49.) See also Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 77) ;
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Serapion (c. 171) ; Ebn Baithar,
pluries. Pliny describes a fourth species under the name of
Pistolochia. ^Modern authorities confirm the birthwort's cha-
racter as to its being powerfully emmenagogue. See Quincy,
Lewis, Pereira, and the other writers on the Materia Medica.

Junipeinis, the Jumper, heats and dries in the third degree.
The fruit is equally calefacient, but desiccant only in the first
degree. '

CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides describes two species of it, the
' "^ ' major and the minor, which probably are to be referred to the
Juniperus macrocarpa, Sibth., and the /. oxycedriis. He calls
them acrid, diuretic, and calefacient, and fui'ther recommends
them in diseases of the chest, in the hysterical convulsion, and

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 51

as being alexipharmic. (i, 103.) The other authorities, both Comm.
Greek and Arabian, copy closely under this head from him. ' ' '
See in particular A^dcenna (ii, 2, 359) ; and Ebn Baithar (ii,
189.) The vernix is a resinous gum, which is procured from
the juniper ; it is called Sandarax by the Arabians, and is to
be carefully distinguished from the sandaracha or sulphur et of
arsenic. They recommend it in haemoptysis. See Serapion,
Rhases, and Avicenna. Of the juniper, see further under
KtSpoc, and appendix under Sandaracha.

Arcium (called also Prosopites) ; its leaves are like those of
the colocynth, but larger and harder. It is discutient and
desiccant, and has some stypticity. Wherefore, its leaves
cui'e old sores.

Commentary. The ancient descriptions of this plant seem Comm.
to point to the burdock, which, however, owing to a confusion ^~~'^~'
of names, has been called the Arctium lappa. Dioscorides re-
commends it internally in diseases of the chest, and externally
as a cataplasm to old ulcers. (iv, 105.) This is the same as
the second arctium of Galen, who recommends it in the same
cases as Dioscorides. Apuleius, like Dioscorides, says it is
useful in cases of strangury. Our old herbalists treat of the
virtues of the burdock in the same terms as the Greek and
Roman authorities. The Arabians, as far as we can discover,
do not treat either of the arcion or the arction, Avith the ex-
ception of Ebn Baithar, who merely gives extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen, and seems puzzled to distinguish the
two plants from one another, (i, 25.) In the modern Greek
Dispensatoiy both the Arctium hardana and the A. lappa are
set down as corresponding to the apKeiov.

' ApKTlOV,

Arctium, Lappa, is like the verbascum ; its roots are tender,
white, and sweet : it consists of subtile particles, and is pos-
sessed of desiccant and moderately detergent powers.

Commentary. This, which is treated of under the same Comm.
name by Dioscorides (iii, 104), and is the former arctium of" ' '
Galen, is probably the Verbascum sauf/uineum. The description
of it given by Galen, at all events, points to some species of

52 SIMPLES. [book yii.

CoMM. the mullein. Both the authorities we have mentioned recom-
" mend it as an appHcation to burns and chilblains.

Armeniacum, has detergent properties with a little acrimony,
and a small degree of astringencv. It is therefore mixed up
with ophthalmic medicines, and promotes the growth of the
hairs of the eyelids.
CoMM. Commentary. We shall not enter into the discussion of dis-
" ' ' puted points respecting this article, further than to state our
own opinion, that in all probabiHty it was a native ore of carbo-
nate of copper ; but which of the species or sub-species described
by modern mineralists the armenium was, we cannot venture to
decide. See Cleavland's Mineralogy (p. 570, &c.) Dioscorides,
who treats of it under the name of ai'menium, (v, 105), com-
pares it to cluysocolla, which it is well ascertained is that
species of native carbonate of copper now described under the
names of copper green and mountain green. He merely re-
commends it as a cosmetic when applied to the eyelashes.
Serapion confounds this substance with the Lapis armeuiacus,
(c. 404) ; but AA-icenna accurately distinguishes between them,
(ii, 2, 56, 415.)

Apvapu),

Arnabo, is one of the aromatics. Hence it is mostly mixed
up with ointments, being possessed of hot and dry powers in
the third degree, like cassia and carpesium. Hence Posidonius
says, that it may be used instead of cinnamon when it is not
at hand.

Commentary. This article, which is treated of 'only by -

Aetius (xvi, 113), besides our author, has never been accu- i

rately determined. It has been supposed to be the zerum- \

beth, of which we >viU have occasion to treat more fully in
another place. See the Appendix.

AoI'OyXw(T(70V,

Plantasro, Plantain, both cools and di'ies in the second
degree, being composed of a watery and a terrene substance,
and having a little astringency ; therefore it agrees with ma-
lignant ulcers, defluxions, and mortifications; by the symmetry

CoMM.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 53

of its temperament it stops hemorrliages, and agrees with most
of tliem. For it is desiccant without being stimulant, and
cooUng without Toeing narcotic.

CoMMEXTARY. The greater plantain of Dioscorides was Comm.
probably the Plantayo major, which, in all ages down to the
present times, has been so celebrated as a vulnerary herb.
Our author's account of its virtues is taken either from
Dioscorides or Galen, for, in the present instance, there is
scarcely a shade of difference in opinion between these two
authorities. The lesser plantain of Dioscorides is either the
lanceolata or mm'itima, probably the former, (ii, 152.) See
Macer Floridus. Avicenna and Serapion copy word for word
from Dioscorides and Galen. None of the plantains are men-
tioned b}' Hippocrates. Celsus places the " plantago" in the
list of substances which are both astringent and cooling,
(ii, 33.) None of the species of plantago here described occur
in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

'Apoi^,
Arum, JFakerobm, is of the first order in heating and
drying, being formed of a terrene substance that is hot and
detergent. Its roots are hotter. But the dracunculus is
stronger.

Commentary. We have all along assumed, with our older Comm.
herbalists, that this is the wakerobin or cuckow-pent, namely, ' ' '
the Arum maculatum, L. Pliny and Mesne are the only
ancient authors who have noticed its purgative powers. Our
author's account of its faculties is much the same as that given
by Dioscorides, Galen, and Oribasius, and its ancient character
has been amply confirmed by modern authority. The Arabians
treat of it fulh% but rather confusedly, under the name of Liif.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 432) ; Serapion (c. 43) ; Ebn Baithar (ii,
246.) Even at the present day it is not wholly excluded from
the Materia ]\fedica. See Pereira (]\I. M. p. 811.) We have
treated of its congener, the dragon herb, as an article of food,
in another place. See Book I, 114.

'ActaiviKOV,
Arsenic, is possessed of caustic powers. It is used also for
depilatories, but if the application l)c allowed to remain long

54 SIMPLES. [book vii.

it affects the skin itself. Wlien burnt its particles become
attenuated.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be no hesitation in deciding that
" ' ' this is the yellow- sulphuret of arsenic, commonly called
orpiment, the latter term being a corruption of auripig-
mentum, the Latin name of it. See Celsus (v, 5.) The
ancients used this mineral very freely as an external applica-
tion, and internally by the mouth, in clysters, and in fumiga-
tions. Avicenna recommends arsenic with the gum of pine,
in the form of a pill, for asthma. He also speaks highly of a
potion containing arsenic and honeyed water. He particularly
commends arsenic as an application to herpes esthiomenos of
the nose, (ii, 2, 48.) Csehus Aurelianus recommends an in-
jection containing arsenic for ascarides. (Tard, Pass, iv, 7). It
was freely used in injections for the cure of chronic dysentery.
(See Book iii.) Serapion speaks favorably of it in complaints
of the eyes. (§ 381.) Servitor says, that sublimed arsenic is a
septic and pungent medicine, which removes the fungous flesh
of ulcers, and is a depilatory. He describes minutely the
process of subliming and whitening it. AA-icenna likewise
makes mention of white arsenic. Geber also treats of sub-
limed arsenic, by which it is clear he meant the factitious oxide
with which we are now familiar, (iii, 29.)

AoTfyittcrm,
Artemisia, Mugwort; both varieties are heating in the
second degree, and desiccant in the first. They are composed
of subtile particles, so that they break down stones in the
kidneys, and suit with fumigations of the womb.
CoMM. Commentary. The three species of the artemisia described
' ' ' by Dioscorides are probably the arborescens, spicata, and
camjjestris. He recommends the artemisia strongly as an
emmenagogue, when given internally, in the form of a hip-
bath, and as an injection into the vagina. He also makes it
to be lithontriptic. (iii, 107, 118.) The same characters are
given it by Galen and by AAacenna, whose berengfef it appears
to be. (c. 83.) Aetius and most of the authorities describe
only the first two species of the artemisia. Serapion and
Avicenna describe under this head an oriental species, which,
it is probable, was the Artemisia Judaica. Honain (ap.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 55

Avicennam), also describes tlie A. Indica. The famous Moxa Comm.
is prepared from the lanugo or downy substance which adheres ' '
to the Under surface of the leaf of the artemisia. See Barrow's
' Travels in China/ Woodville, ]\Iiller, and Pereira. That the
artemisia long retained the character which Dioscorides gave
it, of possessing powerful virtues as an emmenagogue and a
lithontriptic, is evident from what is said of it in the work of
Macer Floridus. Except as furnishing the moxa, (and it is now
believed to be got from a particular species, the A. moxa) the
species of artemisia here treated of are now wholly discarded
from the practice of medicine.

' KoTOQ,

Panis, Bread ; in a cataplasm it is more discutient than can
be accounted for from the properties of wheat, owing to its
containing salt and leaven. For the leaven is attractive of
the deep-seated humours.

Commentary. AVe have given some account of the kinds Comm.
of bread used by the ancients in the 78th sect, of the First ' • '
Book. Oribasius gives an excellent description of the mode
of preparing the bread poultice and its uses. He directs us
to dissolve the bread in water until it acquires the consistence
of gruel, and then, having added oil or butter to it, to boil it
to the proper consistence. He adds, that it is the best of all
applications with which he was acquainted for promoting sup-
puration. His account of the difterent kinds of cataplasms
is most ample and interesting. (Med. Collect.)

Asarum, Asarabacca, has the same powers as the sweet flag,
but more intense.

Commentary. This plant, which is certainly the Asarum Comm.
Europceum, or common Asarabacca, is said by Dioscorides to '^^^^
be diuretic, heating, and emetic, answering well with dropsi-
cal cases and chronic sciatica and promoting menstruation ; its
roots drunk with midse to the amount of six drachms, he says,
purge like white hellebore, (i, 9.) Galen seems to have over-
looked the importance of this article, for he is nearly as brief
as our author in treating of it ; and Aetius and Oribasius follow
him. Scrapiou, Rhases, and Avicenna recommend it in the

56 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. same cases as Dioscorides, and also in obstructions of tlie liver
" • and spleen^ and as a stimnlaut ingredient in coUyria. Modern
authorities confirm the character of this medicinal article
given it by Dioscorides. See Lewis (Mat, Med. i, 178); Rutty
(Mat. :Med. 43) ; Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 38.) Although
not excluded from our Dispensatories, less attention is now
bestowed on the asarabacca than it woidd seem to deserve.
See Royle (M. M. p. 548.) Ipecacuanha has nearly super-
seded it as an emetic in this country. The asarum is still
retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia (p. 22.)

Fuligo, the Snot which painters use. It is taken from glass-
works,- and is possessed of discutient and acrid powers, so as
to burn and occasion putrefaction. It cures burns, with
rose-cerate.
CoMM. CoMxMENTARY. Dioscoridcs and some of the other authorities
' ' ' mention the Fuligo, or soot of glassworks, in nearly the same
terms as Paulus.

A.aKa.\apwTr]Q,
Stellio, the Sivift ; this animal is useless for all other pur-
poses, but the}^ say that it is a good apphcatiou to persons
bitten by a scorpion. It is mixed also with venereal excitants.
CoMM. Commentary. We have treated of this reptile in the Fifth
" ' ' Book. It is the spotted lizard, Lacerta stellio L. Its
aphrodisiacal faculty is alluded to by our author in another
place. (B. Ill, 58.)

AaK\r]TnaQ,
Asclepias, Sw allow -ivort, being hot and dry as to its powers,
and consisting of subtile particles, agrees well with tormina
when drunk with wine, and in the form of a cataplasm it is a
good application to the bites of venomous animals, and malig-
nant ulcers in the uterus and breasts.
CoMM. Commentary. There appears little reason to doubt that it
' • ' is the Asclepius vincetoxicum, or Swallow-wort. Our author
borrows its medicinal characters from Dioscorides. (iii, 96.)
Galen candidly admits, that he had no experience of it as a
medicine. Pliny, like Dioscorides and our author, recom-
mends it for the cure of tormina and the bites of serpents.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 57

(H. N. xxvii, 18.) Until lately it held a place in our modern Comm.
Dispensatories, with the characters given it by the ancients. ' ' '
See Quincy (p. 59) ; Rutty (Mat. ]Med. p. 44) ; Gray (Suppl.
to Pliarmacop. p. 57.)

''AaKvppou is treated of under Androssemon.
Commentary. We have stated under avSocxrai/iWv the dif- Comm.
ficulty there is in distinguishing the different species of Hype- " '
7'icum described by the ancients. We cannot pretend to
decide whether the present article be the androscemum or the
perforatum. Dioscorides recommends the ascyrron as an
emmenagogue, in sciatica, and as an application to burns, (iii,
163.) The Arabians treat of it only as being identical either
with the hypericum or the androssem.um . See E-hases .(Cont.
1. ult. i, 59) ; Avicenna (ii, 2. 354.)

A(T7raXaaoc,

Aspalathus, Kose-wood, is composed of heterogeneous ingre-
dients, having acrid and astringent powers, and hence it is
desiccant. On this account it is useful for mortifications and
defluxions.

Commentary. We must not enter into the discussion re- Comm.
garding this article ; suffice to say, that we have now arrived * '
at the conclusion that it was either the Lignum rhodium, or a
substance so near to it in qualities, that the latter came to
be substituted for it. We need scarcely say, that there is
great difference of opinion among the botanical authorities
what tree or shrub it is which produces the Lignum rhodium.
Upon the whole the predominence of evidence is in favour of
some species of Cytisus. Dioscorides recommends the aspala-
thus when boiled in wine as a gargle in aphthae, as an injection
in spreading and impure ulcers of the genital organs
{chancres ?), in dysuria, flatulence, and other complaints, (i, . 19.)
Now it will be observed that the distilled oil of Lignum
rhodium has been recommended in similar cases by modern
authorities. See ^Moses Charras (llojal Pharmacopoeia,
Chemical, iii, 1, 24.) The Arabians give the aspalathus the
same characters as the Greeks. Sec Avicenna (ii, 2, 20(5) ;
Rhases (Cout. 1. ult. i, 251.) The aspalathus of Cclsus (v, 24)

58 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. was, no doubt, the same as that of Dioscorides. It is pro-
' ' ' bably the /.liXaiva p'lQa of Hippocrates.

AtTTrapo'yoCj
Asparagus, the Rock Asparagus, or Myacanthinus, is deter-
gent, but of a middle temperament as to heat and cold ; it is
deobstruent of the kidneys and liver, especially its roots and
seed. It also cures toothache.
CoMM. Commentary. See Book I, 75. The medicinal asparagus
' ' ' of the ancients would appear to have been different from our
garden asparagus, from the description of its root given by
Dioscorides (ii, 151), and yet there seems to have been very
little difference between them in properties, since both are used
for the same culinary and medicinal purposes ; the ancient, we
suppose, must have been the A. acutifoHiis. From Dioscorides
down to the present time, the asparagus has been celebrated
as being possessed of deobstruent and diiuetic powers, and
hence it has been given in jaundice, nephritis, and many other
diseases of a like kind. Celsus recommends it as a pickle in
affections of the spleen, (iv, 9.) It occurs in the Hippocratic
collection, and is fullv treated of by the Arabians. See
A\acenna (ii, 2, 603) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 667.) Symeon
Seth, after repeating from Galen that the asparagus acts upon
the kidneys and imparts its odour to it, remarks that this need
not surprise us, since, by holding a certain herb of a red colour
in the hands, the urine is reddened. What herb he alludes
to cannot be exactly ascertained. (V. Not. Bogdani.) At all
events it is clear from this that the ancients believed in ab-
sorption by the cuticle. The Arabians held that it is antiseptic.
Casiri (Bibl. Hist. Arab. 337.) The wild asparagus was called
Corruda (Cato de R. R.)

AcTTrXjJl'tOV,

Asplenium, Spleemvort, or Ceterach, has the properties of a

substance which consists of subtile particles, but is not hot.

It therefore breaks down stones and dissolves indurated spleens.

CoMM. Commentary. The spleenwort, or Asplenium ceterach, held

" " ' a place in the INIateria Medica from the earliest times down to a

very recent period. Dioscorides commends it in diseases of the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 59

spleen (whence it derives its name), in strangury, jaundice, and Comm.
calculus. Galen briefly assigns it the same character, which is ' ' '
repeated by Aetius and Oribasius, as well as by our author,
and also by AT-iceuna (630.) We cannot find it mentioned by
Serapion or Rhases. It held a place in our Dispensatory in
the time of Lewis. (Materia Medica a.d. 1791.)

Uva passa, the Raisin ; the cultivated is possessed of diges-
tive, astringent, and slightly discutient powers ; the wild is
possessed of strongly acrid, so as to be strongly phlegmagogue
and detergent.

Commentary. Dioscorides treats much more fully of the Comm.
medicinal powers of raisins than Galen and our author, recom- ' '
mending them in affections of the windpipe, chest, kidneys,
and bladder; for dysentery when eaten with their stones by
themselves, or when fried along with millet flour, barley-meal,
and eggs ; in masticatories with pepper ; in inflammation of
the testicles, when applied in a cataplasm with the flour of
beans and cumin ; for epinyctis, carbuncle, fevers, putrid and
gangrenous sores about the joints, without their stones, when
pounded with rue ; for gout in a cataplasm with opoponax,
and for the removal of loose nails, (v, 4.) A\dcenna and
Rhases briefly quote Dioscorides, and supply nothing additional.
They hold, like the Greeks, that in particular cases raisins
prove injurious to the urinary organs. Symeon Seth mentions
that the Egyptians prepared a very sweet wine from raisins
and honey. (De Alimentis.)

'A.(XTl)p 'Attikoq,

Aster atticus, Starwort, is also called bubonium, because it
is believed to cure buboes, not only when applied for this pur-
pose but even Avhen appended as a periapt. It is possessed of
mixed powers, being discutient and cooling.

Commentary. Our author's account of the starwort. Aster CoMxr.
amylhis, is taken from Galen, who in his turn copies from " ' '
Dio.scoridcs. In the common editions of Dioscorides there is
a passage under this head (which although quoted by Serapion
(§ 96), is scarcely considered genuine by Sprcngcl, seeing it is
not alluded to by Galen or Pliny), in which the Aster atticus

60 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM, is recommended for ardour of the stomacli, inflammations of
' " ' the eyes, buboes, and quinsies. The Arabians in treating of
the Aster atticus copy from Dioscorides, See in particular
Avicenna (ii, 2, 357) ; Serapiou (De Simpl. 96) ; Rhases
(Contin. 1. ult. i, 95-) It is not found in the works of Celsus.
It held a place in our modern Dispensatory down to a late date.
See Quincy (116.)

AcrroayaAoc^
Astragalus, Tfild Liquorice, is a small shrub, having astringent
roots, and is desiccative in no contemptible degree. It pro-
motes the cicatrization of old ulcers, and when drunk with
wine stops the discharges of the bowels. It is mostly pro-
duced in Pheeneum of Arcadia.
CoMM. Commentary. That the astragalus belongs to the vetch
tribe can admit of no doubt, but the particular genus and
species have never been determined. AU the authorities, both
ancient and modern, recommend it as an astringent both exter-
nally and internally. We cannot find it in the Avorks either of
Hippocrates or Celsus. Our author manifestly borrows from
Dioscorides. (iv, 62.) The Arabians do not appear to treat
of it.

' 'Acr^aXroCj

Bitumen ; it is desiccant and calefacient in the second
degree : it is therefore agglutinative of fresh wounds.
CoMM. CoMMENTAKY. The asphaltus, or Bitumen judaimm, held
'""'^ ' a place in the Materia Medica from the days of Hippocrates
down to a very recent period. It got the name of Jew's pitch,
from its having been principally procured from Judsea, where
it is found floating on the surface of the Dead Sea, or Lacus
Asphaltites. Some commentators have been puzzled by Dios-
corides representing the colour of the finest asphaltus as
purplish, but it is to be borne in mind that the ancients ap-
plied this term not to a scarlet red but to any rich dark-blue
colour, such as that of the sea. All the authorities, ancient
and modern, represent it as being emollient, discutient, and
emmeuagogue. Serapiou gives a very interesting account of
it. (§ 177.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 114) ; Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. i, 88) ; also Celsus (v, 6.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 61

Asphodelus, Kingspear ; its root is possessed of detergent
and discutient powers. When burnt its aslies become more cale-
facient, desiccative, and attenuate. It therefore cures alopecia.

Co-AiMEXTARY. All the aucicut authorities^ including Hippo- Comm.
crates and Celsus, treat of the Aspodelus ramosus, or King- ' ' '
spear, and in general are agreed in recommending it internally
as being emmenagogue and diuretic, and externally as an
application to alopecia or porngo decalvans. The author who
treats of it most elaborately is Dioscorides, who recommends
it for the purposes we have mentioned, and as an alexi-
pharmic, as a cure for toothache, and many other cases, (ii,
199.) Our author follows Galen. For the Arabians, see
Avicenna (ii, 273) ; Serapion (c. 221) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i,
26.) They all copy from Dioscorides and Galen. It was
sometimes used as a culinary herb. See Vol. I, p. 118. Our
old herbalists repeat its ancient characters as a medicine. See
Gerard (i, 70.) It has been discarded from the Pharmacopoeia
for some time past.

A.TOaKrv\iQ,

Atractylis, Wild Cnicus, or Distaff-thistle ; it is of the thorny
tribe, being possessed of desiccative and moderately heating
powers.

Commentary. In another place (Vol. I, p. 113) we have Comm.
treated of the atractylis as a culinary herb, agreeing with ' '
Sprcngel in referring it to the Carlina lanuta. The commen-
tators on Dioscorides, however, are greatly at variance with
regard to it ; most of the old herbalists agree with Belon and
Fuchsius in holding it to be the Carduus benedidus, or blessed
thistle. See Gerard^s Herbal (ii, 489.) We cannot help
remarking, however, that the virtues of the Carduus benedictus
as given by Quincy (English Dispensatory, i, 2) by no means
agree with those assigned to the atractylis by Dioscorides ; he
holds it to be alexipharmical. (iii, 97.) Oiu* author copies from
Galen. The Arabians supply no additional information. See
in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 159.)

ATpo<^a^(CJ
Atriplcx, Orache, moistens in the second degree and cools

G2 SIMPLES. [book vii.

in the first. It therefore opens the belly.- Its fruit is pos~
sessed of detergent powers, whence it is useful in jaundice and
obstructions of the liver.
CoMM. Commentary. We have treated of the orach {Atriplex
' " ' Hortensis) as a cuhnary herb in Book I, § 74. It is still used
as an article of food on the Continent. Our author copies
from Dioscorides (ii, 145), whose account of it is amplified and
explained by Galen. (De Simpl. v.) It is briefly treated of in
like terms by A\dcenna (ii, 2, 174) ; Serapion (c. 146) ; Ehases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 97.) Rhases, after quoting what Dioscorides
and Paulus say of it, adds on his own authority that he had
known the seed of it prove powerfully emetic and laxative.

Aphace, Wild Vetch, is possessed of astringent powers like
the lentil j but when eaten it is more difficult to digest than
the lentil, and is more strongly desiccative, with a moderate
degree of heating properties.
CoMM. Commentary. This is clearly a species of Vicia, but whether
' ' ' the bithynica, lutea, or hybrida cannot be satisfactorily deter-
mined. It is treated of by om- older herbalists, who agree
with the ancients in assigning to it astringent powers. The
Arabian authorities would appear to have overlooked it. Our
author is indebted to Dioscorides (ii, 177) and Galen (De
Simpl. v.)

A^jooi'irpov,
Aphronitrum is possessed of discutient and detergent powers,
so as not only to cleanse those parts which are foul, but also
to cure pruritus. But when drunk it is bad for the stomach.

A(j)^OQ J'tVpOV,

Spuma nitri; it has powers like those of natron, but its
substance is more attenuate, and therefore it is smooth like
flom\
CoMM. Commentary. As Dr. Coray's account of the Nitrmn, Aphro-
nitrum, and Spuma nitri- o^ the ancients is of high authority, we
are induced to give it in his own language literally translated.
" The nitrum of the ancients was not that substance which
modern chemists call by the name (nitre or nitrate of potass),

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 63

being a composition of nitric acid and a vegetable alkali, Ijut Comm.
that wliicb is called natron, being a native combination of ' '
carbonic acid and an alkali (natron or native carbonate of
soda.) And they called the harder and more stony lumps
nitrum or litrum, and tlie more spongy and softer aphronitrum
or aphrolitrum ; and spuma nitri or litri, the superficial efflo-
rescence of the nitrum and floury part, which was easily scraped
ofi:'.^^ (Ad Xenoc. et Galen, de Al. ex Aquat.) — From this account
it appears that the firmer and harder lumps of the native car-
bonate of soda were called nitrum ; the softer and more spongy
pieces aphronitrum, and those kinds which had a bright florid
appearance externally and readih^ crumbled down into a poAvder^
the spuma nitri. Dioscorides gives a more lengthy account
of its medicinal properties than either Galen or our author,
not only recommending it externally as a stimulant and dis-
cutient application to various cutaneous diseases and the bites
of mad dogs, but also internally as an antidote to poisonous
mushrooms, buprestis, bull's blood, &c. (v, 129.) Serapion has
a very interesting chapter on nitrum and aphronitrum, but it
is in a great measure made up from Dioscorides and Galen
(c. 411.) For a fui'ther account of the ancient nitrum^ see
under Litrum in this section. AVe may just mention in this
place that the aphronitrum would appear to have been merely
Afrum nitrum, that is to say, a variety of the nitrum or natron
found in Africa.

'A^pctc,

Pyrum silvestre, the Jflld Pear ; its properties are hke those
of the common pear, but more intense. It therefore agglu-
tinates large wounds.

Commentary. Dioscorides mentions that it is a species of Comm.
wild pear. He recommends it as an antidote to mushrooms. '"""'
(i, 168.) Serapion and Mesne give it the same character.

Absinthium, Wormwood ; it is heating in the first degree,
but drying in the third, being possessed at the same time of
astringent, bitter, and acrid qualities. It therefore evacuates
bilious humours in the stomach by the bowels and by urine.
But in collections of phlegm it is of no service, owing to its

64 SIMPLES. [book vii.

astringency. The juice of it is mucli liottei' than the herb
itself.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides also describes two other species,
' ' ' the one being clearly the Ai-temisia marithna, and the other
not the santonica, although it bears that namC;, but rather the
palmata, according to the best modern commentators. Dios-
corides recommends the true wormwood {Artemisia abrotanum)
in a great many cases, both externally and internally ; as being
diuretic and preventing surfeit when taken beforehand, re-
lieving flatulence of the stomach and bowels ; proving emme-
nagogue in a potion or pessary, removing the feeling of suffo-
cation induced by mushrooms, when drunk with vinegar, and
when with wine counteracting the poisonous effects of ixia and
hemlock, the bites of the shrew mouse and sea dragon ; its
vapour removing toothache, and a cataplasm the intense pains
of ophthalray ; as suiting in dropsical affections and diseases of
the spleen, and in many other cases. He mentions a wine of
wormwood made by the people about Propontis and Thrace,
which they used for the aforesaid purposes in the absence of
fever, (iii, 23.) Pliny enumerates fully the many medicinal pro-
perties which were ascribed to it. (H. N. xxvii, 28.) Galen says
that it is less attenuant but as desiccative as southernwood.
Apuleius calls it anthelminthic. The Arabians recommend it
with the same intention. Casiri (Bibl. H. A. 336.) All the
authorities hold that it is cholagogue. See in particular Avi-
cenna (ii, 2, 2), who is very full in describing the medicinal pro-
perties of wormwood, recommending it in infusion, in decoction,
in the form of syrup, and in wine. See also Serapion (c. 14);
Averrhoes (ColHg. v, 42) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 9.) The last
of these, after giving the opinions of Dioscorides, Galen, Ruffus,
Pythagoras, and Oribasius, quotes Musy (Mesne ?) as saying
of it that it is stomachic, a whetter of the appetite, useful in
jaundice, quinsy, inflammation of the eye and ear, hardness of
the liver, spleen, and womb, and in dropsy. One of Serapion's
Arabian authorities commends it as a deobstruent, and in cases
of jaundice. It occurs in the list of medicinal substances used
both by Hippocrates and Celsus. The latter recommends it
as being both stomachic and diuretic. Although its use as a
febrifuge has been superseded by a more popular medicine of
the same class, we need scarcely remark that it still holds a

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 65

place in our Dispensatories. The modern Greek Pharmacopoeia Comm.
contains the two species which are described by the names of ' " '
Artemisia Absinthium and Artemisia contra. The latter is the
santonicum, its name being an abbreviation of contra vermes.
See Lindley (Veg. Kiugd. 705.)

BaXaJ'OC ^IvovpiKT],
Glans iinguentaria. Nut Ben ; its inner and^ as it were, fleshy
parts have detergent and incisive powers along with astrin-
gency : and therefore when drunk with honeyed w^ater, to the
amount of a drachm weight_, it occasions vomiting and loosens
the lower belly. But when taken with oxycrate it is of use
for obstructions of the viscera. It proves detergent in afifec-
tions of the skin when rubbed in with vinegar. Its bark is
very astringent.

Commentary. There can be no dispute that this is the Comm.
ben nut, the term ben being derived from the Arabians. The ' ' '
tree from which it is procured is said to be the Hyperantliera
moringa Yahl. See Ainslie (Mat. Med. i, 197.) It is further
called Myrobalanum, but the coincidence of name must not
lead the reader to identify it with the myrobalans of the
Arabians, of which we shall have occasion to give some account
in another place. Pliny gives an interesting account of it,
representing the Arabian as being the best oil in quality, and
the Troglodytic or Ethiopian, as the w^orst. (H. N. xii, 47.)
Being principally used in unguents, it has often got the name
of glans uuguentaria. Dioscorides writes fully of its medicinal
properties, recommending it in particular inwardly, as an
emetic and purgative, and externally, as an application to
various cutaneous diseases, such as psora and leprosy (iv, 157.)
Celsus recommends it in several places as an ingredient in
emollient ointments, more especially for indurations of the
spleen (iv, 9; v, 18, 4.) The Arabians, especially Avicenna and
Serapion, treat of it at great length, but in nearly the same
terms as Dioscorides and Galen. Of late years nut ben has
been excluded from our Dispensatories; but our older authori-
ties in modern times confirm the characters of it given above
from Dioscorides, that is to say, that it acts both as an emetic
and a purge, but in the latter capacity slowly and with pain.
See Hill (Mat. Med. 4, 94) ; Rutty (Mat. Med. p. 52.)
111. 5

66 SIMPLES. [book VII.

Baccliaris, Spikenard, is a fragrant herbj like cinnamon,
used for garlands. It is acrid; and its root when boiled is
deobstruent, diui'etic, and emmenagogue. Bnt its leaves being
astringent are beneficial in fluxes.
CoMM. Commentary. Regarding this mucb disputed article, tbe
predominance of authority, as we think, is in favour of its
being some species of Conyza. Old Gerard gives it the
English names of ploughman's spikenard and cinnamon-root,
and repeats the characters of it given by the ancient authori-
ties. It has been long since expelled from our Dispensatories.
Galen, in his Commentary on the Glossa Hippocratica, mentions
that the name is applied both to a herb and a Lydian ointment.
It does not occur in the Avorks of Celsus nor in those of the
Arabians. Our author draws his characters of it fi'ora
Dioscorides, who recommends it, among other purposes, as
being emmenagogue and promoting parturition (iii, 44.)

BaAavoTtOJ',
Balaustium, the Flower of the IVild Pomegranate ; it is power-
fully astringent, haAing also desiccant and cold powers. It
heals superficial sores, and stops defluxions.
CoMM. Commentary. Balaustine, or the Flower of the double Wild
Pomegranate, is an astringent medicine much used by the
ancient physicians. Dioscorides recommends it principally as
an anthelminthic to kill the broad ascaris, by which he meant
the tseuia. (See ii, 147.) Galen writes very elaborately
on this article, contending that it is a good example of a
plant possessed of an astringent quality, and stating that it
was in general use with this intention externally in intertrigo
and other ulcers, and internally in cases of haemoptysis,
dysentery, and in all defluxions from the stomach or womb.
The Arabians give a similar account of it, and further recom-
mend balaustine as a whetter of the appetite, and a restorative
from the ill eff'ects of intoxication, and a medicine calculated
to stop vomiting. See in j)articular Serapion (129), and
Avicenna (ii, 2, 109.) Although modern authority is not
wanting to confirm what the ancients have stated regarding
the efiicacy of balaustine as an astringent in diarrhoea,
dysentery, and menorrhagia, it has been excluded of late

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. ^^

years from our British Dispensatories. Our continental Comm.
brethren still make use of it. The modern Greek Pliarma- " ' '
copoeia does not retain the leaves.

BaXoro^Joi',

Balsamum^ Balsam-tree ; that part of it which is like its
wood is desiccaut and heating in the second degree. It is
also composed of subtile particles, but the juice of it is much
more so. Its fruit is possessed of similar powers, but its
particles are less subtile.

Commentary. This clearly is the Balsamum Gileadense, or Comm.
Balm of Gilead, being procured, as Dr. Peireira states, from the ' ' '
Balsamo-dendron Gileadense, a middling-sized tree growing in
Arabia. He says, it is rarely or never employed by Europeans ;
but is adapted to the same cases as the terebinthinates. The
Asiatics use it for its odoriferous as well as its medicinal pro-
perties. Dioscorides certainly writes strongly in its favour,
recommending it as a detergent application to sores and com-
plaints of the eyes, and internally as an emmenagogue and
diuretic, and as an antidote to poisons and venomous animals.
Galen treats of it much more reservedly (i, 18.) The balsam
occurs in Celsus's list of articles which concoct and promote
suppuration (v, 3.) The Ai'abians fully coincide with the
character of it given by Dioscorides. See in particular Serapion
(c. 160); Avicenna (ii, 2, 81.) Though this article has almost
ceased to be employed in the practice of the scientific
physician, it Avas the instrument by which one of the most
successful pieces of empiricism was perpetrated in the begin-
ning of this century. We allude to Dr. Splomon's celebrated
Balm of Gilead.

BoAwrrj,

Balote, by some called Black Horehound ; it is possessed of
acrid and detergent powers ; therefore, when applied with
salts, it relieves the bite of mad dogs.

Commentary There appears little reason to doubt that Comm.
this is the Ballole nigra, or stinking horehound of our her- " '
balists. Our author^s account of it is abridged from
Dioscorides. It is not treated of by Galen, Aetius, nor

68 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Oribasius, neither is it found in Celsus. Avicenna and Ebn
" " Baithar we believe are the only Arabians who notice it, and
they copy from Dioscorides (ii, 2, 553, and i, 166.)

^aroc,
Riibus, the Bramble; its shrubby part is moderately astringent
and desiccantj and therefore agglutinates wounds and stops
defluxions. The root, in addition to its astringency, is
attenuate in no small degree. It therefore breaks down renal
calciiK. Its rijie fruit is hotter, and has a moderate astringency.
It is therefore edible ; but the unripe is sour and powerfully
desiccant, more especially if dried. In like manner also the
flower.
CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. The first species of bramble described by
Dioscorides is probably that well-known one the Rubus fruti-
cosus, the other is the Rubus Idcexis, or raspberry bush. The
B. '\oaioq of Dioscorides was supposed by Ruellius and others
to be the Fragaria or Straivberry, but with this supposition we
cannot agree. Strawberries are not noticed by any Greek
writer, but are first mentioned by Ovid (]Met. i, 104) ; and
then by Pliny (H. N. xxv, 62.) The f.Lopov (iaruiSsg, of which
mention is occasionally made bv our author, was the fiiiit of
the bramble, being so called, according to Eustathius, from its
resemblance to mulberries. (Ad Iliad, xiii, 121.) Om' author
abridges Galen, who is at great pains in defining the powers
of the batos, which he makes out to be moderately astringent
and desiccative ; and hence he pronounces it to be useful in
dysentery, fluxes of the bowels, atony, hcemoptysis, and in cal-
culus as a lithi'ontriptic. Dioscorides indulges in a still more
lengthened exposition of its virtues, recommending the decoc-
tion of it as an astringent in looseness of the bowels, and in
fluor albus, as an antidote to the sting of the serpent Prester ;
its leaves when chewed, to strengthen the gums and cure the
aphthae of children, and externally, for the cure of herpes,
achor, procidentia oculi, and many other diseases (iii, 36.) It
is briefly alluded to by Celsus in treating of lientery (iv, 16.)
The Arabians, as usual, copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See
Serapion (De Sinipl. 124) ; A^-icenna (ii, 2, 572.) The rubi
held their place and ancient chai"acters in our Dispensatories

SECT. iii.J SIMPLES. 69

down to a late date. See Quincy (p. 94.) Even yet several of Comm.
the rubi are still kept in the shops for medicinal purposes. Sec ' * '
Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 89.)

Ranunculus, Croivsfoot, consists of four varieties, all of
which are possessed of powerfully heating and desiccant powers,
and also of acrid and caustic, so as to occasion ulceration with
pain ; but when moderately used, it proves only detergent of
the skin. The dried root is a sternutatory.

Commentary. According to Sprengel, the first species is Com.m.
the Ratiunctdus Asiaticus ; the second, the R. lanuginosus ; the ' ' '
third, the R. miiHcatus ; and tlie fourth, the R. aquatilis.
Galen recommends it as a powerful escharotic, and our author
evidently copies from him. Dioscorides gives a similar account
of the ranunculi, recommending them for the removal of leprous
nails, psora, stigmata, and other tumours, -as a fomentation to
chilblains, and as an application to remove toothache. The
Arabians treat of the ranunculi in the same terms as the
Greeks, copying their medicinal characters from Dioscorides
and Galen. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 368), and Ebn Baithar (ii,
343.) Neither of them gives anj-thing original of his own,
nor from any Arabian authority. The ranunculi, we need
scarcely mention, have now been discarded by the regular
practitioner; but yet several of them are still kept in the
shops, and have the reputation of being excellent vesicants.
Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 122.) In like manner old
Culpeper affirms that the crowsfoot is an effectual and a much
safer blister than cantharides (p. 59.) The modern Greek
Pharraacoposia does not contain it.

Barpayoi,

Ranse, Frogs; they are eaten when made into a soup for the
bites of venomous animals ; when burnt, their ashes become
very desiccant ; and stop hemorrhages, and cure alopecia, along
with liquid pitch.

Commentary. Dioscorides, Galen, and Scrapion recom- Com
mend them in the cases mentioned by oiu- author. The — ^
species with which they must have been most familiar is
the green frog. Wc have stated in another place that the

M.

70 SIMPLES. [book vii.

if

CoMM. Greeks and Romans did not use tlie frog as an article of

"-^^ food. (Vol. I, 166.)

BSfXXto)',
Bdellium ; both the Scytliiau and Arabian are possessed of
powers which prove emollient of indurated tumours, more
especially the recent. The Arabian is also diuretic^ lithon-
tripticj and digestive.

CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides, as Dr. Ainslie remarks (Mat.
Ind. i, 30), has suflBciently well described this article ; and yet
he adds afterwards, it is a lamentable fact that the actual tree
from which bdellium is got has not hitherto been clearly as-
certained by botanists. He rejects the conjecture of Sprengel,
although supported by the high authority of Ksempfer and
Rumphius that it is procured from the Borassus flabelliformis,
and also that of ]Matthiolus, who maintained that it is procmed
from the dwarf palm, or Cliamwrops humilis. Upon the whole,
the opinion of Virey, founded on the authority of Forskael,
that it is got from some species of Amyris, seems to be the
most probable. Dr. Pereira gives the following account of
this article : " The term Bdellium is applied to two gummy
resinous substances. One of these is Indian bdellium, or false
myrrh, the bdeUium of Scripture, which is obtained from
Amyris {Balsamodendron ?) Commiphora. See further Royle
(Hindoos Med. p. 90.) The other kind is called African
• Bdellium, and is obtained from the Heudolotia Africana." (Mat.
Med. 1634.) On the Bdellium, see further what we have
said in the Appendix to Dunbar's Greek Lexicon. The
ancients would appear to have been well acquainted with both
these kinds of bdellium ; at all events they were acquainted
with the Indian, for Dioscorides has described it. He repre-
sents the bdellium to be calefacient, emollient, and dissolvent,
and recommends it for dissolving hard tumours, for promoting
menstruation in pessaries, and fumigations, and as an emetic,
diuretic, and expectorant (i, 80.) Tlie Arabians were evidently
still more fomiliar with the bdellium than their Grecian masters ;
but have supplied little or no additional information respecting
it. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 117), and Ancenna
(ii, 2, 112.) Celsus recommends it frequently as an ingredient
in external apphcations. As far as we have been able to dis-
cover, it does not occur in the works of Hippocrates.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 71

Bfrrovtfcr;,
Bettonica, Bettony, is a herb having slender branches like
those of the pennyroj-al, but still more slender^ and is pos-
sessed of scarcely any quality to the taste. It grows mostly
in rocky situations, and is used for the composition of nephritic
medicines. There is among the Romans another herb called
bettonica, to which Dioscorides gives the name of cestrum;
but others name it psychrotrophon, because it delights in cold
situations, having no resemblance to the aforementioned, ex-
cept its medicinal powers. In addition to its action as a
diuretic, it is useful for many other purposes ; for its root in
particular, when drunk with hydromel, occasions vomiting, and
the leaves open the bowels.

Commentary. Dr. Alston says, " There is a Libellus Comm.
(De Betonica) attributed commonly to Augustuses physician, ' ' '
Antonius INIusa, by some to L. Apuleius, of which there are
said to be very ancient MMS." We have seen the work
mentioned by Alston. It is published Tiyuri, a.d. 1537,
with notes by Humelbergius. It is a small work, occupying
scarcely four leaves in octavo. The author commences with a
dedication to Augustus, in which he informs the emperor that
the betony is useful for forty-seven complaints, which he pro-
ceeds to enumerate, after giving a short description of the
herb. He says of it, " Cestrou vocatur, etiam psj^chotrophon,
siquidem frigidis reperitur in locis, radicibus tenuibus, thyrso
tenui ultra cubitum quadrangulo, foliis quercui similibus,
boni odoris, semine in summitate thyrsi spicato, modo
thymbrte.ee The following are some of the cases in which he
recommends it : For fractures of tiie head, as an external ap-
plication ; for pains of the eyes in a fomentation ; for pains in
the teeth, boiled in old wine or vinegar; for consumption and
difficulty of breathing ; for complaints of the liver, spleen, and
kidneys ; as a purgative when given to the amount of four
drachms in eight cyathi of hydromel ; for calculus ; for dropsy;
to prevent intoxication ; as an antidote to poisons and the
bites of venomous reptiles and mad dogs ; for gout, &c. Many
diiferent opinions, as stated by Sprengel, have been entertained
respecting this herb. Perhaps, as he suggests, it may have
been the Rumex Htjdrolapatlmm or Aquaticus. The Kiar^zvq of
Dioscorides he thinks is the B. alapecurus. But for the gene-

72 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. ral literature of this subject, we must refer to our discussion
' ' ' on it in tlie Appendix to Dunbar^s Greek Lexicon. The betony
held a place in the Materia Medica down to a very late
period. Both Dioscorides and Pliny recommend it in haemo-
ptysis and purulent affections of the chest, and it enters as an
ingredient into several of Myrepsus's antidotes for dysentery
and ceeUac affection. Celsus mentions it only in one place,
where he says of it, that it is an useful application to the
stings of venomous snakes (v, 27, 10.) For the Arabians, see
in particular Serapion (322), and Averrhoes (Coll. v, 42.)
Our old herbalists and other modern authorities who treat of
betony, praise it as a vulnerary herb, and as being possessed
of diuretic and emmenagogue faculties.

BjJ^tOV,

Tussilago, Coltsfoot, it is also called Bechicon ; it is so
named from its proving useful for coughs, and orthopnoea in
fumigations; and it is composed of a hot and watery substance.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Tussilago Farfara, or Coltsfoot. Both
' * ' Dioscorides and Galen recommend it in fumigations for the
cure of coughs, and this reputation it has retained down to the
present day. Though now expelled from our Dispensatories, a
patent medicine, prepared from coltsfoot, is still in considerable
celebrity. It is retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia
(p. 67.)

BX/tov,
Blitum, Bute, is an esculent potherb, which is humid and
cold in the second degree.
CoMM. Commentary. The bhte, or Amaranthus Blitum, has been
long celebrated as a culinary and medicinal herb. (See vol. i,
114.) Galen and Dioscorides, like our author, treat of its
medicinal powers in very brief terms. For the Arabians,
see Avicenna (ii, 2, 518) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 148) ;
Averrhoes (Colhg. v, 41) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 128) ; Ebn
Baithar (i, 154.) These Arabian authorities commend it strongly
as an apphcation in diseases of the skin, and in phthiriasis,
and also in alopecia and apostemes, Archigenes, as quoted by
Rhases, says, the blite is more laxative than the mallow. It
is treated of by our older herbalists ; but has long since
ceased to occupy a place in our Dispensatories.

SECT. III.] -SIMPLES. 73

BoA/3oc,

Bulbus; the esculent is possessed of a certain degree of
bitterness, and at the same time of astringency, and is desic-
cative and agglutinative of wounds^ and also detergent. The
emetic is hotter in its properties.

Commentary. We have mentioned in the First Book that Comm.
Harduin considers the esculent bulbus to have been a species
of onion_, but that Sprengel refers it to the Muscari comosmn.
In addition to the reasons there mentioned for preferring the
conjecture of Harduin, we have to add the account of it given
by the SchoHast on Theocritus : |3oX/3oc: aSoc jSorcu'jjg op.oi.aq
Kpo/iifivw KoXyriKw. (Idyll, xiv.) There is also a good deal of
uncertainty with regard to the emetic hulbus; but the pre-
dominance of authority is in favour of its being the Hyacin-
thus comosus. The fact of the matter, however, we believe to
be that various plants having bulbous roots are possessed of
emetic powers, and that the name emetic bulbus was often ap-
plied in a loose manner. Dioscorides merely says of its medicinal
properties, that when eaten by itself, and when its decoction
is drunk, it cures diseases of the bladder and produces vomiting
(ii, 200, 201.) Galen and the succeeding authorities, like our
author, treat very succinctly of it. The Arabians, also, merely
copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See particulai-ly Avicenna
(ii, 2, 85) ; Serapion (c. 355.)

Borpyg,

Botrys, Goosefoot ; some call it Ambrosia, and others Mug-
Vort. It is a plant sufficiently fragrant, and when drunk with
wine cures orthopnoea.'

Commentary. There seems no reason to doubt that tliis Comm.
is the plant described by our old herbalists under the name of
Oak of Jerusalem. It has now got the scientific name of
Chenopodium Botrys. It is briefly recommended in orthopnoea
by Dioscorides (iii, 120), and Pliny (N. H. xx\'ii, 31.) It is
not noticed by Galen, Aetius, Oribasius, Celsus, nor we believe
by any of the Arabians, with tl^e exception of El)n Baithar,
yet it held a place in our English Dispensatory as late as the
time of Quincy.

Bovpwvtoi',

Bubonium, has been described under Aster Atticus.

74 SIMPLES.* [book vii.

Boi>yXw(T(TOl',

Buglossum, Biigloss, is humid and hot in its temperament.
Hence Avheu added to wines it is said to produce hilarity.
CoMM. Commentary. The Borage^ or Anchusa Bughssum, long held
' ' ' a place in the Materia IMedica. From Dioscorides down to
Boerhaave^ it had the reputation of being a good cordial. See
Dioscorides (iv, 126) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 375.) "We believe it is
not met with in the works either of Hippocrates or Celsus.

BoUl'EtO)',

Buuium (or Arctium), Rape ; it is hot, diuretic, and emme-
nagogue; and the Pseudobunium in like manner.
CoMM. Commentary. We treated of this article, which, notwith-
" ' ' standing the disagreement of the commentators and herbalists,
we are willing to believe to be the Bunium Bulbocastamwi, or
Earth-nut, as a culinary herb in the First Book. The pseudo-
bunium may be the PimpineUa tenuis. Dioscorides represents
it to be diuretic, calefacient, possessing powers to promote the
lochial discharge, and useful in affections of the spleen, kid-
neys, and bladder (iv, 122.) Galen and the other authorities
give the same account of it as our author. It long held a
place in oui* modern Dispensatories.

BouTrprjcrrjCj
Buprestis, Burncoiv, is an insect resembling the Cantharis,
and may therefore be prepared like it.
CoMM. Commentary. Whatever doubts others may have enter-
' * ' tained respecting the Biiprestis of the ancients, we are well
satisfied that it was the Meloe vesicatoria. We have treated
fully of it as a poison in the Fifth Book § 31. Occasional
mention of it is made in the Hipprocratic treatises. (De Mulieb.
i, et alibi.)

Butyrum, Butter, is possessed of digestive and moderately
discutient properties when applied to soft bodies ; it is there-
fore of use for buboes and parotis ; it attenuates the gums,
more especially of children during the time of dentition, and
in a linctus it concocts humours lodged in the chest.
CoMM. . Commentary. Though it certainly be true, as stated by
' • ' Beckmann (History of Inventions), that the Greeks and Bomans

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 75

made very little use of butter as an article of food compared with Comm.
the moderns, it is equally clear that they were well acquainted *
with various kinds of it, and their medicinal virtues. If, as
he and Michaelis suppose, the Hebrew word, which, in the
Septuagint Scripture, is rendered bouttjron, signifies cream, or
sour thick milk, the first mention of butter which occurs in
ancient literature is in the following passage of Hippocrates :
" These people (the Scythians) pour the milk of their mares
into wooden vessels, cause it to be violently stirred or shaken
by their blind slaves, and separate the part which arises to the
surface, as they consider it more valuable and more delicious
than that which is collected below it.^^ (De Aere, Aquis, etc.)
The Hlppace is also described in another of the Hippocratic
treatises (De Morbis, iv.) Beckmann quotes a passage of the
poet Anaxandrides, preserved by Athenseus (iv, 131, ed. Ca-
saubon), to prove that butter is of Thracian origin. We having
thus descnbed the origin of butter, shall now give a descrip-
tion of its medicinal uses from the works of the medical
authorities. In the Hippocratic treatises butter is several
times mentioned as an external medicine. (De Natura Mu-
herum, Vj De Morbis MuHerum, ii, 5.) But Dioscorides is
the first author who gives a distinct account of its medicinal
properties. Butter, he says, is possessed of emollient and oily
powers, whence it loosens the bowels when drunk in large
quantity, and is useful in the treatment of poisoning by deadly
substances in the absence of oil ; when mixed with honey, and
rubbed in, it is useful for painful dentition, pruritus of the
gums in children, and aphtlue ; when rubbed in externally it
preserves the body plump and free from watery pustules
(psydracia) ; it is beneficial for inflammations and hardness of
the womb, when not fetid or old ; for dysentery and ulceration
of the colon, in a clyster ; it is mixed advantageously with
suppurative applications, and more especially in wounds of the
nerves, membranes of the brain, the bladder, and neck ; it fills
up, cleanses, incarnates, and proves useful as an application in
cases of persons bitten by the asp. Fresh butter in cookery is
used instead of oil, and in cakes instead of suet. His chapter
on butter concludes with directions for preparing the sort of
butter, which he rein-esents as being dcsiccative and astringent
in ophthalmic applications, and capable of stopping defluxious

76 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Cor-iM. and cicatrizing ulcers, (iij 81.) Pliny's account of milk being
' ' mostly taken from Dioscorides^ we shall not dwell upon it.
He is original, hov.ever, in stating that most butter is got
from cow's milk. (H. N. xsviiij 35.) Celsus merely enume-
rates butter among the articles which incarnate and fill up
sores, (v, 14.) Galen states that butter is contained in greatest
quantity in the milk of cows, and hence it derives its name.
That it has concoctiTC powers with a small portion of discu-
tient, and is of intermediate powers with regard to softness
and hardness of the body, by which he means that it has no
powers to discuss preternatural tumours of very hard bodies,
but that it concocts and discusses soft inflammations, such as
parotis, bubo, boils in the mouth, and many others of a like
nature. He recommends it also in dentition and inflammatory
aff'ections of the mouth in children. He also mentions it as
a useful expectorant in pleurisy and pneumonia, both when
drunk and in the form of a linctus. (De Simpl. ix.) Aetius
copies the description which he gives of butter from Galen.
(ii, 104.) Oribasius borrows from Dioscorides. (xv, 2.) Rhases
quotes Dioscorides, Galen, Oribasius, and Paulus, and gives
nothing of his own. (1. ult. 133.) Avicenna also recommends
butter in exactly the same cases as Dioscorides and Galen,
(ii, 2, 110.) Serapion literally translates Dioscorides and
Galen. (De Simpl. 457.)

J^ov(j)6a\/iioi',
Buphthalmum, Oxeye, has a flower like that of the
camomile, but much larger and more acrid. It is there-
fore discutient, so as to cure indurations when mixed with
cerate.
CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. The old herbalists were much puzzled what
' ' ' to make of the Buphthahnum, some contending for its being
Helleborus niger, some a species of ConsUigo, some a Chrysan-
themum, and so forth. See Gerard (Herbal) and Sprengel
(Ad Dioscor.) It would seem likely that it is the Anthemis
Valentino. Our author boiTOws all that was worth copying in
the chapter of Dioscorides (iii, 146.) Galen expresses himself
respecting it in nearly the same terms as Dioscorides. For
the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 97.) It is not mentioned
in the Hippocratic collection.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 11

Sabina, Savin, being like the Cypress, it is heating and
desiecative in the third degree ; and consisting of subtile par-
ticles, it is possessed of subtilizing and discutient powers if
drunk. It is applied to mortifications like the Crj)ress.

Commentary. The two species of savine described by Comm.
Dioscorides are probably the Sabina cypressifoUa and tamaris- "
cifolia. He recommends it principally as an external applica-
tion to spreading sores and carbuncles. He says it produces
bloody water and abortion when drunk in wine, and when
applied externally, or in the form of fumigation. (L, 104.) All
the ancient authorities, including Macer Floridus (but his
works, we are well aware, are not generally reputed genuine),
hold it to be an uterine medicine. Its medicinal and delete-
rious powers are given in like manner by the Arabians. See
in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 6); Serapion (c. 255); Ebn
Baithar (i, 5.) Apuleius praises it strongly in jaundice. We
need scarcely mention that savin still retains its place in our
Dispensatory, being, according to Pereira, " the most certain
and powerful emmenagogue of the whole ]\rateria ]Medica.'^
With regard to jts action on the animal economy, " it ope-
rates," according to Suudelin, as quoted by Pereira, " as a
specific excitant and ii'ritant on the kidneys, and yet more
obviously on the uterus." All this shows how correctly the

ancient authorities had judged of its powers.

Boerravt/cj/,

Bretannica, Water-dock, is possessed of astringent and ag-
glutinative powers, and in appearance resembles the Wild-
dock. The juice of it cures mortifications in the mouth.

Commentary. It would not be worth while, even if this Comm.
were the proper place, to touch upon the lengthened contro- ' * '
versy which has prevailed among the old herbalists and bota-
nical authorities with regard to this plant. Whoever would
wish to investigate the subject may consult Professor hunting's
elaborate work 'De Vera Herba Britannica,' (Amst. 1698,) and
SprengeFs '^Annotations on Dioscorides' (iv, 2.) Suffice it to
say, that, in all probability, tlie plant in question was some
species of water-dock. All the authorities who treat of it give

78 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. it mucli the same character as our author. See particularly

' ' ' Avicenna (ii, 2, 102) ; Serapion (c. 222.) It held a place in

our English Dispensatory as late as Quincy, who represents

it {'' the hydrolopathum, supposed to be the Bretannica of the

the ancients") as a specific for scurvy.

Boo^ioc,
Avena, Oats, has powers resembling those of barley. It is
desiccative^ and moderately discutient without pungency. It
has also some astringencyj whence it cures diarrhoeas.
CoMM. Commentary. It is not well ascertained whether this be
" ' ' an Avena or Secale. The chapter of Dioscorides under this
head is probably spurious. Our author abridges Galen. It
is not treated of bv Celsus nor the Arabians.

4'

Bowov,
Bryum ; the sea-biyum or lichen is cooling and astringent,
and is therefore useful when applied as a cataplasm to hot
inflammations ; that kind which is called splanchnon, being
found on oaks, white poplars, and pitch-trees, is at the same
time discutient and moderately emollient, more especially that
upon cedars.
CoMM. Commentary. It appears e\ddent that it is a species of
' " ' Lichen or Usnea, but what species is not clear. The term usnea
is borroAved from the Arabian authors. Our author copies
closely from Galen. Dioscorides recommends it as an as-
tringent principally in affections of the womb, in the form
of a hip-bath or fumigation. Avicenna (ii, 2, 713) and
Serapion (c. 247) biiefly notice several species of usnea
without appearing to identify it with the bryon of the Greeks.
E-hases, however, is quite aware of their identity. (Contin.
1. ult. i, 753.) Avicenna says it is emmenagogue, and pro-
cures the delivery of the foetus either dead or alive. He
adds that, in a dose of 10 drs. it acts as a deadly poison.
Serapion recommends it principally as being diuretic and em-
menagogue. Several species of the genera lichen and usnea
are still to be found in the shops, and have the reputation of
being powerful astringents. See Gray (Suppl. to the Phar-
macop. pp. 11, 12.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 79

Bryonia, Bryony ; the White Vine is so named.

Commentary. See under a/.nre\oQ. Mesne recommends Comm,
it as a plilegmagoguOj deobstruent, and diuretic medicine; ' * '
for epilepsy, vertigo, coldness of tlie nerves, couglis, asthmas,
especially in a linctus, in pleurisy, and as an external applica-
tion to hard aspostemes, inflammations of the spleen, in the
form of a plaster, with figs and wine ; for the removal of
whitlow, spicultie of hones, thorns, and the like. In a draught,
he says, it proves emmenagogue and procures abortion. He
also commends it as a cosmetic in diseases of the face. Both
internally and externally he praises it in scrofula. He adds
further, that it is useful in the cure of persons who have been
bitten by venomous animals. In a word, no ancient author
has bestowed so flattering an eulogium upon bryony as Mesne
(De Simplicibus.) We need scarcely say that bryony {Bryonia
dioica or alba) is now regarded in the light of a poison rather
than a medicine. See Orfila (Toxicol. Gen. i, 679), and Cliris-
tison on Poisons (p. 445, First edition.)

FoXo,

Lac, Milk ; every sort of milk consists of three substances,
a cheesy, a serous, and a fatty part, which last is contained in
greatest abundance in the cow^s milk, and from it butter is
fiprmed. Whey is possessed of detergent properties, and hence
it loosens the belly if separated by boiling. The cheesy and
thick part is more compact, and on that account blunts acrid
humours. When milk is boiled either by hot pebbles or any
other way, it is an excellent remedy for dysenteries and other
acrid defluxions on the bowels. The whole contents of milk
are suitable applications for acrid humours of the eye, and all
other acrimonies. The milk of a woman is of the best regu-
lated temperament ; after which the goat^s, and then that of
the ass and sheep ; and last of all the milk of cows.

Commentary. We have treated of the properties of milk Comm.
so fidly in the First Book that we need not enlarge on the
subject in this place. Our author's account of it is abridged
from Galen. Dioscorides, Galen, Celsus, Serapion, and most
of the authorities, recommend milk as a remedy when acrid
substances, such as cantharides or arsenic, have been swallowed.

80 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Dioscorides says whey is beneficial in cases of melanclioly,
epilepsy^ lepra, elephantiasis, and exanthemata in all parts of
the body. He recommends new milk as a gargle in all ulce-
rations of the mouth, and in defluxions on the bowels with
ulceration and tenesmus. He says, the milk of sheep, cows,
or goats stops them, when boiled with pebbles, and injected
either by itself or with ptisan, or the decoction of chondrus ;
it is also injected, he adds, in ulcerations of the womb. A
Avoman's milk, he says, when sucked from the breast, relieves
erosion of the stomach and phthisis ; it suits the cure of those
who have di'unk of the sea-hare, and is otherwise useful as an
application to the eyes, and to the gout. All kinds of milk,
he adds, are inapplicable in diseased spleen, diseased liver,
• vertigo, epilepsy, all nervous affections, fevers, and headaches,
unless when the schiston is given to move the bowels. What
the schiston was we have explained in the Fii'st Book (§ 88.)
All the other authorities, whether Greek or Arabian, in treat-
ing of milk, follow Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular
Serapion (De Simpl. 457.) Celsus entertained nearly the
same views, with regard to milk, as the Greek authorities.
Thus he recommends it in phthisis, and as an antidote to
various poisons, but condemns it in headaches and acute
fevers. Hippocrates prescribes milk in various instances, and
seems to have been very partial to the use of it. He recom-
mends the schiston, prepared with pebbles, in affections of the
bowels. (Epidem. vii.)

FaXrj,
Mustella, the Weasel; when burnt, its ashes are discutient.
Wherefore when rubbed in along with vinegar it relieves gout
and rheumatism J when prepared and dried it answers with
epilepsies.
CoMM. Commentary. According to Sprengel, the FaXrj is a species
' " ' of mustella, but neither the M. communis, called weasel in
English, nor the M. Furo, or Ferret. Our author's description
of its medicinal virtues is taken from Dioscorides.

VaXiov,
GaUum, Yellow Ladies' Bedstraw, or Cheese Rennet ; it derives
its name of Galium from its coagulating milk. It resembles

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 81

the cleavers, and is desiccative and subacrid. The flower of it
suits with hemorrhages and burns.

Commentary. The very name, Galium veriim, now gene- Comm.
rally given to the yellow bed-straw, implies that it is generally ' ' '
admitted to be the galium of the ancients. Dioscorides, be-
sides assigning to it the virtues enumerated by oiu' author,
states, that it is aphrodisiacal (iv, 94.) It was principally
celebrated, however, as a styptic, and this character it con-
tinued to hold as long as it obtained a place in the Dispensa-
tory. See Quincy. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2^
317) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 327) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 229.)
They all merely copy from Dioscorides and Gralen. We
have not been able to find it in the works of either Hippo-
crates or Celsus.

Galiopsis (called also Gahobdolon), is like the nettle, but
smoother and fetid, and acts as a discutient and emollient
application to indurated tumours. It also agrees with spread-
ing ulcers in the form of a cataplasm.

Commentary. Our old herbalists generally held the gali- Comm.
opsis of Dioscorides to be a species of Lamium. (See Gerard *
and Parkinson.) But whether it be that or a species of
figwort (the Scrofularia ■peregrind) cannot be positively deter-
mined. Rutty says the Lamium maximum of C. Bauhin has
all the marks which Dioscorides gives to the galiopsis. It
was used only externally in applications to foul ulcers, and
this character secured it a place in our Dispensatory until
recent times. See particularly Dioscorides (iv, 94.) Few of
the other authorities have noticed it.

Fapoc,

Garum, Brine of Pickled Fish, is powerfully calefacient and
desiccative, and is therefore used as an external application
to putrid ulcers, and is administered as an injection in dysen-
tery and ischiatic diseases.

Commentary. " Garum est exquisiti liquoris genus, intes- Comm.
tinis piscium cseterisque quse abjicienda sunt sale maceratis."
Rcndtorpi Notse ap. Fabricii Bibl. Gr. iv, 333; Geopon.
XX, 46 ; Pliny (H. N. xxxi, 43) ; Athenaeus (Dcipnos. ii) ;
Apicius (c. vii.) Coray defines it, " the juice or brine of

III. 6

82 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. pickled fishes." (Ad Xenocrat. Fragment.) Sauce prepared
' ' ' by macerating the intestines of the tunny was particularly
esteemed. Cselius Aiu'elianus praises that from the silurus.
• (Tard. Pass, ii, 1.) Dioscorides recommends the sauce of
pickled fishes as a cataplasm to persons bitten by dogs^ and
as an injection in dysenteiy and sciatica (ii, 34.) All the
other authorities that treat of it give it the same character.
See Aetius (ii) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 486) ; Serapion (c. 184.) It
occurs in the works of Celsus (ii, 21), and also frequently
in those of Hippocrates. Foes gives a learned dissertation
on this article in ' CEconom. Hippocrat.^

Tsi'TiaVTf,

Gentiana, Gentian ; the root is sufficiently efficacious in sub-
tilising and cleansing, and as a detergent and deobstruent
medicine.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides states that the gentian [Gentiana
lutea ?) has a heating and astringent faculty ; that it is a re-
medy in cases of persons bitten by venomous animals, with
pepper and rue ; that it is useful in hepatic and stomachic
affections ; that it procures abortion when applied in a colly-
rium : that it is a ^iilnerarv herb, and is used for manv ulcers
and other cutaneous affections, (iii, 3.) Galen justly remarks
that it owes its attenuant and deobstruent powers to its being
intensely bitter. (De Simpl. v.) Apuleius, like Dioscorides,
recommends it as an application for the bites of sei-pents.
Hence it always obtained a place in the Theriac. See Celsus
(v, 23.) Serapion says it is the best of all remedies in cases
of hydrophobia, and this character it has obtained in modern
times. Avicenna gives a very circumstantial account of it,
enumerating all its virtues as stated by the Greek authorities,
namely, its abstergent, attenuant, deobstruent, diui*etic, and
emmenagogue powers, and recommends it particularly as an
application to parts stung by venomous animals. (ii_, 2, 281.)
Ebn Baithar gives very interesting extracts from Ai'abian
authorities on this head, (i, 260.) It is found in the Hip-
pocratic collection. In the modern Greek Phai'macopoeia
it is stated that the G. lutea grows in the Alps of Switzer-
land. This would seem to imply that it is not a native of
Greece.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 83

Vepaviov,

Gerauium, CraneblU ; that species, the leaves of which re-
semble those of the Anemone, and has edible roots, when
drunk with wine to the amount of a drachm, removes inflation
of the uterus. The other species is of no use in medicine.

Commentary. Dioscorides and the other ancient authori- Comm.
ties describe only two species of the Geranium, the former of " *
which would certainly seem to be the tuberosum, and the other
the rotundifolium. They were not acquainted with the Gera-
nium Robertianum. Dioscorides merely says of the geranium
that when drunk in wine, to the amount of a drachm, it cures
inflation of the womb (iii, 121.) Few of the other authorities
notice it. See Ebn Baithar (i, 10.) The geraniums held a
place in our English Dispensatory until a recent period. See
Quincy (p. 88.)

Terra, Earth ; all kinds are desiccants ; that which is un-
mixed with any other substance is also free of pungency ; but
if any fiery quality is mixed with it, it lays the same aside
when washed. The fatty part, then, of wrought earth is an
useful application to all organs that require drying ; they use
therefore the clay of Egyptian earth to dropsical and splenitic
afi'ections, and to soft swellings, with manifest advantage. Of
medicinal earths, the Lemnia rubrica, or Sigillum, as it is called,
in addition to its being moderately desiccative and astringent,
proves an antidote to deleterious medicines, cures malignant
ulcers with wine or vinegar, stops all kinds of hemorrhage, and
removes dysentery and spreading ulcers of the intestines, the
gut being first washed out by an injection of honied water,
and then of brine. The Rubrica Sinopica, or vermilion, being
stronger than the Lemnian, is used as an ingredient in plasters,
and when drunk it kills worms. The Samian is much more
emollient than the Lemnian, as being glutinous and viscid.
It is to be used then in all cases in which emollients are in-
dicated ; but it also cures spitting of blood from whatever part
it proceed. The Selenusian and the Chian are more detergent,
and are therefore used by some women in the cleansing appli-
cations to their faces. It also produces the incarnation and
cicatrization of ulcers, more especially of burns. The unwashed

84 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Cimolian is possessed of mixed powers, being refrigerant and
discutient ; but tbe washed is more cooling, and cures burns
with oxycrate. The Terra Ainpelitis (it is the kind of earth
which is rubbed upon vines to destroy the worms which breed
in them) is powerfully desiccant and discutient, but not with-
out pungency. The Cretan is full of air and detergent, with-
out pungency. The Eretrian is decidedly astringent, but when
burnt and washed it is desiccant without pungency ; but the
cineritious is preferable. The Pnigitis has powers resembling
the Cimolian, but is black. The Armenian, called also Bole, is
powerfully desiccative, and therefore agrees excellently with
dysenteric cases, fluxes of the belly, spitting of blood, con-
sumption, dyspnoea from humidity, humid ulcers, and pesti-
lential afl'ections. It is drunk with a thin diluted wine, or, if
fever be present, with water. The Alanabolus is possessed of
similar powers to the Armenian. Ochre is discutient and sep-
tic in its powers; it therefore restrains the fungous flesh of
ulcers, and fills hollow ones when mixed with cerate.
CoMM. Commentary. We shall now give a brief explanation of
' — " — ' the medicinal earths of the ancients, and for a fuller account
of them we would beg to refer to the Appendix to Dunbar's
' English and Greek Lexicon,' to Hiirs ' Annotations on
Theophrastus on Stones,' and to Sprengel's 'Notes on Dios-
corides.' Of the ancient writers, Dioscorides and Galen give
the fullest account of them. The Arabians, also, especially
Rhases, Avicenna, and Serapion, treat of them in the most
ample manner, but supply little additional information.
Geoffrey says of the Lemnian earth, that it is " a fat, viscid,
slippery clay, of a pale red colour." The Lemnian ruddle
(jUiXroc) was the red Armenian bole, consisting of silex, alu-
mine, oxyd of iron, &c. The Lemnium Sigillum was the Lem-
nian earth, made into cakes and stamped with a seal, as a
guarantee of its purit}\ The Cretan earth is white chalk.
The Samian earth, as Sprengel states, appears to have been
pure argil ; Kidd supposes it to have been pipeclay. The
kind called aster was globose and thick. The Chian, Selenusian,
and Pniffitid earths, are also argils, more or less pure. The
Sinopic ruddle was a compact kind of ochre or marl, nearly
resembling: the Lemnian eai'th. Pliny ranks the Cimolian earth
among the chalks or clays (cretse.) Sprengel and Kidd sup-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 85

pose it au argil. Tlie purple Cimolian earth of the ancients Comm.
was our steatitis or soap-rock. From Dioscorides^s account of " ' '
the Melian earth, it appears to have consisted principally of
alum, and was different from the Terra Melia of Theophrastus.
The Ampelites would seem to have been a bituminous earth,
formed from stone-coal, probably resembling cannel coal. The
Armenian earth, as ^Nlatthiolus remarks, was different from the
Armenian bole now brought from the East. The ancient is
described to be a very dry clay, having the appearance of
stone, and veiy triturable, like lime. It was much celebrated
as a remedy for the plague. See Galen, Aetius, and Serapion.
It was introduced into practice by Galen. It is clear, as
Dr. Hill remarks, that it was the yellovj Armenian bole which
Galen used ; the red being first used by the Arabians. Dr.
Hill found it an excellent astringent and absorbent. The
Eretrian earth was an impure argil, of a snow-white coloui'.
Geber makes frequent mention of magnesia.

Senecta Serpentis, the Slough of a Serpent, is decidedly
desiccative : when boiled with vinegar it, therefore, cures
toothache. That of the asp, when tritm-ated vriih honey and
rubbed in, sharpens the powers of \-ision.

Commentary, Galen and Serapion likewise recommend Comm.
the skin of a snake, when boiled in wine or ^-inegar, as a ' '
remedv for earache and toothache. See also Halv Abbas
(Pract. ii, 49, 530.) Dioscorides gives nearly the same account
of it, only he recommends the cast skin of the viper as an
ophthalmic remedy, (ii, 19.) The serpent's slough is still
used medicinally in the East. See Ainshe (^Materia Medica,
ii, 291.)

Ft/c tvTepa,

Vermes terreni. Earthworms, when pounded and applied
to wounded nerves, have immediately the most Avonderful
effects.

Commentary. Dioscorides says that earthworms, pounded Comm.
and applied, agglutinate divided nerves, and stop tertians;
that, when boiled with the grease of a goose, they cure affec-
tions of the ears when injected ; that, in like manner, when
boiled in oil and injected into the opposite ear, they relieve

86 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. tootliache ; and that they promote the flow of urine when
' ' ' pounded and drunk in wine, (ii, 72.) Galen commends earth-
worms as being diuretic when drunk in must. He mentions
further, that, according to the report of certain physicians,
earthworms have been given internally and applied externally
without burning or boiling. Of all the ancient authorities,
Aetius is the fullest on the medicinal virtues of earthworms,
(ii, 168.) The Arabians do little more under this head than
copy the descriptions of them given by Dioscorides, Galen,
and Paulus. Avicenna recommends them, when pounded and
drunk in wine, not only as being diuretic but also lithontriptic.
(ii, 2, 198.) The Lumbrici terrestres, or earthworms, are
described and very much commended for their medicinal virtues
in Quincy^s ' Dispensatory' (p. 140), and Lewis's ' Materia
Medica' (ii, 76.)

Tiyapra,
Gigarta vinacea. Grape-stones, are desiccative in the second
degree, but refrigerant in the first. Being, therefore, cooling,
they agree with all defluxions.
CoMM. Commentary. Galen mentions Grape-stones as sour and
' " ' astringent remedies, and, therefore, applicable in all defluxions
from the bowels. Avicenna recommends the ashes of grape-
stones with vinegar in torsion of the nerves, and along with
oil for contusion of the limbs and softening^ of the joints,
(ii, 2, 723.) See also Ehases (1. ult. Cont. i, 745.)

Tiyy'iSiov,
Gingidium, Toothpick Fennel, is possessed of no manifest
heat, but is desiccative in the third degree, and astringent. It
is, therefore, stomachic.
CoMM. CoiMMENTARY. Dioscoiidcs says of the Daucus gingidium,
" * ' that it is a good potherb, and that as a medicine, when taken
in a decoction with wine, it is diuretic and lithontriptic (ii, 166.)
Galen defines its virtues to be considerable astringency with
slightly heating powers. The others treat of it in like terms.
Few if any of the Arabians have noticed it.

VXavKiov,
Glaucium, Horned Poppy, is rather disagreeably astringent.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 87

but decidedly refrigerant, so that it cures erysipelas when the
attack is not severe.

Commentary. In the Fifth Book we have treated of the Comm.
different species of poppy used by the ancients. It appears ' * '
from Dioscorides that it was its expressed juice which was
used in practice. It was used principally in applications to
the eyes. Our author borrows from Galen, and he • follows
Dioscorides (iii, 90.) The Arabians recommend it, not only in
affections of the eyes, but also in boils and erysipelas. See
particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 470) ; Rhascs (Cont. 1. ult. i, 464.)
As far as we can discover, it does not occur in the works o^
the Hippocratists, nor in those of Celsus. It has been scarcely
known in the modern practice of medicine.

Glaux, Milhvort ; the herb is hot and humid in tempera-
ment, and, therefore, promotes the formation of milk.
■ Commentary. Dioscorides gives a very circumstantial Comm.
description of it, from which it has been concluded that the
Glaux was a species of Astragalus, (iv, 139.) All the autho-
rities mention it in the same light as our author, but few of
them have described it. We are not aware of its having been
used in modern practice.

rXrj'^wi',

Pulegium, Pennyroyal, is strongly calefacient and attenuant.
Hence, when applied externally, it proves rubefacient. It also
promotes the expectoration of thick and viscid humours lodged
in the chest and lungs.

Commentary. Dioscorides commends the Mentha Pulegium Comm.
as an emmenagogue, and for forwarding deliver}' ; and the ' '
same character has descended to it down to recent times. See
Gerard, Culpeper, Quincy, and Hill. Even at the present
day it holds a place in our Dispensatories, but with a diminished
reputation : stat magni nominis umbra ! The Arabians gene-
rally treated of it along with the dittany. See Avicenna (ii,
2, 461) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 310.)

rXoiof,',

Sordes, that of baths, is moderately heating, emollient, and

88 SIMPLES. [book vii.

discutieiit. It, therefore, agrees ■with fissures and condylo-
mata.
CoMM. Commentary. See Dioscorides, witli the commentaries of
Matthiolus and SprengeL Suffice it to say, that the Sordes
balneorum was nothing but the sweat scraped from the bodies
of persons who were shampooed, in an apartment of the bath for
this purpose, namely, in the Laconicum. (See Book I, 68.) Of
course it would consist of nothing but animal sweat, mixed up
perhaps with either natron or the flower of beans, which was
generally used during the process. The Sordes gynmasiorum
is also in like manner treated of by Dioscorides, and it must
have been the sweat collected from the statues and walls of the
gymnasia. Dioscorides recommends it for crude boils (phy-
mata), desquamated surfaces, and old sores. The Sordes pales-
tra must have been pretty much the same as the Sordes bal-
neorum, and accordingly it was used in a similar manner. The
Sordes ex gymnasio occurs in Celsus's list of emollients (v, 15) ;
and is treated of likewise by the Arabians. It appears singular
that mankind should have so long retained a fancy for such an
application, considering how easy it was to find a more agree-
able substitute for it.

GlycjTrhiza, Liquorice, is of a tepid and humid tempera-
ment, having also some astringency. Hence it smooths aspe-
rities, not only in the trachea but also in a scabious bladder.
It also quenches thirst.
CoMM. Commentary. It would appear to have been rather the Gly-
cyrrhiza gJanduUfera than the G. glabra. The latter, according to
C. Bauhin, contains more sacchai'ine matter than the G. of the
ancients. Dioscorides, in his usual empirical style, enumerates
with considerable judgment the cases in which it may be ad-
ministered with advantage; such as asperities of the trachea
(hoarseness) in the form of a linctus, for ardour of the stomach,
ulcerations of the bladder and kidneys, and so forth (iii, 9.)
All the ancient authorities, from Dioscorides downwards
agree in stating that liquorice quenches thirst ; and this we be-
lieve is still the popular opinion in this country, and was the
professional, down to a late date. See Rutty (Mat. Med.
p. 221.) The glycyrrhiza occurs in the works of Hippocrates,

SECT. III.] • SIMPLES. 89

Celsus, and the Arabians. As they all give it the same cha- Comm,
racters, we need not occupy space with extracts from them. See " '
particularly Serapion (De Simpl. 147) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 66.)
According to the Greek Pharmacopoeia the G. glabra is the
species now used in Greece.

TXvKvaic)],

Glycyside, Pceony, (called also Pentorobon and Pseonia) ; its
root is acrid, somewhat bitter and desiccative, having also
some astringency. Hence it excites the menstrual discharge,
and cleanses the kidneys and liver when drunk, to the size of
an almond, with wine ; but if the wine be austere it restrains
alvine defluxions. When appended as a periapt, it cures the
epilepsy of children.

Commentary. Sprengel makes the two species described Comm,
by Dioscorides to be the Pteonia officinalis and Cor'allina. We
have mentioned in the Third Book that it has been much cele-
brated both in ancient and modern times as a cure for epilepsy
when appended as an amulet. See Andreas Laurentius (De
Mir. Strumar. Cm-at. pp. 40, 63), and Macer (De Yiribus
Herb.) Quincy, in his ' Complete English Dispensatory'
(London 1769), says of the root of peony, "the good
women highly esteem necklaces made of it to hang about their
children's necks for convulsions and difficult breeding of the
teeth." Considering the faith which many educated persons
now repose in the virtues of galvanic rings and garters, the
present generation has little ground for laughing at the credu-
lity of our forefathers, with respect to amulets and other phylac-
teries. On the Poeouia, see particularly Dioscorides (iii, 147) ;
Galen (De Simpl. v) ; Serapion (c. 61) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 240.)
The PcBonia officinalis is still retained in the Greek Pharma-
copoeia (p. 121.)

rvo^aXioi',

Gnaphalium, Cudweed, is so called because its soft leaves
have been used in place of combed wool (gnaphalum.) They
arc white and moderately astringent, and are, therefore, di'imk
with austere wine for dysentery.

Commentary. There has been a great shifting of names Comm.
by botanical authorities of late, with regard to the Gnaphalia '
and the cognate genera. It seems now agreed that the medi-

90 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM, cinal cotton--weed of the ancients shall be called Otanthus

' * maritimus, Link. Our author borrows from Dioscorides and

Galen, who both give exactly the same character of this plant,

and this it retained down to a very recent period. See Quincy.

E-apum, Turnip ; the root and seed are flatulent, promote
the formation of semen, and rouse to venery.
CoMM. Commentary. The predominance of authority has deter-
' mined us, after a good deal of consideration, to set this down

as the Brassica Napo-brassica, the navew, or French turnip.
All the authorities, in a word, from Dioscorides downwards,
held it to be aphrodisiacal. Dioscorides holds it to be a sove-
reign remedy for chilblains in fomentation, cataplasm, or
prepared thus : a turnip is to be scooped out in the middle and
filled with rose-cerate, which is to be melted by placing the
turnip in hot ashes, when it forms an excellent application to
ulcerated chilblains, (ii, 134.) Pliny likewise says of the tur-
nip, " Est et rapo vis medica. Peruioues fervens impositum
sanat.^^ (H. N. xx, 9.) A roasted turnip is still a popular remedy
in Scotland for chilblains. Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius give
brief descriptions of the gongylis, and from them our author
copies. Celsus treats of the tiapiis and rapum only as potherbs.
The Arabians give a confused account of the matter ; Avicenna
under brassica, and Serapion under 7'apa. (De Simpl. 191.)
Rhases, translating the 134th chapter of Dioscorides, renders
gongyle by Rapa rotunda. (Cont. 1. ult.557.) Altogether it appears
to us strange that some of our late authorities should have re-
ferred the gongylis to the Brassica oleracea. See Dierbach
(Mat. Med. Hippocrat.) The introduction of the different
varieties of the latter into gardening is a very curious but diffi-
cult subject. See Beckmann (Hist, of Invent.), and Loudon
(Encyc. of Garden. 674.)

Gordylium (called also by some Seseli), is hot, diuretic, and

emmenagogue. The root of it, when taken in a linctus, with

honey, promotes expectoration.

CoMM. Commentary. Most probably it is a species of Seseli.

Either our author or some copyist of his works has evidently

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 91

been guilty of the mistake of Trriting gordylion for torchjlion. Comm
See the chapter of Dioscorides on the torclylium (iii, 56.) ' '

TVQIQ,

Pollen, Fine Flonr, resembles stai'ch in its properties^ but is
weaker.

Commentary. On the medicinal properties of poUen, see Comm.
Pliny (H. N. xxii, 60)^ who, however, borrows all his informa- ' ' '
tion from Dioscorides (ii, 107.) Both recommend the pollen
used for glueing books, in hccmoptysis.

Gypsum, Parget, or Mineral White, in addition to its desic-
cant, is possessed of obstruent powers. Hence it agrees with
hemorrhages, along with pollen and the white of an egg.
When burnt it has no longer its obstruent powers, but it is
more desiccant and repellent, especially with oxycrate.

Commentary. We have treated pretty fully of this article in Comm.
another place (Vol. II, 233.) It is the sulphate of lime, of which
selenite or the foliated sulphate of lime is a sub-species. In the
shops, when pulverized, it is known by the names of mineral
white and stucco. Dioscorides merely says of its medicinal
powers, that it is styptic and emplastic, and restrains bleeding
and sweats. Galen is somewhat fuller in his account of it,
recommending it, with the fine flour of Avheat, which is found
sticking about the walls of mills, and the down of a hare, for
stopinng bleeding. Aetius and our author copy closely from
Galen. Serapion borrows both from Dioscorides and Galen
(c. 379.) Avicenna recommends it with Armenian bole, lentils,
myrtle-water, and some vinegar, as an application to the fore-
head in bleeding from the nose, (ii, 2, 284.) Rhases copies
verbatim from Galen, Dioscorides, and our author. (Cont. 1.
ult. i, 235.) Averrhoes recommends it in the manner described
above from Galen as a styptic. (Collig. v, 43.) Celsus prescribes
it for stopping colliquative sweating in cardiac disease (iii, 19.)

Tedse, Dead Pines, have certain acrid, concoctive, and deter-
gent powers. Hence boiled in vinegar they cure toothache

92 SIMPLES. [book VII.

when the mouth is rinsed with the vinegar ; but if a little
honey is added, they bring away phlegm. When made into a
linctus they promote the discharges from the breast.
CoMM. Commentary. This term properly signifies a small torch
used in performing lustrations, but here it is used for a small
slip taken from a pine-tree. The tree from which the tedce
were taken was the Pinus Cembro ; this IMatthiolus, Harduin,
and our old herbalists have clearly made out. See in parti-
cular Parkinson (p. 1537.) Gerard calls it by the English
name of torch-pine, and, evidently copying from Dioscorides,
adds, " the torch-pine, cut into small pieces and boiled in
vinegar, is a remedy against the toothache, if the teeth be
washed with the decoction." (p. 1361.) The other authorities
treat of it in general terms, under the head of Pinus.

AfijuatT/c»jra,
Damascena, Damascenes, will be treated of with Plums.

Aa/uacratoj'ioi',
Damasonium, Water -plantain, has certain detergent powers,
and proves lithontriptic, and occasions a metastasis of the con-
tents of the intestinal canal to the urine.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be no doubt that it is the Alisma
' " ' of Dioscorides, and therefore probably the elegant water plant
now called Alisma Plant ago. On this point see Gerarde, Par-
kinson, Cordus, and Sprengel. Dioscorides recommends its
root in cases of poisoning by the sea hare, the red frog, and by
opium ; in tormina and dysentery when drunk by itself and
with carrot ; and in convulsions and hysterical complaints.
He adds, that the herb binds the belly, is emmenagogue, and
softens swellings when applied, (iii, 159.) Galen states that
he had never any experience of it in the cases mentioned by
Dioscorides ; but that he had found it possessed of lithontriptic
powers. The other Greek authorities follow him. The Arabians
copy from both. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 244, 249) ; Ebn Baithar
(ii, 513.)

AaiJjcoc,
Daucus, Carrot (called also Staphylinus), consists of two
varieties. The root of the cultivated carrot is flatulent and

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 93

aphrodisiacal ; the seed of the wild is wholly devoid of flatulent
properties^ is diuretic and emmenagogue ; and so in like man-
ner the stem.

Commentary. Of the three species of Daucus described by Comm.
Dioscorides (iii, 76), the leaves of the first are compared by ' " '
him to those of the fennel ; the leaves of the second to those of
the wild parsley ; and the leaves of the third to those of
coriander. The first is the species which was long known in
this country by the name of Candy carrots, and which has ob-
tained various names of late years from our botanical authori-
ties. It seems now settled that it should be called Athamanta
Cretensis. " The second/^ says our indefatigable herbalist, old
Parkinson, Avhose practical acquaintance with all sorts of plants
entitles his opinion to high consideration, " is acknowledged to
be so like the first that the climate and country only make the
difi'erence.^^ It is now called Athamanta cervaria. The third,
or coriander-leaved daucus, as the same authority clearly indi-
cates, was probably a species of seseli. It, however, is not
ver}' certainly determined. The following description of their
medicinal virtues by our Quincy may be said to embody the
concurrent opinions of all the ancient authorities, Greek,
Roman, and Arabian. "The seed is aperient and good in
disorders of the kidneys ; as also to hasten delivery, and bring
away the after-birth. It is likewise accounted a good alexiphar-
mic, and proper against the bites of venomous creatures." See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 214, 287) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 462) ; Celsus (v,
23) ; Hippocrates (De Ratione Vict, in Acut.) ; also under
Staphylinus.

Laurus, The Bay-tree ; its leaves are powerfully desiccant and
calefacient, but its fruit still more so. The bark of its root,
being bitter and sub -astringent, proves lithontriptic and cures
hepatic affections when drunk to the amount of three oboli
with fragrant wine.

Aaf^i'rj TToa,
Laurus herba (Ruscus ? Butcher' s-broom ?), called also
Alexandrina, is hot, acrid, and somewhat bitter; it therefore
promotes the menstrual and urinary discliarges. The daphnoides

94 SIMPLES. [book vn.

and the chamsedapline are possessed of tlie same powers ; but
the latter is edible.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides describes the virtues of the bay-
tree {Laurus nobilis) at considerable length, representing it to be
heating and emollient, and hence he says, the decoction of it
makes a good hip-bath in diseases of the womb and bladder ;
the green leaves, he adds, are sub-astringent, and hence prove
useful when applied to the stings of wasps and bees. He re-
commends the berries in phthisis and other complaints of the
chest, as alexipharmic, and as forming a good application to
leprosy, and as an injection in earache and deafness. The bark,
he says, is lithontriptic, kills the foetus in utero, and proves
useful in hepatic diseases, (i, 106.) Galen briefly calls it
diuretic and emmenagogue. The Arabians follow Dioscorides.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 444i.) The Laurus still holds a place in
the Materia Medica, although now seldom used. See Pereira
(p. 800.) The concurrent authority of the commentators and
herbalists has settled that the Laurus Alexandrina was a
species of Ruscus, probably the R. hypophyllum. The chamse-
dapline was also a species of Ruscus, perhaps the racemosus.
The daphnoides is generally held to be the mountain laurel of
Parkinson, i. e. the Daphne Alpina. All the other authorities treat
of these plants in nearly the same terms as our author. They
are all generally held to be emmenagogue and diuretic.

Pellis, Ski7i ; that of a sheep newly taken off and still warm,

when applied to those who have been scourged with rods, cures

them wonderfully. The skin of the hippopotamus, when burnt

and triturated with water and applied, disperses hard tubercles.

That of the viper, when triturated and applied in cases of

alopecia, promotes the growth of the hair in a wonderful degree.

The leather of old shoes burnt has desiccative ashes ; hence it

cures sores in the feet from friction, if not in an inflamed state ;

and also burns, intertrigo, and protuberances.

CoMM. CoMMExNTARY. Wc havc mentioned, in the Fourth Book,

' ' ' that the fresh skin of a newly-killed sheep was esteemed an

. excellent application to parts which had been bruised or cut

by scourges. (See Vol. II, 46.) Dioscorides and most of the other

authorities recommend the ashes of old shoes in the cases

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 9.5

mentioned by our authors. Avicenna recommends the fresh Comm.
skin of a goat as an application to poisoned wounds, (ii, 2, 539.) ' * '

AlKTlllill'OV,

Dictamnum, Dittany, consists of more subtile particles than
pennyroyal, but resembles it in other respects. That variety
called Pseudo dictamnum is weaker.

Commentary. That the Dictamnus Creticus, so celebrated ^omm.
even in poetry (Virg. ^n. xii, 412) as a vulnerary herb, was
a species of Origanum, has been long known and acknowledged.
Until of late years it held a place in our Dispensatories under
the name of dittany of Candy. It was always held to be alexi-
pharmic, and as such it is commended by Dioscorides. Such, he
adds, is the power of this herb that by the smell and touch it
kills venomous reptiles; and the juice of it when poured into
a wound inflicted by an iron instrument or the bite of a veno-
mous animal immediately cures it. (iii, 34.) Galen would
appear to have been sceptical as to the great medicinal powers
said to be inherent in this plant, for he dismisses it wdth a
brief notice to the eff'ect that it is more attenuant than the
pennyroyal, but like to it otherwise. See also Celsus (v, 25.)
The Arabians follow Dioscorides, and represent it to be diuretic
and emmenagogue. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 461) and Serapion
(De Simpl. 310.) They describe it along with the pennyroyal.
The bastard dittany has been pretty generally recognized as
the Dictamnus Fraxinella. See Parkinson, Miller, and Pereira
(ii, 1652, ed. sec.) The last of these authors remarks regarding it,
that " it was formerly much used in medicine, but of late years
has fallen into almost total disuse." Not very many years
ago, however, it was in great repute as being 'diuretic, emme-
nagogue, alexipharmic, anthelmintic, &c. See Alston^s Lectures
(i, 434.) It is still esteemed by the Arabians and Persians as a
tonic and stimulant. Ainslie (Mat. Med. 63.)

Dionvsias, is treated of under Androsseraum.

Diphrygcs, Husk of Brass, is possessed of mixed powers.

96 SIMPLES. [book vii.

being somewhat astringent and moderately acrid. It is there-
fore a good application for malignant ulcers.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides gives a very circumstantial de-
" * ' scription of three varieties of this substance, "which for many
years has been lost sight of. Matthiolus calls it the Husk of
Bronze, and Sprengel says it is called Kupfermulm in Germany.
Eiutty ranks it among the obsolete medicines of the ancients.
(Mat. Med. pr. 27.) Rhases treats of it. (Cont. ult. 256.)
See Serapion (c. 418.)

Dipsacus, Teasel; the root of this thorn is desiccant in the
second degree, and is also somewhat detergent.
CoMM. Commentary. The root of the Dipsacus fidlonum, or
' — • ' manured teasel, is praised by Dioscorides as an application to
fissures and fistulse of the anus, and it held a reputation in
these cases down to a late period. See Rutty (Mat. Med.
168.) Dioscorides fui'ther mentions its use as an amulet in
quartans, for which also it was long celebrated ; for our Quincy
speaks of '' the superstition of some people of his day in using
it as a charm against agues." (Complete Dispensatory, 117.)
For the Arabians, see particularly Serapion (c. 106) and Ebn
Baithar. It is not noticed by Hippocrates nor Celsus.

Aopu/ci'toi',
Dorycnium, Shrub Trefoil {?), is of a similar temperament
with the poppy and mandragora, that is, immoderately cold.
When taken in a small quantity it occasions torpor, and in
hirger doses it proves fatal.
CoMM. CoiMMENTARY. In the Pifth Book we have stated the diffi-
' — V — ' culty of determining what it was. Authorities are divided
between the Convolvulus Dorycnium L. (Angl. Shrubby Bind-
weed), the Solanum SodomcBum, smd At7'opa Belladonna. Dios-
corides says of it that it is soporific, and when taken in large
doses proves fatal ; he adds, some afl&i'm that the seed of
it is sought after for philtres, or love potions, (iv, 75.) Galen
gives nearly the same account of it under the name of Doryc-
nidium. The Arabians would appear not to have admitted it
into the INIat. Med., for the Doronicon of Serapion is a difi'erent
plant, (c. 335.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 97

^paKOVTlOV,

Dracontium, or Dracunculus, Dragon-herb, somewliat resem-
bles the Wake-robiu (Arum), but is more acrid and bitter than
itj and also hotter, and consists of more subtile particles. It
has also some astringenc3\ The root of it^ therefore, when
taken in a potion cleanses the bowels, and is an excellent appli-
cation to malignant ulcers ; and the leaves in like manner.
But the fruit of it is stronger.

Commentary. We have treated of the Dragon-herb Comm.
[Arum Dracunculus) as an article of food in another place. (Vol.
I, p. 114.) Dioscorides gives so circumstantial a description of
its medicinal properties that we cannot find space for it. Suffice
to say, he uses it internally in diseases of the chest, and as an
aphrodisiac, externally, in various cutaneous diseases, in collyria,
in injections into the ears, and as an alexipharmic. (ii, 195.)
Galen embodies the substance of Dioscorides^s empirical de-
scription of its virtues agreeably to his own system, recom-
mending it principally as a deobstruent internally, and an appli-
cation to sores and cancerous tumours externally. Aetius also
gives an elaborate description of its powers. Oribasius merely
states in general terms that it is calefacient and attenuant.
Apuleius recommends it for the bite of the asp. Mesne ascribes
to it powerfully cathartic and carminative powers. His account
of it is very elaborate, and deserving of more attention than we
can afford room to bestow upon it. He recommends it in the
form of a suppositorv to relieve hemorrhoids and flatulence.
(De Simpl. 24.) Avicenna borrows largely from Dioscorides.
(ii, 2, 432.) Khases copies from Dioscorides, Galen, and
Oribasius. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 257.) Serapion does the same.
(De Simpl. 43.) It remains to be mentioned that Dioscorides,
Oribasius, Mesne, and Avicenna, besides the species of dracun-
culus which we have been treating of, also describe another by
the name of the Lesser. It is supposed to be the Arum Italicum.
The dragon-herb held a place in the Dispensatory down to a
very late date. Boerhaave calls it a powerful diuretic and
promoter of the menses. Ouincy says it is reckoned alexi-
pharmic.

ApUOTTTfpiC,

Dryopteris, Oak-fern, is sweet, acrid, and bitterish, and its
root has some sourness. It is septic, and hence it is depilator3^
111. 7

98 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. Accoi'ding to DierbacL^ it compreliends both
' ' ' the Polypod'mm Dryopteris and the Asplenium Adiantum nigrum,
and this opinion is supported by that of the okler authorities.
See Parkinson (1042) and Alston (§ 52.) Sprengel refers it
to the former. Our author borrows from Dioscorides^ and
Avicenna does the same, (ii, 2, 219.) Our older herbahsts,
Parkinson and Gerard, treat of the oak-fern, but it has long
ceased to hold a place in our Dispensatory.

Quercus, the Oak ; its leaves and fruit are possessed of
desiccant and tepid powers, so as to agglutinate recent wounds
and cure incipient inflammations. The membrane under the
bark of the acorn which siu-rounds the fleshy part of the fruit
being much more astringent, is given for the female fluor and
other diseases attended with discharges.
CoMM. Commentary. Dierbach states that three species of the
' ' ' oak with edible roots grow in Greece, the Quercus JEsculus,
the Q. Bex, and the Q. BaJlote. He adds, that the first species
is generally meant by Spug in the Hippocratic writings. Eus-
tathius remarks that the ^»?yo(; of Homer was a species of oak.
(Ad Iliad. V, 691.) In fact, it was the Quercus (sschylus, or
rather comprehend it and the Q. Robur. See Parkinson (1389.)
After all the illustration which the subject has received from
the old herbalists, and more recent commentators on Dioscorides
and Theophrastus, it must be admitted that there is still consi-
derable diflSculty in determining the various species of oak
described by the ancients. Our author borrows his account of
the medicinal powers of the oak from Dioscorides, whom all the
other authorities also follow. The quercus occurs in the Mat.
Med. of Hippocrates, and in those of all the Ai-abians. We need
scarcely add that the Quercus Robur still maintains a place in
our Dispensatory.

Ebenus, Ebeny ; the wood is calefacient, detergent, and

consists of subtile particles. Hence it is believed to remove

films which obstruct the pupil, and is an ingredient for other

ophthalmic remedies.

CoMM. Commentary. The Latin poet Virgil, who appUes the

" ' ' term India both to the region of the East, which has always

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 99

held that name, and to Abyssinia (Georg. iv, 293), says^ that Comm.
India is the only country that produces ebeny. (Georg. ii, IIG.) * '
This account of it will still be admitted to be pretty correct.
Dr. Royle mentions that " Diospyros Ebenus yields the best
kinds in the INIauritius, perhaps also in Madagascar ; but D.
ebenaster and D. melanoxylon, the ebeny trees of the Coromandel
coast, yield it in the peninsula, of very good quality, as other
species do in other parts of India." (Hindoo Med. 89.) See
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 48.) In medicine it was principally
used in collyria for psorophthalmia and xerophthalmia as re-
commended by Dioscorides (i, 129), and in old ulcers and
watery pustules as recommended by Aetius (i) and Galen.
(De Simpl. \d.) See also Celsus (v, 12.) The Arabians, who
must have been still more familiar with it than the Greeks,
say of it, in addition, that it is lithontriptic. Rhases (Coutin.
1. ult. 258), Avicenna (ii, 2, 226), and Serapion (c. 152.) It is
still imported to this country, but has long ceased to occupy a
place in our Dispensatory.

Cerebrum, Brain ; the boiled brains of a hare when rubbed
in and eaten, are useful (it is said) for forwarding dentition
in infants. Some write that brain when eaten proves useful
for tremblings. Dioscorides says that the brain of a cock
when drunk with wine relieves those who have been bitten by
venomous animals, and that it stops hemorrhages from the
meninges. Galen says that the brain of a camel when dried
and drunk with vinegar cures epilepsy, and that of the weasel
in like manner ; that the brain of a swallow with honey
is of use in suffusions ; while that of sheep when prepared
in like manner is an excellent remedy in the dentition of
children.

Co:mmentary. Galen and Serapion treat of the medicinal Comm.
properties of brains in much the same terms as our author. ' ^^
Indeed our author copies from Galen. Avicenna says brains
prove emetic after food, and are useful in the case of a person
who has swallowed any poison, (ii, 2, 125.)

EAa^a,
Olea, the Olive ; the green shoots of it are possessed of the

100 SIMPLES. [book VII.

same degree of coldness as of astringency ; the fruit wlien
perfectly ripe is moderately liot, but tlie unripe is more as-
tringent and cold. The tear of Ethiopian olive resembling
the slender ammoniac, is possessed of detergent powers. It
is used, therefore, for cicatrices, albugo, and dimness of vision,
and for the pains of the teeth when put into the carious hole.
But some say that it is the wild olive tliat does this. Oil
from fully ripe olives is sweet and moderately hot, and rather
of a moistening nature. But the unripe has just as much
astringency as coldness. The washed is freer from pungency.
As to the old, the older it is so much the hotter and more dis-
cutient is it, more especially if it consist of subtile particles at
first. This is ascertained from its being pure and transparent,
and from a small quantity of it being sufficient to anoint a
large part of the body, and from its being readily drunk in by
the skin. Such in particular is the Sabine. That from the
wild olive is at the same time detergent, astringent, and drying,
as an oil. Castor oil has the same powers as old oil. The
other kinds, such as that of sesame, or of radish and the like,
derive peculiar properties from the substance they are formed
from.
CoMM. Commentary. We have treated of the olive as an article
of food in another place. (Vol. I, 135.) The Ethiopian or wild
olive comprehended several species of the Elceagnus. The
tears of it, mentioned by Dioscorides and our author, and
likened to gum ammoniac, are now unknown. Some, as Par-
kinson remarks, have supposed it our gum elemi, but that is
probably a mistake. All the authorities, Greek, Latin, and
Arabian, mention it as a sour, astringent medicine. Samonicus
calls it " succis oleaster acerbis.^'' Abu I'Fadli calls it a power-
ful astringent. (Apud Celsii Hierobot.) The leaves of the
cultivated olive Dioscorides says have the same kind of powers
as the wild, but in an inferior degree, and hence, from their
greater mildness, they are more suitable for ophthalmic remedies;
he also recommends the juice of the green olive in pityriasis,
psora, and other cutaneous diseases, (i, 136.) "We need not
follow out what has been wi'itten by the others on this subject.
"EXotoi'. For an account of the oils used by the ancients
in the practice of medicine, see in particular Dioscorides (i, 29
et seq.), Galen (De Simpl. vi), and Mesne (De Oleis. The

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 101

Oleum Cicimim, i. e. oil of the palma christi, now called castor Comm.
oil, is often mentioned by the ancient authors. Dioscorides ' * '
states that it is purgative and anthelminthic. Aetius states
that linseed oil may often be used instead of it. Almond oil
he particularly commends in complaints of the ears. The oil
of Sesame, he says, resembles common oil, being a gentle pur-
gative ; it is the gingilie oil of the modern Hindoos. Serapion
recommends the oil of olives as an astringent application to
stop profuse perspiration, to remove scabies and other cutaneous
complaints on the head, to cure aphthae and ulcers of the mouth,
and for various other complaints. He, however, merely copies
from Dioscorides, (i, 136.) But of all the ancient authorities,
Mesne is the one who gives the fullest account of the composi-
tion and medicinal powers of the oils. Some of them are not
described by the Greeks before his time, as far as we know.
We shall give a specimen of a few of his prescriptions. His
oil of mandragora, which he recommends for extinguishing in-
flammation and procuring sleep, is prepared from equal parts
of the juice of its berries and oil of sesame boiled in a double
vessel until the juice be evaporated. Add, he says, a little
juice and boil again, do so a third time, and lay it aside. For
the oil of mandi'ake a much more complicated receipt is given
by Myrepsus (xvi, 50), which held its place in our Pharma-
copoeia down to the days of Quincy. (Complete Dispensatory,
527.) The oil of eggs, which Mesne commends strongly from
experience for cleansing the skin, curing cutaneous eruptions,
making hair grow, and curing malignant ulcers, he directs to
be prepared thus : about thirty yelks of eggs hardened by
boiling, and broken down into pieces, are to be fried in an
earthen fryingpan that has been leadened, stirring with a
wooden or iron ladle until they grow red, and their oil is poured
out, which they j'ield the more largely if compressed with the
ladle. This oil of eggs is described in similar terms by Moses
Charras, in the Royal Pharmacopoeia (p. 200), and is a popular
remedy in Scotland to this day. Mesue describes the composition
of an oil of frogs, which he recommends nnich for soothing the
pains of arthritis, and the burning heat of ardent fevers, also
the oil of vipers, of wolves, and many others, which will Ijc more •
properly treated of by us in section xx of this Book. The oils
arc also well described by Aetius (i) and Myrepsus (De Oleis.)

102 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Elseomeli, Honeyed Oil. In Syria, an oil thicker and sweeter
tlian honey, flows from a certain trunk ; when drunk to the
amount of two cyathi with a hemina of water, it produces a dis-
charge of crude and hihous matters from the bowels. Those
who have taken it become torpid ; yet one need not be alarmed,
but only rouse them.
CoMM. Commentary. Pliny describes it as a natural exudation
from trees on the maritime coasts of Syria. He adds, it is fat,
thicker than honey, thinner than resin, of a sweet taste, and
is used in medicine : '^ ]\Ianat ex arboribus pingue, crassius
melle, resina tenuius, sapore dulci, et hoc medicis." (H. N. xxv,
7.) He states in another place that it is a nauseous purgative,
(xxiiij 56.) Dioscorides gives the same account of it as our
author, and describes an oil to be prepared from it. Avicenna
and Rhases recommend it as an application to ulcerated
scabies. It appears singidar that this natural substance should
have been entirely lost sight of in modern times, inasmuch
that unless we adopt the conjecture of Alston, that it was
some species of manna, we must admit ourselves entii'ely igno-
rant of it.

Elaterium ; the juice of the fruit of the "^dld cucumber is so
called, being in the second order of calefacients. It pro-
motes the menstrual discharge, and destroys the fcetus when
applied in a pessary, by its extreme bitterness. When rubbed
in with milk it evacuates by the nose. When administered
in an injection, it occasions a discharge downwards of phlegm,
and sometimes of blood.
CoMM. Commentary. It would appear that Hippocrates applied
the term to all drastic piu'gatives. See Eustathius, Iliad, (xviii,
564-.) By Dioscorides and all subsequent authorities, it is
restricted to signify the fecula of the Momordica Elaterium, or
wild cucumber. It was much used by the ancient physicians
in the cure of dropsy, as we have stated in the Third Book.
Dioscorides cori'ectly states that it evacuates bile and phlegm,
both upwards and downwards. He I'ecommends it particularly
in cases attended with difficulty of breathing. As an emetic,
he directs us to administer it in oil, or vrith the ointment of
iris. As a purgative, he recommends it to be given with

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 103

double the quantity of salt and some mustard, in the form of Comm.
a pill, of the size of a tare. Like our author, he states that " * '
it is emmenagogue, and proves fatal to the foetus when applied
in a pessary. Galen and the other authorities on the Materia
Medica give it nearly the same characters. Theophrastus
. states that it is the most durable of all medicines, and that the
oldest is the best. (H. P. ix, 14.) It is said by Hippocrates,
that if a woman or she-goat, giving suck, partake of elaterium,
it will aflFect her young. (Epid. vi, 5.) Galen in his com-
mentary remarks, that other pm*gatives have the same effect
when given similarly. (Op. t. v, 218, ed. Basil.) The Arabians
also show a good practical acquaintance with this substance.
Thus, for example, Avicenna praises it strongly in affections of
the chest attended with difficulty of breathing, and more espe-
cially in cases of dropsy. He recommends it also in the form
of a clyster for the cure of diseases of the joints and sciatica,
and speaks of a plaster of it for the gout. He directs a pill
to be prepared from it with double the quantity of salt. He
states correctly that it occasions evacuations of phlegm and
blood; that it is diuretic, and emmenagogue, and kills the child
in a suppository, (ii, 2, 177.) Mesne also writes of the wild
cucumber and elaterium with great precision, recommending
the latter internally as an emetic, a phlegmagogue, and a hy-
di'agogue, more especially in dropsy. He also recommends it
in jaundice, and engorgement of the liver and spleen ; and states
that it is most beneficial in sciatica when administered in a
clyster or applied as a plaster. He speaks highly of the efficacy
of the roots of the wild cucumber when applied to the head, in
a cataplasm for hemicrania, and as an errhine in the same
complaint. (De Simpl. ix.) Serapion also, in treating of the
wild cucumber, gives interesting extracts, both fi'om Greek
and Arabian authorities, respecting the medicinal powers of
elaterium. (De Simpl. 204.) Ebn Baithar gives a most ample
account of it. (ii, 276.)

EXarr?,

Abies, the Fir ; this tree is calefacient and desiccativc, like
the black poplar. Its resin will be treated of among the resins.

Commentary. Without doubt it is the Pinus Abies, li. The Comm.
other authorities in general do not treat of it, except under the ' ' '

104 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. resinse. It does not otherwise occur in Dioscorides^ Galen,
* ' SerapioBj or Avicenna.

Elatine, the Toadflax ; tliis herb is like the Helxine, and is
moderately refrigerant and astringent.
CoMM. Commentary. That the Fluellin or Female Speedwell
' {Linaria Elatine) is the elatine of the ancients has been long
known and almost generally admitted. See Parkinson,
Gerard, Eutty, &c. Dioscorides recommends the leaves with
flour for inflammations and running of the eyes, and for dysen-
tery. Pliny, evidently translating Dioscorides, says of the
elatine, '^ eadem cum line semine cocta sorbitionis usu dysen-
teria liberat.^'' (H. N. xxvii, 50.) It would appear that it had
been omitted by the Arabians. It held a place in our Dispen-
satory with its ancient character down to a late period. See
Parkinson, Gerard, Quincy, Rutty, and Hill.

Pabulum cervi [Pai'snip ?), is of heating and drying powers
in the second degree, and consists of subtile particles.
CoMM. Commentary. Our older herbalists and commentators are
' • ' pretty well agreed in holding it to be the garden parsnip [Pas-
tinaca sativa.) Dioscorides pronounces it to be alexipharmic,
and Aetius does the same. The other authorities treat very
briefly of it. Avicenna calls the Pastinaca aphrodisiacal, and
this reputation it maintained down to modern times. See
Quincy.

Salvia, Sage, is decidedly calefacient and subastringent.
CoMM. Commentary. The sage [Salvia officinalis) has held a place
^~^ in the Materia Medica from the earliest ages down to our
times. Dioscorides calls it diuretic, emmenagogue, alexiphar-
mic, and vTilnerary. The other Greek authorities, Hke our
author, speak more moderately in its praise. The Arabians
who treat of it follow Dioscorides. See Serapion (De Simpl.
153.) In modern times it was at one period held in much
esteem. See Quincy. It is retained in the modern Greek
Pharmacopoeia (p. 142.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 105

RXeinov,

Inula, Elecampane (?) ; it is calefacient and desiccative with
some recrementitious humidity. When mixed with linctuses it
jjromotes expectoration^ and it acts as a rubefacient to the
parts it is appKed to.

Commentary. All the other authorities give the elecampane Comm.
[Inula Helenium) much the same characters as our author. ' * '
Dioscorides says the root is calefacient, and proves diuretic and
emmenagogue ; that in a linctus, with honey, it is useful in
coughs, orthopncea, and the like ; and, further, that it is car-
minative and alexipharmic. The leaves he recommends in a cata-
plasm with wine for ischiatic disease, and in powder for haemop-
tysis, (i, 27, 28.) Galenas character of it mainly agrees with
that of Dioscorides, that is to say, he recommends elecampane,
internally, in chest complaints, and externally as a rubefacient in
sciatica, hemicrania, and a disposition of the joints to disloca-
tion. The Arabians give it all the characters ascribed to it by
the Greeks, namely, of being diuretic, emmenagogue, expecto-
rant, carminative, alexipharmic, and rubefacient externally ;
and, fiu'ther, hold of themselves that it is cordial. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 235), and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 237.) Serapion
gives us the following extract from Hunain's ' Translation of
Hippocrates' (Hunain ex verbo Hippocratis) : " Elecampane
drives away anger and sorrow, strengthens the mouth of the
stomach, clears the chest, expels the superfluities in the veins
by the menses and urine, and more especially a wine made
from it.'' (De Simpl. 138.) In fact, as we ought perhaps to
have mentioned, the helenium is a Hippocratic herb. (Nat.
Mul. 572, ed. Foes.) It was also well known to Celsus (v, 11
et alibi.) The elecampane still retains its place in our Dispen-
satory and also in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia (p. 7Q>.)
The other species described by Dioscorides as the Egyptian
elecampane, and Avhich he recommends solely as being alexi-
pharmic, is held by Sprengel to be the Teuci'ium Marum.
Parkinson, however, supported by high authority, seems to
make out a strong case for the Cistus Helkmthenium, or rock
rose (p. 655.) Old Gerard, on the other hand, adopts the
opinion of those commentators who referred it to the Marum.
(p. 67.) The Teucrium Marum also holds a place in the
modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

106 SIMPLES. [book VII.

lliXsoaeXivov,
Apium palustre, Mcn'sh Parsley ; being formed in wet places,
it has the same properties as the cultivated parsley, and is
larger than it.
CoMM. Commentary. The smallage [Apium graveolens) is briefly
" • ' treated of by the other authorities. We need scarcely say
that it is still retained in our Dispensatory. See Quincy.

Elephas, the Elephant ; the parings from its hoof, when
applied in a cataplasm, cure whitlow ; and those of the bones
and teeth of it, being of a drying and detergent nature, are
mixed with similar medicines.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides in like manner recommends a
' ' ' cataplasm prepared with the shavings from the elephanVs
hoofs in cases of paronychia. Most of the other authorities
would appear not to have treated of it. Ivory shavings were
retained in the Dispensatory until late years. See Quincy.

£A/cuff/uara tou apyupoK,
Recrementum argenti, the Dross of Silver, has the same
powers as the molybdsena, for it is astringent and epis-
pastic, hence it is mixed with the plasters called Fusca and
Epulotic.
CoMM. Commentary. What the ScoricB argenti are will be readily
' • ' understood from the following description of the process of
extracting silver from the ores of it : " These ores are ex-
tremely hard, and also mixed with bituminovis, sulphureous,
arsenical, or vitriolic substances, which carry off with them a
considerable part of the silver, or burn it to scoria along with
themselves." Geoffroy, &c. (p. 272, Engl, ed.) Our author
copies almost verbatim from Dioscorides, and the other Greek
authorities supply nothing additional under this head. Aetius
treats of the scoria in general terms, as we shall see in the
proper place, and merely says of the Scoria argenti that they
are possessed of desiccative powers. Of the Arabians, Avicenna,
in treating of this article, borrows every word from the Greeks,
(ii, 2, 693.) Serapion quotes an Arabian authority, Adamasti,
to the effect that the scoria argenti is of use in cardiac disease
(c. 415.) Rhases, after quoting from Galen, Dioscorides, and

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 107

Paulus, gives the opinions of two Arabian authorities, Damas(?) Comm.
and Chuz, the former to the effect that it is useful in palpita- ' '
tion of the heart and fetor of the mouth, and the other, that
it cures scabies and pruritus. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 74.)

Helleborus, Hellebore ; both kinds are calefacieut and desic-
cative in the third degree. It (the white) is also acrid and
detergent ; and hence it agrees with leprous affections of the
skin. The black, when introduced into fistulse, makes the
callus cast off in three days.

CoMMENTAKY. Thoso who wisli to SCO the general litera- Comm.
ture of this interesting article may find our opinions briefly
stated under the proper head in the Appendix to Dunbar^s
'Lexicon.' In this place it will be sufficient to mention
that we have come to the conclusion that the Helleborus albus
of the ancients was identical with our Veratrum album. Hip-
pocrates makes mention of both species ; when he simply uses
the term helleborus, he means the white, as in Aphor. v, 1,
and iv, 15, 16. He also recommends the niger as well as the
albus in melancholy and quartans (Epist. 1288, ed. Foes.)
Aretseus, at the conclusion of his work, as it has come down
to us, pronounces a strong eulogy on hellebore, which he calls
the great remedy in cases of elephantiasis. Dioscorides re-
commends it as an emetic, emmenagogue, and sternutatory,
(iv, 148-9.) Mesne and Serapion mention it as an emetic,
but concur with Hippocrates in stating that it sometimes in-
duces convulsions if administered unguardedly. Haly Abbas
gives exactly the same account of it. Averrhoes mentions
that in his time the Lapis lazuli was used as a pm'gative in
place of hellebore, (v, 42.) Rhases concurs with the Greek
authorities in praising its effects for the cure of epilepsy,
melancholy, arthritis, and mania. INIacer Floridus praises it in
the cure of epilepsy, mania, quartans, &c. We would 'now
beg to be allowed to depart from our general rule, and to
quote some modern opinions in illustration of the ancient on
this important subject, — tlie more important from hellebore
forming, as is supposed, one of the ingredients in the cele-
brated patent medicine can medicinale . Conrad Gesner, an
upright and learned physician, as Bergius calls him, had great

108 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. confidence in the white hellebore, which he took himself, and
* administered freely to his patients with great success. He
says of it, '' recreat et roborat^ et hilariorem facit, et acuit
ingenium^ quod in me et aliis ssepissime expertus scribo. Ego,
si vixero, in ellebori historia multa proferam quje medici ad-
mirentur." The following is his formula for preparing it :
R Hell. alb. dr. ij, vini cretici oz. \], stent in maceratione, per
mensem, additis, si placet, aromatibus. Of this preparation,
from 6 to 9 scr. were given according to circumstances.
Baglivi calls hellebore the " Hercules remediorum, plui'iumque
domitor incurabilium morborum." Platearius, treating of
hellebore, says that the ancients used it as a purge, in like
manner as scammony is now used, for that men^s bodies, in
former times, were stronger than now ; such a medicine would
require to be given with great caution. He says of it, that it
. purges phlegm and black bile. The white, he adds, is a more
violent medicine than the black. (De Simplici Medicina.) For
a great many years past, with the exception of the partial
administration of the eau medicinale in cases of gout, the
internal use of the veratrum may be said to have been quite
lost in the practice of medicine, and that, not only in this
country, but also in the land of Hippocrates and Dioscorides.
In the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia it is directed to be kept
as a poison, (p. 7Q.) Mesne, Serapion, and many of the
authorities recommend the black hellebore in melancholy.
That it was either the HeUehorus niger, or the species ori-
entcdis, Tournefort, and not the Veratrum album which was
commonly administered in Anticyra, in cases of mania and
melancholy, is clearly proved from Dioscorides (iv, 149.) He
further states of it that, applied per vaginam, it procures
menstruation, and kills the foetus ; he recommends it for the
cure of scabies, alphos, hchen, and leprosy; he also speaks
favorably of it as an external application to fistulse, dropsies,
toothache, and diseases of the ears. Galen recommends
both species equally in nearly the same class of complaints.
Notwithstanding the high authority of Pereira, who main-
tains the contrary, we do not see the least reason to doubt
that the black hellebore of the ancients was our Helleborus
niger, or Christmas rose. See Gerard (Paradisus, p. 386)
and Parkinson (p. 211.) Without doubt it was introduced '

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 109

into tliis country by the Uomans for their H. niger. The Comm.
H. officinalis, Salisb., which Dr. Sibthorp brings forward in ' ' '
its placBj is a distinct species. See Alston^s Lectures (42) ;
also the Greek Pharmacopoeia, Athens, 1837, (p. 77.)

Elichrysum, Shrubby Everlasting or Eternal Flower (called
also Clirysanthemon and Amarantum), is a plant used for
garlands, having capillary leaves of a golden appearance.
When drunk with wine it is suitable for dysuria, the bites of
reptiles, ischiatic disease, and fractures. It also promotes
menstruation, and dissolves coagula when drunk with wine and
honey, and relieves catarrhs.

Commentary. Linnseus makes the ancient Helichrysum Comm.
identical with his Gnaphalium. (Gener. Plant. 946.) Accord- " *'""'
ingly Sprengel, in his R. H H., refers it, with Cordus and
Sibthorp, to the Gnaphalium Stcechos. But in his edition of
Dioscorides he rather inclines to the Tdnacetum annuiim.
Dr. Hill says of the tansy : " It has been greatly celebrated
as an uterine, a vulnerary, and a diuretic. It is recommended
in suppressions of the menses, and in cases of the gravel, and
other nephritic complaints." This agrees so well with the cha-
racters of the elechrysus as given by Dioscorides and Paulus,
that we are inclined to identify this article with the Tanacetum
annuum. It is proper to admit, however, that the virtues
which Dioscorides ascribes to the elechrysus are ascribed by
old Gerard to the cudweed. It is one of those articles in
the ancient Materia Medica which can never be satisfactorily
determined. See further, Parkinson (p. 695) and Lewis's
Dispensatory (i, 411.)

EX^/i'rj,

Ilelxine, or Parietaria, Pellitory of the Wall (called also
Perdicium, Parthcnium, Sideritis, and Hcraclea) ; its powers are
detergent and slightly astringent, with a coldish hixmidity.
The Ilelxine, called also Cissampelos, is possessed of discutient
powers.

CoMMEiVTARY. This is evidently the second species of Comm.
Dioscorides (iv, 86), who represents the leaves as being cooling * '

110 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. and astringent, and consequently proving a suitable cataplasm
' — ' ' in cases of erysipelas, burning, and other inflammations, and
as proving useful in cbronic coughs, inflammations of tlie
tonsils, and so forth. That this plant is the pellitory of the
wall {Parietaria officinalis) has been long pretty generally
acknowledged. See Parkinson, Gerard, and Sprengel. Galen
ascribes the same medicinal virtues to it as Dioscorides ; and
Aetius and Oribasius treat of it in nearly the same terms.
It is the mm-alis of Celsus, who recommends the juice of it,
added to ceruse, as an application to the gout, (iv, 24.) It may
be proper to mention that Dioscorides (1. c), Pliny (H. N.
xxii, 19), and Apuleius (81), also recommend it as an appli-
cation in cases of gout. The Arabians give the pellitory exactly
the same characters as the Greeks do. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 335)
and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 536.) The Arabians call it herba
vitri, because glass vessels were cleaned with it. It is now
excluded from the Dispensatory, but held a place in it clown to
a late date. See Quincy, Hill, and Rutty. That the former
species of helxine described by Dioscorides was a species of
Convolvulus has long been known. See INIatthiolus and Par-
kinson. Dodouccus makes it the ni(/er, and Sprengel the
arvensis. Dioscorides briefly states of its medicinal virtues,
that it is laxative, (iv, 39.) It is not treated of, as far as we
have discovered, bv Galen. Aetius, or Oribasius. The Arabians
treat of it as a species of Volubilis, by the name of acfin. See
Serapion (De Simpl. 41) ; Mesne (De Simpl. 24.) Both agree
with Dioscorides in making it to be laxative. See further App.

'EAv^iog j; ^NlfXa'j?,

Panicum, Punic, is, like millet, desiccative and refrigerant

in its powers when applied externally. It also dries up ahine

fluxes.

CoMM. Commentary. Panic, as Miller remarks, is a plant of the

" ' ' millet kind. It is the Panicum Italicum. It is more an article

of food than of medicine. V\e have treated of it accordingly

in the part of this work devoted to Dietetics. See Vol. I, 124.

' EyHTTErpoi' »'/ IlpocrcrooEc,
Empetron, Black-berried Heath, is a medicine which purges
phlegm and bile. It is also saltish and therefore, detergent.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. Ill

Commentary. It is not well determined w'liether it be a Comm.
species of Crithmum, Herniaria, or Salsola. Dioscorides makes " * '
it to be a purger of phlegm, bile, and water ; and all the other
authorities, both Greek and Arabian, give it the same cha-
racters in the main. It does not appear that the Arabians
have noticed it ; neither do we find it in the works of Hippo-
crates or Celsus. In the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia it is
set down as being the Pimpinella Saxifraga.

^TriOv/Liov,

Epithymum (vel Cuscuta minor ?) Dodder of Thyme, is desic-
cant and calefacient in the third degree, being more drastic
than thyme.

Commentary. Dioscorides says of the Cuscuta Ejnthymus, Comm.
or lesser dodder of thyme, that it purges phlegm and black " '^
bile, and agrees particularly with melancholic and flatulent
cases, (iv, 176.) Aetius, likewise, calls it a melanogogue
medicine. Galen and Oribasius give exactly the same cha-
racter of it as our author. Serapion gives a most graphic
description of this singular parasitic plant, in the present
instance quoting solely from Arabian authorities. They agree
in general that it is deobstruent, cathartic, and emmenagogue,
and join in recommending it particularly in jaundice, obstruc-
tions of the hver and spleen, and in the fevers of chikben.
(De Simpl. 39.) Mesne, also, gives nearly the same charac-
ters of it ; he mentions of it that it is a weak and slow purge,
unless taken in a large dose, and, therefore, he recommends
it to be given with Indian myrobalans, black hellebore, mulse,
salts, or the like. (10.) See also A^icenna (ii, 2, 226) and
Rhases (Cont. 270.) It held a place in our Dispensatory, with
the character of being a cleanser, down to a late period. See
Rutty (Materia Medica, p. 80.) ; Quincy (Complete Engl.
Dispens. p. 117.)

'E7ri/i?jSioi',
Epimedium, Barren Wort ; its powers are moderately refri-
gerant, with a wateiy humidity. When applied in the form
of a cataplasm it preserves the breasts in a right state. It is
also said to prevent conception when taken in a draught.

112 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Commentary. Our author borrows liis description of the
" • ' Epimedium Alpinum, or Barren Wort, from Dioscorides ; and
none of the others supply any additional information respect-
ing it.

E7r//trjAiCj
Epimelis, Crab-tree, called also Unedo by the Italian hus-
bandmen. It is a sort of wild apple, the fruit of which, being
sour, is bad for the stomach, and occasions headache.
CoMM. Commentary. It appears, from Dioscorides (i, 170), that
it is a species of Medlar. Probably, then, it was the Mespilus
Germanica. Dioscorides, Galen, and all the other authorities
that treat of it give it the same character as our author. As
a medicine, it has the same characters as the other Medlars.

^irnraKTiQ,
Epipactis (called also Helleborine, or Bastard Hellebore), is
drunk as an antidote for deadly poisons, and for diseases of
the liver.
CoMM. Commentary. The older herbalists, supported by the
• ' authority of Anguillara, incline to refer this article to the
genus Herniaria, or Rupture Wort. The epipactis, it would
seem, is still in great repute throughout Greece, as being
alexipharmic, and curing complaints of the liver. Our author
and all the others who notice it take its medicinal characters
from Dioscorides. (iv, 107.) As far as we have been able to
discover, it is not noticed by Hippocrates, Celsus, nor any of
the Arabians.

EjOf/3u'0ocj
Cicer, Vetch or Chick-'pea, a common kind of pulse ; is flatu-
lent, nutritious, a proper medicine for the bowels, diuretic,
engenders milk and semen, and proves emmenagogue. The
kind called Arietinum is more diuretic than the others. A
decoction of them, more especially the black sort, breaks down
stones in the kidneys. The species called Ervinum, is hotter
than the others, and bitterish. The wild are in every respect
stronger than the cultivated.
CoMM. Commentary. It comprehends several species of the Cicer.
The Kpiog is undoubtedly the Cicer arietanum. The two
other species cannot be so readily determined. Probably they

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 113

are but varieties produced by cultivation. We have treated Comm.
of them among the articles of food, in tlie 79th section of the
First Book. As a medicine, Dioscorides recommends them
especially in a cataplasm for inflammations of the testicles,
scabies, achor, lichen, cancerous and ill-conditioned ulcers.
All kinds of vetches, he says, are diuretic, and prove useful
when given with rosemary, for jaundice and dropsy, (ii, 126.)
Galen gives the chiches the same character, and further holds
them to be lithoutriptic. (De Simpl. v.) Aetius follows him
closely, (i.) The Arabians in addition say that chiches are
anthelminthic, diuretic, and purgative, and that they are useful
in arthritic diseases. See Serapion (80) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 128) ;
and Rhases (Cent. 1. ult. i, 209.) Avicenna, in particular,
gives a long list of their medicinal virtues. In addition to those
already stated, he joins Hippocrates in holding chiches to be
aphrodisiacal ; and hence he says procreating animals, such as
camels, are fed with them. He joins the others in holding
them to be deobstruent, lithoutriptic, cathartic, and diuretic.
Chiches long held a place in our Dispensatory with the cha-
racters given to them by Dioscorides and Avicenna. See .
Quincy (HI) and Rutty (122.) Tliree sorts were used in
modern as in ancient times, namely, the Avhite, the red, and
the black, but, as Quincy remarks, their medicinal virtues are
all pretty much the same.

Eoia,

Lana, Wool ; that which is unscoured is useful for embro-
cations, for the CEsypum is digestive, like butter. That which
is scoured is simply the vehicle for other applications. That
which is burnt has acrid, hot, and desiccative powers, with
some tenuity of paits so as to melt down the flaccid flesh of
ulcers.

Commentary. Dioscorides, Galen, Serapion, and the other Comm.
authorities give nearly the same account of the medicinal pro- ' ' '
perties of wool.

Erica, Heath, is possessed of discutient powers without
pungency. Its flower and leaves are principally to be used.

Commentary. Sprengel and Schneider agree that it isthecoMM.
Erica arhorea, but the description of it given by Dioscorides, " *

III. 8

114 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. namely, that " it is like tlie tamarisk but mucli smaller/^ would
' • ' rather seem to apply to one of the lesser species. Dioscorides
commends it as an application to the bites of reptiles, (i, 116.)
Our author copies from Galen. The Arabians, with the excep-
tion of Ebn Baithar, would appear not to have treated of it,
and it has not held a place in our Dispensatory for a long time
past. The old herbalists, copying from the ancient authorities,
ascribe to the heath the virtues which Dioscorides and Galen
held it to be possessed of.

' Eod'oc,
Erinos, Water-basil, is an aquatic herb, two drachms of the
fruit of which with four drachms of houev, when rubbed in
stops defluxions of the eyes. Its juice is also a remedy for
earache.
CoMM. Commentary. That it is a species of Campanula has been
' ' ' long agreed upon. Columna held it to be the C. Rapunculus
or Rampions, but Sprengel names it C. Erinus. It is the
ec/dnos of Galen, as is ob^dous from the similarity of the de-
scriptions of the two articles. Few of the other authorities
notice it. Our author merely abridges Dioscorides (iv, 29.)
The rapunculus or rampion is still cultivated as a salad. See
Loudon (Encycl. of Garden. 734.)

Ep/.iocaK7uXoc,
Hermodactylus, Hermodactyl ; the root of it is possessed
of pui'gative properties, and also the decoction. It is given for
affections of the joints in rheumatism, but it is bad for the
stomach.
CoMM. Commentary. We cannot afford room here to discuss fully
' ' ' the much agitated question respecting the ancient hermodac-
tjdus, and beg to refer to what we have said on the subject in
the Appendix to Dunbar's Lexicon. See also particularly the
commentators on Mesne and Dioscorides. It is to be remarked
that our author has entirely omitted to notice the KoXvi/cov
of Dioscorides bv name, and that the onlv article which he
has in place of it is the 'E|0^. This is a presumptive proof of
the identity of these two medicines. Serapion moreover, in
his chapter on Hermodactylus, gives the words of our author
in this place along with Dioscorides's account of the colchicum.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 115

Accordingly, Bergius, Tournefort, Humelbergius, and GeofFroy Comm.
are decidedly of opinion that tliey Avere identical. Prosper ' ' '
Alpinus, in like manner, says of it " liermodactylus qui est
radix colcliici Grcecorum.^^ (De Med. Meth. iii, 9.) See also
HilFs Mat. Med. On this side of the question we further beg
to quote the authority of Dr. Paris : " The active ingredient
of the Eau medicinale has been discovei'cd to be the Colchicum
Autumnale or meadow-saffron ; upon investigating the pro-
perties of this medicine, it w^as observed that similar eflFects in
the cure of the gout were ascribed to a certain plant called her-
modactylus by Oribasius and Aetius (Paulus ^Eg. ?), but more
particularly by Alexander of Tralles, a physician of Asia INIinor,
in the foui'th century; an inquiry was accordingly instituted
after this unknown plant, and upon procuring a specimen of
it from Constantinople it was actually found to be a species
of colchicum." (Pharmacologia, 58.) We have already given a
full account of the administration of hermodactyls in gout.
(Book III, 78.) Alexander of Tralles, as far as we know,
is the earliest authority that treats of the liermodactylus by
name, and he recommends it for the cure of arthritic dis-
eases, (xi.) Our author is the only one of the Greek writers
"who admits it into the Materia jNIedica. The Arabians treat
of it fully, but some of them confusedly, by mixing up the
ancient descriptions of the epliemeron and colchicum with it.
Thus Serapion, after quoting, as already stated, Dioscorides's
account of the colchicum, gives the opinions of various Arabian
authorities, all of whom concur in representing it to be a cale-
facient herb, and most of them in recommending it in diseases
of the joints. (De Simpl. 194.) Mesne recommends it as a
phlegmagogue in diseases of the joints, when given internally
with cumin, ginger, pepper, myrobalans, &c. ; and externally in
the form of a cataplasm. He also states it to be a good appli-
cation to foul ulcers. (De Simpl. vii.) Avicenna quotes no
Greek authority in his chapter on liermodactylus but Paulus,
from which it may be inferred that he did not identify it with
the colchicum of Dioscorides, like Serapion. He recommends
it especially in gout, both internally and in the form of plaster,
(ii, 2, 3-13.) Rhases refers to no other Greek authorities on
this head except Paulus and Alexander, but quotes the opinions
of several Arabians, all of whom agree in recommending her-

IIG SIMPLES. [book vTi.

CoMM. modactylus in gout and foul nlcers. An anonymous authoi'ity
" " ' makes it to be aphrodisiac. (Cont. 1. vilt. 362.) See also Haly
Abbas (Pract. ii, 43.) It is particularly to be remarked that
the Arabian authorities all notice three varieties of the hermo-
dactyl root, the white, the red, and the black ; and restrict the
medicinal use of the H. to the first of these, and condemn
the two others as being deleterious. Nicholaus Myrepsus
(i, 1) and Actuarius (De Compos. Med. i), however, prescribe
also the red, which the learned Fuchsius, in his annotations on
the former, sets down as being the behen rubi'um. We know
not what are his grounds for this opinion. It is the white
variety which has been always used medicinally. See Boer-
haave, Quincy, and Pereira. We Avould beg particularly to
refer our readers who wish to oljtain the modern literature of
this subject, to the Materia Medica of Pereira (p. 949.)

' EpTTuXAog,
Serpyllum, Wild Thyme, is heating, so as to promote the
urinary and menstrual discharge.
CoMM. Commentary. All agree that the Thymus Serpyllum is pos-
' • ' sessed of diuretic and emmenagogue powers. Dioscorides
recommends it in tormina, con\Tilsions, &c., and as an alexi-
pharmic. The others, like our author, treat more briefly of it
in general terms. Serapion and Avicenna borrow freely from
Dioscorides. The Serpyllum held a place in our Dispensatory
with its ancient characters down to a very recent date. See
Quincy and Rutty (Mat. Med.) The latter, however, questions
its identity with the ancient Serpyllum.

¥.pv9pocavov,
Erythrodanum, Madder, is the Kubia Tinctorum. Being
sour and bitter, it purges the spleen, liver, and kidneys, so as
to occasion a discharge of bloody urine. It acts as an emme-
nagogue, and cleanses the sordes of the skin.
CoMM. Commentary. There seems scarcely any reason to hesitate
in admitting it to be the Rubia Tinctorum, madder and dyer's
madder. Dioscorides holds it to be powerfully diuretic, inso-
much as sometimes to occasion a discharge of blood in the
urine. He recommends it in sciatica and paralysis ; as an
alexipharmic medicine, and as producing abortion, menstru-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 117

ation, and the locTiial discharge when applied as a pessary. Comm.
He addsj that it cures alphos (mild leprosy) in a cataplasm ' ' '
■with vinegar, (iii, 150.) Our author borrows from Galen, who
sets it doAvn as being deobstruent, diuretic, and emmenagogue.
Aetius uses nearly the same words as our author in treating
of it. All the Arabians follow the Greeks in giving madder .
the character of being diuretic and deobstruent w^hen given
internally, and emmenagogue and alexipharmic when applied
externally. See Avicenna (ii^ 2, 573), Rhases (Gout. 1. ult. i,
590.) The Arabian writers mention that a bi'ead was some-
times prepared from madder in times of famine. (Casiri, Bibl.
Arab. Hisp., 336.) It is still sometimes given as an emme-
nagogue, notwithstanding that Dodonseus questioned the truth
of Dioscorides's opinion as to its possessing the powers of occa-
sioning bloody urine and a discharge of the menses. (De
Purgant. 97.) Our old herbalists, Parkinson and Gerard,
dispute whether Dioscorides or Dodonseus is to be followed
in this instance. The Rubia Tinctorum holds a place in the
modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

EoU(T</JOJ',

Erysimum, Hedge-nmstard ; its seed is fiery and heating,
equally as cresses. Wherefore, when boiled in leaven and
added to linctuses, it pui'ges the chest. It also softens in-
durations, and in the form of a cataplasm is of use for latent
cancers.

Commentary. We may pretty confidently set it down as Comm.
the Eryshnum officinale, Hedge-mustard. Our author abridges ' " —
Galen, who, in the present case, borrows almost everything
from Dioscorides. Aetius copies from Galen even more closely
than our author. Tlie Arabians, in like manner, borrow every-
thing from Dioscorides and Galen under this head. See in
particular Serapion (De Simpl. 357.) It is worthy of remark
that Dr. Hill gives the same medicinal character to the hedge-
mustard which Dioscorides gives to the Eryshnon, which it
will be admitted forms a strong presumption of their identity ;
at all events, they were e^^dently congeners, a fact which is
not disputed by those who question their identity. Sec Rutty
(Mat. Med.) aud Sprengcl (ad Dioscor.)

118 SIMPLES. [book VII.

Eruca^ Rocket, being also like it in temperament, is flatulent.
It tlierefore produces venereal incitement, and the seed of it
is diuretic. The wild is stronger than the cultivated.
CoMM. Commentary. There can he no doubt that it is the Brassica
" * ' Eriica, L. Dioscorides agrees with our author in setting it
down as being aphrodisiacal and diuretic, and Aetius does the
same. The latter proposes to correct its tendency to induce
headache by giving it with lettuce, (ii, 169.) Celsus ranks the
" eruca" among the things " quae contrahere semen videntur.'^
(iv, 21.) The Arabians agreed with the Greeks as to its
aphrodisiacal properties. (Casiri, Bibl. Arab. Hisp. i, 336.) See
also Serapion (224), Avicenna (ii, 2, 227.) Even down to a
late date rocket retained this character. See Rutty (183),
and Quincy (109.) It is still cultivated in gardens. See
Loudon (Encycl. &c. 744.)

EuTTorwproi',
Eupatorinm, Hemp-agrimony , consists of subtile particles,
and is possessed of incisive powers without manifest lieat.
Hence it clears away obstructions of the liver, and has also
some astringency.
CoMM. Commentary. That the £Mj!?a/ormm of Dioscorides and the
' ' ' other Greek authorities is the Agrimonia Eiqjatormm, will
hardly be questioned now by any competent judge who has
investigated the question. Dioscorides recommends its leaves
in ill-conditioned ulcers, and its seed and stalk in wine, for
dysentery and the stings of reptiles, (iv, 41.) Galen makes
it to be deobstruent and tonic. Serapion copies from Dios-
corides and Galen, and merely adds, in the end, from ilhases,
that southernwood is more suitable in complaints of the liA^er ;
and from Mesne, that it is good in protracted fevers. (De
Simpl. 77.) Avicenna^s chapter on Eupatorinm is entirely
compiled from Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion, without the
slightest change or addition, (ii, 2, 239.) No one who has
examined into the matter can tlierefore doubt that the En.
of these two Arabians, was the same as that of the Greeks.
The Eupatorinm of Mesne, however, has been generally held
to be a very different plant, namely, the Eupatorium Canna-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 119

binum, according to some, from his comparing the leaves to Comm.
those of the lesser centaury. It is to be borne in mind, how- " * '
ever, that the Latin translations of the Arabians are not to ])e
trusted in small matters, and therefore this comparison may-
be all a mistake. And that the Eu. of Mesne was the same
as that of the others, seems highly probable from his recom-
mending it in the same complaints, namely, in obstructions of
the liver, and chronic fevers. (De Sim pi. 15.) Such is the
conclusion to which an impartial examination of the question
has brought us. It is but fair to mention, however, that all
the old herbalists and writers on the Mat. Med. down to Rutty
and Quincy, are against us, and hold that the Eupatorium of
Mesne was different from that of the Greeks. See Matthiolus
(in Dioscor.) ; Parkinson (Theatre of Plants) ; and the com-
mentators on Mesne.

Eu^opptoi',

Euphorbium, is possessed of caustic powers, and consists of
subtile particles like the other juices.

Commentary. A gum-resin produced from some species Comm.
of Euphorbia still holds its place in the Materia Medica. ' * '
Alston remarks, " neither Dioscorides nor Galen take any
notice of the cathartic quality of the Euphorbium, but Pliny
does, as do also Aetius, Paulus, and the Arabians ; but all
make it excessively acrid, upon account of which its internal
use is now generally condemned.^^ Mesne particularly com-
mends it in diseases of the joints. It Avas formerly supposed
that Euphorbium is procured from a species called the E.
antiquorum, but it is now admitted that the species is still
undetermined. See Pereira (1127.) Probably, as stated in
the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia, it is procured from several
species of the Euphorbia. (66.)

E(^r}^t£f)oi',

Ephemerum (or Colchicinn Autuninale ?), not the poisonous
species but that Avhich is called the Wild Iris. It is possessed
of mixed powers, repellent, and discutient.

Commentary. See "Ei^fxo^aKTvXoq, and Book V (48.) The Comm.
E., here said to be the same as the wild iris, is the Convalluria ' "
verticillata. Dioscorides recommends its root in toothache.

120 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. and its leaves as possessing discutient powers when applied to
' ' ' swellings and tumours, (iv, 75.) Galen is at great pains to

explain its modus operandi agreeably to liis theory of the

action of medicines.

Vipera, the Viper ; its flesh is decidedly hot and dry iu
temperament, so that it cleanses the whole body by the skin.
Wherefore many persons affected with elephantiasis, by eating
or drinking of it have been cured. Those which live by the
sea-side, or in other diy situations, rather occasion thirst.
CoMM. Commentary. As stated bv us in the Fifth Book, the
" * ' Echidna Asiatica of Nicauder is the Coluber yEcjyptius, and
the E. Europffia the C. Berus. The e/tc, probably is the C.
Amodytes. Dioscorides recommends vipers, having their
head and tail cut off, and the entrails taken out, boiled with
oil, wine, a little salts and dill, for nenous affections and
scrofula. He gives no credit, however, to the vulgar belief of
his time, that hving upon vipers prolonged life, or that they
prevented lice from forming on the body. He describes dis-
tinctly the process of preparing salts from vipers, but says
they have not the same efficacy as the flesh, (ii, 18.) The
Arabians display much more credulity than Dioscorides, in
describing the medicinal virtues of vipers, ascribing to them
wonderful powers, not only of preserving Hfe, but even of re-
storing youth. See in particular, A\'icenna (ii, 2, 608), and
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 731.) Galen gives a very lengthened
disquisition on the medicinal ^-irtues of vipers. (De Simpl. xi.)
Aetius abridges the same, (ii, 160.) See Oribasius (Med.
Collect. XV, 2.) We shall have occasioii, however, to treat
further of the medicinal properties of the viper when describing
the composition of the theriac ; and, instead of collecting the
sentiments of the ancient authorities on this head, we shall in
this place merely subjoin the opinion of a modern author, who
appears to have been familiar with the use of it : " The powder
of vipers is veiy much enlivened with the volatile salt where-
with the vipers abound, which enables it to force its virtues
through the pores, though never so close shut, to the more
remote parts of the body. It is a singular medicine to cure
scabs, itches, and erysipelas, and particularly the leprosy. It

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 121

restores plumpness of body to persons wasted Avitli long agues Comm.
and tedious diseases. It is to be taken fasting, in broths, Avine, ' ' '
or any otlier cordial liquor, or else incorporated Avith some
syrup, or in some confection like a bolus." (Moses Charras.)
In Scotland the adder (which is a variety of the Coluber Berm)
is a popular remedy for malignant diseases of the skin. It is
taken in the form of soup, as described by Dioscorides. The
viper broth is descriljed in Quincj^s Dispensatory (400) in
nearly the same terms as by Dioscorides, and recommended
" as doing good service in leprous and other obstinate cutaneous
complaints."

Echinus ; the herb is austere, repellent, and dcsiccant.
Of the Land Echinus, or Hedgehog, the flesh when strongly
dried is discutient and desiccant ; when taken in a draught,
therefore, it is beufficial in elephantiasis, cachexia, and many
other complaints. Its skin, when burnt, becomes more desic-
cant and discutient. It therefore cures alopecia when rubbed
in \\'\i\\ liquid pitch. Of the Sea Echinus, the edible part is
diuretic, and agrees with the bowels. Its shell, v.hen burnt,
resembles that of the land echinus.

Commentary. The herb is not described by Dioscorides, Comm.
Theophrastus, or Pliny. It would appear to be the same as
the EriniLS, which see. The 'E. yioaaioq is undoubtedly the
Hystrix Cristuta, and the 'E. OaXarTiog \]ie Echinvs Esciilenhis.
Dioscorides and Galen give the same account of their medi-
cinal properties as our author. Serapion, after giving the
description by Dioscorides and Galen, adds, from an Arabian
authority, that the flesh of the land echinus is beneficial
in protracted fevers. (De Simpl. 435.) Avicenua (ii, 2, 234,)
treats of the two echini at greater length than any other
ancient author, recommending the flesh of the land, in phthisis,
dropsy, elephantia, scabies, scrofula, and other complaints of a
formidable nature. Upon the whole, however, his account of
it is mostly made up of extracts from Dioscorides and Galen.
See in like manner Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 273.) He recom-
mends tlie land echinus in the irretention of urine to whicli
children arc subject, adding that when frequently administered,
it biings on dysuria. lie and Avicenua quote Serapion as an

122 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. autliority for its use in protracted fevers. Botli the ecMni
' " disappeared from our Dispensatory a considerable time ago.

"Ey^iov,
Ecliium, Viper's BugJoss, (some call it also Dorias, and
others Alcibiadium,) is a prickly herb, which not only relieves
those who have been bitten by reptiles when drunk in wine,
but, if taken beforehand, it preserves them from being injured.
CoMM. Commentary. It appears to us quite clear that this article
is the Echiwn vuJgare or Viper's Bugloss, which we have no
doubt was introduced into Britain with other medicinal herbs
by the llomans, for it is never found remote from cultivated
places, and therefore we believe it not to be truly indigenous.
Some have taken it for the Echium vubrum, from Dioscorides
having described the flowers as being purplish, whereas, pur-
plish signifies a bright blue, and not red as is supposed.
Parkinson thus describes the colour of the flowers of the Echium
vulgare : " The flowers are of a purplish violet colour, in them
that are fully blown, but more reddish while they are in bud ;
but in some places of a paler purple colour," &c. (p. 413.)
We, then, have no hesitation in acknowledging it as the Echium
vulgare. Our author borrows his account of its medicinal
powers from Dioscorides. (iv, 27) The Arabians Avould seem
to confound it with the Anchuste, to which it is closely allied.
Our old herbalists, in treating of the viper's bugloss, follow
Dioscorides J but it has long ceased to hold a place in
our Dispensatory. It still, however, is known in the shops,
where its root retains the character of being aperient and
slightly astringent. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. p. 54.)

Defrutum, Boiled Must ; it is moderately heating and diges-
tive, and is also emplastic and free from pungency.
CoMM. Commentary. Pliny gives thefollowing account of it : '''Sirseum
' * ' quod alii hepsema, nostri sapam appellant, ingenii, non naturse
opus est, musto usque ad tertiam partem mensiirse decocto :
quod ubi factum ad dimidiam est, defrutum vocamus.'' (H. N.
xiv, 11.) Harduin states that the Hepsema is called Rob or
Sapa semplex. (1. c.) Moses Charras gives the following direc-
tions for preparing it : " B . Of the new juice of white grapes

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 123

perfectly ripe, lb. xxx ; boil it over a gentle fire in an earthen Comm.
glazed vessel, or a copper vessel tinned within, until a third ' ' '
part of the juice only remains. But if you desire a defrutum,
boil it only to the consumption of the third part." (Roy. Phar.
p. 70.) The following prescription, taken from a still later
writer, will further be useful in illustrating the meaning of a
term which often occurs in the course of this work, but which
has now fallen into disuse. "The Simple Rob or Sapa. Take
of juice newly expressed from generous and white grapes any
quantity, and boil it over a slow fire, until one pint of it only
remains out of three, or it becomes of a honey consistence."
Quincy's Dispensatory (432.) Few of the other authorities
treat of this article at all, and those that do, despatch their
notice of it in few words. Thus, for example, Avicenna says
of rob, that it is expectorant, and hence it is made an ingre-
dient in the syrup of popjiies ; and that it is useful in pain of
the kidneys and bladder, (ii, 2, 570.)

Zj'/a,

Far, Spelt, has powers like the kinds of wheat, holding an
intermediate place as to heating and cooling; it is also gently
desiccative and emplastic.

Commentary. This, as we' have explained elsewhere (Vol. I, Comm.
123), is the Triticum Sjjelta, to which our older herbalists give ' " '
the names Greek Wheat, Spelt "Wheat, or Spelt Corn. That
the Ze'ia of the Greeks Avas identical with the Far of the
Romans, is proved beyond all dispute from a passage of
Asclcpiades preserved by Galen. (De Locis Aflectis, ix.) The
term spelta is derived from the latino-barbarous translations of
the Arabians. See Serapion (122), who quotes under this
head the chapter of Dioscorides on trcujus, which was «2)elt de-
prived of its hull. The other authorities say little of spelt as
a medicine ; but commend it highly as an article of food.
(See Vol. I, 1. c.) Avicenna describes it by the name of
harcoman (ii, 2, 323) ; and Rhases by that of haratinam (Cont.
1. ult. i, 352.)

Zingiber, Ginger ; its root is powerfully heating, but not on
its first application, as it contains some crude and thick juice.

124 SIMPLES. [book vii.

on wliicli account it readily becomes carious^ hut it preserves
the heat.
CoMM. CoMME.VTARY. Without doubt the Amomwn Zbigiber.
Dioscorides after describing the country of the ginger, and the
characters of the best kinds of it, states its medicinal powers
to be heating, digestive, mildly aperient of the bowels, and
stomachic ; and recommends it in nebulse of the cornea, and
adds of it, that as an ingredient in antidotes and otherwise it
resembles pepper (ii, 189.) Galen writes very elaborately in
explanation of the action of ginger on the animal frame ; and,
in accounting for the difference between it and pepper and
other articles of the same class practically, his conclusions re-
garding it are the same as our author's. Aetius and Oribasius
copy from him. Serapion, after quoting the opinions of
Dioscorides and Galen, gives a very sensible account of the \T.r-
tues of ginger from Mesne and another luiknown authority.
Mesne says it is beneficial in obstriictions of the liver, ansing
from coldness and humidity; that it softens the bellv, heats
the stomach and the Avhole body ; promotes digestion ; is
alexipharmic and aphrodisiacal ; removes phlegm (water brash?)
and is beneficial in obscurity of vision. The unknoAvn autho-
rity says it improves the memory, and removes the humidity in
the stomach, arising from the eating of fruit, such as melons
and the like (De Simpl. 336.) In the works of Mesne, now
extant, ginger is not treated of. llhases gives very interesting
extracts from Dioscorides, Galen, and various Arabian authors
Of the latter, one says of ginger, that it softens the belly, and
another that it binds it. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 762.) Avicenna
quotes Dioscorides as stating that it is aperient, and Alcanzi as
holding that it is astringent. He agrees Avith the latter, that
ginger binds the bowels, when their loose state arises from in-
digestion and viscid humours. He agrees also with the other
authorities, that it is stomachic and aphrodisiac, (ii, 2, 735.)

Zythus, Ale, is of a compound nature ; for it is acrid, as
being formed by a putrefaction (" fermentation?^'), and cold,
as being possessed of an acid quality. It therefore produces
bad chyle.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 125

Commentary. The plan of our present work prohibits iis Comm.
from entering into an exposition of the general literature of this ^^
subject, but we think this the less necessary as in another work,
to which we have often referred in this part of our Commen-
tary, we have given an elaborate disquisition on the ancient
Ales, into which we have condensed all the information whicli
we could procure respecting them. We would also beg leave
to refer to Gruner's learned annotations on Zozimus Panopo-
lita (De Zythorum Compositione) ; to Ludovicus Nonnius (De
re Cibaria, iv, 15) ; Eustathius (Comment, in Iliad, xiii, 640) ;
and Athenseus (Deipnos. x, 67, ed. Schweigh.) Our proper
business now is to state the opinions of the medical authori-
ties with regard to their medicinal powers. Dioscorides mentions
two kinds of ale or beer, in his Mat. Med., both of them pre-
pared from barley, but does not state wherein the diflerence
between them consisted. The Zythus, he says, is diuretic, apt to
affect the kidneys and nerves ; peculiarly calculated to prove
prejudicial to the membranes of the brain ; is flatulent ; engen-
ders depraved humours, and occasions elephantiasis. Of the
Courrai, he also says, that it occasions headache, forms bad
humours, and is liurtful to the nerves ; he adds, that drinks of
this nature are also formed from wheat, in Spain and Britain
(ii, 109, 110.) See further, Pliny (H. N. xxii, 82.) Aetius,
Oribasius, and our author, copy almost verbatim from Galen.
Rhases treats of the Zythus, by the name offoca, first quoting
the chapter of Dioscorides on the Zythus, and then adding,
upon the authority of an Arabian writer, Bimasuy (Mesue the
elder ?), that ale prepared from barley, cloves, and rue, is pre-
judicial to the head ; but that prepared from fine bread
(similago ?) mint, and parsley, forms good chyle, and is good
for the stomach (Cont. 1. ult. i, 306.) Avicenna^s account of
Zythus, which he also describes by the name of foca, is en-
tirely made up of extracts from Dioscorides and Rhases. (ii, 2,
272.) Serapion, as far as we can discover, does not treat of
this article. A liquor is treated of pretty copiously by Symeon
Scth, under the head of Fucas, whicli, as his editors remark, is
probably a corruption of Posca. In his account of it, he in-
troduces a short sentence from Dioscorides's chapter on Zythus,
to the effect that "ivory steeped in it becomes as ductile as
wax." It was not, strictly speaking, an ale or beer, being

126 SIMPLES. [booktii.

CoMM. merely a mixture of vinegar and water, rendered more agree-
" ' ' able to the palate by some aromatics. See Harduin ad
Plinii (H. N. xix, 29.) Respecting this beverage Seth states,
as his own opinion, that it is wholesome, especially when used
by persons of a hot temperature of stomach ; that it quenches
thirst ; whets the appetite ; increases the ahdne and frequently
the renal discharge.

Fermentum, Leaven ; it also is composed of opposite ingre-
dients ; for it is possessed of a cold acidity and putrefactive
("fermentative?^') heat, and moreover of salts and flour. It
is, therefore, heating and discutient in no ordinary degree.
CoMM. CoiMMENTARY. On tlic aucicnt modes of preparing Fer-
""" ' mentum or Leaven, see ' Geopon.' (ii, 31) ; and Pliny (H. N.
xviii, 26.) The kind in most common use was prepared from
millet and must, or the fresh juice of the grape. Our author's
description of its medicinal powers is taken from Galen.
Aetius treats of it in nearly the same words. Dioscorides
praises the leaven of wheat as being heating and epispastic,
and suiting with complaints of the heels, phymata, and
furunculi. (ii, 107.) Serapion under this head gives two ex-
tracts from Dioscorides and Galen, followed bv one from
Abenmesuai (the elder Mesne?), who recommends it in the
fevers of children for quenching thirst. (De Simpl. 29.) Rhases
gives a formula for a draught to be prepared from leaven,
which he in like manner praises as being wonderfully effica-
cious in the fevers of children. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 306.)

Jusculum, Broth, loosens the belly if drunk by itself or
with wine, when made from fresh fish ; but particularly that
which is simply prepared from hakes, scorpion-fishes, rainbows,
perches, and other tender fishes which dwell among rocks, with
water, oil, dill, and salts. In like manner, also, the broth of
the Crustacea, especiallj^ of the Tellinse (limpets), the Chamte
(cockles), and Concliylpe (oysters). The broth of an old cock,
boiled with salt to a great degree, is laxative ; but that of a
hen, on the other hand, is astringent.
CoMM, Commentary. The account here given of the broth of
fishes is taken from Dioscorides (ii, 35.) Galen directs the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 127

brotli of fish to be prepared in the following manner : first Comm.
pour in plenty of water^ then add of oil q. s. with a little ' ' '
dill and leek ; tlien^ when the fish are half boiled, sprinkle a
little salt. (De Alim. Facult. iii) ; (jNIeth. Med. ix.) Apicius
in the tenth chapter of his work, gives fourteen diff'erent re-
ceipts for preparing soups from fishes. INIost of them contain
wine, honey, vinegar, and oil, with pepper, lovage, cumin,
rue, &c., among the ingredients which enter into their compo-
sition. On the fishes mentioned under this head, see Book I
(90.) The Arabians generally condense the substance of
Dioscorides^s two chapters on Garum and Jus into one, under
the title of Mur'ia. See Serapion (184), and Avicenna (ii, 2,
486.) Serapion's Arabian authorities recommend it as a
gentle purgative and phlegmagogue in sciatica, both when
given by the mouth and in clysters. One of them says of it,
that it makes the pustules of smallpox come out, when the
eruption is slow in taking place.

xioti OCTROI',

INIentha, Mint, is hot, consists of subtile particles ; its powers
are acrid in the third order, with some half-concocted fluids ;
it therefore provokes to venery. It has, likewise, some bitter-
ness, by which means it kills intestinal worms ; and by its
sourness its restrains recent discharges of blood.

Commentary. We need have no hesitation in referring it Comm.
with all the best commentators to the Mentha sativa, L. ' ' '
Dioscorides says it has calefacient, astringent, and desiccative
powers ; and hence, he adds, it stops the discharge of blood
when drunk with vinegar, and kills the round worms, (iii, 36.)
According to him, it stimulates the male to venery, but pre-
vents conception in the female when applied on a pessary
before coition. He further says of it, that it stops hiccup,
vomiting, and cholera, when taken in a draught along with
the juice of an acid pomegranate. He also recommends it, in the
form of an external application, for headache, complaints of the
breast, and other cases. Galen pronounces mint to be one of
the most attenuate articles in the Mat. Med, He agrees with
Dioscorides that it is useful in haemoptysis ; and that it is
anthclminthic and aphrodisiac. The author of the Hippocratic

128 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. treatise ' De Dlatd,' while, like Dioscorides, he gives mint the
" * ' credit of promoting the urinary discharge and stopping vomit-
ing, says, that taken in great quantity it weakens the semen
and stops erections. Aristotle likewise holds the opinion that
mint is anaphrodisiac. (Bibl. ii, 20.) Aetius, seemingly with
the desire of reconciling these great authorities, maintains
that mint indeed generates much semen, but of a feeble
nature. (Tetr. iv, 4, 26.) Ludovicus Nonnius, by the way,
also attempts to account for the difference among the profes-
sional authorities on this point. (De re Cib. i, 15.) See
also Rutty, (Mat. Med. 323), and Parkinson (35.) The
Arabians in treating of it follow Dioscorides and Galen closely,
and add little or nothing of their own. They all agree with
Dioscorides, that it is aphrodisiac and stops vomiting. See in
particular Serapion (290), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 188.) We
need scarcely mention that this species of Mentha is now re-
jected from our Mat. Med., but that three other species of it
are still retained.

Hedysarum, French Honeysuckle, is bitter and subastringent.
It is therefore stomachic, when taken in a Hquid form, and
clears away "\asceral obstructions.
CoMM. Commentary. There has been great difference of opinion
among the commentators and herbalists respecting this
herb ; but we are inclined to decide, with considerable confi-
dence, that it was the Hatchet Vetch, or Coronilla securidaca.
Dioscorides says of it that it is stomachic and alexipharmic,
and that, in a pessary, it prevents conception. Our author
abridges Galen, and Aetius does the same ; and so likewise
Oribasius. We have been unable to find it in the Mat. INIed.
of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who
merely copies from Dioscorides (i, 80.)

'HXtOrpOTTtOl',

Heliotropiura, Simfloivei- ; the large one (called also Scor-
piurus) is possessed of calefacient, desiccant, and detergent
powers. Its decoction when drunk brings away phlegm and
bile. Its fruit in a cataplasm dries myrmecia and such like

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 129

cutaneous complaints. The small Sunflower also removes
these complaints and kills worms if drunk with the fruit along
with natron, hyssop, and cardamom.

Commentary. Dioscorides calls the great Sunflower [Helio- Comm.
trojnum Eiiropceum) phlegmagogue and cholagogue, and says it
is useful in the bites of scorpions, both internally and exter-
nally. He adds, that it was used as an amulet to produce
sterility. He also recommends it in intermittent fevers, and
as a cataplasm and fomentation to various tumoiu's, sprains, &c.
He adds, that it is emmenagogue, and procures abortion
when powdered and applied on a pessary, (iv, 190.) None of
the other Greek authorities, as far as we have been able to
discover, have treated of either of the heliotropes ; and if the
Arabians describe them, we have not been able to discover
under what name it is. The lesser heliotrope is probably the
Croton tincto7'ius.

HXE/CTpOfj

Electrum, Amber; they say that it is the tears of the
poplar, which are discharged into the river Po, and get con-
creted into a golden-coloured substance. This, being pulverized
and drunk, stops defluxions of the stomach and bowels and
discharges of blood.

Commentary. It is well known that the ancient authors Comm.
in general represent amber as an exudation from the poplar ' "^ '
tree, commonly found on the banks of the Po. Some of
them, however, such as Lucian (De Electro), held that it is a
bituminous substance. See also Theophrastus (De Lapidibus,
with the annotations of Hill.) Serapion says of it, that it is
formed in the sea as mushrooms are formed on land ; and
when the sea is troubled it casts forth large stones, and with
them are cast out crusts of amber. He also gives an account,
which is not very intelligible in the Latin translation, of its
being swallowed up by a fish, from which, when killed, amber
was procured. What is of a citrine colour, he says, is good;
but what is white, like an ostrich's egg, is bad. Upon the
authority of Aben Mesuai (INIesue the elder ?), he calls it a hot
and dry medicine, and says it strengthens the brain, all the
senses, and the heart, and is useful to old persons and men of a
cold temperament. (De Simpl. 19G.) Aviccnna'a account of it is

111. 9

130 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. mostly made up from Serapion. Amber, he says, in my
* ' opinion, is an emanation from a fountain in the sea. He also
repeats the account from Serapion, of its being procured from
the belly of a fish which has swallowed it and dies. He must
allude to the ambergris which is procm'ed from the sperm-
whale. He determines it to be hot in the second and dry in
the first degree. He recommends it in exactly the same cases
as Serapion. He makes mention of a species used for dyeing
the hair black, (ii, 2, 62, and 364.) Rhases merely gives its
medicinal character, which is the same as that quoted above
from Serapion. (Cont. 1. ult. 44.) But no ancient writer has
given so full and correct an account of amber as Symeon
Seth. He says it abounds in various places, and that there
are fountains of it as of pitch, bitumen, and the like ; that the
best kind is of a grayish colour (grisea ambra ?) and fat, which
is sold in a certain city of India, called Silachetum. The
ambergris or ambra-grisea, is found in a city of Arabia Fehx,
called Syachria. The worst kind, he says, is black, and is col-
lected from fishes that have swallowed amber at its fountains.
It has, he adds, calefacient and incisive powers, and therefore
some add it to stomachic remedies. It strengthens the head
and heart ; and when smelled to in drinking accelerates in-
toxication, and still more so if added to the wine. (De
Ahmentis, xiii.) Psellus says, it cures dysury when appended
as an amulet, removes fever, stops defluxions of the stomach,
and sharpens the sight. (De Lapidibus.) Having been led
along in the present instance by the ancient authorities who
have given the most correct description of amber, we omitted
to mention at the commencement, that Dioscorides describes
the electrum under the head of populus, as being said to be
the tears of poplars which have di'opped into the Po, and
become coagulated. He adds, it is of a fragrant smell when
rubbed, and of a golden colour ; and when triturated and
drunk, it stops defluxions of the stomach and belly, (i,. 110.)
See also Pliny (H. N. xxxvii, 11), who supposes amber an
exudation fi"om pines, and gives otherwise a very authentic
and interesting account of its origin. He makes mention of
amber being used as an amulet in diseases of childi'en, a
practice which, like other superstitions of the like kind, has
been transmitted to modern times. We need scarcely remark

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 131

that the ancient opinions regarding the origin of amber, are Comm.
now looked upon as being not far removed from the truth. ' " '
Amber, aUhough now in a fossil state, is supposed to have
been an exudation from some tree of the genus Pinus. See
Pereira (Mat. Med. 223) ; and the Appendix to this section.

H/tEoo/caXXi q,

Hemerocallis, Lily of the Valley ; its root has powers hke
those of the lily, and, like it, is useful for burns.

Commentary. This is undoubtedly a plant of the lily Comm.
tribe ; probably the Lilium bulbiferum. Dioscorides, besides ' ' '
recommending it in burns, like our author, says of it that
when dmnk and applied in a pessary of wool it produces
discharges of water and blood ; and that its leaves form an
excellent application to the inflammations of the breasts after
parturition, and to those of the eyes. Our author follows
Galen. Serapion treats of it under the head of Lihum, (189.)

^fllOVlTlQ,

Hemionitis, Moon Fern, is possessed at the same time of
astringeucy and bitterness. It therefore relieves affections
of the spleen when taken with vinegar.

Commentary. Galen calls it also by the names of Scolo- Comm.
pendrium and Asplenium. (ii, 292, ed. Basil.) Dioscorides ' — "^ — '
describes it so as to leave no doubt of its being a cryptogamous
pa nt. It is a species of the Scolopendrium. The other autho-
rities praise it in enlarged spleen.

'HTTOp,

Hepar, the Liver ; if that of a mad dog be roasted and
eaten, it is said to relieve those who have been bitten bv him.
The sanies of a boiled goat's liver relieves nyctalopia when
injected into the eye. They also direct the vapour of it when
boiliHg to be received into the eyes, and also to be eaten.
They say that it rests epileptics if eaten, and that the liver of
the buck-goat does the same. The liver of a lizard when put
into carious teeth relieves the pain. That of the wolf is added
to the hepatic medicine prepared from cupatorium. The liver
of an ass when roasted is of use to epileptics when eaten
fasting. That of a bear when dried in its fresh state and

132 SIMPLES. [book vii.

triturated with wine is drunk for the bites of reptiles. The
liver of the cormorant, Avhen dried and taken in a draughty
makes calculi be discharged.
CoMM. CoMMENTAKY. "VVc havB treated of the livers of animals
in the dietetical part of the First Book. See also in parti-
cular Galen and Serapion. Our author copies from the former,
who in his turn follows closely in the footsteps of Dioscorides,

Senecio, Groundsel, has mixed powers, being refrigerant
and moderately discutient.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides recommends it [Senecio vulgaris)
in inflammatory complaints, and also says of it that Avhen
drunk Avitli must it relieves the pains of the stomach pro-
ceeding from bile. Galen and the other authorities, like
Paulus, treat of it in general terms as an antiphlogistic apj)li-
cation. Apuleius recommends it in sciatica (75, 5.) In
modern times it had the character of being emetic, but the
ancient authorities do not say that it has this property.

Wpvyyiov,
Eryngium, Eryngo, is calefacient in no imperceptible degree,
and has no little heat and subtility of parts.
CoMM. Commentary. That it is a species of Eryngium or sea
' " ' holly seems indisputable. It may either be the maritimum,
the planum, or the campestre, all of which are brought into
view and figured by our careful herbalist Parkinson. (Theatre
of Plants, 986.) Dioscorides^s description of its localities
would seem to agree best with the campestre; he calls it
calefacient, and says it is diuretic and emmenagogue, removing
tormina and flatulences, and proving serviceable in hepatic
diseases, and as an alexipharmic. He adds, that it is related
of it that it discusses hard tumours, both when appended as
an amulet and in a cataplasm ; and that the root of it "cui'cs
opisthotonos and epilepsy when drunk with hydromel. (iii, .21.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it in general
terms like Paulus. The secacul of the Arabians has been
taken for this article, but erroneously, as Matthiolus has
well remarked. (Ad Dioscor. iii, 31.) But Serapion treats of
it under the name of Iringi, as being a white variety of the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 133

Aster Atticus. He merely translates the words of Dioscorides Comm.
and Galen. (De Simpl. 96.) We cannot find any mention ' ' '
of it in the works of the other Arabians^ except Ebn Baithar,
who also does little more than copy from Dioscorides and
Galen. The eryngo long retained its place in our Dispen-
satory, indeed it can scarcely be said to be yet formally ex-
pelled from it. Pereira briefly notices the Eryngium campestre.
It is the Ei'yng'mm maritimum, however, which is described in
the Edinburgh INIat. Med. Quincy, by the way, in imitation
of Serapion, confounds the Eiyngo with the Aster Atticus.
(Complete Engl. Disp. 113.) Boerhaave gave the candied
root and decoction of eryngo as an attenuant and deobstruent
in obstructions of the viscera, and for coughs ; and Tournefort
makes mention of the same as being in common use in his
days. (Mat. Med. 98. Engl, edition.)

QaXaaaiov vcwp,

Aqua Marina, Sea Water, is acrid, moderately calefacient,
and desiccant ; it is bad for the stomach when taken in a
draught, disorders the bowels, and proves phlegmagogue. If
poured hot on a part it attracts and discusses.

Com]\h;xtary. The ancient authorities who have written Comm.
most learnedly on this important, although common-place *
article of the INIat. ]\Ied., are Dioscorides, A\icenna, and
Rhases. Sea water, says Dioscorides, is heating, acrid, and
bad for the stomach, for it disorders the belly, bringing away
phlegm and bile. When poured hot on a part it attracts and
discusses, suiting with afl'ections of the nerves and chilblains be-
fore they become ulcerated. It is proper for mixing with raw
barley-meal, and is suitable for plasters and discutient malag-
mata. For evacuating the bowels it is injected in a tepid
state, and for tormina in a hot. It is a suitable fomentation
in cases of scabies, pruritus, lichen, enlarged tonsils, and
turgid mammre. In hot fomentations it dispels lividities, and
is useful in the bites of venomous animals, such at least as
induce tremblings and rigors, but especially of scorpions,
phalangia, and asps, and if, in such cases, one go into a hot
bath, it proves useful ; and in chronic cachexia of the body and
nerves the bath of it is useful. Its hot vapours soothe dropsies,
headaches, and dullness of hearing. It is given as a purge

134 ,^ SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. either alone or with oxycrate, wine, or honey ; and after the
' ' ' purging takes place the broth of a hen or of fishes is exhibited
to dilute its acrimony and pungency, (v, 19.) Avicenna
borrows largely from Dioscorides, but supplies some additional
remarks of his own bv no means devoid of interest and im-
portance. He recommends sea water for chilblains, for
killing lice, and discussing extravasated blood. He also,
copying from Dioscorides, praises it in pruritus, scabies, and
impetigo. Epileptics, he says, are benefited b}^ tepid salt
water, but injured by hot. The vapour of salt water, he adds,
is beneficial in vertigo and dropsies, (ii, 2, 58.) From Rhases's
very lengthened dissertation on this subject we can only find
room for a few extracts. Upon the authority of Johannitius
(Serapion ?), he states that the use of salt water to one unac-
customed to it proves laxative and pinches the belly, but to
one accustomed to it, it proves astringent. Another of his
authorities, Judaeus, says salt water proves beneficial in pain
of the head and chest, in dropsy, and a watery stomach. He
also states of salt water, that although at first it proves laxative,
the continued use of it brings on constipation, because, he says,
its salt dries, astringes, and strengthens the belly. (Cont.
1. ult. i, 70.)

QaklKT^OV,

Thalictrum, Meadow Rue, has desiccant powers, without pun-
gency. It therefore heals chronic ulcers.
CoMM. Commentary. Sprengel confidently pronounces it to be
" ' the Thalictrum minus, L., that is to say, the lesser meadow rue
of our herbalists. See Parkinson (265.) Dioscorides and
Galen state its medicinal properties in the same terms as our
author. It is the Thalitruum of Pliny, who likewise praises it
as an application to ulcers. (H. N. xxvii, 112.) We have not
been able to find it described by any of the Arabian authorities
on the Mat. Med. except Ebn Baithar, and it has had no
place in our English Dispensatory for many ages past.

Thapsia, Deadly Carrot, is acrid and strongly calefacient,
with some humidity. It therefore attracts strongly the deep-
seated fluids, and dispels them when attracted.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 135

Commentary. The authorities are divided between the Comm.
Thapsia Garganica and the Thapsia Ascleplum. Old Gerard * '
gives it the name of deadly carroty but Parkinson that of
scorching fennel. Theophrastus mentions that it purges
upwards and downwards. (P. ix, 10, 24.) Pliny describes it
as a very acrid poison. (H. N. xxiii, 43.) See Dioscorides
(iv, 154.) Serapion states that it is a violent emetic and
cathartic, and operates powerfully as an external application.
The thapsia has long ceased to be employed in medicine ; even
old Culpeper calls it " a venomous foreign root, and therefore
no more of it.''^

QllOV,

Sulphur ; it likewise is possessed of attractive powers, is
hot, and consists of subtile particles, so as to be an antidote
against many poisonous animals, more especially the sea-turtle
and dragon, either sprinkled dry or mixed with saliva, or with
the urine of a child, or oil, or honey. It is also a wonderful
remedy for scabious complaints.

Commentary. Sulphur was extensively used in medicine Comm.
from the earliest times. Pliny gives a very full and inter- ' * '
esting account of it. (H. N. xxxv, 50.) The sulphur vivum,
of which mention is so often made in this work, was CAddently
native sulphur, that is to say, the prismatic sulphur of Jameson.
The sulphur ignem expertum was clearly the factitious sulphur
or brimstone, namely, that which is procured from pyrites by
sublimation. We need scarcely mention that sulphur was
extensively used as an application in cutaneous diseases, and
more especially scabies. It was also given internally in
catarrhs and other complaints of the chest. See Dioscorides
and Pliny. The words of the latter are well worth quoting
in the present instance. " Natura ejus calfacit, concoquit,
sed et discutit collectiones corporum : ob hoc talibus emplastris
malagmatisque miscetur. Renibus quoque et lumbis in dolore
cum adipe mire prodest impositum. Aufert et iichenas a
facie cum terebinthi resina et lepras. Harpacticon vocatur a
celeritate avcllendi, avelli enim subinde debet. Prodest et
suspiriosis linctum. Purulcnta quoque extussientibus, et
contra scorpionum ictus. Yitiligines vivum nitro mixtum atque

136 SIMPLES. [BOOK vii.

CoMM. ex aceto tritum et illitum toUitj item lendes in palpebris, aceto
' ' ' sandaracliato admixto." We have not found the acetum san-
darachatum mentioned by any other writer ; from its name, it
was no doubt composed of vinegar and arsenic, that is to say,
realgar. Serapion, in treating of sulphur, confines himself
entirely to Greek authorities (407) ; and so in like manner
Avicenna (ii, 2, 612), and Rhases (Cont. ult. 694.)

Gep/uoc,
Lupinus, Lupine ; that vrhich is edible is possessed of em-
plastic powers ; but the bitter is detergent, discutient, and
desiccative, without pungency. It kills worms, both when
applied externally and when taken in infusion, and it cleanses
the bowels when drunk with rue and pepper. It also cleanses
the skin, and discusses tumours when applied with oxymel.
The wild is more bitter and stronger than the cultivated in aU
respects.
CoMM. Commentary. Two varieties of the lupine, the sativus and
' ' ' sylvestris, were used in medicine from the days of Dioscorides
down to our Quincy. Though the former of these, which
was the one principally used, be well known, there is some
doubt as to the species ; whether it was the pilosus, or the
hirsutus, or, what is more probable, whether it comprehended
both. Dioscorides and Galen agree in enumerating a long list
of cases to which the lupine is applicable, but as our author's
account embraces the sum of Avhat they have Avritten on it,
we need not enter here into an exposition of their opinions.
Suffice it to say, that as an emmenagogue and deobstruent
it was much relied upon internally, and applied in a great
variety of external complaints in fomentations. The same
virtues are ascribed to it by the Ai'abians, who, however, sup-
ply no additional observations of any importance. Avicenna^s
account of its medicinal powers is particularly full, (ii, 2, 440.)
Hhases derives almost all his information from the Greeks.
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 435.) Serapiou copies altogether from Dioscorides
and Galen (De Simpl. 74.)

Which some call Nymphsea or Filix, Female Fern, is like the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 137

fern in all its properties. When drunk with wine it kills the
broad and round worms. It also destroys the foetus in utero.
Its leaves, when eaten, soften the belly.

Commentary. There seems every reason to refer it to the Comm.
Asplenium Filix fcemina, Bernh., or Polypodhun, L. Theo- ' • '
phrastus recommends it as a vermifuge medicine. (H. P. ix,
20.) Galen, Avicenna, and all the authorities that treat of
it, concur in assigning to it this faculty. Dioscorides also
sets it down as a medicine calculated to induce sterility and
occasion abortion. The powder of it is recommended as an
application to ill-conditioned sores. In the days of Quincy
it still held an equivocal place in the Dispensatory.

Bursa Pastoris, Shepherd's Purse, is possessed of acrid powers,
so that when druuk it breaks internal abscesses, and occasions
a flow of the menses ; and if injected by the anus it relieves
ischiatic disease by occasioning a bloody discharge. It other-
wise purges bile upwards and downwards when drunk to the
amount of an acetabulum.

Commentary. Sprengel holds that the O. of Dioscorides Comm.
is the Thlaspi Bursa Pastoris. Dioscorides describes another ' ' '
species, which is either the Iberis umbeUata, or the Viola
laiifoJia. Pliny recommends the Thlaspi as a phlegmagogue
and cholagogue. (H. N. xx^di, 113.) Dioscorides assigns it
the same character, and also holds that it is emmenagogue.
Our author copies closely from Galen. A^dcenna dwells at
considerable length upon the virtues of Thlaspi, calling it
emetic and purgative, and also anthelminthic, emmenagogue,
and carminative. The Thlaspi arvense held a place in the
Dispensatory, with all the characters of the ancient T., down
to a late date. See Quincy (Compl. Engl. Dispens. 66.)

Lactuca, Lettuce, is a juicy and cold potherb, yet not ex-
tremely so, but of the temperament of spring water. It
therefore suits with hot inflammations, and also quenches
thirst. When taken in an infusion it stops gonorrhoea and
libidinous dreams. The wild lettuce is less cooling and
diluent than the other, and is also more juicy.

138 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Commentary. The cultivated kind is certainly the Lactuca
' " ' sativa : the wild the L. virosa. The ancients^ as Ave have
stated in another place, were well acquainted with the hypnotic
powers of lettuce. See Celsus (ii, 32) j Dioscorides (ii, 164);
Athen. (Deipnos, ii, 80, ed. Schweig.); Pliny (xix, 38); Galen
(De Alim. Facul. ii, 40); Geopon. (xii, 13); Aetius (i, 168);
Sjaneon Seth (De Alimentis); Macer Floridus (De Herb, vir.);
Serapion (De Simpl. ex Plant.) According to Dioscorides, it is
also anaphrodisiac, and removes the pollutio nocturni somni.
One of Serapion^s Arabian authorities commends it in jaundice;
and another of them says that it dispels the unpleasant effects
produced by intoxication. (De Simpl. 240.) Avicenna's account
of its medicinal virtues is very interesting, but is in the main
derived from Dioscorides and Galen. He represents it to be an
eminently cold, that is to say, a sedative plant, and recom-
mends it in all complaints of a hot nature, in watchfulness,
alienation of mind, and in coup de soleil. He also speaks
highly of its milk in hot affections of the eyes, (ii, 2, 441.)
Rhases likewise gives an excellent description of its powers,
but in nearly the same terms as Avicenna. He makes it to
be soporific, anaphrodisiac, and alexipharmic. (Cont. 1. ult. i,
386.) Dioscorides states that the wild lettuce is a hydragogue
purgative, and we may mention that the late Dr. Collin, of
Vienna, gave it with great success in dropsies. Avicenna
says the wild, in virtue, resembles the black poppy. We need
scarcely say that both the L. sativa and virosa have, of late
years, been restored to the ]Materia Medica. Upon reference
to the works of Orfila, Paris, Pereira, and other authorities
of the day, it will be seen that the ancients had correctly
stated the medicinal vu-tues of both species.

Gv/xog,
Thymus, Thyme, heats and dries in the third degree. It
also incides viscid and thick humours.
CoMM. Commentary. We have little hesitation in describing it
' * ' to be the Tliymus vulgaris. Dioscorides states that thyme is
expectorant, diuretic, emmenagogue, and discutient ; and all
the authorities, down even to modern times, confirm this cha-
racter of it. Galen says it is to be placed in the third order
of desiccants and calefacients. He recommends it as being

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 139

diuretic and emmenagogue, and says that it destroys the foetus Comm.
in utero, clears out the viscera, and is useful in discharges ' * '
from the chest and lungs. Oribasius gives it the same cha-
racter. Aetius, from personal experience, as he says, writes
of its virtues more elaborately than any other ancient author.
Thus he gives a prescription for a draught composed of oxymel
and finely powdered thyme, which he says proves beneficial
in arthritic diseases by purging bile and the acrid humours,
both by the belly and by the bladder. He recommends
similar compositions in sciatica, pleuritic pains, meteorism of
the hypochondria, and tympanitis. He prescribes, in like
manner, thyme and oxymel to melancholic persons, to those
disordered in mind, and possessed with morbid apprehension ;
and in gout, when given with undiluted wine. He also re-
commends it to be giveu in swellings of the testicles, to the
patient fasting, in undiluted wine. The Arabians write fully
on this head, but borrow almost all their information from
Dioscorides and Galen, and make no reference to Aetius.
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 328), and Serapion (De
Simpl. 281.) They all agree in giving it the character of
being diuretic, emmenagogue, anthelminthic^ and phlegma-
gogue.

Qv/iippa,

Thymbra, Savory ; the wild has the same powers as
thyme. The garden is in all respects weaker, but is better
for food.

Commentary. The ancients made use of Savory [Satureia Comm.
Thymbra^ as a condiment. Aristophanes (Nubes, 420.) Dios- " ' '
corides recommends it in the same cases as thyme, and all
the others write of it in much the same terms. Symeon
Seth says it promotes digestion, is emmenagogue, diaphoretic,
and carminative. Macer Floridus affirms that it is aphro-
disiacal, and produces abortion in pregnant women when
applied on a pessary. It long held a place in the Dispensatory
with the character of being '' warm and discussive." See
Quincy (127.)

Thymelsea, Spurye-flax ; from it the Gramim Gnidium is
produced, which has similar powers to it.

140 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. The confusion about tlie Thymelsea and
Chamelcea of the ancients may be partly removed by the fol-
lowing account of the matter given by Alston. There are
three species of Laureola, 1st, the L. officinalis, or L. Mas,
Dwarf Laurel, or Spurge Laurel, Avhich grows in hedges and
woods in England ; 2d, the Chamelffia^ or Laureola femina
namely, the true Mezereon, or Spurc/e Olive, which grows
plentifully in Germany; 2)A, the Thymelrea, Spurge Flax, or
Mountain Widoiv Wail, which grows in the south of France.
We will treat further of the Chamelfea, or ]Mezerion, in its
proper place. Sprengel is decidedly of opinion that the Thy-
melsea of the ancients is Daphne Gnidium, L., or flax-leaved
daphne, and one of the latest and best authorities on the Mat. Med.
comes to the same conclusion respecting it. Dr. Pereii'a says,
" Daphne Gnidium is the Gu^uEAcua, or Thymelaea of Dioscorides^
whose fruit is the kokkoq kv'i^ioq, or Gnidium berry, used by
Hippocrates. Its properties are similar to those of the D.
Mezereon." (Elements of ]\Iat. Med. 807.) For an account
of its effects on the animal economy, see Orfila (Toxicol, ii,
3.) We will treat of its medicinal Airtues under Coccus gnidius.

Idsea Radix, Idcean Root ; being sour as to taste and powers,
it agrees with hemorrhages and rheumatic affections when
drunk or applied externally.
CoMM. Commentary. As may be seen upon referring to Bauhin,
' ' Woodville, Sprengel, and Pereira, several of the authorities
have been disposed to hold this plant for the Arbutus Uva Ursi ;
but the probability is that it was the Laurus Alexandrina, or
Uvularia amplexifolia. Dioscorides recommends it in fluxes
from the bowels and womb, and in all kinds of hemorrhage,
(iv, 44.) Pliny translates the chapter of Dioscoiides. (H. N.
xxvii, 69.) Our author copies from Galen ; and Oribasius, in
like manner, borrows his description of the plant from him.
As far as we can discover the Idsea Radix is not treated of by
the Arabians ; and even in the days of jNIatthiolus it had dis-
appeared from the Mat. Med.

IcOLOC.

Sudor, Sweat ; it is troublesome to collect by itself ; but

SECT. m.J SIMPLES. 141

is mixed witli tlie powder of those who exercise tliemselves in
the palestra, which powder, being only repellent before, thns
becomes altogether discutient. It is, therefore, a powerful
remedy for inflamed nipples, and for extinguishing the heat in
them. It also answers with buboes ; but if too dry it must
be softened with oil of privet or oil of roses.

Commentary. Siveat, or the matter of Perspu'ation. Comm.
" Sweat," says Galen, " is one of the fluids formed in the " ' '
animal body, consisting of the same materials, and having the
same mode of formation, as the urine, for both are formed
from the liquids drunk, these being heated, and acquiring also
some bihous property. But the sweat is more elaborated, as
having passed through so many intervening bodies to the
skin." (De Med. Simpl. x.) This is a very ingenious account
of the nature of the sweat and urine, which, it is certain, bear
a close analogy to one another, and are often vicarious dis-
charges. Thus, in cases of suppression of urine, the perspira-
tion has often an tu'inous taste and smell. But this is not
the place for enlarging further upon this subject. Our author's
account of the medicinal properties of sweat is taken from
Galen. (1. c.) All the other authorities, in like manner, copy
from him. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 466), and
Avicenna (ii, 2, 648.)

Viscum, Birdlime, is heating with acrimony. It attracts,
therefore, the deep-seated humours powerfully, and is dis-
cutient, like the Thapsia, but is much more inefficacious
than it.

Commentary. The Yiscum, or Birdlime, is got from the Comm.
Loranthus Europaus, or jNIisseltoe. The Yiscum querciuum ' * '
held a place in the jMateria INIedica from the earliest times
down to a very late date. Dioscorides mentions that birdlime
is also got from the apple tree, the pear tree, and other trees,
and is found upon the roots of certain shrubs. Pliny describes
the ordinary mode of preparing it. (H. N. xvi, 94.) Dioscorides
recommends it principally as an agglutinative and attractive
application to indolent tumours and sores. When mixed with
the caustic ley (quicklime and potass) he says birdHme in-
creases its eflBcacy. With orpiment and saudai'ach, and applied

142 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. in a cataplasm, it draws off diseased nails, (iii, 93.) Galen
' * ' remarks that, like Thapsia, its calefaeient powers do not come
into immediate operation. The other authorities, in treating
of this substance, follow Dioscorides and Galeu. See in par-
ticular Avicenna (ii, 2, 717), and Ebn Baithar (i, 410.) The
Yiscum album is retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.
(Athens, 1837, 167.)

'I '

Viola, the Violet ; its leaves have a watery and coldish sub-
stance for theii* prevailing ingredient.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be little or no doubt that the purple
" ' ' violet of Dioscorides is the Viola Odorata. On the violet, see
a most interesting disquisition by Celsius (Hierobotanicou in
voce Dudaim) ; also Sprengel (R. H. H.) Dioscorides calls
it refrigerant, and recommends it as an external application
in ardor of the stomach, inflammation of the eyes, and pro-
lapsus ani ; and mentions, that it had been taken internally in
quinsy and epilepsy of children, (iv, 120.) Galen merely re-
commends it externally in the same cases as Dioscorides. The
Ai'abian authorities extend the use of tliis article. Thus,
A^icenna recommends it in heat of the stomach, both inter-
nally and externally; in a syrup for coughs, pleurisies, and
other affections of the lungs ; in pains of the kidneys as a
diuretic, and as a cholagogue. (ii, 2, 715.) See also Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. 3, 21), and Ebn Baithar (i, 170.) Serapion, on
the authority of Aben Mesuai, says fui'ther of it that it is laxa-
tive in doses of from three to seven drachms. (De Simpl. 141.)

iErugo, Verdigris, has a bitter quality to the taste, being
discutient, cathartic, and corrosive, not only of soft but also of
hard flesh ; but by mixing a little of it with much cerate, one
may render the medicine detergent without pungency.
CoMM. Co:mmentary. That it was the jErugo JEris, or A'erdigiis,
seems indisputable. The scraped verdigris (iog t^cjToq) was
the common kind, and the name is still retained in the modern
Greek Pharmacopoeia (61.) Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Pliny,
and Galen recommend verdigris in complaints of the eyes.
Dioscorides describes very minutely the process for preparing

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 143

verdigris, which is not very unlike that Trhich is now practised Comm.
in France. He also makes mention of another species_, ' ' '
namely, the ^rugo Scolecia, with which we are now unac-
quainted. He gives an interesting account of the cases in
which it is applicable, (v, 92.) Galen also writes of it with
great precision. He says, when lightly applied it relieves fun-
gated sores ; and when diluted with cerates, it cleanses them.
(De Simpl. ix.) The other Greek authorities give much the
same account of it. The Arabians treat fully of the two kinds,
which they call JErvgo rasilis and subtiUs, but borrow almost
all tlieii- information from Dioscorides and Galen. Like the
Greek authorities, they apply it principally in intractable
ulcers and in diseases of the eyelids. See Avicenna (ii, 2,
739), and Serapion (De Simpl. 383) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii,
44) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 540.)

iTnrOKUfXTTOQ,

Hippocampus, is a sea animal, the ashes of which when
burnt thicken the hair in alopecia, along with liquid pitch.

Commentary. It is, indisputably, our SyngnatJius Hippo- Comm.
ccnnpvs. ^lian relates that it has proved useful in cases of
hydrophobia. (Hist. Anim. xiv, 20.) Our author borrows
from Dioscorides (ii, 3.) The Arabians do not treat of it.

ImroXaTTaOov,

Hippolapathum, Horse Burdock, grows in marshes, being
like the Burdock.

CoMMENTAKY. This articlc, which would seem to be the Comm.
Rumex HydrolaputJium, is treated of in the same brief terms
by the other authorities. See Dioscorides (i, 141.)

].TnroixdoaOQOV,

Ilippomarathrum, Horse Fennel ; that variety which resem-
bles the Cachrys is more desiccant than the common Fennel.
It is, therefore, astringent, lithontriptic, and emmenagogue ;
but that species which has seed like coriander seed, is also
like it in other respects, but weaker.

Commentary. There is little doubt that the former Comm.
species is the Cachrys Sicula. The other is undetermined. ' ' '
Our author copies closely from Dioscorides (iii, 76) ; and the

144 SIMPLES. [book tii.

CoMM. otliers follow liis example. The modern herbalists, in like
" ' ' manner, borrow from Dioscorides. See Parkinson (884.)

•T '

iTTTrOTTOTOJUOg,

Hippopotamus, Sea-horse ; its testicle, when dried and

drunk, is a remedy for the bites of reptiles.
CoMM. Commentary. This brief notice of the Hippopotamus am-
" ' ' phibius, or AYater-horse, is taken from Dioscorides (ii, 25.)

Most of the other authorities have omitted it.

fTTTTOtyEXtVOl',

Hipposelinum, Horse Parsley, has properties resembling
those of parsley, but weaker.
CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. It is the Smyrnium Olusatrum, according to
' * ' Dierbach, Stackhouse, Sprengel, and all the best authorities.
Dioscorides represents it to be emmenagogue and diuretic, and
as proving beneficial in rigors, (iii, 71.) Galen and the others
treat of it briefly hke our author. The Arabians treat of it
under Selinum [Apium.)

'T *

LTnrOVOLQ,

Hippomis, Horse-tail, has astringent qualities with bitter-
ness, and on that account it is at the same time powerfully
desiccant, without pungency. It is agglutinant, therefore, of
the largest wounds, and is useful in intestinal hernia, and
cures defluxions when drunk with wine-
CoMM. Commentary. The first species of Dioscorides corresponds
" " ' to our author's, and is marked as the Equisetum Fhiviatile by
Sprengel, which is called in English the Horse-tail. The other
is the E. Limosum. Apuleius recommends it in dysentery and
spitting of blood. Aetius recommends it in the same com-
plaints. But both, in fact, only borrow from Dioscorides and
Galen, especially the latter, who treats of it more fully than
Dioscorides. The Arabians give exactly the same account of
the Equisetum ; indeed they profess to borrow everything from
Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular Serapion (137), and
Avicenna (ii, 2, 200.)

iTTTTO^oEg J/ \~7r 0(paioc,
HippophaeSj used for scouring clothes. It is a branchy

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 145

shrub, the root of which contains juices which are extracted
like those of Thapsia. One obokis of the juice mixed with
the flour of tares, purges phlegm and bile ; and the whole
plant, when dried, becomes purgative.

Commentary. Without entering into the discussion re- Comm.
garding this plant, we shall merely observe that we are dis- *~^
posed to agree with those who refer it to a species of spurge,
namely, Eypfwrbia spinosa. Dioscorides describes it as being
cholagogue, hydragogue, and phlegmagogue. (iii, 159.) It does
not appear that it is treated of by Galen, nor by the Arabian
authorities.

'Ip/c-

Iris, Fleur-de-Iys, is calefacient, consists of very subtile par-
ticles, and is detergent and digestive. It therefore agrees
with coughs, renders expectoration easy, cures tormina, and
cleanses ford ulcers. When drunk with honeyed water it eva-
cuates the bowels.

Commentary. Probably it comprehends the Iris Germa- Comm.
nica and /. Florentina. It is the first article treated of by ' ^ '
Dioscorides, who gives a full account of it, and concludes by
saying that the different species of it are useful for many pur-
poses. He recommends them as an external apphcation in
cutaneous diseases and ulcers, and as being soporific and alexi-
phai-mic ; when drunk with wine as proving emmenagogue, and
also applied in pessaries, malagmata, and acopa. The others
treat of its virtues less copiously, with the exception of
Serapion and Avicenna. One of Serapion's Arabian authori-
ties, Aben ]\Iesuai, says it purges yellow bile and black bile,
and is deobstruent in obstructions of the liver. He also men-
tions it as a sternutatory and masticatory. (De Simpl. 189.)
Avicenna^s characters of the Iris are in the main derived from
Dioscorides, but altogether his description of it is very in-
teresting. He recommends it very particularly in diseases of
the rectum and uterus, both when administered internally and
in a hip-bath. He also represents it as proving useful in
gonorrhoea, and in the pollutio nocturni somni. He con-
cludes by calhng it a general alexipharmic (ii, 2, 31-9.) The
root of the Florentine Iris or Flower de Luce, was used in
the practice of medicine down to a late date. See Quincy and
Boerhaave. It is still kept in the shops, and has the charac-

ni. 10

146 SIMPLES, [book vir.

CoMM. ter of being a drastic hydragogue. Gray, Suppl. to Pliar-
' ' ' macop. (251.) It retains a place in the Modern Greek
Pharmacopoeia.

laciTig.
Isatis, Woad ; the garden species which dyers use, is of a
desiccative nature, having also some astringency. By means
of these powers it agglutinates even the large wounds of hard
bodies, is of use in hemorrhages, discusses cedematous swellings,
and opposes the progress of all malignant diseases. The wild
is more pungent, and on that account being more desiccant, it
the more strongly resists all humid gangrene, but for all other
purposes it is worse as being pungent. Owing to its strong
powers, it is useful in affections of the spleen.
CoMM. Commentary. Dr. Martyn says, "The Woad is called
Isatis and Glastum, and affords a blue tincture." (Ad Virg.
Ec. iv, 43.) See also Miller, Parkinson, and Gerard. It is the
Isatis Tinctoria. The second species of Dioscorides, or Sylvestris,
is the Su'ponaria Vaccaria, L., but the passage is probably
spurious. Our author^s account of the Isatis is abridged from
Galen, who has an elaborate article under this head. Aetius
copies still more closely from Galen. Both these authorities
direct bread or barleymeal to be mixed with its pounded
leaves when they are otherwise too strong. Of the Arabians,
Avicenna gives the most accurate account of it under the head
of Nil seu Glastum sativum et sylvestre. In its external use
he follows Dioscorides and Galen, and joins Hhases in recom-
mending it internally as an emetic for the cough of children,
ulcers of the lungs, and pleurisy arising from black bile. He
further commends the wild species in affections of the spleen,
(ii, 2, 505, 290, 299.) Serapion and Rliases give a confused
account of the Isatis, under the head of Indicum. (De Simpl.
47) ; (Cont. 1. ult. 370.) The Woad held a place in our Dis-
pensatory down to a recent date. See Quincy (91.) "Woad
and indigo were long used together in dyeing, which pro-
bably is the reason of these two articles being confounded
together by certain of the ancient authorities.

l(Toirvpov j; ^acrtoXoi',
Isopyrum or Faseolus, (Bog Bean ?) ; its seed is bitter and

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 1^7

somewhat sour. It is^ therefore, detergent, and exudes the
thick and \iscid humours at the same time that it contracts
bodies,, and is astringent. It therefore purges deep-seated
humours, and is not against persons aflected with vomiting of
blood.

Commentary. From our author's account of it, it would Comm.
seem to be the same as the fasil, or kidney-bean ; but Dios- "
corides clearly distinguishes between them, (iv, 119.) Dodonseus
had referred it to the Memjanthes trifoliata, or bog-bean ;
but this opinion is rejected by Sprengel. He inclines to the
Corydalis claviculata, Pers., but is not decided. We rather
incline to the opinion of Dodonseus, on the ground that its
medicinal character, as given by Galen and our author, applies
very well to the Memjanthes trifoliata. It is not treated of by
Aetius, nor can we find it in the Mat. Med. of the Arabians.

Iria,

Salix, the JViUoiv ; the leaves and flower are possessed of
desiccant powers without pungency. It has also some astrin-
gency ; but the liark is drier, and when burnt, the ashes of it
are powerfully desiccant, for they remove clavi and myrmecia
with vinegar.

Commentary. Several species of the Salix are described Comm.
by Theophrastus and other ancient authors. Milligan refers ' '
that of Celsus to >S^. alba, fracjilis, and purpurea ; but to de-
fine the species, which are so numerous in this genus, is futile.
But that the Alba was one of the medicinal willows of the
ancients, can admit of no doubt. See Parkinson (1430.)
Dioscorides says the fruit and leaves, and bark and juice of
the willow tree are possessed of an astringent power, and ac-
cordingly he recommends them both externally and internally
in various complaints for which astringents are indicated, such
as haemoptysis, and as a fomentation in arthritic complaints.
He also mentions the ley of it when prepared with vinegar for
the removal of callus and corns, {i, 35.) Galen also gives a
very elaborate statement of its medicinal virtues : he savs it
is desiccative without pungency, and has some astringency ;
and he recommends it strongly in the same cases as Dioscorides
and our autlior; indeed, the latter merely abridges Galen.

148 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM, Aetius copies from Galen almost -word for word. The Ara-
' * ' bians treat fully of it : but iu the same terms as their Grecian
masters. See Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 2, 250) ; A^icenna (ii, 2,
319, 677) ; Serapiou (De Simpl. 136) ; Ebn Baithar (i,
122.) In the modem Greek Pharmacopoeia both the Salix
fragilis and alba stand for the ancient 'nea.

IchthyocoUa, Fish-give ; its powers are emplastic and desic-
cant. It answers well for the composition of cephalic and ag-
glutinative plasters, and of those which are prepared for
leprosy ; also for remonng wrinkles from the face.
CoMM. Commentary. That described by Dioscorides and our
' • ' author was got from the Acipenser Huso. The large fish de-
scribed bv Herodotus, and Eustathius, in his commentary on
the work of Dionysius the geographer, under the name of
Antacseus, was, most probably, nearly the same as the Huso.
See the modern Greek Pharmacopceia (83.) Artedi makes
the Huso, IchthyocoUa and Antacaus to be varieties of the
species of Acipenser, which he caUs Acipenser tuberculis carens.
It would appear to be the o^upu'y^oc of ^han. (H. A. xvii, 32.)
He makes mention of its gluten or isinglass. Our author^s ac-
count of its medicinal vii'tues is mostly copied from Dioscorides.
The others supply no additional information. The Arabians treat
of it under the general head of gluten, aud recommend it in
the same cases as the Greeks, quoting Dioscorides, Galen, aud
Paulus. Serapion and Hhases recommend it in haemoptysis.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 202) ; Serapion (c. 138) ; Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. i, 336.)

Kaicai'oc,
Cacanus ; its root is moderately desiccative and not pun-
gent, also emplastic, and hence it reheves roughness of the
windpipe in a linctus with wine, and when chewed like traga-
canth and liquorice.
CoMM. Commentary. It is not mentioned by Dioscorides, Pliny,
Theophrastus, Aetius, or any other ancient author but Galen
and Paulus ; nor has any one of the commentators noticed it.
We are unable, therefore, to determine anything for certain

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 149

respecting it. But as Dioscoricles and Pliny ascribe nearly Comm.
the same medicinal powers to the Cacalia as our author does to ' ' '
the Cacanus, it seems not improbable that they may have been
identical. Our author evidently borrows from Galen.

KayKajuov,

Cancamum; it is the tear of an Arabian wood, resembhng
myrrh, fragrant, and hence used in perfumes. It has the power
of extenuating fat bodies, and is detergent and deobstruent.

Commentary. Dioscorides treats of it in the portion of his Comm.
work devoted to aromatics, calling it the tear of an Arabian ' ' '
wood, having some resemblance to myrrh, which was used
in fumigations with myrrh and storax. He calls it emmena-
gogue ; mentions that it is given in asthmatic, epileptic, and
splenetic cases ; says it is useful as a cleanser in diseases of
the eye ; but that it is most particularly applicable for fungous
gums and toothache, (i, 23.) Galen has omitted it from his JNIat.
Med. Of the Arabians, Avicenna is the authority who has
treated of it most distinctly. He calls it a gum of a bad taste
which is brought from the region of the west. (This account of
the country which produces it may warrant suspicion that he
had confounded it with some other gum, the production of Italy
or Spain.) He says of it, that some had confounded it with
sandaracha (gum vernix?). In giving its medicinal virtues, he
copies closely from Dioscorides (ii, 2, 382.) It is doubtful,
from this imperfect description of the Cancamum, what sub-
stance it appHes to ; probably either to Gum anime or to Gum
elemi. There seems no good ground for referring it, as some
have done, to Lacca ; nor to some nondescript species of the
Amyris Katef, as Sprengel does. (Ad Dioscor. 1. c.)

Kao^ita,
Cadmia, Calamine ; both kinds of it are desiccant, but that
which is called Botryitis, consists of the more subtile particles,
and the Placitis, of the grosser. When calamine is burnt, it
becomes desiccant and detergent, without pungency, and is
also useful for sores requiring to be filled up, about the eyes
and in the whole body, more particularly those on softer
bodies, which are more humid, for those upon harder bodies
require stronger means.

150 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Commentary. Under this head we cannot do better than
' ' in the first place copy the account of the ancient cadmia given
by the learned and accurate GeofFroy. " The name Cadmia
has been applied to several things. Dioscorides understood by
Ka^l^dm the recrements which arise from brass while melting in
the furnace. Galen applied it to two substances, one which comes
from brass (chalcos ?), which is the same with the cadmia of
Dioscorides ; the other a native substance found in the island
of Cyprus, which he terms \iQm^i]q or stony. Plinj^, besides
the factitious cadmia of Dioscorides and Galen, mentions
another by the name of Lapis cerosus, which he says was an ore
out of which copper was made, and this perhaps is the same
witli the Cadmia lapidosa of Galen.^^ (ii, 2, 6,) The botryital or
clustered cadmia was Tutty, or the Cadmia fornacis sen
factitia. It is the Zinci Oxydimi impurmn. The Capnifis and
Placitis were merely varieties of the same, the former being in
the shape of a fine powder, collected at the mouths of the fur-
naces, and the latter consisting of coarser and heavier grains.
The minerals from which all these preparations of cadmia
were prepared, are the two varieties of calamine, now called by
mineralogists "the siliceous oxide of zinc" and "the carbonate
of zinc." See Cleavland's ' Mineralogy' (656, 657.) Dioscorides
gives a very distinct description of the cadmia. which he re-
commends principally in the composition of ophthalmic reme-
dies (v, 84.) Galen's account of it is to the same efl^ect, and is
couched in his peculiar logical language. (De Simpl. ix.) The
Arabians give a confused description of cadmia and the other
mineral substances used by the Greeks in medical practice.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 163, 164) ; Serapion (418) ; Rhases (Cont.
I. ult. i, 150.) For an elaborate disquisition on the cadmia of
the ancients, we beg to refer to Beckmann's ' History of In-
ventions.'

Ka/cfcoXta,
Caccalia ; its powers and use are like the Cacanus.

CoMM. Commentary. See under Cacanus.

KaXa^mypwcrrJCj
Calamagrostis, is desiccative ; wherefore, its juice and the
decoction of the roots of it are mixed up as ingredients with
ophthalmic remedies ; but its seed is diuretic and stomachic.

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 151

Commentary. This is decidedly the Calamayrostis Epiyeios Comm.
Eoth. or Small Reed. Dioscorides says it proves destructive ' '
to cattle when eaten by them, especially the variety which
irrows in Babvlon by the wavside. Parkinson (Theatre of
Plants, 1181) figures and describes a species of reed-grass,
bearing a considerable resemblance to our Epigeios, but of
more luxuriant growth ; which, he says, Lobel calls Cala-
mayrostis forte Babijlonica. Neither Galen nor Aetius treat
of it. The Arabians briefly notice it under the head of Theil
or Grameu, but merely copy from the Greeks. See Serapion
(De Simpl. 119), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 704.)

KaA«/tuv0r;,

Calamintha, Calamint, is of a hot and drying temperament
in the third degree, consists of subtile particles, is acrid, and
much stronger than mint ; for it is a sort of wild mint. It,
therefore, attracts readily the deep-seated fluids to itself, and
hence evacuates dropsies, and discusses swelling of the whole
body, and stops periodical rigors, when strongly rubbed in
externally with oil, and when taken internally in a draught.
"When applied in a clyster it removes pains of the hip-joint,
and clears aw^ay impurities from the skin.

CoMMEXTARY. Apulcius says, " Graeci calaminthen Latini ("omm.
mentham vocant, alii nepetam," (De Herbis.) R. Stephens ' * '
says, " CalaminthcC Dioscoridi tria sunt genera, quorum pri-
mum nihil aliud quam vulgare Calamenthum ; secundum
Latino Nepeta appellatur; tertium est nostra herba Cataria,
I'herbe du chat." Sprengel makes the first species of Dios-
corides to be the Melissa Cretica, L. ; the second, the Thymus
Nepeta, Scop. ; and the third, the Melissa altissima. Our
author's calamint is evidently the first species. Galen, Dios-
corides, Aetius, and Serapion, like Paulus, describe it as a hot
and acrid medicine, which proves useful in diseases of the
joints. They all, also, say that it is emmenagogue ; and
recommend it as a discutient and expectorant medichie.
Dioscorides and Aetius recommend it in elephantiasis, for
attenuating and cutting the gross humours which give rise to
the disease. All agree in praising calamint in the cure of
intermittent fevers. Dioscorides recommends it as a vermifuge
when given with salts and honey. Dioscorides, and, after him.

152 SIMPLES. [book vit.

CoMM. Aetius and otlier of the authorities^ say that calamint-water,
when injected into the ear, kills vrorms in it. Galen and
Dioscorides both affirm that when taken internally and applied
on a pessary, it procures abortion. All agree that it is also
beneficial in asthmatic complaints. Avicenna gives a lengthy
and very elaborate account of the three species of calamint ;
but it can hardly be said that he adds anything of importance
to the information vrhich he drew from his Grecian masters.
He agrees with them that it is diuretic and emmenagogue,
and holds that it is anaphrodisiacal, and removes the poUutio
nocturni somni. He also, like them, commends it as a deob-
struent in jaundice and other obstructions of the viscera. He
praises it as a stomachic, (ii, 2, 154.) None of the other
Arabian authorities treat so fully of this article as Avicenna.
Rhases, however, is worth consulting. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 466.)
The calamint, that is to say, the first species of Dioscorides,
would appear to be the " mentastrum'^ of Celsus, who recom-
mends it as a remedy in the bites of venomous animals.
(v, 277.) It also occurs in the ' Flora Hippocratica.'' See
Dierbach. The three kinds of calaminth were long retained
in the INIateria IMedica of the moderns. See Toiu-nefort^s
Materia Medica (i, 6, 4.) INIore recently only one kind was
used. See Quincy. Of late all the kinds have been nearly
discarded from our Dispensatories, but are still to be found in
the shops of apothecaries. See Gray's Supplement to the
Pharmacopoeia (p. 47.)

KaAa^ioc apiviiiaTiKog,
Calamus Aromaticus, Siveet-cane, is heating and desiccant
in the second order. It also consists of subtile particles, and
has some astringency. It is, therefore, diuretic, and is mixed
up with stomachic remedies, and those prepared for the liver
and womb. The species called phragmitis is detergent, but
the leaves of it are green and moderately cooling, and the
bark of it, when burnt, is heating and desiccant in the third
degree. The root of it, when applied with bulbi, is said to
extract darts and thorns.
CoMM. Commentary. Having shown above that the acorns of the
" ' ' ancients is the Acorus Pseudacorus, we need have little hesi-
tation in stating that we agree with the older authorities, who

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 153

refer the present article to tlie Acorus Calamus. Dr. Royle, Comm.
however, holds that it was the Andropogon Calamus aroma- * '
ticus. See Hindoo Med. (34) and Lindley (Veg. Kiugd. 133.)
The (j>oayi.uTr}^ of Dioscorides and our author is decidedly the
Ariindo Phragmites, or Common Reed. Our author follows the
description of them given by Dioscorides and Galen, and more
especially the latter. Galen says of the aromaticus that it is
more desiccative than calefacient, and that it has some volatility,
like all the aromatics. Aetius, in like manner, copies mostly
from Galen. The Arabians, in treating of these reeds, borrow
closely from Dioscorides. Thus Avicenna, among other virtues
which he holds that they possess, commends them as being
diuretic, emmenagogue, and alexipharmic. (ii, 2, 64.) The
calami do not occur as articles of medicine in the Hippocratic
collection. The Calamus Alexandrinus of Celsus (v, 24), was
no doubt the C. aromaticus. Although a native of India, as
Dioscorides states, it is likely that the Romans would get it
through Alexandria. It occurs in the modern Greek Phar-
macopoeia, and is now found growing in Laconia.

KojUTrai,

Erucse, Caterpillar' ; those upon potherbs, when rubbed in
with oil, are said to preserve from the bites of venomous
animals.

Commentary. The metamorphosis of Caterpillar is ac- Comm.
curately described by Theophrastus (C. PI. v.) See also
Aristotle (H. A. v, 20), and Pliny (H. N. xi, 32.) Our author's
account of these erucse is taken word for Avord from Diosco-
rides (ii, 64.) Few of the other authorities treat of them.

Cantharides; those found among wheat, have pale, transverse
zones, and being suffocated by the steam of hot vinegar, are
used for many purposes. For, with cerate, they cast off
scabious nails, and relieve clavi and scabious afiections. They
are also corrosive and caustic. Some mix a small quantity of
them with diuretic remedies, and give them in this form.

Commentary. Dioscorides and Galen direct the species Comm.
which is found among corn to be used medicinally. As the
Meloe vesicatorius is commonly found upon trees, such as the

154 SIMPLES, [book vii.

CoMM. fraxinus, sambuchus, aud ligustrum, it is evidently ditfereut
' ' ' from the ancient cantharis, aud yet their effects upon the
human frame would appear to have been very much alike.
It appears to be now agreed upon by all competent judges
that the medicinal cantharis of the ancients is the Mylabris
Cichorii or M. Fusselini, which is still used for forming blister-
ing plasters by the profession in Constantinople and by the
native practitioners in Hindostan. See Ainslie (Mat. Ind.,
i, 622), Royle (Antiq. of Hindoo Med.), and Pereira (1834.)
The Buprestis, however, which also is included by Dioscorides
in his Materia Medica, can have been no other than the Meloe
vesicatorius. See Book V of this work. It is the tellini fly
of the Hindoos. See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 417.) The
ancients prepared the cantharides for medicinal use in the
same manner as the Spanish fly is now prepared, namely, by
killing them with the fumes of vinegar. Dioscorides says can-
tharides are septic, ulcerative, and calefacient, and hence are
mixed up with the medicines that cure cancerous diseases,
leprosy, and lichen agrius ; they are also emmenagogue when
applied in a pessary; and some, he adds, relate that cantha-
rides are beneficial in dropsies, by acting as diuretics. Their
wings and feet are further said to be antidotal, that is to say,
we suppose, to counteract the operation of the body of the
insect, (ii, 65, 66.) Galen treats of the cantharis and buprestis
in very nearly the same terms as Dioscorides. Instead of
using only the wings and feet, as mentioned by Dioscorides,
he says that he used the whole insect. (De Simpl. xi.) In
moderate doses he held it to be a safe diuretic, (ii, 463, ed.
Basil.) Aetius and Oribasius give nearly the same account
of the cantharis as Galen. Cantharides are frequently men-
tioned in the Hippocratic treatises (De Nat. Mulier. 565, ed.
Foes; De Intern. Affect. 552), and in the works of Celsus.
(199, ed. Milligau.) Ai-etseus is the first author, as far as we
know, who notices the external use of cantharides as a rube-
facient. (De Curat. Morb. Chron. i, 4.) The Arabians, in
treating of cantharides, borrow nearly all the information they
give from Dioscorides and Galen. See Serapion (c. 441),
Avicenua (ii, 2, 201), Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 162.) Rhases
on his own authority, affirms, that administered in small doses
cantharides cleanse the kidneys. We are rather surprised to

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 155

find tliat the Mylabris does not occur in the modern Greek comm.
Pharraacopceia. , ' — ■< '

l^avvapic,

Cannabis^ Hemp ; the fruit is carminative and desiccative,
so as to dry up even the semen. The juice of it when green
is useful for pains of the ears and obstructions of them.

Commentary. It appears evidently to be the Cannabis Comm.
sativa, or Hemp. The species sylvestris of Dioscorides, is the '
Althcea Cannabina. See Sprengel (ad Dioscorid. iii^ 155), and
Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 307.) Dioscorides recommends
the latter in the form of a cataplasm to soothe inflammations
and discuss tumours. Our author copies from Galen, who,
like him, only describes the sativa. The Arabians describe
both species with more accuracy than the Greeks. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 170, 656), Serapion (207.) Avicenna calls them car-
minative and desiccative ; and hence he holds that they dry
up the semen. He says a middhng dose proves laxative of the
bowels.

Kai'WTTOl',

Canopum, the Flower of the Elder-tree, which has been
already treated of.

KaTTl'lOV,

Fumaria, Fumitory (called also Capnos), and is so named
because the juice of it provokes a great discharge of tears;
and it sharpens the \ision. It is also acrid and bitter ; hence
it occasions a discharge of much bilious urine, aud cures ob-
structions and atony of the liver. It also strengthens the
stomach and softens the belly.

Commentary. All the commentators seem agreed that it is Comm.
the Fumaria officinalis, except Sibthorp, who prefers the F.
2Jarviflora, Lam. Our author's account of it is mostly taken
from Dioscorides and Galen. The others give nearly the same
description of its medicinal virtues. See particularly Serapion
(c. 71), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 275.) They represent it as being
a stomachic and hepatic medicine, gently purgative and
diuretic. Furaitorj'^ is described as a mediciiud herb by all
our old herbalists, and held a place in the Dispensatory down
to a late date. See Quincy (125.) The F. officinalis is still
retained in the modern Greek Phaiuiacopoeia.

156 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Caparis, Caper-tree; its root deterges, purges, incides, and
discusses by its bitterness and acrimony. It also contracts,
astringes, and condenses by its sourness. It therefore cures
indurated spleens -when drunk and when applied externally.
It is also emmenagogue, and occasions a discharge of phlegm.
It cures ill-conditioned ulcers, and relieves pains of the teeth,
dispels tumours and alphos, and kills vermin in the ear. The
leaves and fruit of it are possessed of similar powers, but
weaker.
CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. It is the Capparis spinosa, namely, the plant
' — • — ' which produces our ofiicinal capers. Dioscorides and Serapion
mention that pickled capers act as a gentle laxative, but say
that thev are bad for the stomach. The Arabians held that
they are good whetters of the appetite. Casiri (Bibl. A. H.
i, 337.) Galen gives a very elaborate article on the virtues of
capers, which, he says, are the best medicine which we pos-
sess in scu-rhous enlargement of the spleen. He says it clears
away the humours by the belly and by urine, and also acts as
an emmenagogue. Their taste, he says, is a combination of
bitterness, acrimony, and sourness. He concludes by stating
that capers produced in very wai-m climates, such as Arabia,
are much more acrid than in his country. (De Simpl. ^-ii.)
The Arabians held that capers are aphrodisiacal and alexi-
pharmic. See Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 164^), A^-icenna (ii, 2,
138), and Serapion (c. 291.)

Kaooa^oCj

Nasturtium, d-ess ; the seed of it is caustic like mustard.
When applied externally, therefore, it proves rubefacient, in-
cides also the thick humours when drunk with other things.
And the dried herb is possessed of similar powers, but the
juicy one is more moderate ; it therefore is eaten raw.
CoMM. Commentary. It was indisputably a species of cress, pro-
""^^^ bably the Lepidhim sativum. We have treated of it as an
article of food in Book I. Our author^s account of it is
mostly derived from Galen. Symeon Seth, with most of the
authorities, calls it aphi'odisiacal. iSIacer says, on the con-
trary, that its powers are equal to those of rue for repressing
venereal desires. Dioscorides calls it alexipharmic, and says

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 157

of it, that in fumigations it driA^es away venomous reptiles. Comm.
It occui's in the Flora Hippocratica. See Dierbaeh. The ' ' '
Arabians treat of it veiy elaborately. See Ehases (Cont. 1.
ult. i, 472), A\dcenna (ii, 2, 502), and Serapion (c. 359.) They
agree that it evacuates bile both upwards and downwards, that
it is aphrodisiac and alexipharmic. The cress (^Nasturtium),
until very lately, was admitted into our Dispensatory. See
Gerard, Parkinson, Culpeper, and Quincy.

Cardamomum, Cardamum, is also acrid, but weaker than the
Cardamus. It has also some bitterness, by which it destroys
intestinal worms, and with A-inegar clears away scabies.

Commentary. The officinal cardamom of the present time Comm.
has now got the scientific name of Elettaria Cardamomum,
and as far as we can see there is no reason to doubt its being
identical with the cardamomum of the ancients. There are,
however, several varieties of the cardamom which are not
satisfactorily defined, any more than the four species men-
tioned by Pliny. (H. N. 'xii, 29.) See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 32),
and Pereira (Mat. ]Med. 694.) Dioscorides recommends it for
various pui-poses, both externally and internally ; for epilepsy,
coughs, ischiatic disease, nephritis, and as an alexipharmic
and lithontriptic medicine, (i, 5.) Galen is more guarded in
enumerating its virtues, and all the other Greek authorities
follow him. The Arabians rather imitate Dioscorides. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 156), and Serapion (c. 64.) One of Serapion's
Arabian authorities, Isaac eben Amram, describes two species,
the greater and the lesser, a distinction stiU recognized. AVe
need scarcely add that it is well known at the present day,
and is used for various purposes both in this country and in
the East.

Squilla, a Legless Lobster, when triturated and drunk with
the root of bryony it kills luml)rici.

Commentary. The squilla belongs to the order of naXaKoa- Comm.
T^aKu. (See Book I, 91.) The present article we suppose is
the Cancer Squilla, L. It is treated of very cursorily by the
other authorities.

158 SIMPLES. [book vii.

J^apKivog,
Cancer, CVab ; of the ashes of burnt crabs, that of river-
crabs is equally desiccative with those of the sea urchins and
cockles. By the peculiarity of its whole substance it proves
wonderfully efficacious when applied to persons bitten by mad
dogs, as mentioned in another place. The ashes of the sea-crabs
being extremely desiccative, do not indeed agree with them,
but rather relieve those who stand in need of desiccative reme-
dies. The river-crab when pulverised and applied, ejects thorns
and the points of darts.
CoMM. Commentary. The Cancer Pagurus, a large edible crab,
would appear to be the sea animal treated of under this head.
The river-crab, we suppose, is the Astacus fluviatilis, or craw-
fish. Dioscorides recommends the ashes of the river-crab most
especially in hydrophobia, and as an application to fissures in
the feet and anus, chilblains, and cancers, and also as an anti-
dote to the bites of venomous animals. Galen also gives an
interesting account of the use of them in hydrophobia, and
Serapion repeats Galen's account of them. See further.
Book V, 3, of this work. Galen speaks with great confidence
of their efficacy in this case, indeed he affii'ms that he had
never known them fail when they had got a fair trial. The
other authorities supply no additional information of interest
imder this head. See A\acenna (ii, 3, 147), Rhases (Cont. 1.
ult. iii, 42.) These two agree that the flesh of the river-crab
with the milk of asses is beneficial in phthisis.

Kaooj',
Carum, Caravjay ; the seed is desiccant and heating in the
third degree ; and not only the seed, but also the whole plant
is carminative and diuretic.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be no doubt that it is the Carum
* Carui. It is evidently the careum of Pliny, and derives its
name from Caria. (H. N. xxix, 49.) Om- author copies closely
from Galen. Dioscorides calls it diuretic, stomachic, pleasant
to the taste, digestive, &c. The Arabians further give it the
character of being a cordial and anthelminthic medicine. (See
Serapion (c. 279), Avicenna (ii, 2, 137), and Rhases (Cont. 1.
ult. i, 178.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 1.59

Kao7rj>«Ttoi',

Carpesiunij is aromatic, and consists of subtile particles.
It therefore clears away A-isceral obstructions, proves diuretic,
and removes calculi of the kidneys.

Commentary. The Arabians identified this substance with Comm.
their own Cuhehce. See Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 242), Avicenna
(ii, 2, 131), and Serapion (c. 188.) But we will show in
another place that this was a mistake on their part. Nothing
satisfactory has been ascertained regarding it, and we have
no pleasure in dwelling upon the conjectures of the commen-
tators on Dioscorides and of the herbalists.

Kapuoi'j

Nux Juglans, Walnut ; the tree has some astringency in the
shoots, but more in the bark of the nuts. The juice of them,
therefore, when boiled with honey, becomes a stomachic medi-
cine. The rind of it, when burnt, consists of subtile particles,
and becomes desiccant without pungency; but the edible
part of it being oily, is readily converted into bile. The oil
formed from them consists of subtile particles, and discusses
swellings and gangrenes. Walnuts which are rancid from age
prove detergent of cutaneous affections. But the Pontic,
called the slender nut, is colder and austere, but in other re-
spects is like the large.

Commentary, We have treated of this article in the portion Comm.
of our work devoted to dietetics. See Book I, We shall
merely repeat that the two species of nuts described by Paulus
and other ancient authorities are e\adently the Nux Juglans,
or walnut, and the Nux Avellana, or filbert. This is very
evident from Galen's description of them. (Opera, ed, Basil,
ii, 88,) Our author copies closely from him, Dioscorides
treats of the nuces still more circumstantially, recommending
them both internally and externally as being vermifuge, and
curing ill-conditioned ulcers, and many other diseases. The
filbert, when triturated with axunge or bear's grease, he re-
commends for the cure of baldness, (i, 178, 179.) The
Arabians, under this head, do little more than condense the
information supplied to them by their Grecian masters. See
iu particular Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 505), A\dcenna (ii, 2, 42,
494), and Serapion (c. 1G2.) Serapion states that the nux

160 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. avellana is useful in catarrhs^ and as an application in cases
" ' ' of alopecia. Here, however, he professes to borrow from
Dioscorides. Avicenna and Rliases recommend the oil of the
hazel-nut in herpes esthiomenos, erysipelas, and fistula lachry-
malis. They speak favorabh' of both as a remedy for the bites
of venomous animals. They also are agreed that the walnut is
expectorant.

Kapuo^uXAoi',
Caryophyllum, Cloves; they are not the substance which
their name might imply, but, as it were, the flowers of a tree
which are brought from India; like chaff, black, nearly a
finger's length, aromatic, acrid, bitterish, hot, and desiccative
in about the third degree. They serve many useful purposes
for condiments and other medicines.
CoMM. Commentary. From our author's description there cannot
be the least hesitation on our part in acknowledging it to be
the CaryojjhyUus aromaticus, L. [i. q.), Eugenia Caryophyllata,
Thunberg, that is to say, the Clove-tree. We are equally well
convinced that no mention of tliis article is to be found in
the works of Dioscorides, Pliny, Theophrastus, Galen, Aetius,
Oribasius, nor, in short, in those of any preceding author.
Whence Paulus drew his knowledge of it cannot now be
ascertained. The Arabians display a very correct acquaint-
ance Avitli it. Avicenna, in treating of it, refers to no other
Greek authority but Paulus. After describing it in much the
same terms as our author, he states it to be hot and dry in
the third degree, says it renders the breath fragrant, improves
the sight, and is useful in pterygium; is stomachic and he-
patic, and removes vomiting and nausea, (ii, 2, 311.) Serapion,
in treating of the Gariofilus, first quotes from a translation of
Galen the description of the Garyophyllon given by Paulus,
which he afiirms is taken line for line from Galen. This is
CAddentlv a mistake, founded on some erroneous translation of
Galen into Arabic. He then gives its characters from several
Arabian authorities to the effect that it is stomachic, hepatic,
cordial, aphrodisiacal, and digestive ; and says that it is
brought from India, (c. 319.) Rhases says cloves are hot and
dry, and are both stomachic and cordial. (Ad Mansor. iii, 22.)
We have not been able to find the passage in the ' Continens '
where they are treated of, there being some mistake in the

SECT. III.] DIMPLES. 161

marginal reference of Avicenna. Symeon Seth says of the Comm.
caryophyllon that it is hot and dry in the second, or, perhaps, ' * '
in the third degree; is the fruit of a tree, and is stomacliic,
hepatic, and cordial ; removes nausea connected with humidity,
but is bad for the bowels, (c. 15.) The caryophyllon also
occurs in one of the antidotes of Myrepsus. (c. 22.) Ebn
Baithar, however, is the ancient authority who gives the fullest
account of cloves, which he represents as being useful in
diabetes and strangury, in black bile, diarrhoea, and chronic
coughs. He says in particular that they are uterine and
aphrodisiac, and hence warm the uterus and promote impreg-
nation. He also holds that they are stomachic, carminative,
and hepatic, (ii, 281.)

JLaaaa/iiov,
Cassamum ; some say that it is the fruit of the balsam-tree,
of which we have treated under that word.

K-aaata,

Cassia, is heating and desiccative in the third order, consists
of sufficiently subtile particles, is acrid, and moderately as-
tringent. It is therefore incisive and discutient, imparts
strength to the organs, and is also emmenagogue.

Commentary. Salmasius contends that the ancient Cassia Comm.
was the same as our cinnamon. See Xeedham (ad Geopon. ' '
vii, 13), and Celsus (Hierobot. in voce Kiddah.) Stackhouse
affirms, however, that the ancients were unacquainted with the
Laurus Cinnamomum. He refers it to the Laurus gracilis.
(Comment, in Theophrast.) Spreugel, in his R. H. H., makes
it to be the Laurus Cassia, which has now got the scientific '
name Cinnamomum Cassia, The close connexion between the
cinnamon and cassia has occasioned difficulty in distinguishing
them from one another, down even to the present times.
They are often sold for one another in the Indian bazaars.
The Cassia Rgnea of the ancients would appear to have beea
the same thing as the Cassia bark of the moderns. Accord-
ing to Ainslie, the odour of it is very like cinnamon, but
fainter. (Mat. Ind. 35.) The Cassia Fistula was merely
the bark rolled up into fistula, or pipes. The Greeks, as we
shall show in another place, were unacquainted with tlie true

III. 11

162 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Cassia Fistula. Dioscorides describes several varieties of it
' ' ' whieli cannot now be readily recognized. He calls it beatings
diuretic, desiccant, and mildly astringent, and recommends it
as an emmenagogue, and for various otlier medicinal purposes.
He concludes by saying it may be used in place of cinnamon,
and tliat it is useful for many purposes, (i, 12.) Galen and
the other Greek authorities treat of it briefly, in nearly the
same terms as Paulus. All the Arabians treat of it fully.
See in particular Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 183), Serapion (c. 301),
and Avicenna (ii, 2, 151.) A\icenna describes circumstantially
several kinds of cassia, which he says is closely allied to cin-
namon in nature and in virtues. He recommends it in dis-
eases of the eyes and uterus, and joins Serapion in holding it
to be alexipharmic. The only Arabian authority quoted by
Rhases under this head (namely, Misib) calls it stomachic,
hepatic, and attenuant. The same authority is quoted by
Serapion. Another of Serapion^s authorities says it has strong
powers for procuring abortion. The cassia occurs in the
works of Hippocrates, and in those of Celsus. The latter
ranks it in his list of discutients. (v, 11.) Galen states that,
in the absence of cinnamon, a double dose of cassia or of
carpesium may be used in place of it. (ii, 434, ed. Basil.) It is
described by Theophrastus (H. P. ix, 5), and Pliny (xi, 43).

Castorium, Castor, is heating and desiccative, with excessive
tenuity of parts, by which, in addition to its other actions, it
is rendered a suitable remedy for aS'ections of the nerves pro-
ceeding from a collection of humours. It also readily warms
parts which are immoderate!}^ cooled, both when applied ex-
ternally and when drunk, without at all injuring any other
part, even if they should be in a state of moderate fever, as
in cataphora and lethargy. It is likewise emmenagogue, and
expels the secundines. In affections of the brain and lungs it
is a very efiicacious remedy, even when inhaled in respiration.
CoMM. Commentary. All the ancient authorities describe the
Castor as being the testicles of the beaver {Castor Fiber, L.)
Matthiolus, we believe, was the first to rectify this error. It
is a substance contained in follicles situated between the anus
and genital organs. The use of castor in hysteria is men-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 163

tioned by Herodotus, (iv.) Dioscorides, Galen, Rhases, and Comm.
Serapion, like our author, recommend it as an emmenagogue ; " " '
Celsus prescribes castor with pepper in cases of tetanus, (iv. 3.)
He also recommends it in lethargy and deafness, (vi.) Pliny
also mentions its being used in tetanus and other cases where
soporifics are indicated, (H. N. xxxii, 3, 8.) Of all the
ancient authorities A^dcenna treats of it most fully, recom-
mending it particularly in nervous affections, stupor, and
paralysis, also in hiccough when drunk with \'inegar, and as a
carminative in flatulence of the bowels. The best counter-
agents to it are acid citrons, vinegar with wine and asses' milk.
He says of it, that it is alexipharmic, and proves beneficial in
the suffocation induced by hellebore, (ii, 2, 122.) Serapion
copies Hterally from Dioscorides and Galen (c. 445.) Rhases
recommends it as a calefacient medicine for warming the
nerves, promoting menstruation, and dissolving swelhngs. (Ad
IMansor. iii, 30.) The account which he gives of it in his
'Continens' is made up of extracts from Dioscorides, Galen,
and our author. (1. ult. 188.) Ebn Baithar gives a very
lengthy and not uninteresting account of this substance,
(i, 263.)

Kau/coXtc,

Caucalis, IVild Carrot ; it is heating, like the carrot, desic-
cant, diuretic, and is pickled as a preserve.

Commentary. Sibthorp supposed it to be the Tordylium Comm.
officinale ; but perhaps we may venture to refer it rather to
the Caucalis maintima, Lam. R. Stephens calls it Persil
batard, i. e. Bastard parsley. It is more properly an article
of food than a medicine. Om* author borrows his account of
it from Dioscorides and Galen, and none of the other autho-
rities supply any additional information of interest respecting
it. In modern times its application in medicine has been ex-
tended. See Matthiolus (in Dioscorid.) and Parkinson (922.)

Milium, Millet, is cooling in the first degree, and desiccant
in the second. It also, to a certain degree, consists of subtile
particles. When used then for a fomentation in small bags,
and in the form of a cataplasm, it is of a desiccant nature.

164 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Commentary. Dierbach inclines to the Holcus Sorghum, a
" ' species of millet called Sorgo or Guinea corn. Most of the
other authorities refer it to the Panicum Italicum. (See
Spreugel^ Schneider, and Parkinson.) We have treated of it
among the articles of food in Book I. As a medicine, it is
principally in the form of a fomentation that it is prescribed
by Dioscorides and the other authorities. Galen does not
speak very favorably of the cataplasm prepared from it. The
Arabians treat of it in much the same terms as the Greeks.
See Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 532), A\dcenna (ii, 2, 288), and
Serapion (c. 102.) They all speak of it as being a very in-
ferior article of food ; and as a medicine, recommend it only
in a fomentation. It was retained in our English Dispensa-
tory down to a late date. See Quincy. To this day it is
much prized by the native practitioners of Hindostan. See
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 124.)

Cedrus, Cedar {?), or Juniper ; the shrub, which resembles
juniper, and the tree are calefacient and desiccative in the
third degree ; but the oil prepared from them, which they call
cedraea, touches upon the fourth, being composed of sufficiently
subtile particles. It therefore corrodes soft flesh readily, and
without pain ; and the hard flesh, more particularly of dead
bodies, it dries and preserves from putrefaction. It kills lice,
nits, ascarides, worms in the ears, and has many other powers.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides describes two species, the larger
being probably the Juniperus Phoenicea, and the smaller the
Juniperus communis. The apKEvOog was a species of the same
genus. Pliny calls the pitch of the tree by the name of
Cedria, and the oil by that of Pisselaon. Is the cedria the
gum vernix, called sandarax by the Arabians ? "VYe will dis-
cuss this question in the Appendix to this Book, when we come
to treat of the substances introduced into the Materia Medica
by the Arabians. Dioscorides says of the fruit of the cedar
or juniper, that it is calefacient and bad for the stomach, that
it is useful in coughs, as an emmenagogue, and alexipharmic.
(i, 105.) Galen says the fruit is edible, but apt to occasion
headache and pain of the stomach. (De Simpl. vii.) The

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 165

Arabians treat fully of it. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 160, 608.) Comm.
He and the other Arabians borrow nearly all their information
from the Greeks. Even Ebn Baithar contains little that is
original under this head, (ii, 94.) We observe, by the way,
that his translator, Dr. Sontheimer, marks it as the Pinus
Cedrus, but this it clearly cannot be.

Ktl'TOKptOV,

Centaurium, Centaury ; the root of the great centaury is
acrid and heating, with a terrene astringency. It therefore
promotes menstruation, kills and expels the foetus, agglutinates
wounds, relieves haemoptysis, and other affections of the chest.
The root of the small centaury is possessed of no powers, but
the branches are strongly desiccative, and without pungency.
Hence they are applicable in those cases in which the great
centaury was mentioned as being useful ; and in ischiatic
complaints the decoction of it given in an injection evacuates
bile and sometimes blood, which affords great relief.

Commentary. The Centaurea Centaurium, L., and the Comm.
Erythrcea Centaurium, Pers., would appear to be the greater ' *
and less centaury of the ancients. See Parkinson, Sprengel,
and the other commentators on Dioscorides. Pliny describes
three sorts, but would seem to have fallen into a mistake as
to the meaning of a passage in Theophrastus. See Harduin
ad Plinii H. N. xxv, 32, and Parkinson (Theatre of Plants,
273.) Dioscorides recommends the greater centaury in the
same cases as our author, who abridges him and Galen under
this head. He says very particularly of it, that it produces
menstruation, and expels the foetus when applied in the form
of a collyrium (tent) to the vagina, (iii, 6.) The Arabians
give it the same characters as their Grecian masters. See
A^^cenna (ii, 2, 158), Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 176), and Sera-
pion (c. 202.) Serapion and Mesne likewise recommend the
lesser centaury in sciatica, either in a potion to the amount
of two drachms, or in a clyster to the amount of three
ounces, with oil of sesame. Galen, has a Avliole book on
the virtues of the lesser centaury, in which there is a pre-
scription for an extract of it. The ancients had great faith
in it for the cure of hydrophobia. According to Galen,

166 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. (who it may well be supposed had devoted great attention to
" ' ' the study of its virtues), it is possessed of bitterness with some
astringeucy, and is most especially excellent as a deobstruent
in obstructions of the hver and scirrhus of the spleen. He
mentions that some gave it in a potion for nervous aftections,
and that in a clvster it relieves sciatica bv occasionins: evacua-
tions of bile. He also recommends it strongly in the form of
a fomentation to ill-conditioned and obstinate ulcers. The
lesser centaury {Erythraa Centaurium, Persoon) still continues
to hold a place in our Dispensatory, but, as Dr. Pereira re-
marks, " is rarely nsed by medical practitioners ; yet it might
be used as an indigenous substitute for gentian." (Materia
Medica, 809.) In the days of Quincy it retained all its ancient
characters. (Engl. Dispens. 103.) Galen's tract on it must
hare been in great repute anciently, since Serapion has given
a translation of the whole of it. It is retained in the modern
Greek Pharmacopceia.

K, ' \
iOOQ aiyoQ,

Cornu Capri, Goatshorn, and K. t\u(f)ov, Cornu Cervi, Harts-
horn, cleanse the teeth when burnt, and restrain the progress of
foul ulcers. The hart's horn, when pulverised and then
applied, fastens loose teeth ; when washed after burning, it
relieves dysentery, cseliac affection, spitting of blood, and
jaundice, when given to the amount of two spoonfuls. It is
also mixed up with ophthalmic remedies. The horn of a bull,
when taken in water, restrains hemorrhages.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion speak of
" * ' the medicinal properties of horn in nearly the same terms as
our author. We need scarcely say that the stag's or hart's
horn has been much used in modern times for the preparation
of ammonia, which is hence called the spirit of hartshorn.
Dioscorides recommends hartshorn when burnt until it become
white, and cleaned like calamine, in aflections of the eves.
It will now be readily understood, that when so treated it is
reduced to a phosphate of lime. Avicenna further prescribes
it for remoA-ing the swelling of dropsy ; and, hke Dioscorides,
he recommends it in jaundice, (ii, 2, 178.) We would remark,
in conclusion, that it was the red deer which fui-uished the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 1(37

medicinal liartshorn of tlie ancients, but that the moderns Comm.
have commonly used the horns of the fallow-deer instead. ' '
See Hill's Materia Medica (835.)

Cerasia, Cherries ■ the sweet are more laxative, the austere
more stomachic, but the acid agree best with pituitous and
foul stomachs, owing to their being incisive. The gum of the
tree smoothes asperities of the trachea, and relieves calculous
affections when drunk with wine.

Commentary. This unquestionably is the Prunus Cerasus, Comm.
L. We have given some account of cherries in the portion
of our work devoted to ancient dietetics. Galen, in his work
on Simples, treats of them with great precision ; he remarks
that in some the austere quality, in some the sweet, and in
others the acid prevails, and that when unripe the sour is pre-
dominant. In fact, our author's account of them is manifestly
abridged from Galen. Aetius and the other authorities, in
like manner, copy from Galen. See also Serapion (c. 145.)

KepoTwi'ta,

Ceratonia, Carob-tree, and the fruit of it {siliqucB) are pos-
sessed of desiccant and astringent powers, with a certain share
of sweetness.

Commentary. It is unquestionably the Ceratonia Siliqua, L., Comm.
or Carob-tree. We have given some account of it among the
articles of food in Book I. All the other authorities on the
Materia Medica give it nearly the same characters as our
author. The writer who is fullest on this head is Avicenna,
who treats of it under the name of Carob, i. e. Siliqua. (ii, 2,
193.) See also Serapion (c. 135), and Ilhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 366.) Our modern herbalists treat of it in nearly the same
terms as the ancients. See Parkinson ('236.) It is still used
on the Continent and in Asia as an inferior article of food,
and holds a place in the modern Greek Pharmacopojia.

Capita, Heads ; those of pickled herrings, when burnt, ac-
(juire a desiccative power without being very acrid. They
therefore relieve fissures about the anus, and chronic cases of

168 SIMPLES. [book vii.

indurated uvida. The entire head of the anchovy (sinaris),
when burnt, is useful in alopecia when applied with bear's
grease. The burnt head of a mouse when applied with honey
does the same thing. The dried head of the kite without its
feathers, when drunk in water to as great an amount as can
be lifted with three fingers, relieves gouty affections. They
say that the head of a lizard extracts sharp-pointed things,
and removes myrmecia, acrochordon, and clavus.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author^s account of the medicinal pro-
perties of Heads is taken from Galen. See also Aetius and
Serapion. Dioscorides treats of the different articles sepa-
rately, and not under a general head like Galen and his suc-
cessors. (See ii, 31, 32, &c.) The Arabians merely copy from
Dioscorides and Galen, especially the latter. See in particular
Serapion (c. 571.)

Galla, Gall; that sort called Omphacitis is a very sour
medicine, and hence it proves desiccant, repels defluxions,
contracts and astringes relaxed and debilitated parts. It
agrees also with all cases of defluxion. It is to be placed in
the third rank of desiccants, and the second of refrigerants.
The other sort, which is yellow, porous, and large, is desic-
cant indeed, but less so than the other, inasmuch as it is
deficient in astringency. In a decoction it relieves inflam-
mations of the fundament and prolapsus aui when burnt.
Extinguished in vinegar they become styptic.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides describes two species of galls, of
" ' ' which the better kind, called omphacitis, consisted of small,
hard, and solid pieces without perforations, and is not to be
confounded with the o/.i(paKtg, or cupula of the acorn, mentioned
by Paulus. (iii, 6.2.) See also Theophrastus (Hist. Plant,
iii, 9), Pliny (H. N. xvi, 9), and Serapion (De Simpl. c. 237.)
Galls were much used by the ancient physicians in all cases
requiring powerful astringents. According to Dr. Hill, the
Gallae omphacita of the ancients were the same as the Aleppo
galls now in use, and the other kind, sometimes called Onocicce,
the same as the European. Dioscorides describes the gall
as the fruit of the oak, an error Avhich is to be found, as Dr.
Pereira remai'ks, in the works of comparatively recent writers.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 1G9

We need scarcely say that the excrescence is now well ascer- Comm.
tained to be the production of a hymcnopterous insect on the ' ' '
Quercus infedoria. Dioscorides treats largely of the cases in
which galls are applicable, concluding with the remark that
their use is indicated whenever it is wished to astringe, re-
strain, or dry. (ii, 146.) Our author's description of their
medicinal properties is mostly taken from Galen. Nearly the
same may be said of Aetius and Oribasius. The Arabians, in
treating of them, borrow all the information which they give
from the Greeks. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 308),
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 234), Serapion (c. 98.)

KrjTTta,

Cepea, resembles the Purslain. The leaves of it in an in-
fusion relieve scabious bladder when drunk ; and the root of
it, when taken in a draught with rock asparagus, relieves
strangurv from obstruction.

Commentary. Little is known for certain of this herb ; but Comm.
the most probable conjecture that has been made regarding it ' ^
is, that it is the Sedum Cepcea, L. Our author's account of it
is taken literally from Dioscorides. Galen does not treat of it,
nor have we been able to trace it out in the INIateria Medica
of the Arabians. Our old herbalists treat of it very hesitat-
ingly under the head of brooklime. See Gerard and Parkinson.

Cera, Wax, being of a moderate temperament, forms the
basis of many other medicines. By itself it is shghtly deter-
gent, and has some discuticnt and calefacient powers.

CoMMENTAiiY. This article is so well known that it requires Comm.
no illustration. Dioscorides describes very circumstantially ' • '
the process for bleaching wax and making it white. It was
done with salt water and natron in a manner quite different
from the process now pursued for this purpose, (ii, 105.) The
Arabians treat fully of it, but without making any addition of
much importance. See in particular Serapion (c. 10) and
Avicenna (ii, 2, 402.) Avicenna says that wax, when appHed
to the Avound inflicted by a poisoned arrow, prevents it from
being followed by any bad effects. He recommends it as an
expectorant in diseases of the chest, l)oth in a hniment and in

170 SIMPLES. [book vit.

CoMM. a potion. One of Serapion^s authorities, Abugerig, in like
' ' ' manner, recommends it in diseases of tlie cliest.

Buccinee (a species of sliell-fish) ; their shell when burnt is
possessed of sufficiently desiccative powers without pungency,
they therefore agree with malignant ulcers, and are to be
used for putrid ulcers with vinegar, wine, or os.ymel. Tliat part
of them which is as it were their flesh when alive, if boiled in
oil, renders the oil an useful injection for reheWng earache.
CoMM. Commentary. Sprengel makes them to be the Buccina
' • ' Harpa and Lajnllus. They are noticed among the articles of
food in the ninety-first section of the First Book. Dioscorides
correctly remarks that a species of quicklime is got from their
shells. He recommends it as a dentifrice, and as an appli-
cation to burns, (ii, 5.) Galen very properly inculcates the
necessity of getting them finely levigated before apphdng them
to sores. Avicenna treats of the buccina along with other
Crustacea under one head. His information is almost entirely
borrowed from Dioscorides and Galen, (ii, 2, 529.) See also
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 224.)

Ki'/ci,
Ricinus, Palma Christi ; its fruit, which is also purgati\ e,
has detergent and discutient properties, and so also has its leaf,
but weaker. We have already spoken of its oil.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be no doubt that the k'iki or Kporwi'
" ' ' was the Ricinus communis, the Castor-oil plant, or Palma
Christi. It is mentioned by Herodotus (Euterpe, 94) and in
several passages of the Hippocratic treatises. See fficonom.
Hippocrat. (218.) It does not occur, however, in the works of
Celsus. Dioscorides informs us that it is called croton, from
its resemblance to the dog-tick, and it is worthy of observation
that both the plant and the dog-tick bear the name of Ricinus
in Latin. See Phny (H. N. xi, 34, and xv, 7.) Dioscorides
says that the oil is used for lamps and plasters, and also as a
purgative and emetic ; but that it is a very loathsome and
harsh medicine when administered internally. He further
mentions the seeds as being used in cutaneous diseases, and
the leaves in diseases of the eyes (iv, 141.) Galen notices it

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 171

but very briefly as a purgative lia\ing detergent and discti- Comm.
tient powers. Aetius and Oribasius appear to have over- ' ' '
looked it. INIesue commends it as a purgative in cases of colic
attended -witli flatulence. He says it produces vomiting and
painful dejection of tlie bowels, but that its operation occasions
a discharge of phlegm and bile, which often proves eff'ectual in
diseases of the joints. (De Simpl. 28.) He calls it by the
names of Albemesuch, Granum regiim, and Kei^va. Avicenna
says of the oil, that it is laxative, and is a good application to
scabies and other cutaneous diseases, (ii, 2, 523.) It is deserving
of remark that the Grana reyia of Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 339),
are applicable to the Lathyris, and not to the Cici. Indeed Mesue
jumbles together his description of these two substances. (1. c.)
We have mentioned already that the Oleum Cicinum or Castor-
oil, was used as a purgative by the ancient physicians. Dr. Hill
says of it, "the ancients obtained an oil by expression, and also
by boiling, from the seeds ; they called it Oleum Cicinum ; they
used it, for burning in their lamps, and in some of their oint-
ments and plasters. Dioscorides commends it internally
against worms ; and Piso tells us that it is sometimes used in
the same manner in the Brazils, with success."

Kii'i'opaptc,

Cinnabaris, Satic/uis Draconis, is possessed of moderately
acrid powers with some astringency.

Commentary. We must refer to what we have stated in Comai.
another work, which we have already often quoted, for the
general literature of this subject. It will be sufficient in this
place to state that the substance here treated of under the
name of Cinnabaris is indisputably the Sanguis Draconis, or
concrete juice of the Dracoena Draco. This is ob^^ous from
Dioscoi'ides's description of it, who says that it is of a deep
colour, and hence some had thought it the blood of the
dragon, (v, 109.) See further, Pliny (H. N. xxxiii, 38), and
the very interesting note of Harduin, in Avhich the origin of
the confusion of the dragon's blood with cinnabar is fully ex-
[jlained. Serapion treats of the Sanguis Draconis as the pro-
duction of a tree, and quotes a description of it from
Dioscorides and Galen. What vegetable substance in their
Mat. Med. Serapion refers to, we are at a loss to decide.

172 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. One of his authorities, Constantinus, calls it the juice of a
" ' plant^ possessed of styptic powers, and therefore used as an as-
tringent both internally as a suppository, and externally when
so applied. (De Simpl. 341.) AAdcenna recommends it simi-
larly, but gives no description of it. (ii, 2, 6.27.) It is to be
borne in mind that besides the vegetable cinnabar, the ancients
described two other substances under this name, viz., the
native mineral cinnabar or sulphuret of quicksilver, and a
factitious cinnabar, which was their Sal Atticum. See Hill
(Mat. Med. 60), and Geoffroy (215.) The dragon's blood is
retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia, where it is
set down as the product of the Calamus Draco.

Ku'J'O^iW/iOl',

Cinnamomum^ Cinnamon, is composed of extremely subtile
parts, yet is not extremely heating, but only in the third de-
gree. But of those in the same rank of calefacients none is
so desiccative owing to the tenuity of its parts. The cinna-
momis is a sort of weak cinnamon ; but some call it pseudo-
cinnamomum.
CoMM. Commentary. Sprengel and Dierbach acknowledge it as
" ' ' the Laurus Cinnamomiis. "We have stated, however, under
Cassia that Stackhouse is of opinion that the ancients were
unacquainted with our Laurus C'mnamomus ; but we see no
good grounds for this opinion. We shall give the words of
Sprengel : " Cassia lignea nostratum et cassia cinnaraomea
eadem esse \identur, unde et cassiam ipsam ex eadem arbore
provenire, quse cinnamomum largiatur, veteres jam statuerunt.^^
(ad Dioscor. i, 13.) Dioscorides recommends cinnamon in uterine
affections, that is to say, for promoting the flow of the menses
and for the expulsion of the foetus. We need scarcely men-
tion that this use of it has been revived of late. He also holds
it to be alexipharmic, recommends it in coughs, dropsies, and
diseases of the kidneys and bladder ; in complaints of the eyes,
and in the formation of elegant ointments ; in short, he adds,
it is a medicine much in use. (i, 13.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities give its medicinal characters in more gene-
ral terms. The Arabians treat of it at great length, and more
especially Aviceuna, who recommends it in the same cases as
Dioscorides, namely, as a diuretic, eraraenagogue, and alexi-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 173

pharmic medicine^ and also as a stomachic and deobstrucnt in Comm.
congestion of the liver. He also holds it to be cordial and
expectorant, (ii, 2, 124.) Serapion professes to borrow his ac-
count of cinnamon from Dioscorides and Galen ; but the
extract which he gives from the latter, is not to be found in
his works as they now exist. In it cinnamon is commended
as being an aromatic medicine, applicable in complaints of the
stomach and liver, in affections of the eyes, and as an
emmenagogue and diuretic. (De Simpl. 266.) Rhases copies
from Dioscorides, Galen, and our author. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 213.)

KtpKfO,

Circea, Enchanter's Nightshade ; its root, which is desiccative
and fragrant, when drunk with wine, cleanses the uterus.
Its fruit, when taken in gruel, promotes the formation of milk.

Commentary. The commentators are much divided re- Comm.
specting it. Sprengel inclines to the Cynanchus niger. Lobelius
took it to be the Solanicm Dulcamara. One thing is certain,
that it was quite different from any known species of the
modern genus Circaea. See Parkinson (351.) Both Galen
and our author, in treating of it, borrow from Dioscorides, the
former of these professedly. We have not been able to detect
it in the Mat. Med. of the Arabians.

Ktcrar;pt<;,

Pumex, the Pumice-stone, is detergent, and more particularly
of the teeth, not only in power, but also by its asperity. It is
also joined to the medicines used for the incarnation of ulcers,
and to the abstergent plasters applied to the skin. If burnt,
its parts became finer, but it is then pungent ; but if washed
it lays aside its pungency.

Commentary. There can be no doubt that it was Pumice. Comm.
Pumice, according to the latest analysis, is found to contain
silica, argil, magnesia, soda, oxyd of manganese, and some
water. For an account of it, see Pliny (H. N. xxxvi, 42.) He
recommends it in diseases of the eyes. It appears evident,
however, that he had copied from his contemporary, to wliom
he is so frequently indebted, we mean Dioscorides, who gives
a similar description of pumice, and also recommends it in
diseases of the eyes, more especially in opacity of the cornea.

174 SIMPLES. [book VI] .

CoMM. and likewise as an ingredient in applications to sores, and as a
' ' dentifrice, (v, 124^.) Galen, after some preliminary discussion
whether pumice be a metal, a stone^ or an earth, proceeds to
state its medicinal properties, in which he agrees with
Dioscorides, most especially commending it as a dentifrice.
(De Simpl. ix.) We may just mention in this place that
modern authorities do not think so highly of this substance as
a dentifrice. See Jameson's ' Mineral.^ (i, 333.) The Arabians
under this head merely copy from Dioscorides and Galen. See
in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 417.) Pumice anciently
was used for polishing the leather with which books were
bound. (Catullus, Epig. i.) Theophrastus (De Lapidibus),
states that pumice is formed by the action of ftre ; and M.
Dolomieu suspects that it is a viti'ified granite or gneiss. The
pumice, for some time past, has ceased to hold a place in our
Dispensatory. Neither is it to be found in the modern Greek
Phai'macopoeia.

KttTTOc h Ktoaaoog,
Cistus, Rock-rose ; it is an astringent shrub, and of gently
cooling powers. Its leaves and shoots are so desiccative as to
agglutinate wounds ; but the flowers are of a more drying
natm'e, being about the second degree, and hence when drunk
they cure dysenteries and all kind of fluxes. Externally they
relieve putrid ulcers.
CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. Stackhousc marks it simply as the Cistus, L.,
' • ' called by ^Miller the Rock-rose (Index to Theophrastus.)
Woodville calls it the C. Creficus (Medical Botany.) Dioscorides
describes two species of it, which probably ai'e the C. salvifo-
lius and C. villosus. Galen particularly commends the for-
mer in uterine diseases. He also treats under this name of
a much more celebrated species of the cistus, namely, the
Ladaniferiis, of which we will have to give some account
under LaSavof. Aetius and Oribasius are the copyists of Galen.
The Arabians treat separately of the Cistus and Ladanum,
recommending the former as a powerful astringent, both in
external ulcers and in those of the intestines and womb.
Avicenna speaks favorably of it in deafness and other afi'ec-
tions of the ear. (ii, 2, 111.) Serapion would appear to have con-
founded it with the Kiaaoq (ivy) ; or at least he has given a

SECT. HI.] SIMPLES. 175

very confused account of it in his chapter on the Ivy. (De Comm.
Simpl. 41, 42.) Rhases does not appear to notice it separately ' ' '
from the Landanum (Ladanmn) (Cont. 1. ult. iii, 67.) The
two species of cistus treated of under this head have long
ceased to hold a place in our modern Dispensatories.

Hedera, Ivy, is composed of opposite po'wers, for it is astrin-
gent and cooling, and acrid and hot ; consisting of a watery
and tepid ingredient when green. Its leaves, when boiled with
wine, are agglutinative of wounds and relieve burns and splenic
affections. Its juice is an errhine, and cures chronic defluxions
from the ear. Its tears, being more acrid, kill lice and act as
a depilatory.

Commentary. We need have no hesitation in referring it Comm.
with the best authorities to the Heclera Helix, L. Dioscorides
describes three varieties of it, the white, the black, and the
helix ; but it is easy to see that they are all varieties of the
same species. His distinctions, however, occasioned great
trouble and confusion both to his Arabian copyists and to the
modern herbalists. See Serapion (De Simpl. 41), and
Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 680), and Gerard (History of
Plants, 857.) Our author^s account of its medicinal properties
is taken from Galen. The tears of it, mentioned by Dioscorides
and our author, were evidently its resin, now generally known
by the name of gum ivy. All the ancient writers recommend
it for thinning the hair and killing lice.

Citrium, Citron, called also Malum INIedicum ; its middle
part is acid or devoid of qualities ; but the part in which the
seed is contained belongs to the third rank of cooling and
desiccative medicines. The bark is desiccative in the second
degree, but not cooling, for it is acrid. Its flesh engenders
thick chyme, is phlegmatic and cold. Its seed is discutient
and desiccative in the second degree ; and the leaves of the
tree are possessed of desiccative and discutient powers.

Commentary. Without doubt, as Sprengcl states, it is the Comm.
Malus Medica, L., or Citron. INIost of the commentators on ' ''
Virgil agree that it is his "felix malum" (Gcorg. ii, 127.) Dr.

176 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Paris remarks that it probably deserves the praises bestowed
' * * on it by him as an antidote to poisons (Pharmacol. 254) ;
and on this head there is a very interesting dispute between
the celebrated Fr. Hoffmann and Moses Charras, the famous
French authority on the Pharmacopceia. See Pharm. (ii,
39.) According to Macrobius, it is the Ovov of Homer, who
mentions it in the following line :

Ovov dva vijffov oSiodn. — Odyss. v.

Pliny, however, is not of this opinion (H. N. xiii, 16.) Our
author copies closely from Galen. Dioscorides's account of its
medicinal properties is far more precise and interesting.
Citrons, he says, when drunk with wine, counteract the ope-
ration of deadly poisons, and loosen the belly ; the decoction is
a gargle for occasioning sweetness of the breath ; its juice is
much used by women labouring under pica (see Book I, 1, of
this work), and then seeds seem to preserve clothes in a chest
from being moth-eaten, (i, 166.) The Arabians treat very
fully of the medicinal properties of the citron. See Serapion
(De Simpl. i, 1), Avicenna (ii, 2, 116), and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 219.) They all agree that its seed is alexipharmic, both
when taken in hot water, and when the juice is applied to a
poisoned wound. See particularly Avicenna (De Med. Cord, ii.)
They also hold that it is an excellent cordial and stomachic ;
that it stops bilious purgings, fluxes, and vomiting ; and that
it dispels sorrow. They hold, however, that it is preju-
dicial to the lungs and nerves. They speak highly of the oil
of citrons in paralysis and other affections of the nerves. We
need scarcely remark that this preparation has been much cele-
brated in modern times (see Charras, 1. c), and is still retained
in om' Pharmacopoeia. See Pereira, 1235.

Ki ,t \

Cichorium, Succory, is, as it were, a wild endive, being cool-
ing and desiccant in the first degree. It has also some
astringenc}^, and hence it agrees with hepatic dysenteries.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Cichorium Intybus. We have
" ' ' treated of it among the pot-herbs in the First Book. It occurs
in the Flora Hippocratica. Dioscorides recommends both the
garden and the wild succory as being astringent, cooling, and

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 177

stomachic, in various cases, both internally and externally, for Comm.
binding the bowels in dysentery, as a cataplasm in cardiac af- " *
fection, and as a remedy for gout and ophthalmy. (ii, 159.)
Celsus also ranks the intybus and ambubeia, which are the
wild and garden succory, with astringents, (ii, 30.) Galen and
the other Greek authorities give it the same general characters.
The Arabians treat of the seris and intybus at greater length,
and seem to confound the latter, or endive, with the taraxacon
(Leontodou taraxacum?). See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2,
229, 683.) He recommends the latter most particularly as a
deobstruent in obstructions of the liver and other viscera; he
speaks favorably of it as a plaster in palpitations of the heart,
and as a gargle along with Cassia fistula in inflammations of
the throat. All the Arabians recommend both species as
antidotes to the bites of venomous animals. See Avicenna
(1. c), Serapion (c. 143), and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 266.) The
wild succory (Cichorium Intybus) is still sometimes employed
in medicine. Dr. Pereira says, " the medicinal properties of
Cichorium Intybus are analogous to those of Taraxacum Dens-
leonis." (jNIat. Med. 698.) It occurs in the modem Greek
Pharmacopoeia.

Clematis, Virgin' s-boioer, (called also Myrsonoides, Daph-
noides, and Polygonoides,) has twigs as long as the thickness
of a May -rush, (holoschsenus,) and petals like the bay, and is
of a desiccant nature ; it, therefore, stops diarrhoeas, dysen-
teries, and pains of the teeth, and is useful for the bites of
venomous animals. The other species of clematis twines
around trees like ivy, being of an acrid and caustic nature. Its
fruit, when drunk with water, evacuates bile and phlegm
downwards ; and its leaves in a cataplasm, remove leprosy.

Commentary, The former species, distinguished by the Comm.
synonyme of Daphnoides, is the clematis described by ' '
Dioscorides (iv, 179), and is the second species of Galen, who
expresses himself contemptuously of Pamphilus for con-
founding the two species together. It is clearly a species of
Clematis, either the vitalba or cirrhosa. All agree in recom-
mending it as a safe astringent. The other species described
by Dioscorides (iv, 7), and wliich is the former species of

III. 12

178 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Galen, may be decidedly determined to be either the Vinca
' ' ' major or minor. It, according to Galen, is possessed of acrid
and caustic poAvers. The Arabians v/ould appear not to dis-
tinguish properly the clematis from the hedera. See Serapion
(c. 41), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 169.) The modern Greek Phar-
macoposia contains the C. erecta.

KXtVOTTOOlOl',

Clinopodium, Field Basil, is possessed of heating and desic-
cative powers, not caustic however, but of the third degree.
CoMM. Commentary. It may with considerable confidence be set
" * ' down as being the Chnopodium vulgare, although doubts have
been started on this head. See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 23),
and Sprengel (Ad Dioscorid.) Our author follows Galen very
closely. Dioscorides represents it to be diuretic and eramena-
gogue (iii, 99.) We have not been able to discover any traces
of it in the Mat. Med. of the Ai'abians, nor in Hippocrates.

Cnicus, Bastard Saffron ; its seed is used only for purgings,
but if applied externally it belongs to the third order of cale-
facients.
CoMM. Commentary. The preponderance of authority is decidedly
" ' ' in favour of its being the Carthamus tinctorius, a plant which
held a place in our Dispensatory with its ancient characters
down to recent date. (See Quiucy, 167.) Dioscorides men-
tions of it that it is used as a potherb, and as a medicine for
opening the bowels. Galen gives it exactly the same charac-
ter as our author. The Arabians give rather a confused
account of it by treating of it along with AtractyUs, which
they held to be the wild cnicus. See in particular Avicenna
(ii, 2, 159.) All the Arabians hold that it is not only laxa-
tive, but also powerfully alexipharmic. They call it Kartam or
Cartamus. See further Serapion (c. 202), and Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. iii, 46.)

KoyyuXta,
Conchy Ii a ; their powers resemble those of the buccinse.
CoMM. Commentary. This name was applied to various Testacea,
" ' ' or Shell-fish. See Harduin (Ad Plinii H. N. ix, 60) ; Athensei

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 179

Deipnos, iii ; Aristotle, H. A. v, 14 ; and Gesner, De Aquat. Comm.
Oysters are frequently called by this name, as in the following ' • '
lines of Petronius Arbiter :

Lucrinis
Eruta littoribus vendunt Conchylia, csenis
Ut renovent per damna famem. — Satyricon.

Dioscorides does not treat of this article, at least, under this
name. The Arabians would appear to have identified them
wdth the Cochlece. See in particular Serapion (c. 434.)

KoiXio,

Venter, the Belly of the cormorant, either when boiled,
fresh, or dried, is said to be stomachic if eaten ; and in like
manner, the inner coat of the stomach of hens when dried and
taken in a draught. But Galen says, that he found upon
trial both these statements false. Dioscorides relates that the
stomach of a wood-pigeon, if drunk, gradually makes stones be
expelled by urine. The stomach of a weasel, when drunk, is
a preservative against all poisonous animals.

Commentary. Properly speaking the Stomach. Our au- Comm.
thor, as he acknowledges, borrows from Galen and Dioscorides. ' * '
Serapion repeats the same characters of this article upon the
authority of Dioscorides. (c. 469.) We may be allowed to
mention that the inner membrane of the crop of a fowl is still
a popular remedy for indigestion in the north of Scotland.

KoKKOC Kv'icioq,

Granum Gnidium, is the fruit of the Thymelaea and not of
the Chamelsea as some have supposed. Being possessed of
acrid and caustic powers, when drunk, it purges water down-
wards.

Commentary. See under Gu/u'Aam. All the authorities, Comm.
from Hipprocrates downwards, describe it as an acrid purga- ' ' '
tive. Dr. Pereira says, " Daphne Gnidium is the Thymelcea of
Dioscorides, Avliose fruit is the kokkoq kvi^ioq, or Gnidian-bei'ry,
used by Hippocrates. Its properties are similar to those of D.
Mezereum." (Mat. Med. 807.) Dioscorides gives a full de-
scription of the thymelsea, and states, with excellent precision,
its operation on the animal economy. He says it purges.

ISO SIMPLES. [BOOK VII.

CoMM. bringing away a watery discharge, and kills the foetus in utero
" ' ' when applied on a pessary, (iv, 170.) Galen and Aetius and
Oribasius state its characters in brief terms, like our author.
It would appear, in fact, to have been little used in medicine.
The Arabians confound the thymelsea, chamelcea, and chameleon
together, so that there is great difficulty in making out what
were theii' exact views on the Thymelacece. Indeed, the genera
of this tribe of plants are still with difficulty distinguished from
one another. See Lindley^s Vegetable Kingdom, 530.

Ko/cKOf: l3a(piK6g,
Granum tinctorium, is desiccative without pungency. It
agiTCs, therefore, with large wounds and wounds of the nerves
when triturated Avith vinegar or oxymel.
CoMM. Commentary. It is Vermilion or Scarlet grain, being the
' "^ ' product of a little hemopterous insect called kermes or Coccus
ilicis. See Theophrastus (H. P. iii, 16), and Pliny (H. N.
xvi, 12.) It was anciently used in dyeing, but is now super-
seded by the cochineal. An interesting account of kermes
and cochineal is given by Beckmann. (History of Inventions.)
Dioscorides and the other authorities, like Paulus, commend
it as a vulnerary medicine, especially in wounds of the nerves.
The Arabians, in treating of the kermes, merely repeat what
Dioscorides and Galen had written on this head. See in par-
ticular Serapion (De Simpl. 321) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 718) ;
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 740.)

KoK/cOjUJ)Xea,
Prunus, the Plum ; its fruit loosens the belly, if fresh, in a
greater degree, or if dried, in a smaller. The decoction of it
in gargles, cures inflammations about the uvula. The gum of
the ti'ee has the powers of an incisive and attenuate substance,
so that some relate that when drunk with wine it proves
lithontriptic. With nnegar it is said to cure the lichen of
childi'en. The fruit of the wild plums is manifestly astringent,
and constipates the belly. This plant in Asia is called
Pnminum. The dried garden plums, now called damascenes,
appear to be similar, as Galen says.
CoMM. Commentary. Without doubt it is the Prunus insiticia or
Bullace tree, a well known species of plum. The Damask-plums

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 181

are much celebrated by ancient authors. We have treated of Comm.
phinis as an article of food in the First Book. Pliny and " ' '
jNIarcellus Empiricus recommend them particularly in diseases
of the tonsils and gums ; but, indeed, all the ancient autho-
rities prescribe them as astringents in such cases. There is a
slight difference of opinion between Dioscorides and Galen
regarding the virtues of the plum. Dioscorides says, " the fruit
is esculent, but bad for the stomach, and loosens the bowels.
But the dried fruit of the Syrian plums, and more especially those
which grow about Damascus (damascenes ?), are stomachic and
astringent of the bowels." Galen says, " the fruit of the plum
tree loosens the bowels, the fresh in a greater degree and the
dried in a less. I know not how it is that Dioscorides says
that the dried damask-plums bind the bowels, for even these
manifestly loosen, but in a less degree than the Spanish; for
the damask are more astringent, and the Spanish more sweet,
&c." (De Simpl. vii.) This slight difference created a keen
controversy in modern times between Brasavolus, who impugns,
and ]Matthiolus, who defends the strictures of Galen. To us it
appears that the only mistake committed by Dioscorides con-
sists in stating his views too succinctly. He, no doubt, never
meant to deny that the damask-plums have a certain purgative
faculty mixed up with astringency, like plums in general.
Galenas language is more precise, but we do not see that
there is much real difference between his views and those
of Dioscorides. The Arabians gravely state this mighty con-
troversy between the two ancient sages, but scarcely pretend
" tantas componere lites." See Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 565) ;
Avicenna (ii, 2, 532) ; and Serapion (c. 139.) One of E-hases's
authorities says of plums, that they moisten the stomach and
loosen the belly, purging yellow bile. Another of them,
named Chuz, says the water of them is emmenagogue, and
their gum, mixed with sugar, cures impetigo. Avicenna
quotes this opinion with approbation. All agree that they
are lithontriptic.

KoXXn,
Gluten, Glue ; that prepared from the sirailago and pollen
is of an emplastic and digestive nature.

182 SIMPLES. [book VII

CoMM. Commentary. Gluten or Paste. Dioscorides mentions that
' ' ' tlie best kind is prepared from the hides of bulls in Rhodes.'
Galen makes mention of another kind prepared from flour, and
used in binding books, (De Simpl. vii.) See further, Pliny
(H. N. xiii, 26.) The Arabians, in treating of it, derive
most of their information from the Greeks. See Serapion
(c. 138) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 202) ; and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 336.) They treat of the ichthjocolla under this head.

KoXoKUl'0»?,

Cueurbita, the Gourd, is of a humid and cold temperament
in the second degree. Hence, when applied entire in a cata-
plasm, it cools hot inflammations.
CoMM. Commentary. We have stated the difiiculty of determin-
' ' ' ing this article in the chapter of the First Book on the summer
fruits. It would appear to be sometimes put for the Cucumis
sativus or Cucumber, and sometimes for the Cueurbita or Gourd.
About the species, however, there is some doubt. On its
medicinal properties, besides the medical authorities, see
Geopon. (xii, 19.) Dioscorides recommends it raw, as a cool-
ing application for various swellings and apostemes ; also for
the siriasis of infancy (See Book I, 13), for inflammations of the
eyes, and those of gout iu like manner. He also speaks of it
as being useful in earache and heat of the stomach. He states
that it is laxative of the bowels; and for this purpose directs
a raw gourd to be hollowed out, and wine having been poured
into it, it is to be exposed for a time to the heat of the sun,
when it Mill become gently laxative, (ii, 161.) Galen, Aetius,
and others give it much the same characters as our author.
The Arabians, as usual, borrow freely from the Greeks without
making any addition of much consequence. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 175) ; Serapion (c. 248) ; and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
1, 344.) One of Serapion^s authorities, called Masarugie,
says of the gourd, that when it is surrounded with paste and
roasted, the water thus squeezed out of it is beneficial in acute
diseases and cough, that it quenches thirst, and when taken
Avith sugar gently opens the bowels. Another of them, Habix,
gives nearly the same account of it. Another of them says of
its seed, that it is diuretic, and softens the belly. In modern

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 183

times the seeds of gourd were formerly held as one of the four Comm.
greater cold seeds. See Charras (Roy. Pharm. 66) and Quincv " '
(p. 197.)

Cucurbita sylvestris, Colocynth, is possessed of a strong
purgative power. If the juice of it, while in a green state, be
rubbed into the part, it relieves ischiatic disease.

Commentary. There can be no doubt that it is the Comm.
Cucumis Colocynthis, Coloquintida, or Bitter Gourd. It was ' ''
used in medicine from the earliest times, being the KoXoKvvQr]
aypia of Hippocrates (De Mulieb. 621, ed. Foes), as Galen has
explained. It does not occur, however, in the works of Celsus.
Dioscorides gives an excellent account of it, recommending it
as a powerful phlegmagogue and cholagogue, both when given
by the mouth and in clysters; and as a gargle in toothache.
He says it kills the foetus in utero when applied on a pessary,
(iv, 175.) Our author^s account of it is copied from Galen.
The Arabians treat of it more fully. See Avicenna (ii^ 2, 127);
Rhases (Cout. 1. ult. i, 222) ; Serapion (c. 272) ; Mesne (De
Simpl. 4) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 421) ; and Ebn Baithar (i^ 331.)
Avicenna is very precise in giving directions for the prepara-
tion of the medicine. His statement of its medicinal properties
is so long that we cannot find room for it. He says it evacu-
ates phlegm, bile, and perhaps blood from the intestines ; that it
is useful in dropsy, and that it is alexipharmic, in proof of w hicli
he refers to the report of a case of a person who had been stung
by scorpions, and was immediately cured by it. But of all the
authorities, jNIesue is, perhaps, the one who treats of it most
elaborately : he recommends it as purging phlegm and yellow
bile, in cephaltca, hemicrania, epilepsy, apoplexy, vertigo, de-
fiuxion in the eyes, cold gout, and other affections of the
joints ; asthma, chronic cough, dyspnoea, &c. But, he adds,
it is more especially useful in pituitous and flatulent colic, aud
in dropsy. For this purpose it may be administered by the
mouth, in clysters and in suppositories. Applied per vaglnum
it kills the fcEtus. He directs its bad efi'ects to be corrected
by means of mastich, tragacanth, &c. He forbids it to be
administered cither in great heat or cold. Averrhoes ranks it
with the strongest phlegmagogucs, and recommends that its
activity sliould be abated by almonds, tragacanth, fistics, &c.

184 SDIPLES. [BOOK VII.

CoMM. Ebn Baitliar treats of it at very great length. Serapion says
that, being a drastic purgative, it ought not to be given during
the heat of summer, or cold of winter ; for that, at these sea-
sons, Hippocrates had forbid to administer purgatives. Pliny
recommends it in injections for diseases of the intestines,
kidneys, and loins. He says that an embrocation of it with
oil cures pains of the spine and hip-joint, and is useful in
jaundice when followed by oxymel. (H. N. xx, 7, 8.) Marcellus,
the Empiric, says of it that it purges phlegm, yellow and
black bile, when given with oxymel. (c. 30.) Ruffus Ephesius
says of colocj^nth, that it purges phlegm and pure bile : in a
word, he adds, it is useful in asthma, pleurisy, chronic head-
ache, vertigo, and dimness of "vision. (De Med. Purg.)

Arbutus, the Arbute Tree, is of a sour quahty, both the tree
and its fruit, which is called memycoelon. It is hurtful to the
stomach, and occasions headache.
CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. Apuleius says " Comaron Grteci, Romani
* ' fragum vocant." It is the Arbutus Unedo or IVilcl Strawberry
Tree, which must not be confounded with the Fragaria vesca,
L., Angl., Wood Strawberry. It seems difficult to account for
its holding a place in the ancient Materia ^ledica, since all
the authorities, like Paulus, speak unfavorably of its medicinal
powers. See Dioscorides and Galen.

Gummi, Gum, is of a desiccative and emplastic nature, and
manifestly cm'es asperities (hoarseness?).
CoMM. Commentary. For an account of the ancient gums see
' ' ' Pliny (H. N. xiii, 20.) He says the best kind is got from the
Egyptian thorn or Acacia ; this must have been either the
Acacia vera, L., or Acacia Senegal. Galen delivers the medi-
cinal character of gum in the same terms as our author, and
the other Greek authorities do the same. Dioscorides recom-
mends the gimi of the acacia (gum-arabic ?) as possessing
emplastic powers, and for blunting acrid medicines when mixed
with them. He adds that, when mixed with the white of an
e^^, it prevents blisters from rising on burnt parts, (i, 133.)
The Ai'abians concm* in recommending gum-arabic as being

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 185

beneficial in hot coughs, in ulcers of the lungs, and for clear- Comm.
iner the voice ; thev also held it to be stomachic and thcriacal. ''"'' '
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 310) ; E-hases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 345) ;
and Serapion (c. 229.)

Koi'ia,

Lixivium, Lye ; the washings, as it were, of ashes are so
named. The most detergent and desiccative of all are those
made from the ashes of figs and of the spurges, so that they
are possessed of almost septic powers. If a little quicklime be
added to the ashes it renders the lye caustic, which is then
called protostactos, being mixed up principally with medicines
administered by injection. But the strongest of all is that
prepared from quicklime alone.

Commentary. We have given some account of the Lixi- Comm.
vial Ashes or Lyes of the ancients in the 9th section of Book YI.
They were all of them preparations of potass mixed up with
various impurities The term was applied not only to the
solution, but also to the dried cineres of the same. Even
quicklime is sometimes called by this name : /coi'i'a rj aaf^tcrrog.
(Schohastes in Theocrit. Idyll, i.) The Cinis lisivius of the
fig-tree is the one most frequently mentioned of them. See
Phny (H. N. xv, 18) ; Geopon. (v," 33) ; Dioscorides (i, 186) ;
Serapion (183) ; and A^dcenna (ii, 2, 188.) Avicenna recom-
mends the lye of the mezerion in quinsy and affections of the
eye. See also Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 214.) The protostactos
Avas a composition of potass and lime. (See Book YI, s. 9.)
On the alkalies or Cineres lixivii of the ancients, see further,
Dutens (Decouvertes attrib. aux Modern. 187.)

Conyza, Fleabane ; both species of it are desiccant and cale-
facient in the third degree. Hence, even the oil in which it
is boiled stops periodical rigors ; and the flowers have similar
powers. The decoction of them promotes menstruation, and
expels the foetus. That which grows in moist situations is
more fetid and has weaker powers.

Commentary. There is considerable difficulty in deter- Comm.
mining exactly the conyzai of the ancients. See Parkinson
(Theatre of Plants, i, 41), and Spreugcl (Ad Dioscor. iii, 126.)

186 SIMPLES. [bookvii-

CoMM. The preponderance of authority seems to lead to the conclu-
" ' ' sion that they all were species of Inula, namely, the greater
/. viscosa, Act., the lesser Inula saxatUis, and the third,
/. oculus Christi. The convzse were employed in medicine at
a very early period, being frequently mentioned in the Hippo-
cratic treatises. See Dierbach, who, however, has decided
differently from us as to the plants to which the conyzai are
referable. He marks the fetid conyza as being Ambrosia
maritima, and the fragrant as Inula bifi'ons. The greater
conyza of Dioscorides would appear to be the cunilago of Pliny
(H. N., XX, 63), where see the note of Harduin. Our author
follows Dioscorides and Galen, who ag-ree in the main as to
the medicinal properties of these plants. All the authorities
concur in opinion that the greater conyza is emmeuagogue,
and procures abortion in pessaries. Ebn Baithar seems to
treat of it rather confusedly under the head of Thuback.
(ii, 1 50.) Few, if any, of the other Arabians have noticed it ;
and it is not contained in the Greek Pharmacopoeia.

Ko7r<)oc,
Stercus, Dung ; all kinds of it are of a heating, desiccative,
and discutient nature, but they differ from one another ac-
cording to the temperament and diet of the animal Avhich
voids it. The dung, then, of dogs fed on bones, when dried,
cures dysenteric affections if taken in a draught with divided
milk (lac scissum), and old ulcers, if mixed with suitable medi-
cines. In cynanche and inflammations about the tonsils, it is
rubbed into the parts mixed with honey. These complaints
are greatly relieved by the dung of children who have not
been permitted to take too much food. The dung of wolves
and the whiter sort which is found upon certain shrubs, is an
admirable remedy for colics, and that, not only in a draught,
but also when appended as an amulet. It may be fastened
either with the wool of a sheep recently killed by a wolf, or
the skin of a stag. Goat^s dung, being more acrid and discu-
tient, discusses scirrhous tumours when applied externally,
more especially upon hard flesh. When burnt it is more
detergent and attenuate. The dung of oxen has some attrac-
tive powers, and, therefore, cures the stings of wasps and bees.
And if the whole body of persons affected with dropsy be

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 187

rubbed with cow's dung in the sun they will be much relieved
thereby. Sheep's dung with \inegar cures myrmecia, acro-
chordon^ furunculus^ aud clavus. That of wild pigeons, being
much more acrid than the other kinds, proves rubefacient
when applied with the seed of cardamus. That of domestic
fowls, when drunk with oxymel, vinegar, or wine and honey,
causes the suffocative mushrooms to' be vomited, and proves a
preservative from them. Some have given it to drink also iu
colics. They say also that the dung of storks, when drunk, is
useful in orthopncea. That of mice, being more detergent
than all others, agrees with alopecia, and when applied to the
anus of children provokes evacuation. The dung of starlings,
when they feed on rice, becomes detergent so as to clear away
freckles. That of land crocodiles removes alphos, as that of
the crocodiles of the Nile is beheved to attenuate leucoma
(white films on the eyes).

Commentary. Our author's account of the medicinal pro- Comm.
perties of Dung is abridged from Galen. As we have no wish ' " '
to see this article restored to the Materia Medica, we shall not
enlarge upon the subject. Those who wish to improve their
knowledge of the medicinal articles mentioned under this
head by our author, may find them treated oi usque ad nauseam
by Dioscorides, Galen, Serapion, and Avicenna. Many of
them were retained in the Dispensatory^ down to a compara-
tively recent date. For example, the white dung of dogs,
usually called Album Gr cecum, was long used in the cure of
quinsies. See Quincy (140, 20G.)

KopaAAioj',

Corallium, Coral, is a sort of petrified arboret, not growing
on dry land, but among the mud of the sea, being of a red
colour, and like stone. Its powers are decidedly desiccant and
moderately astringent. It answers, therefore, with cases of
haemoptysis and dysentery.

Commentary. The Coral of the ancients is the Isis nohilis, Comm.
Pall. ; the name Isis being borrowed from Pliny. (H. N.
xiii, 52.) Pliny mentions, in another place, that corals, burnt
and pulverised, and drunk in water, are useful in some pains
of the bowels and bladder, and in calculus. Tie adds that
tliey are also soporific. Corals were much used as amulets or

188 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. phylacteries. (H. N. xxxii, 5.) See also Solinus (ii), and
" " Geopon. (xv, 1.) Celsus ranks the corallinm -with those sub-
stances which burn : " Yeratrum^ album et nigrum, corallinm,
cantharides, pp-ethrum, adurunt," (v, 208.) This article does
not occur in the Hippocratic treatises, nor in Galenas work
' On the Faculties of Simples.^ The latter, however, prescribes
it for spitting of blood in another place. (De Comp. Med.
sec. loc. vii.) Dioscorides and Serapion, likewise, recommend
it as an astringent in haemoptysis and in dysentery. It
appears from the Royal Pharmacopoeia of Moses Charras, that
it was used for the cure of these complaints in his time. He
prefers the red coral, and directs us to give it in the form of
an impalpable powder, The red coral held a place in our
English Dispensatory until a recent date. See Quincy (101.)
It was much used in infantile convulsions. It is still admitted
to be a good antacid. See Gray (Pharmacol. 146.) Accord-
ing to Dr. Ainslie, the Tamool practitioners prescribe it, when
calcined, in cases of diabetes and bleeding piles. The Arabians
place it among their astringents and cordials. (Mat. Ind. 52.)
The sea-coralline is retained in the modern Greek Pharma-
copoeia, under the title of Helmiuthochortos, which, however,
as is there stated, comprehends several species of the Ceramium
helminthochortum, mixed up with ulvae, coufervse, but espe-
cially red corallines. (77.) On the use of it by the Ai-abians,
see the commentators on Mesne. (De Electariis, 89.) The
Electarium de Gemmis, in which it occurs as an ingredient, is
said to be most efScacious in cold affections of the brain, heart,
stomach, liver, and womb; an excellent exhilarant and cordial ;
and restorative in palpitation of the heart, and in syncope.

Cimices, Buys; these animals are of an acrid nature.
Some write that when drunk with vinegar they eject leeches.
CoMM. CoxMMENTARY. Dioscoridcs recommcuds Buys in quartan
' ' ' iutermittents, uterine suffocation, and as an antidote to the
bite of the asp. (ii, 36.) Galen properly recommends garlic
as a substitute for them in the case of leeches which have been
swallowed. PHny, apparently deriving his information from
Dioscorides, ascribes to bugs alexipharmic properties of the
most general nature; and more especially commends them as

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 189

being a remedy against the bite of asps. (H. N. xxix, 17.) Comm.
The Arabians copy all that the Greeks had recorded respect- ' ^ '
ing the medicinal virtues of bugs, without making any addition.
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 270.)

Coris, the herb ; some call it Hypericum {St. John's Wort) .
It is acrid and fragrant ; but the fruit of it, in a draught,
promotes the urinary and menstrual discharges. It is also a
remedy for the bites of venomous spiders ; and in cases of
opisthotonos it is rubbed in with oil.

Commentary. It is Hypericum Coris. This name is taken Comm.
from Pliny, who recommends it in strangury and pleurisy.
(xx^•i, 54.) Our author's statement of its medicinal powers is
abridged from Dioscorides. (iii, 164.) Galen does not treat of
it by name, but ascribes nearly similar powers to hypericum.
We cannot find it described in the works of the Arabians.

oooiavvov r; Kopiov,

Coriandrum, Coriander, is composed of opposite powers.
For it cousists of a terrene part formed of subtile particles,
which is bitter, and of a watery juice, which is tepid (mild?).
It has also a small degree of astringency, so as to accord with
inflammations and cases of erysipelas, which are not of too
hot a nature ; and it also discusses the softer tumours with
some of the other subtile remedies. The seed, when drunk
in small quantity with sweet wine, expels worms ; but when
taken in larger doses it disturbs the understanding.

Commentary. It certainly is the Coriandrum sativum. Comm.
Dioscorides says that its action is refrigerant, but Galen insists
that it is calefacient. Symeon Seth, jSIesue, as quoted by
Serapion, and most of the ancient authorities adopt the opinion
of Dioscorides. Our modem \'iews would seem to correspond
better with those of Galen ; coriander-seed being now gene-
rally looked upon as an aromatic stimulant, and as being
carminative and stomachic. Galen's remarks under this head
are highly interesting. The coriander was used in the age of
Hippocrates. (359, etc. ed. Foes.) Celsus, like Dioscorides,
holds it to be refrigerant. (8 1, ed. Milligan.) He also calls
it dim'etic. (Ibid.) The Arabians say that when the juice is

190 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. taken to the extent of four ounces, it proves destructive of life.

' — ' ' Avicenna (ii, 2, 143) ; Serapion (c. 44) ; and Rhases (Cont,
1. ult. i, 229.) They also hold that it is possessed of soporific
powers. They prescribe it for the cure of epilepsy, in which
case they say it checks the aura which ascends from the
stomach to the brain. The Coriandrum sativum holds a place
in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia. (58.) It is also still
retained in our Materia Medica. See Pereira (1073.)

Koj3uSoc >J Ko|OuSaXXoCj
Alauda, the Lark ; this bird when boiled with plain broth
is of use in colic aflFections. But one must eat it perseveringly
and frequently with the broth.
CoMM. Commentary. No one can doubt, from the ancient de-
' — ""^ scriptions of it, that it was the Alauda cristata. Galen
remarks, that it is correctly described by Aristophanes, in his
'Birds;' and that it is noticed by Theocritus. (Idyll, vii.) It is
also mentioned by Aristotle and yEHan in their works on
Natural History. Pliny calls it Galerita. Galen says there
is a herb of the same name. Like our author, he praises
it when given in broth, for the cure of colic. Both, however,
copy from Dioscorides. (ii, 59.) It is not noticed in the
works of Hippocrates and Celsus. It would appear that it
is the hanabroch of Serapion, who, in describing it, merely
gives extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. (436.) It is also
briefly noticed by Ebn Baithar in nearly the same terms as
Serapion. (ii, 329.)

KojOWVOTTOUC^

Coronopus, Buck's-hoi'n Plantain ; the root of it is believed
to be useful in cohc affections when eaten.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Plantago Coronopus, called in
" ' ' English Buckshorn Plantain. See Parkinson, Gerard, and
Quincy. Dioscorides says it is used as a potherb, and that it
is given as a medicine in colic, (ii, 157.) None of the others
supply any additional information regarding it worth quoting.

YioGTOQ,

Costos, is possessed of a small degree of a bitter, but a
greater degree of an acrid and hot quality. Wherefore, when

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 191

a part requires to be heated, or a deep-seated humour at-
tracted to the surface, one has recourse to the costus. It is
therefore diuretic, emmenagogue, and anthelminthic. It has
also some flatulent powers, so that it excites to veuery when
drunk with wine and honey. It suits with ischiatic and
paralytic affections, and with periodical rigors when rubbed
in with oil.

Commentary. We should occupy more space than we can Comm.
afford to devote to it if we were to enter into a disquisition on ' *
the general literature of this article. Those who feel curious
to know our opinions on this subject, are referred to the
Appendix to Dunbar's Lexicon, already frequently quoted by
us. Much interesting information respecting the costus has
been supplied by very recent writers. See Koyle (Ant. of
Hindoo Medicine, 88), Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 152), and Pereira
(Mat. Med. 699.) Dr. Lindley says of it, "Dr. Falconer
has ascertained that the costus of the ancients is the root
of his Auklandia Costus, a plant inhabiting the moist open
slopes surrounding the vale of Cashmere. In Cashmere the
plffnt is not held in repute as a medicine, but is chiefly
employed for protecting bales of shawls from the attacks
of moths.'' (Vegetable Kingdom, 708.) We may add, that
although the zeduary be not the same as the costus, as has
been supposed, there can be no doubt that it was often used
in place of the costus. (See M. Charras' Pharm.) More
recently, we have reason to think, our costmary, Balsamita
vulgaris, was used as a succedaneum for the ancient costus.
Compare Parkinson (80) with Hill (M. M. 624.) The three
kinds of costus described by Dioscorides, namely, the Arabian,
the Indian, and the Syrian, would appear to have been only
varieties of the same substance. He says it is possessed of
calefacient, diuretic, and emmenagogue powers, and is useful
in uterine affections, in pessaries, fomentations, and fumiga-
tions. He recommends it as being alexipharmic, expectorant,
aphrodisiacal, vermifuge, a good application externally in
paralytic cases ; and, in short, he gives it nearly the same
characters as our author, who evidently copies from him and
Galen. Aetius and Oribasius do the same. The Arabian
authorities on the Mat. Med. in like manner, do little more
than quote what Dioscorides, Galen, and our author have

192 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. written on the subject. See Rliases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 236) ;

' ' Avicenna (ii, 2, 161) ; Serapion (c. 318.) Avicenna and
Rhases agree that it dries up humid ulcers when sprinkled
over them. One of Rhases's authorities states that the oil of
costus is useful in relaxation and coldness of the nerves, and
in sciatica ; and that a fumigation made with it by means of
an instrument for the purpose (per embotum), kills the foetus,
and promotes menstruation. All join in giving it the character
of being alexipharmic. The costus, as far as we have been
able to discover^ does not occur in the works of Hippocrates.
Celsus mentions it along with other aromatics (iv, 14-, et alibi).
It is often noticed as a precious ointment and aromatic by
the classic authors. See PHny (H. N. xii, 24); Columella (xii,
20); Propertius (iv, 6, 5); Lucan (ix, 917); Horace (Carm. iii,
1, 41); Ovid (Met. X, 308.)

K.OTv\y]C(vv,
Cotyledon, Navel-ivort, is coohng, repellent, detergent, and
discutient. It is believed that when the leaves of it are
eaten along with the root, they prove lithontriptic and diuretic.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides describes two species, which are
' • ' the Cotyledon umbilicus, and the C. serrata. Our author's
description applies to the former of these, and is abridged
from Galen. Galen further recommends it strongly as an
application to inflammatory erysipelas and erj'sipelatous in-
flammation, the nice distinction between which he has stated
under coriander, and in his work Therap. ad Glauc. (ii.) See
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 138.)

Cochleae, Snails, when burnt are of a moderately desic-
cative nature, and somewhat heating. They are useful in
dysenteries when mortification has not yet taken place, if to
four parts of them, one part of white pepper, and two parts of
galls be added. Unburnt, they are triturated and applied
whole to the belly in dropsical complaints, and to the joints
in arthritic, with advantage, being allowed to remain until
they drop oflF spontaneously; and upon the whole they dry
strongly deep-seated humours.
CoMM. Commentary. The k. y(lpacuog is the Helix Pomatia,

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 193

Escargot, or Vinegar Snail. The snail was esteemed a delicacy Comm.
by the Roman gourmands. See Yarro (de R. R. iii, 14) and '
Pliny (H. N. ix, 25.) The use of it, however, was forbidden
by the ^Mosaic law. In one of the Hippocratic treatises, the
cochlete are recommended for procidentia ani. (De fistul.)
Pliny, in like manner, recommends them in dysentery. (H. N.
vii, 30.) Dioscorides and Galen give nearly the same account
of their medicinal properties as our author. The latter says that
they are difficult to digest, but very nutntious when digested.
Celsus, on the other hand, ranks them among the weak articles
of food. Horace seems to say that they whet the appetite.

Testis marcentem squillis recreabis et Afra
Potorem cochlea. — Satir.

Cornus, the Cornel ; the fruit of the ti'ee being sour, proves
strongly astringent of the belly when eaten. The leaves and
shoots, by their sourness, are strongly desiccative, so as to
agglutinate the largest wounds of hard bodies.

Commentary. It is the Cornus Mas. Dioscorides recom- Comm.
mends it as an application to lichen, (ii, 72.) Our author
abridges Galen's account of it. The Ai'abians speak favorably
of it in the same cases as the Greeks, and also recommend it
for cholera, diabetes, and vomiting. See Ancenna (ii, 2, 315),
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 357.)

K-pafxpri,
Brassica, Cabbage ; that sort which is esculent has desic-
cative powers both when eaten and when applied externally,
but it is not sensibly acrid. It therefore agglutinates wounds
and ill-conditioned ulcers, and cures tumours which arc difficult
to discuss. It is also somewhat detergent, by which property
it cures leprosy. Its seed when drunk kills worms, and
especially the seed of the Egyptian cabbage does this. The
ashes of its stalks when burnt are possessed of caustic powers,
and with grease are applicable in chronic pains of the sides.
The wild is stronger than the garden cabbage in all respects ;
hence it cannot be taken internally without incouA-enience.
The sea-cabbage being saltish and bitterish loosens the belly.
III. 13

194 SIMPLES. [book vit.

CoMM. Commentary. The Brassica sativa of tlie ancieuts no
doubt comprehended several species of cabbage. Dioscorides
dwells largely on its medicinal properties, but in nearly the
same terms as our author. He calls it laxative and alexi-
pharmic, and recommends it as an application to erysipelas,
epinyctis, and lepros}^ ; with salts, he says, it breaks anthrax,
and when boiled and mixed with milk, it is a good appli-
cation to spreading gangrene. The Brassica sylvestris
(which Sprengel inclines to set down as being the Brassica
incana, Zenor.), he says, is agglutinative of wounds, and dis-
cutient of swellings and inflammations. Its cyme, he says, is
not unpleasant to the taste. To the sea-cal)bage {Convolvulus
soldanella) he assigns the same characters as our author, (ii,
146, 14-7, 148.) Galen gives nearly the same account of the
three species of brassica. In the Hippocratic treatises, the
decoction of cabbage is recommended as an injection to the
womb. (De INIulieb. ii.) According to Celsus, the brassica when
half raw is laxative, but when twice boiled, astringent, (ii, 29,
30.) The Arabians treat of the different kinds of brassica
at great length ; as usual, drawing largely from the stores of
the Greeks. One of the Arabian authorities quoted by Rhases,
says its seed, if applied per vaginam post coitum, will prevent
impregnation, and that the decoction of it expels the tape-
worm. Another of the same authorities recommends a de-
coction of it as an application to the joints in gout, and to
blistered surfaces after burning, more especially when its ashes
are mixed up with the white of an egg. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 198.)
See in like manner, Serapion (c. 32) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 139.)
As we have stated in our commentary on the 95th section of
the First Book, all the ancient authorities held that the
cabbage counteracts the intoxicating powers of wine. The
brassicse held a place in our Dispensatory, and retained their
ancient character down to a comparatively recent date. See
Parkinson, Culpeper, and still more recently Quincy. (116.)
They are still much prized as medicines by the Ai'abians and
Persians. See Ainslie (M. Ind.)

Kparnioyoi'oi',
Cratseogonon j the fruit of this herb is acrid to the taste and
cold like millet.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 195

Commentary. Dioscorides assigns it wonderful powers in Comm.
promoting procreation, and hence its name. He calls it
intensely acrid. Galen and the other Greek authoritieSj treat
of it very succinctly like Paulus. We have not been able to
find any traces of it in the Mat. Med. of the Arabians. What
plant it was seems a puzzle. Both Parkinson (Theatre of
Plants, 858) and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. 1. c.) incline to the
Polygonum Persicaria, l)ut the medicinal virtues of it, as given
by our older herbalists, do by no means agree with the cha-
racters of the crataeogonon as given by the ancients.

Crethmum, Samphire, is somewhat saltish with a little
bitterness, and therefore its powers are detergent and desic-
cative.

Commentary. It is the Crithmum maritimum^ Samphire, Comm.
or Sea-fenneJ. Dioscorides recommends its fruit, root, and
leaves, when boiled in wine, for dysuria and jaundice. He
further mentions it as a potherb and pickle, (ii, 156.) Galen
and the other Greek authorities state its characters briefly like
our author. Pliny, like Dioscorides, mentions it as a potherb
and pickle, but says nothing of it as a medicine. (H. N. xxvi.)
We do not find it noticed by Celsus nor by the Arabians, -odth
the exception of Ebn Baithar. (ii, 280.)

Kpt0rj,

Hordeum, Barley, is of the first order of cooling and desic-
cativc medicines, and is also somewhat detergent. It is more
desiccative than the flour of beans, and less flatulent. The
polenta of barley is more desiccative than barley itself. Its
ptisan is not only more diluent, but is also more detergent.

Commentary. It is the Hordeum rz^/^rare, comprehending Comm.
no doubt several species. We have treated of it among the
Cerealia in the First Book (Vol. I, p. 123.) The aX(j)iToi', or
polenta, was a sort of malt. Sec Pliny (H. N. xviii, 14.)
We have treated of it in the same place ; and also of the
mode of preparing ptisan. It was a favorite remedy with
Hippocrates (de victu acut. et alibi.) Dioscorides calls it
suitable to the acrimony, roughness, and ulceration of the
windpipe, and says it attracts milk when taken boiled with

196 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. the seed of fennel, and is diuretic, detergent, flatulent,
" ' bad for the stomach, and digestive of swellings. He further
recommends the flour of barley for discussing boils and in-
flammations, when boiled with figs and honeyed water. See
further (ii, 108.) Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius, treat of it
in nearly the same terms as our author. The Arabians give
nearly the same statement of its Adrtues as a medicine. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 530.) He recommends barley-water very
much as a drink in fevers, being, as he says, diluent and
cooling ; in hot fevers it is to be given pure, and in cold, with
parsley and fennel. Ebn Baithar treats of it at great length,
(ii, 97.)

Crimnon, Bran ; the thick part of the flour of wheat and
of sjjclt is so named, being more nutritious than polenta, but
more indigestible.
CoMM. CoMMEXTAUY. It is, properly speaking, groats or coarse
meal ; it was also applied to spelt and other species of grain
coarsely ground. See Dioscorides, from whom our author's
account of it is principally taken. Both Dioscorides and Galen
recommend the coarse meal of spelt which has been toasted
for binding the belly. From the coarse meal of wheat, pap or
porridge, they add, is prepared.

Ko/cov,
Lilium, the Lily ; its flower is of a mixed temperament, being
composed of a subtile part, a terrene, and a certain watery
substance of a moderate temperament. Hence the oil com-
posed from it being of a discutient and emollient nature agrees
w ell with inflammations of the uterus. The root of it and its
leaves are desiccative, detergent, and moderately discutient,
and hence are useful for burns. The juice of it is serviceable
for Avounded nerves, with oxymel.

CoMM. Commentary. Without doubt it is the Lilium candidum.

' * Dioscorides praises the seed of the lily, given in wine, as
an antidote to poisonous serpents ; and, by the way, the same
character is given of it by Walafridus Strabo in the ninth century,
and by INIacer Floridus in the tenth, Dioscorides further recom-
mends it as an application to burns, ulcers, erysipelas, and so
forth. He further describes a species of lilium with purple

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 197

flowers, which grows in Syria and Pisidia of Pamphylia, and Comm.
was famous for the composition of unguents. This might be
the LiJium Martagon. Galen Avrites elaborately on this article,
but in the main agrees with Dioscorides as to the medicinal
■vdrtues of the lib', of which he mentions only the former species,
He recommends it principally in external applications to
wounds, ulcers, and diseases of the skin, such as scabies,
leprosy, and achores, and also very particularly to diseases of
the uterus. Aetius and Oribasius briefly give it the same
characters. Celsus mentions a decoction of the leaves of the
lily boiled in old wine and oil, as an application to burns, (v,
17, 18.) For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 436); Serapion
(c. 189) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 422) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 68.)
They commend it as a general alexipliarmic, both Avlien applied
to the bites of venomous animals, and as an antidote to hyo-
scyamus, coriander, and mushrooms. They all agree that it is
one of the best applications to burning with hot water.
Avicenna says the oil of lilies given internalh', is usefid in
ileos. Ebn Baithar treats of the lily at very great length.

KoOfCOOttXtOJ',

Crocodilium ; the seed and juice of it are possessed of desic-
cative, heating, and discutient powers, and are, therefore,
diuretic and emmenagogue ; the root is of great use as an ex-
pectorant, and occasions a discharge of blood by the nose.

Commentary. Dioscorides describes it immediately after Comm.
the black chamseleon to which he compares it. We therefore ' '
are inclined to join the modern commentators and herbalists,
who hold it to have been the Carlina vulgaris, rather than
those who refer it to the Eryngium maritimum. See Parkinson
(Theatre of Plants, 971, 988) and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor.
iii, 10.) Galen calls its seed aromatic and acrid, and sa3^s it
is diuretic and emmenagogue. The juice of the seed and stalk
being possessed, he says, of similar powers, is useful in nephritic
diseases. The root is expectorant, and produces a discharge
of blood from the nostrils. (Do Simpl. vii.) Wc luive not been
able to discover auv traces of it in the Mat. ]Med. of the
Arabians, except in Ebn Baithar. (ii, 253.) His German
translator holds it to be the Eryngium maritimum.

198 SIMPLES. [book VII.

JLpoKog,
Crocus, Saffron, is of the second order of heating and
of the first of desiccative medicines. It is also astringent and
digestive.
CoMM. Commentary. Without doubt it is the Crocus sativus.
Dioscorides gives an interesting account of the different varieties
of it which were used in his time. Suffice it to say, that the best
decidedly was the Ciciliau, from Mount Corycus, which is often
alluded to by classical authors. See Pliny (xxi, 6) ; Celsus
(v, 22) ; Statins (Silv. v, 3, 41) ; Galen (De Antid. i.) With
regard to its action on the animal economy, he mentions that
Thessalus held that it is merely fragrant, while some, on the
other hand, maintained that it is a deadly poison in doses of
dr. iij, but that in truth it is diuretic and sub-astringent, and
therefore applicable to erysipelas and defluxions of the eyes,
as a cure for surfeit, and for producing a discharge of urine
(i, 25.) See, in like manner, Pliny (1. c.) It occurs in the
Hippocratic treatises, and in the works of Celsus, who calls
it purgative, emolhent, and discutient. (196.) By the way,
we may mention that by purgative, Celsus evidently means
cleansing in external applications, as is evident from the sub-
stances with which it is enumerated, namely, verdigris, orpi-
ment, &c. His editor. Dr. Milligan, therefore evidently
mistakes the meaning of his author. (1. c.) Galen and his
followers call it heating in the second degree, and drying in
the first, with some astringency. The Arabians adopt the views
of the Greeks as to its virtues, but prescribe it in a great many
more cases than their predecessors. See Serapion (c. 173) ;
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 241); Avicenna (ii, 2, 126.) Thus they
held that it is both aphrodisiacal and cordial, and recommend
it accordingly. They also used it in cases of difficult labour,
and as a deobstruent in obstructions of the liver and spleen.
One of Rhases^s authorities says that in doses of three di'achms
it proves fatal. Another of them says of it, that it improves
the breathing and appetite. Symeon Seth says that it is
stomachic and improves the colour. He, Serapion, and other
of the ancient authorities, affu'm that in large doses it occasions
involuntary laughter, immoderate mirth, and the other effects
which result from intoxicating liquors. From late experi-

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 199

ments, it would appear that its powers had been overrated. Comm.
See Pereira (Mat. Med. GOG.) It was much used by the ' * '
ancients as a perfume. See Beckmann's ' Hist, of Inventions/
Joh. Bodreus a Stapel (Ad Theophrast. H. P. vi, 6), and
Hertodt's ' Crocologia/ as quoted by him. Its medical use, he
adds, has ahvays continued among the Orientals.

Cepa, Onion, is of the fourth order of heating medicines,
its substance consisting of thick matter, and hence when
applied to hemorrhoids it opens them. It is also sufficiently
detergent, and removes alphos with vinegar ; and in alopecia
it occasions a more rapid growth of hair than alcyouium. Its
juice is useful in suffusion and dimness of vision from thick
humours.

Commentary. It is the Allimn Cepa, or onion. Galen, Comm.
Dioscorides, and Serapion recommend it as an application in "
cases of alopecia or Porrigo decalvans. Dioscorides says that
some applied it as a suppository to promote the discharge of
blind piles, and he mentions its being introduced into the nose
to promote the discharge from it. As a cataplasm with salt,
rue, and honey, he recommends it for the bites of rabid dogs.
He says it concocts and breaks hard tumom^s. Upon the
whole, Galen, Aetius, Oribasius, and our author, do little more
under this head than abridge the more ample account of it
given by Dioscorides. Celsus calls it an aperient of the bowels
(ii, 29) and a diuretic (ii, 31.) He recommends it to be chewed
in paralysis of the tongue, (iv, 2.) The Arabians treat of it
at great length. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 119) ; Bhases (Cont.
1. ult. iii, 18) ; Serapion (c. 354.) They speak fa^■orably of it
as a rubefacient, and all ascribe great powers to it as an alexi-
pharmical medicine.

Kua^tocj
Faba, the Bean, is not far removed from a middle tempera-
ment as to cooling and drying. Its flesh is also somewhat
detergent. It agrees, therefore, with expectorations from the
chest and lungs. Its outer skin having also some astringency
renders the whole bean, when boiled in oxycrate, a suitable
remedy for cteliac and dysenteric affections. In a cataplasm

200 SIMPLES. [book vii.

it cures inflammations and swellings, and dispels the mUk in
the breasts.
CoMM. Commentary. We have stated in the First Book the dif-
' ' ' ficultj of determining exactly tlie nature of the ancient faba.
See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 1054) and Dickson (Hus-
bandry of the Ancients.) Dioscorides describes two species, the
Egyptian and the Greek, of which the former, there can be
Httle doubt, is the Nehunbiuni speciosum. See Sprengel (Ad
Dioscor. ii, 128), and Lindley (Yeget. King. 414.) The other,
as we formerly stated, was probably a variety of our small bean.
The characters of both are fully stated by Dioscorides, from
whom Galen and our author borrow largely under this head.
They treat, however, only of the Greek bean, Dioscorides
says the Egyptian is astringent and stomachic ; that the
flour of it made into a poultice, answers in dysenteric and colic
afi'ections, and in earache. The Arabians give a very full ac-
count of the two species of bean, both as articles of food and
as medicines. See in particular, Aviceuna (ii, 2, 241); Serapion
(c. 97); Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 279.) Avicenna and Rhases
agree in commending beans for spitting of blood, and other
aff'ections of the chest.

Cyanus, is possessed of acrid, purgative, and discutient
powers, greater than those of the cinnabar. It has also some
astringency.
CoMM, Commentary. Matthiolus determines it to be the Lapis
' • ' Lazuli, and Sprengel agrees with him that it was a mineral
containing copper and some impurities, and nearly allied to
the L. Laz. Serapion describes the ap^dviov by the name of
Lapis Lazuli, and, in fact, the dp/jLeviov and Kvavog seem to
have been nearly the same thing. He recommends it as a
pm'gative which evacuates black bile. Rhases, in his chapter
on the Lapis Lazuli, gives the observations of Dioscorides and
Galen on the ap/uLeviov, and in his chapter on the Lapis
Armemis, he compares it to the Lajjis Lazuli (Cont. 1. ult. i,
393, 404.) The following is SprengeFs account of the arme-
nium and cyanus : " Armenium est cuprum carbonicum terreum,
lapidi LazuH simile. Id in australibus petris arenosis, has
ipsas penetrans mineram aeris arenosam format. Ea vocatur

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 201

KvavoQ." (Ad Dioscor. v, 105.) From -oliat has been stated, any Com m.
person acquainted with mineralogy can have no difficuky in * '
decidin"- that the cyunus and armenium were varieties of the
mineral called "blue copper" by Jameson, that is to say, the
"blue carbonate of copper" of Cleavcland (566.) For further
information regarding it, we would refer to Matthiolus and
Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. 1 c), Beckmann (Hist, of Invent.), and
our article under this head in the Appendix to Dunbar^s Greek
Lexicon. Our author copies his account of it from Galen.
Dioscorides recommends it only as an external application,
possessed of repressing, moderately septic, escharotic, and ulce-
rative powers, (v, 106.) The Arabians, Avho, however, evidently
do not distinguish properly this mineral from the lapis lazuli,
recommend it as an emmenagogue and pm-gative. When
boiled with lentils, Avicenna says, it acts as an emetic in the
case of a person who has swallowed any poison. He also pre-
scribes it in asthma and pain of the kidneys. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 56); Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 692) /Serapion (c. 389.)
The later Greek writers on medicine, like the Arabians, con-
found this substance with the lapis lazuli. See Theophanes
Nonnus (c. 125, 143); Myrepsus (i, 30.) The former of
these prescribes it as a specific in the plague. In modern
times also the cyanus or blue copper has been confounded with
the lapis lazuH. See Lewis (M. M. ii, 50.)

Ys^vKXcif-Uvoq,

Cyclaminus, Soio-bread, is possessed of various powers ; for
it cleanses, incides, opens the mouths of vessels, and discusses;
the juice of it, therefore, when applied to hemorrhoids opens
them, and it discusses hardness along with other things.
Along with honey it agrees with suffusions and purges by the
nose. AVhen rubbed into the epigastrium, it loosens the belly
and kills the foetus. The whole root, though weaker than the
juice, is also strong, so that when drunk Avith honeyed water
to the amount of three drachms, it purges the internal parts.
To the skin it also proves detergent. The root of the other
species of sow-bread (called Cissanthemon) is of no medicinal
use, but its fniit is drastic, so that when drunk it acts like
the former.

Commentary. Dioscorides treats at considerable length of Comm.

202 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. the medicinal virtues of the former species, which was the Cy-
' • ' clamen Europanmi, recommending it as being phlegmagogue^
hydragogue, emmenagogue, and alexipharmic ; as an errhine in
diseases of the head, and a suppository per vaginam. His
other species, which he describes as having leaves like the ivy,
and which some of the commentators set down as being the
Lonicera Periclymemim, and others as the Solanum Dulcamara
he recommends in splenic affections, in orthopnoea, and reten-
tion of the lochial discharge, (ii, 193, 194.) Pliny recommends
also the second species as a remedy for coughs (H. N. xxv, 68.)
Harduin agrees with Dodonseus in holding it to be the Dulca-
mara. The scholiast on Theocritus recommends the cyclaminus
as an application to chilblains. (Ad Idyll, v.) Galen writes of
it in sucli terms as shows that he looked upon it as a very im-
portant article. He says it promotes menstruation, both when
taken internally and when applied per vaginam ; and that it
cures jaundice, not only by purging the viscus, but by evacuat-
ing the whole body with sweats ; he also recommends it as an
external application in hardness of the spleen. The other species
he praises in asthma. The other Greek authorities supply
nothing of much interest under this head. The Arabians
treat of it largely, but somewhat confusedly. See Avicenna (ii,
2, 6, 61, 271) ; Ehases (Cont. 1. ult. 281) ; Mesne (De Simpl.
26) ; Serapion (c. 259.) Avicenna directs it to be given to
the extent of three drachms with wine or mulse in cases of
jaundice, and the patient is to be then covered up with many
clothes, when he will sweat out the bile from his body. He
says it purges the body, not only when given by the mouth,
but in a suppository, and when rubbed into the skin. Rhases
(1. c.) describes it under the names of Falaniios, or Panis por-
cinus, whence the English name Sow-bread. His extracts
from Dioscorides, Galen, Oribasius, and Bimasay comprise all
the information on the subject possessed by his Grecian masters
and his countrymen. Mesne gives a very elaborate article on
the Sow-bread, which, like Avicenna, he praises as a general
purger of bile, when taken by the mouth, in a suppository^, and
as a liniment rubbed into the belly; he also praises it as an
emmenagogue, both when taken by the mouth and when ap-
plied as a pessary, and as a tried remedy in jaundice and
induration of the spleen. Even as late as the days of Quincy,

SECT. iii.J SIMPLES. 203

the cyclaminus held a place in the Dispensatory, and retained Comm.
all its ancient characters, (i, 4, 293.) Orfila ranks it with the ' ' '
acrid poisons (iii, 3.) See further (ii, 242.)

JLvfiii'ov,

Cuminum, Cumin, belongs to the third order of heating
medicines, and is diuretic and carminative.

Commentary. The C. of our author is no doubt the Cy- Comm.
minum sativum of Dioscorides, i. e. Cuminum Cyminum L.
The two varieties of the wild cumin of Dioscorides have never
been satisfactorily determined. See Parkinson, Matthiolus,
and Sprengel. Dioscorides represents it as being calefacient,
astringent, desiccative, and relieving tormina and flatulence,
and describes a variety of cases in which he calls it applicable,
(iii, 61.) Galen says it is diuretic and carminative, being
calefacient in the third degree. Aetius and Oribasius give it
much the same character. Celsus assigns to it diuretic powers,
(iv, 9.) The Arabians treat of it at so great length, that we can
scarcely do justice to their views on this head. See Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 212) ; Serapion (c. 287) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 13G) ;
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 394.) Avicenna
says the immoderate use of it renders the face pale. This pro-
perty of cumin is alluded to by the poets as well as the medi-
cal authors. See Horace (Epist. i, 19, 18) ; Persius (Sat. v.)
This character of it is confirmed by modern authority. See
Matthiolus (Ad Dioscor. 1. c.) ; Bodseus a Stapel (in
Thcophrast.) Cumin now barely holds a very undistinguished
place in our Mat. Med. (See Pereira, 1057.)

^vvoapaToq,

Rubus caninus. Hip-tree or Dog-rose ; the fruit is no bad
astringent ; the leaves are moderately astringent ; but we must
guard against the woolly part of the fruit, as it is injurious to
the trachea.

Commentary. Dioscorides's description is not so precise Comm.
as to enable us to pronounce decidedly Avhat it was ; but we " ' '
incline with several of the best authorities to refer it to the
Rosa ccmina, or Hip-tree. Galen, our author, and the other
Greek authorities, follow Dioscorides.

204 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Ki;7raoi(7(70g,
Cupressus, Cypress ; the spherical fruit and shoots of it are
possessed of desiccative powers, liaving no sensible heat, so that
they agglutinate large wounds in hard bodies. In moist gan-
grene it consumes deep-seated humours without trouble, and is
useful in intestinal hernia.
CoMM. Commentary. It appears unquestionably to be the
Cupressiis sempervirens . See Stackhouse (Tab. Syst. in
Theophrast.) Its fruit, being of a globular shape, was called
(j(pcti^ia by the Greeks and Pikda; by the Latins. Pliny
(H. N. xvii, 14.) Pliny recommends this as a cure for the
stings of serpents, and in cases of haemoptysis. (H. N. xxiv, 10.)
Dioscorides and Serapion recommend it in these and various
other cases. The cypress -nut is powerfully astringent and
balsamic : hence it proves an excellent remedy in diarrhoeas
and dysenteries, and, as such, it is celebrated by many authors
ancient and modern. Dioscorides in particular recommends
it for stopping bleeding, for agglutinating wounds, and as an
application to erysipelas and anthrax. Galen Avrites fully of it,
but borrows largely from Dioscorides. Serapion does little
more than give the notices of it by Dioscorides and Galen,
(c. 55.) Avicenna recommends the cypress, and more especially
the nut, in various cases requiring astringents, and among
others as an application to polypus of the nose ; he also speaks
favorably of it in cases of haemoptysis and dysuria. Like the
others, he says it is a good application in ruptures, (ii, 2, 146.)
See further Rhases (Cont. 1. uJt. i, 216.) The cypress is found
in the ' Flora Hippocratica,^ and in that of Celsus. The
cypress-nuts are commended as astringents by all our older
herbalists, and held a place in our Dispensatory as late as the
time of Quincy. (93.)

TLvirepog,
Cyperus, is heating and desiccative, without pungency.
Hence it promotes the cicatrization of the more humid ulcers
in a wonderful manner, and relieves those in the mouth. It
has also some incisive quality, and is lithontriptic, diuretic, and
emmenagogue.
CoMM. Commentary. It is undoubtedly the Cyperus rotundus.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 205

Our author's account of its medicinal uses is taken from Galen, Comm.
and is confirmed by Serapion, Avicenna, and Rliases. All of ' ' '
them, however, are indebted to Dioscorides, who gives it the
character of being calefacient, anastomotic, and diuretic, re-
commends it in uterine complaints as an emmenagogue, in ulcers
of the mouth, and as an ingredient in emollient plasters, (i, 4.)
A modern author. Dr. Hill, gives it nearly the same character
as the ancients ; he calls it stomachic, deobstruent, emmena-
gogue, and diuretic. It likewise occurs in the Materia Medica
of Tournefort, who also calls it deobstruent and emmenagogue.
Quincy gives a confused account of it under the name of
Cyprus (Engl. Dispens. i, 1, 69) ; see also Lewis. Dioscorides
describes also an Indian species having a root resembling
ginger. Both Matthiolus and Sprengel are inclined to refer to
the Curcuma. We shall have occasion to notice it afterwards^
when describing the substances introduced into the Mat. Med.
by the Arabians.

Ligustrum, Privet; its leaves and tops are possessed of
mixed powers, being discutient and astringent, and desiccative
without pain or pungency. Hence the decoction of it, when
poured on a part, is useful for burns, and agrees with inflam-
mations of a hot nature. When chewed it also relieves aphthae,
and is mixed up with splenic remedies.

Commentary. We must decline entering upon the gene- Comm.
ral literatiu'e of this subject, which has created a good deal of ' * '
discussion. Suffice it to say, that we have now no hesitation
in deciding it to be the Lawsonia inermis, namely, the plant
from which the henna of Egypt is obtained. See Lindley's
Veg. King. (575.) It is used by females for staining their
liands and feet of an orange colour. Dioscorides mentions
that an infusion of its leaves in the juice of saponaria, or soap-
wort, was used for painting the hairs yellow. He says of the
ointment prepared from it (unguentum cyprinum), that it is
calefacient, emollient, and fragrant, (i, 124.) Galen, Aetius,
and Oribasius give it the same characters as our author. The
Arabians describe it under the name of alcanna, Avhich seems to
be henna with an Aral)ic prefix. See in particular Scrapion
(De Simpl. 110), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 50.) Eotli copy freely
from Dioscorides and Galen. They say its virtues in female

206 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. complaints are similar to those of the Sanguis Draconis. All
' * ' praise it as a vulnerary herb^ and a good application in cases of
burning. They further commend it in pleurisy and quinsy as
a plaster. Ebn Baithar treats of it at very great length, (i,
338.) It would appear that the privet is still used as a medi-
cine and dye by the native physicians of Hindostan. See a
very interesting account of it in Ainslie^s Mat. Indica (ii^ 190.)

Cytisus ; its leaves are of a gently discutient and tepid nature^
like those of melons.
CoMM. Commentary. After maturely weighing the opinions which
" " ' have been held respecting this classical herb, we have no hesi-
tation in agreeing with those who refer it to the Tree-medick
[Medicago arbor ea L.) Dioscorides says its leaves are cooling
and discutient when applied externally, and diuretic when
taken in decoction, (iv, iii.) Galen and the other Greek au-
thorities treat of it very succinctly, like our author. Avicenna
briefly recommends it as a diuretic medicine, and one which is
applicable in diseases of the spleen, (ii^ 2, 24.)

Cicuta, Hemlock ; that it is possessed of extremely cold
powers is obvious.
CoMM. Commentary. It appears unquestionably to be the Conium
' ' ' maculatum. Stoerck and Bergius, contrary to the opinions of
the ancient physicians, affirm that it is aphrodisiacal. This,
however, seems doubtful. We have treated of its effects as a
poison in the Fifth Book. As a medicine it does not appear
to have been much used latterly, although Dioscorides says that
its inspissated juice is of great use in the healing ai't, being
mixed with wine in anodyne collyria, and used as a cataplasm
for the cure of erysipelas and herpes. He also speaks of its
being applied as a cataplasm to the testicles for the removal of
the pollutio nocturni somni, and with the view of inducing im-
potence ; and to the breasts, in order to dispel milk and render
them atrophied, (iv, 79.) Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius, like our
author, merely state of it, in their works in the Mat. Med.,
that it is possessed of intensely refrigerant powers. It would
appear that Galen was in the practice of administering it inter-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 207

nally. (T. ii, 451, ed. Basil.) Of the Arabians, Avicenna gives Comm.
tlie fullest exposition of its remedial powers, but he copies "~~^'
closely from Dioscorides, recommending it as a cold and nar-
cotic application in the same cases as Dioscorides. He says
it stops bleeding, congeals the blood, and induces torpor, (ii, 2,
663.) See also Serapion (c. 347.) It is, most probably, the
cicuta of Celsus, who places it in his list of emollients, (v, 15.)
It occurs also in the Hippocratic Collection, where both its
leaves and seeds are recommended in fomentations. (De Steril. ;
de Fistulis, &c.)

Kwi'og,

Strobilus, the Wild Pine ; the bark and leaves have powers
like the pine, but more acrid and drastic. As to the fruit,
which is called strobilus, the green has some bitterness and
acrimony, with humidity, and hence it is applicable for pro-
moting expectoration from the chest. The esculent kind,
when soaked in water, so as to lay aside its acrimony, becomes
of a good temperament, being free from pungency and emplas-
tic, and hence it smooths asperities.

CoMMEXTARY. It here signifies the Pinus sylvestris, or Comm.
Wild-pine ; but it is commonly put for the Nux Pinea, or the ' '
cones of the P'lmis Pinea, called in the shops Pir/noli pines, and
the seeds jnne-nuts. Atheuseus says that Theophrastus called
the tree tte'v/cj? and the fruit kiovoq. Diphilus, as quoted by
the same, calls the pine-nuts nutritious, and says that they
lubricate the trachea, and promote expectoration. (Deip. h.)
Galen, Serapion, and the other authorities also commend them
in similar cases. Dioscorides treats of this subject in the 86th,
87th, and 88th chapters in the Fii-st Book, but not under the
same head as our author. He recommends the different
articles in nearly the same cases as Paulus and the other
authorities. The fruit of the wild pine he commends as a
demulcent in affections of the bladder and kidneys, and as a
sedative in pains of the stomach. Celsus prescribes " nuclei
ex pinu silvestri duodecim," among his remedies for ulcerated
kidneys, (iv, 10.) Avicenna treats of the subject under differ-
ent heads, like Dioscorides, whom he closely follows, (ii, 2, 280,
301, 555, 693.) He recommends these articles in diseases
of the chest and kidneys. He calls the fruit aphrodisiacal. See

208 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. also Ehases (Cont. 1. ult. 3, 20) ; Serapion (c. 63) ; Averrhoes
' " ' (Coll. V, 42.) All speak favorably of these medicines in
diseases of tlie kidneys and bladder.

AaywTTOvQ,
Lagopus, is possessed of desiccative powers and dries up
fluxes of the belly.
CoMM. Commentary. This plant, the description of which is passed
' ' ' over by Dioscorides as being well known, may be set down
among the articles of the ancient Materia Medica, which,
are least known to us. We may just mention regarding
it, that some take it for Trifolium arvense, and others for
Lagurus ovatus. Dioscorides calls it an astringent of the
bowels, and mentions that it was i;sed as an amulet in buboes,
(iv, 17.) Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius briefly notice it as a desic-
cative medicine. We have not been able to find this article in
the Mat. Med. of the Arabians, but are aware that it may be
concealed under some of their odd corruptions of the Greek
terms. It seems probable that this is the lagopyrus of
Hippocrates. (De Ulcer.)

Aaoavov,
Ladanum ; it is formed from the Cistus called Ladanus ;
the goats feeding upon it bring away upon their beard and
thighs the fatter and more juicy part of the herb. Ladanum,
when collected, is an excellent medicine, hot in about the
second degree, and consisting of subtile particles. It is mode-
rately emollient, discutient, and digestive ; it therefore agrees
with uterine afi'ections in particular. It has also some astrin-
gency, and hence it strengthens hairs which are falling out.
CoMM. Commentary. Dierbacli and Sprengel agree with the elder
' ' ' commentators in calling it the Cistus Creticus. See also
Royal Pharm. (i, c. 20.) Dr. Lindley says of the ladanum,
that it is a resinous balsamic substance obtained from Cistus
Creticus, and other species of the genus ; he adds, that it has
been esteemed as a stimulant and emmenagogue, and recom-
mended in chronic catarrh. (Veg. King. 350.) Dioscorides men-
tions that it was procured either from the beards of goats which
had browsed upon it, or by scraping the tree with thongs.
Dioscorides, Pliny, and Galen deliver its medicinal characters

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 209

in much the same terms as our author. Dioscoridcs recom- Comm.
mends it not only in uterine diseases, but also as a diuretic. ' '
He also speaks favorably of it as an ingredient in anodyne and
expectorant plasters, (i, 128.) See Galen (ii, 160 ed. Basil.)
The Arabians treat fully of it, but borrow almost every Avord
they say respecting it from Dioscorides and Galen. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 422) ; Serapion (c. 43) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult,
i, 361) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) The labdanum was retained
in the Dispensatory as late as the time of Quincy, who has
given an accurate account of it. (70.) It is also very correctly
described by Tournefort, both in his voyage to the Levant and
in his Mat. Med. (363.) Its use, however, is now obsolete. See
Pereii'a (1263.) In Pemberton's edition of the Dispensatory,
there is given a formula for the composition of a " stomach
plaster," one of the ingredients of which is labdanum. (359.)
We would vote for its being restored to the Pharmacopoeia.

Lathy ris, is a species of spurge, and some say that its juice
purges in a similar manner. Its seed in particular has pur-
gative powers.

Commentary. There can be no doubt, from our author's CoMi\r.
biief notice of it, that it is the Euphorbia LatJiyris, L. Diosco- ' ' '
rides says of it that it evacuates phlegm, bile, and wiiter. He
mentions that its leaves were boiled along with a fowl or pot-
herbs to loosen the bowels. Galen and the other Greek
authorities treat of it in brief terms, like our author. The
Arabians treat of it at greater length, recommending it
strongly in diseases of the joints, gout, and sciatica. They
also mention its being a remedy for dropsy. They say it acts
as an emetic. They direct its seeds to be boiled in the broth
of an old cock, and taken. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2,
473) ; Serapion (c. 354.) It is not met with in the works
either of Hippocrates or of Celsus. It does not occur in the
modern Greek Pharmacopoeia, l)ut is briefly noticed in Dr.
Pereira's Materia Mcdica [777.)

Aa/iixpui'i),
Lampsana, Nippleivort, when eaten supplies l)ad juices to
the body. In a cataplasm it is detergent and discutient.
III. 14

210 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Commentary. It ajjpears pretty certain tliat it is tlie
' ' ' Charlock^ that is to say, either the Raphanus Haplianistrum
or Sincqn Arvense. Both are known by the Enghsh name of
Charlock. It is rather a potherb than a medicine.

AaircSov,
Lapathura, Dock, is possessed of moderately discutient
powers ; but the oxylapathum is also somewhat repellent. The
seed, particularly of the oxylapathum, being astringent, cui'es
diarrhoeas and dysenteries. The leaves, in so far, have opposite
qualities to the seed ; for they, when eaten, loosen the belly,
whereas it, when drunk, proves astringent.
CoMM. Commentary, Of the Rumices, the Oxylapathum, or Rumex
acutus, was the species most used in medicine, and is the only
one particularized by our author, with the exception of the
hippolopathum already described. Of the four other species
described by Dioscorides^ the o^nXlq is pretty generally ac-
knowledged as the Rumex acetosa. The others cannot be
determined with any degree of accuracy. See Sprengel,
Sibthorp, Matthiolus, Parkinson, Gerard, and Rutty. Dios-
corides gives the first of his species much the same characters
as our author, recommending it most especially as a discutient
application to leprosies and scrofulous tumours. He also
speaks favorably of it as applied on a pessary in the fluor
albus. The roots, he adds, boiled in wine, cure jaundice, and
act as lithontriptics, emmenagogues, and alexiph armies. He
further speaks of the dock as being appended in the form of
an amulet for scrofulous swellings, (ii, 140, 141.) Galen and
the other Greek authorities treat cursorily of the lapatha, like
our author. They occur in the works of Hippocrates and of
Celsus ; the latter ranks the lapathum among the articles of
food which contain bad juices (ii, 21), are bad for the stomach
(ii, 25), and are laxative of the bowels (ii, 29.) Pliny^s account
of the lapatha is mostly taken from Dioscorides. (H. N. xx, 85.)
The term rumex, now generally applied to the genus dock, is
taken from Pliny (xix^ 60.) The dock is recommended by
Africanus in jaundice, dropsy, and for the cure of leprosy,
lichen, and alphos. (Geopon. xii, 38.) Macer, in the tenth
century, describes it under the name of parateUa, and, like
the more ancient authorities, commends it externally for the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 211

cure of cutaneous diseases, and internally as an astringent. Comm.
The Arabians, in like manner, prescribe it in these cases, and " '
in general copy from Dioscoridcs in treating of the different
species of dock. See in particular AAicenna (ii, 2, 53) ;
Serapion (c. 3); Ebn Baithar (i, 32 i.) The last of these
treats fully of the rumices, but does not seem to describe any
species not noticed by the Greeks.

AEt/IWJ'lOf,

Limonium, Sea Lavender ; its fruit being austere, is given
to the amount of an acetabulum, with wine, in cajliac and
dysenteric affections, in haemoptysis, and for the uterine dis-
charge.

Commentary. Oui' author's account of the limonium is Comm.
borrowed from Dioscoridcs, who describes the plant as having
leaves like beet, but more slender and longer, a slender straight
stem, like that of the lily, filled with red fruit of an astringent
taste. Like our author, he recommends it in cases requiring
astringents. As far as we can judge, the characters here given
it by Dioscoridcs apply very well to the plant called sea
lavender or red behen, namely, the Statice Limonium, L.
Compare Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 1234) and Gray
(Suppl, to the Pharmac.) with Dioscoridcs (iv, 16.) There
seems no necessity, therefore, for following Gesner in trans-
ferring it to the Polygonum Bistorta. The other authorities,
both Greek and Arabian, follow Dioscoridcs closely in treating
of the limonium. See Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 423) ; Avicenna
(ii, 2, 433) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 452.) The German editor of the
last of these, we are glad to find, agrees with us in referring
this article to the Statice Limonium.

Aa)(r/V,

Lichen ; that upon rocks, which is like moss, being pos-
sessed of detergent and, at the same time, moderately refrige-
rant and desiccative powers, cures lichen, and is anti-inflam-
matory ; and, as Dioscoridcs says, also stops hemorrhages.
The lichens of horses, Avlien triturated with vinegar, arc said
to cure epilepsy and the bite of every venomous animal.

Commentary. Our author's account of the vegetable is Comm.
abridged from Dioscoridcs, who, as stated by him, recommends " '

212 SIMPLES. [booktii.

CoMM. it for stopping hemorrhages^ and also for dispelling phlegmons
" • ' and cnring lichens : he adds, that it cures jaundice and removes
defluxions of the mouth when rubbed in with honey, (iv, 53.)
To which of the Lichenales of modern botanists it is applicable
is somewliat doubtful : whether to the Sticta ptihnonacea, as
Matthiolus held ; to the Peltidea aphthosa ; or to the Peltigera
canina. Compare Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. 1. c.) with Lindley
(Veg. King. 48), and Parkinson (1315.) This is also e-^-idently
identical with the second species of lichen described by Pliny.
(H, N. xxA-i, 10.) His former species is the Marchantia conica,
L. (Ibid.) See Harduin (apud 1. c.)

The \iiyrr]v^Q ittttwi' are the well-knoAvn callosities forming
at the knees of horses, called spavins in English. See further,
Harduin ad Plin. H. N. xxviii, 49. They are thus described by
Cselius Aurelianus : " Sunt autem squamulse anteriorum crurum
sub armoi'um partibus in ipsis animalibus (equis) nata; has
Grseci lichenas vocant, sive chelidonas, nos vero impetigines
vel hirundines." (Tard. Pass, i, 4.) The Empirics gave them
for the cm'e of epilepsy. (Ibid.) See Avicenna (ii, 233) and
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 271.)

AfOi^roTTfraXov,

Leontopetalum, Lion' s-leaf ; its root is heating and desic-
cative in the third degree, and is possessed of discutient
powers.
CoMM. Commentary. Although Dioscorides has described this
' — '' — ' plant with more than his wonted accuracy, there is still some
uncertainty regarding it, some holding it to be the Leontice
Leontopetalon, and others the Corydalis bidbosu. Tlie latter
would appear to agree better in character with the description
of Dioscorides than the other. See Lindley (Veg. King. 436.)
The other authorities treat of it in very general terms, like
oiu* author, except Oribasius, who gives a pretty minute de-
scription of it, like Dioscorides. It is noticed by Ebn Baithar
(ii, 186), who, however, does not supply much additional in-
formation. Dr. Sontheimer sets it down for the Leontice
Leontopetalon.

AfTTtOtOl',

Lepidium, Pejiperivort (by some called Iberis), belongs to

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 213

the fourth order of calefacients^ being like the cress in powers,
but less desiccative.

Commentary. Our author's account of this plant (which Comm.
is Lepidium latifoHinn, Pepperwort) is mostly taken from " ' '
Galen, Dioscorides says it is made into a pickle with milk,
and that the power of its leaves is acrid and ulcerative, and
hence it is used in a cataplasm for sciatica. He says further
of it, that it is also applicable in diseases of the spleen, removes
leprosy, and that its root would seem to soothe pains of the
teeth when appended to the neck as an amulet, (ii, 205.) It
is to be remarked that Dioscorides always speaks of the virtues
of amulets in ambiguous terms. It is described by the Ara- ^

bians under the name of Sltarig or Scitaragi. See Rhases
(Contin. 1. ult. i, 655) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 657.) Avicenna's
description of it is somewhat confused, and cannot be easily
reconciled with that of Dioscorides, but with regard to its
medicinal virtues^ they are quite agreed. Bimasuy, one of
Rhases's authorities^ says of it, that its seed is like the seed of
nasturtium, but not so heating. Beckmann mentions that the
Lepidium latifolium was at one time used as a kitchen vege- ,
table, and was called, in England^ poor man's pepper. (Hist,
of Invent.)

AiTTlQ,

Squama, Flake; all kinds are strongly desiccative and
astringent, and pungent in no inconsiderable degree. But
the squama seris (Flakes of copper) is more desiccative, con-
sists of more subtile particles, and has also some verdigris,
more especially that from Cyprian nails, which is hence called
clavaris. The squama fcrri is possessed of more astringency,
and still more that which is formed from the edge of sharp
instruments, called stomoma, hence it is better for ill-con-
ditioned ulcers. But the squama seris cleanses and melts down
flesh more.

Commentary. The squama seris was a black per-oxyd of Comm.
copper. The squama ferri, a black oxyd of iron. The stomoma '
was the chalybs or steel. See Dioscorides (v, 89), with the
Commentaries of ^latthiolus and Sprengel, and also the
Appendix to Dunbar's Lexicon. Geoftroy says of the squama
icris, that it is little diftcrent from the tes astum being only

214 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. the particles of burnt copper that fly off wlieu hammered.

" * ' Dioscorides calls it astringent and epulotic : when drunk with
honeyed water, he says, it is phlegmagogue ; some give it in
flour as a pill ; it is mixed, he adds, with ophthalmic remedies,
drying defluxions, and removing asperities of the eyehds.
The stomoma, he says, is inferior to the squama seris as a
purgative, (v, 89, 90.) Our author's account of these sub-
stances is borrowed from Galen. Aetius also copies from Galen.
Oribasius gives a fuller description of them^ differing very little
from that of Dioscorides. The Arabians . treat of all these
substances, as usual, borrowing freely from Dioscorides, and
not adding much of their own. See in particular A\dcenna
(ii, 2, 231) ; Serapion (c. 404) ; Khases (Cont. 1. ult. vi, 48) ;
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43.) They prescribe the squama seris
internally as a purge, and say of it that when the palate is
smeared with it vomiting is excited. These substances occur in
the Hippocratic treatises and in the works of Celsus. They have
not been used medicinally in this country for some time past.
The Hindoos use the preparations of copper both internally
and externally, according to Dr. Royle. (Hindoo Med. 90.)

AiVKciKavOov,
Leucacanthon, JVJiite Acanthus (called also Polygonaton
and Ischias) ; its root is of a cutting nature and desiccative
in the third degree, and it is heating in the first.
CoMM. Commentary. We can only determine for certain that it
' ' ' belonged to the Cai^duinece, but can scarcely venture to fix the
genus, so loose is the description which the ancient authors
have given of it, and so various the conjectures of modern
commentators and herbalists respecting it. Upon the whole,
the preponderance of the authorities is in favom- of the Cirsium
tuberosum. Dioscorides says of it, that its root is intensely
bitter, and that the decoction of it with wine relieves chronic
pleurisy and sciatica, ruptures and sprains, and further, that
it relieves toothache, (iii, 19.) Galen recommends it in
cseliac and stomach afi'ections and hemoptysis ; as a cataplasm
to swellings, and a cure to toothache when used as a gargle,
Aetius gives the same character of it. The Arabians ascribe
the same virtues to it, and also hold it to be alexipharmic.
See in particular A\icenna (ii, 2, 80, 671) and Rhases (Cont.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 215

1. ult. i, 1 18.) The use of it in mediciue is as old as the Comm.
Hippocratic age. See Dierbach's INIateria Medica Hippocr. ' ' '

AevKciq,

Leucasj is heating and desiccative in the third degree, but
its prevaiHng property is acrimony.

Commentary. It appears certainly to be a species of Comm.
Lani'mm, either the album or the mucidatum. See Parkinson
(Theatre of Plants, 672) and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor.) Diosco-
rides commends it as an application to venomous animals,
especially those of the sea. (iii, 103.) The other authorities
treat of it in general terms, like our author, who copies almost
word for word from Galen.

Aeu/cotoi',

Viola alba, Stock G'lUyfloioer ; the whole plant is detergent
and attenuating, especially its flowers, and those in particular
which are drier, so that it promotes menstruation, kills and
ejects the foetus ; and if their powers are blunted by a mixture
with water, they will answer with inflammations, particularly
those of the uterus. The roots being possessed of similar
powers, are composed of more gross matter, and are more
terrene. But with vinegar they relieve indurated phlegmons.

Commentary. That the plant here described was stock, Comm.
i. e. Clieiranthus Cheiri, is uuquestionable. Dioscorides evi- '
dently included also another plant of the same order under
this head, which, as stated by Sprengel, may probably be a
variety of the Matthiola incana. He gives nearly the same
account of its medicinal virtues as our author. Dioscorides
says it kills the fcetus in utero when applied on a pessary ;
and Galen and Aetius ascribe the same poAvers to it when
taken in a draught. By the Ai'abians it is obscurely treated
of, their authorities in general seeming to confound it with
the violet. See Rhases (Ad Mansor. iii, 21) ; Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 37, 226) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 103.) The last 'of these
does little more than copy from Galen and Dioscorides. It is
not contained in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia. It is the
Viola lutea of our herbalist Gerard, and held a place in our
Dispensatory as late as Quincy.

216 SIMPLES. [book VII.

AeVKT],

Populus alba^ the White Poplar ; the tree being composed
of a watery, tepid, and terrene substance, has detergent pro-
perties.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be no doubt of its being the
Populus alba, L. Dioscorides says of it, that its bai'k, when
taken in a draught, cures sciatica and strangury; that it is
said to prevent conception ; and that it is a remedy for earache
and other complaints, (i, 109.) Our author copies from Galen.
The Arabians, under this head, are ser^dle copyists from the
Greeks. See Serapion (c. 30) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 333) ; and
Ebn Baithar (i, 340.)

AipavwTlq,
Rosmarinus, Rosemai^y ; there are three varieties of it, one
of which is sterile, and the other two bear fruit. They are
possessed of detergent, incisive, discutient, and emollient
powers. The juice of them, with honey, cures dimness of
sight occasioned by thick humours. A decoction of that
variety, which is used for garlands, proves serviceable in
jaundice.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides, like our author, describes three
species, of which the first bears a fruit called cachrys, a term
pre^dously used by Theophrastus and Nicander, and from
which the plant has now got the scientific appellation of
Cachrys Libanotis. The root of this plant is still kept by our
apothecaries, although it has long ceased to hold a place in
our Dispensator3\ See Gray's Suppl. to the Pharmacop. (80.)
The second species is probably the Ferula nodiflora. The
third cannot be satisfactorily determined. Our old English
herbalists give the libanotis the name of " herb frankincense."
(See Parkinson and Gerard.) These libanotides, however, must
be distinguished from "the libanotis, called rosmarinus by the
Romans,'' which was the well-known Rosmarinus officinalis,
and of which the flower, known by the name of anthos, Avas
in frequent use as a medicine in the age of Sydenham, and
still retains a place in our Dispensator}^ We have been
obliged to enter with more length than usual into the general
literature of this subject, to prevent the mistake of confounding

SECT. III.] SIMPLES.

the cachrijs with the rosmarinus, which might be readily done^ Comm.
if the distinction now adverted to had not been clearly pointed ^~"''
out. Dioscorides recommends the libanotides for various medi-
cinal purposes, as being emmenagoguCj diuretic, and discutient.
Our author^s character of them is mostly taken from Galen.
The Arabians treat obscurely and confusedly of this subject. See
particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 67) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 71) ;
Serapion (c. 327.) Rhases says of the rosemary, that it is
calefacient and attenuant, and hence proves carminative,
diuretic, and emmeuagogue. In the modern Greek Pharma-
copoeia the Rosmarinus officinalis stands as the representative
of the \i^avioT\q. (Athens, 1837.)

AtjSai'dtToc,

Thus, Frankincense is heating in the second order, and
desiccative in the first. It has also a slight sub-astringency.
The bark of it is perceptibly astringent. It is, therefore, desic-
cative in the second degree complete. Consisting of thicker
matter than the frankincense, and being less acrid, it cures
ha3moptysis, dysentery, cseliac and stomachic affections, both
cxternall}' and when taken internally. The green shoot of it
is heating and desiccative in the third degree. It is also
somewhat detergent, by which property it cleanses and fills
ulcers in the eyes.

Commentary. It is still by no means satisfactorily deter- Comm.
mined what tree it is which produces the frankincense ; but
the best authorities are now inclined to think that it is the
Boswellia turifera. See Pereira (Mat. Med., 1185) ; Ainslie
(Mat. Ind. 78) ; and Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 459.) Dioscorides
savs the best kind of incense is " the male," bv which the
ancients meant the purest kind of it, or that consisting of the
larger grains. See Gray (Pharmacop. 200.) The Indian is
of an inferior quality. He calls it heating, astringent, and
cleansing ; and recommends it in hemorrhages, recent wounds,
burns, cliilblains, and other diseases of a like nature. lie gives
minute directions for the use of it in fumigations. The ])ark
of the frankincense tree he recommends in fluxes and hemor-
rhages, and in ulcers of the eyes. The manna of frankincense
will be explained by us uudcr that head. (Mat. Med. i, 81-3.)
Oribasius gives a perfectly similar account of the frankincense;

218 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. indeed, he avowedly copies from Dioscorides. (Med. Collect, xi.)
' • ' Our author's account is mostly taken from Galen. On the
Thus see further Pliny (H. N. xii, 30) and Rhases (Contin.
xxxvii, § 716.) Most of the ancient authorities affirm that it
acts heneficially in mental disease, that it sharpens perception,
and improves the memory. They also recommend it in fumi-
gations for removing the pestilential constitution of the atmo-
sphere, as we have stated in the Second Book. Symeon Setli,
mostly borrowing from Galen and our author, says, under the
head of frankincense, that it is of a drying nature, with a
certain astringent quality ; that it binds the bowels ; in fumi-
gations helps coughs and defluxions ; is emmenagogue both
when drunk and applied per vaginam; that in fumigations it
is possessed of powers for averting the pestilence ; and hence
in a pestilential season that houses should be dihgently fumi-
gated with it, in order to correct the pernicious quality of the
air. The Arabians used it very freely as an ingredient in
their applications to ulcers, including those of the eyes. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 525) and Serapion (c. 278.) Averrhoes, like
preceding authorities, recommends the bark in fluxes, ha3mo-
ptysis, and ulceration of the intestines. (Collig. v. 42.) The
frankincense occurs frequently in the treatises contained in the
Hippocratic collection, and in the works of Celsus. The latter
used all the kinds mentioned by the Greeks, such as, " thus
masculum," " fuligo thuris,'^ and '' cortex thuris.^' These he
uses for the same purposes as the Greeks, that is to say, for
suppressing bleeding, concocting pus, cleansing sores, and so
forth.

Aiyvvq,
Fuligo, the Soot arising from certain kinds of substances when
they are burnt, such as frankincense, myrrh, turpentine, storax,
liquid pitch, and cedar, is desiccative, terrene, and attenuate :
but there are varieties of it agreeably to the material that is
burnt. It is used for ophthalmic remedies and those for
adorning the eyebrows. That which is most used is the soot
from frankincense, as being the mildest ; and again, that from
the pine, wild pine and pitch tree, as being the strongest.
It is applied, therefore, for baldness of the eyebrows, and
for watery and ulcerated canthi of the eyelids, and weeping
eyes.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 219

Commentary. Little need be said under this head. PHny Comm.
recommends it along with vinegar as an application to erysi- '
pelas. Galen recommends it in the same cases as our author.
He defines the soot to be the remains of the fire which con-
sumed the materiel. Serapion's account of it is entirely taken
from Galen. Dioscorides (i, 84) and Oribasius (Med. Collect.
xi) describe more minutely than any of the others the pro-
cess for preparing the Fuligo Thuris. It was used principally
in ulcers of the eyes. The soot of storax and myrrh, as
Serapion says, is prepared agreeably to the same process as
that of frankincense.

AiyvariKov,

Ligusticum, Lovage ; the root and seed of it are heating to
such a degree as to promote menstruation. It is also very
carminative.

Commentary. We have always thought that the Ligusticum Comm.
Levisticum had been introduced into this country by the Romans, " '
in order to supply them with an article frequently used by them
at home, as a condiment. See the works of Apicius (pluries.)
Dioscorides describes it minutely, and recommends it in a
great variety of complaints, as an emmenagogue and diuretic,
to promote digestion and dispel flatulence. He also mentions
that it was often used as a condiment in place of pepper, (iii,
51.) Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it very
succinctly. The Arabians ascribe to it anthelminthic and
alexipharmic powers. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 377) ;
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. iii, 17.) It is not met with in the works
of Celsus, nor, as far as we can discover, in those of Hippocrates.
Lovage held a place in the INIateria INIedica with all its ancient
characters down to a late date. See the works of Parkinson,
Gerard, Culpeper, Rutty, and Quincy. It holds a place in the
modern Greek Pharmacopoeia (97.)

XiQaoyvQoq,
Spuma Argenti, Litharge, is of the middle order among me-
tallic substances ; we therefore often use it as the vehicle for
other remedial powers. It is moderately desiccativc, detergent,
and astringent ; hence it is used for excoriations of the thighs
from friction.

220 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. The ancient Litharge was nowise different
' ' from the raodernj being a secondary product in the cupellation
of argentiferous lead. It was, therefore, a protoxide of lead.
The varieties of it known to the ancients, and their modes of
preparing it, are circumstantially described by Pliny (II. N.
xxxiii, 35), Dioscorides (v, 72), and Oribasius (Med. Collect,
xiii.) It was used by the Hippocratists in the practice of
medicine. (De Morb. Mulier. ii.) It is the " Spuma Argenti" of
Celsus, who notices it in various parts of his works as a cooling
and cleansing medicine, (v, 290.) Dioscorides merely says of
it, that washed litharge seems to suit ophthalmic remedies, \m-
seemly cicatrices, wrinkled faces, and maculae, (v, 102.) Our
author condenses what Galen says under this head. The
Arabian authorities treat of it fully, but supply little or no ad-
ditional information respecting it. See Serapion (De Simpl.
410); Avicenna (ii, 2, 460) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 428.) They recommend it generally as an
astringent in fetor of the armpits, to restrain copious perspi-
ration, to dispel extravasated blood, and remove unseemly
cicatrices, and especially the marks of variolse and morbilli. It
does not appear that any of the physicians administered it in-
ternally ; but Avicenna mentions that lie had known women
give it in fluxes and ulceration of the intestines. Ebn
Baithar is very full on this head (ii, 513.) One of his
Arabian authorities, Ibn Ben Amram, recommends it in
diarrhoea, as a clyster to stop the discharge ; and mixed up
with vinegar and rose-oil, it is said to be useful in congenital
hernia and other complaints about the scrotum.

A/001,
Lapides, Stones ; all kinds are desiccative like earth ; but
the Haematites, or Blood-stotie, is astringent and desiccative in a
considerable degree, so that it agrees with trachoma of the eye-
lids, and if they are free from inflammation it is to be used
Avitli water; but if inflamed, with an egg. It is drunk also
with advantage for spitting of blood ; and it restrains the fun-
gous flesh of ulcers. The Schistos or Scissilis has similar pro-
perties, but is weaker : and after it the Galactites, or Milk-
stone. The Melititis, or Honey-stone, has also a certain degree
of heat. The Moroxus (called also Leucographis), being so

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 221

much softer than the others, and possessing no active quaUty,
is much more mihl, and occasions less pain ; it is, therefore,
used as an apphcation to the soft parts of the body with
cerate for the cicatrization of ulcers. The greenish Jasper,
being possessed of stronger powers, attenuates cicatrices and
pterygia. The Green Jasper is useful in stomach complaints,
when appended as an amulet, and when worn in a ring. That
called the Judaic-stone breaks renal calculi, and hence the
moderns have called it Tccolithos. The Pyrites acts as a
powerful discutient of tumours and coagula; and when it is
not at hand, the Mohms may be used instead. The Phi'ygian,
in addition to being powerfully desiccative, has also some
astringency and pungency ; hence it is repellent and discu-
tient, and is therefore mixed up with ophthalmic remedies.
The Ageratus, being possessed of astringent and discutient
powers, is of use in inflammations of the uvula. The flower
of the Asian-stone is composed of so subtile parts that it cor-
rodes flabby flesh without pungency. The Gagate-stone, being
considerably desiccative, agrees principally with chronic cases
of emphysema. The Magnet (called also the Heraclean-stone)
has similar powers to the Haematites. The Arabian-stone is
like ivory, desiccative and detergent. Some give those aftected
with stomach complaints a draught composed of burnt Ala-
baster. The Smeris, Emery, having detergent powers, cleanses
the teeth. The stones found in Sjmiiges break down renal
calculi ; and those formed on the Argsean mountain of Cap-
padocia are possessed of similar powers, and in like manner the
stone called Ojjhites, which is appended as an amulet with ad-
vantage to those bitten by the viper. The Ostracites and Geodes
are said to be considerably desiccative so as to cure inflammatory
swellings. The Ketrimentum Naxiaj cotis, filings of the Naxian
Whetstone, is said to be refrigerant, so as to repress the breasts
of virgins, and the testicles of children. The filings of the
Cos oleraria, being detergent, suit with alopecia. It is said that
the Hieracites and Indian-stone, Avhen appended as amulets,
stop the discharge of blood from hemorrhoids, and that the
Sapphire, when drunk, rclie\'es persons bitten by the scorpion,
and the Aphrose/inum, epileptics. The Armenian-stone purges
the belly downwards, but is prejudicial to the stomach.

222 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. The following account of the stones used
by the ancients in the practice of medicine is derived from a
careful study of the ancient writers on this subject^ especially
Theophrastus, Pliny, Orpheus, and Psellus. We have also
availed ourselves freely of the labours of the modern commen-
tators who have written on these ancient authors, namely, De
Laet, De Boet, Marbodeus, Hill, and others. For a fuller
description of some of the articles, we would beg to refer to
our Appendix to Dunbar's English and Greek Lexicon.

The H(ematites or Blood-stone was so called from its colour,
or because it was used as a styptic for stopping hemorrhages,
as stated by Galen. It consists principally of the oxide of
iron. Professor Cleaveland says it contains fi'om 60 to 80 per
cent, of iron of excellent quality. It was used for the cure of
ophthalmy. See Dioscorides (v, 143) ; Galen (De Simpl. ix) ;
Serapion (De Simpl. 421.) They also recommend it in me-
norrhagia. Alexander praises it in hjemoptysis. Averrhoes
recommends it in diseases of the eyelids and eyes. (Collig. iv,
43.) Dr. Hill says it is accounted astringent and desiccative.
He adds, " it is given from 10 to 25 grains in hemorrhages and
in distemperatures of the eyes.^' Besides this, the ancients
were acquainted with another Blood-stone which they call
Heliotrope.

The Schistos is only a variety of the haematites, having a
fibrous appearance and ochre colour. Pliny says it is used in
diseases of the eyes.

The Lapis Melitites of Pliny is supposed by Dr. Kidd to
have been borax, or the borate of soda. Pliny recommends
it mixed with wax for ulcers of the throat. (H. N. xxxxvi, 33.)
See Isidorus (Orig. xvi, 4.) It seems likely that it was the
same as the tincar of the Arabians, although on this point we
do not venture to pronounce a decided opinion. One of
Serapion's authorities speaks highly of it in caries of the tepth,
and says it kills the worms in them. Is this the original of the
popular belief, that toothache is connected with worms in the
teeth ? (De Simpl. 423.)

The Galactites most probably consisted principally of chalk.
Matthiolus and Sprengel mention that it is fovind in Saxony.
Dr. Hill remarks that it is, properly speaking, a species of in-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 223

duratcd clay, and not a stone. Dr. Jameson conjectures that it Comm.
may have been Fuller's earth. Dioscorides recommends it as " ' '
a liniment in defluxions of the eyes, (v, 149.)

The Morochthus, according to Sprengel, is called Speckstein
and Seifemtein in German. It consists of talc, argil, and
silica, with a small proportion of iron and manganese. Dr.
Hill says it is an indurated clay, and is now known by the
name of French chalk. Dioscorides recommends it in haemo-
ptysis, cajliac affections, and pains of the bladder ; and for the
cure of fiuor albus on pessaries, (v, 151.) Avicenna speaks
favorably of it also in fistula lachrymalis. (ii, 2, 431.)

The Achates, or Agate, is well described by Orpheus, and
recommended as a remedy for fever and various other com-
plaints. It does not seem to be noticed by the medical
authorities.

The ancients were acquainted with several varieties of Jasper.
See Pliny (H. N. xxxvii, 37.) Thej^ contained talc and various
other ingredients. Dioscorides recommends it solely as a
phylactery or amulet to expedite delivery, (v, 159.) Galen and
Avicenna speak of its being useful as an amulet in affections
of the stomach and bowels. The latter calls it Lapis aneseh.
(ii, 2, 108.) Even in modern times the Jasper has been cele-
brated as an amulet. See Andreas Laurentius (De Mirab.
Strum. Sanat. 69), and Hill (Mat. Med. 276.)

The Judaic-stone appears to be the Tecolithos of Pliny. It
is now ascertained that it is formed from the quills of the
Echinus Marinus, impregnated with calcareous earth, silica,
and perhaps some magnesia. Most of the ancient authorities
commend it as a lithontriptic. V. Harduin in Plin. H. N.
xxxvii, 08. Dioscorides recommends it not only as a lithon-
triptic medicine, but a remedy for dysuria in general, (v, 154.)
Galen and Serapion also affirm that ihej had experienced good
effects from it when given in calculus of the kidneys or bladder.
See in particular Serapion (c. 390.) Rhascs, howevei', affirms
that he had tried the lapis vesicae, by which he probably means
this article, but had not found it to be lithontriptic. (Cont.
1. ult. 414.) Dr. Hill says it is, undoubtedly, diuretic, but it is
not so certain that it is lithontriptic.

The Pyrites, when burnt, forms an oxide of copper with
sulphur. From our author's account, it is evident that the

224 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Molaris nearly resembled it, and the same may be understood
" ' ' from Plin3\ It will, of course, be understood tliat it is the cop-
per pyrites, and not the iron. This is very obvious from the
description of it ^iven by Dioscorides. He calls it heating,
detergent, and a cleanser of obscurities of the eyes, and recom-
mends it for repressing fungated ulcers. When burnt, he adds,
some call it diphryges. It is described under the name of
marchasita by Serapion (c. 395), Ehases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 449),
and A\acenna (ii, 2, 464.) They all recommend it with vinegar
in leprosy and other obstinate diseases of the skin.

The Phrygian-stone was a pumice with alum and some other
ingredients. Dioscorides says it has astringent, cleansing, and
moderately escharotic powers, and proves a remedy for burns.
(v, 140.) Galen professes to have had great experience of it
in diseases of the eyes. (Ed. Basil, t. ii, 122, 208.) See also
A'sdcenna (ii, 2, 405.)

The Ageratus does not occur we believe in Dioscorides or
Pliny. Galen calls it a stone which the curriers of leather
use. He says it is astringent and acrid, and recommends it
particularly in inflamed uvula. Avicenna copies from him.
(ii, 2, 409.")

The Anthrax or Carbuncle of the ancients comprehended
the ruby and a multitude of other gems of the same colour.
It was scarcely used in medicine.

De Boet says that the Asian-stone is light and spongy,
and contains alum, nitre, and salt. Dioscorides calls it slightly
septic and discutient, and recommends it as an application to
old, and more especially fungated, ulcers, and those of a malig-
nant nature. The flower of it, by M'hich vras meant an efflo-
rescence on the surface of it, he says does good in phthisis.
He further says of it, that a hip-bath prepared with it is
highly beneficial in the cure of gout, (v, 141.) Galen, and the
other authorities treat of it in more general terms. (De Simpl.
ix.) See also Serapion, who mereh^ copies from Dioscorides
and Galen, (c. 393.)

The Amethyst of our times is the same gem that the
ancients knew by this name. Except that it was suspended
from the neck as an amulet to prevent drunkenness, we are
not aware that it was used in medicine. See Pliny (H. N.
xxxvii, 40) ; Marbodeus (De Lapid. 4.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 225

The Gagate is a fossil, bituminous substance, containing Comm.
carbon and ethereal oil. It is jet. The TJiracian-stone was ' ' '
similar to it ; indeed, we suppose, a variety of it. The Gagate
was used by the ancients as a test of epilepsy, and a restorative
from hysterical fits. Galen gives an interesting account of
his experience in the medicinal use of gagate and Thracian-
stone, the result of which is, that he found gagate rather to
weaken than increase the powers of the bitumen which he had
picked up upon the shores of the Dead Sea ; but that as a desic-
cant, it operated beneficially in the cure of sores, and that
not only of recent, but also of sinuous ulcers. (De Simpl. ix.)
He mentions that he could not discover the river Gagas in
Lycia, from which, according to Dioscorides, this stone derives
its name. (Ibid.) There is an interesting description of the
Thracian-stonc in a passage of Nicander quoted by Galen,
under this he.id, Theriac. (45.) The Arabians who treat of it
merely copy from the Greeks. See Rhases (Cent. 1. ult. 399,
400), and Avicenna (ii, 2, 407.) Mesne gives a formula for an
oil of gagate. (De Oleis, i.)

Aristotle suggests that perhaps the Magnet is animated.
(De Anima.) To comprehend his reasons for maintaining this
singular opinion, it would be necessary to understand his
theory of motion, as fully exposed in his ' Auscultationes
Naturales.' Lucretius, with considerable ingenuity, attempts
to explain the manner in which the magnet attracts iron,
(vi, 1000.) Plato (in Timseo) and Hippocrates (De Steri-
libus) also allude to its attractive property. Galen recom-
mends it in dropsies. Dioscorides, Galen, and the other Greek
authorities treat of it in a very cursory manner, merely stating of
it that it has the same virtues as the haematite. The Arabians,
more especially Serapion, give a much fuller description of
it, which at all events identifies the Magnetis or Heraclean-
stone of the ancients with our loadstone, that is to say, the
magnetic oxide of iron. It was used by the Arabians as an
application to poisoned wounds. See Serapion (De Simpl.
394) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 463.) It Avas used in the practice of
medicine from the earliest date. See Hippocrates (De Sterilibus.)
Ebn Baithar recommends it in pains of the head and feet, if
taken hold of, and in cramps, lie copies Aetius. (ii, 25.)

The Arabian-stone is a species of white marble. It is re-
in. 15

226 SIMPLES. [book vii,

CoMM. commended by Dioscorides for hemorrhoids and as a dentifrice,
"--^(v, 145.)

The Alabastrites is a thick concrete gypsum. See Kidd's
'Mineral.^ (ij63.) Galen says of it^ that when burned it is adapted
for medicinal use, and that it is sometimes administered
in a draiight to persons affected with stomach complaints.
Dioscorides speaks of its being applied externally in such cases
along with wax ; calls it discutient, and says it represses the
gums, (v, 152.) It would appear that this article is the Lapis
eburneus of R-hases, who calls it an astringent and dentifrice.
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 395.)

Geoffroy says that the Smiris is the Emery of the shops. It
is held by the mineralogists to be a variety of Corundam. See
Cleaveland^s ' Mineral.' (278.) A specimen of it, from the Isle
of Naxos (which may be supposed a good representation of the
ancient Smiris), was found by Tennant to consist principally
of alumine, with small proportions of silex and oxide of iron.
Dioscorides recommends it in looseness of the gums, and as a
dentifrice; he ranks it with septic and caustic substances, (v,
165.)

The Stones in Sponges consist principally of the muriate of
lime. They were much commended as lithontriptics. See
Dioscorides, Pliny, Galen, and A^dcenna.

The Ophites is a pellucid stone, so called from its serpentine
streaks. It was that variety of serpentine called verde antico.
See Jameson's 'Mineralogy.' According to Dioscorides, it
was useful as an amulet in the case of persons stung by
snakes, and was also reported to be useful in lethargy
and headache, (v, 161.) Galen holds it to be lithontriptic. (De
Simpl. viii.) The Arabians copy from Dioscorides and Galen.
See A^dcenna (ii, 2, 406.)

The Ostracites appears to have been petrified oysters.
Dioscorides recommends it in menorrhagia, in inflamed
breasts, and spreading sores, (v, 164.) Galen also recommends
it for clearing the cornea. (De Simpl. ^iii.) See in like man-
ner Avicenna (ii, 2, 393.)

The Geocles contains iron, argil, and silica. It is nearly
alHed to the Eagle- stone, and hence it is often called the Bas-
tard Eagle-stone. See HilFs 'Theophrastus.' Dioscorides
recommends it as an ophthalmic remedy, and as a liniment for

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 227

inflammations of the mammse and testicles, (v^ 168.) Avicenna Comm.
says the vapour of vinegar in which it is dissolved checks the " ' '
flow of blood and cures hot aspostemes. (ii^ 2, 398.)

Matthiolus confesses himself quite unacquainted with the
Naxian Whetstoiie, Sprengel reckons it allied to the Smiris.
Galen would rather seem to make it a variety of the Ostracites.

The Lapis LyncKrius of the ancients was our Jacinth or
Hyacinth. See Beckmann, and De Laet, ' de gemmis.'
Dioscorides recommends it in aff'ections of the stomach and
bowels. {\\, 100.) Serapion describes minutely the Lajns iacinc-
tus, or hyacinth, but merely mentions of it that it was used as
a seal to avert the thunderbolt, (c. 398.) The stone Avhich he
describes in the following chapter, would appear decidedly to
be the Tourmaline. He calls it Lapis rubeus, seu, hager albu-
zedi. Used as a seal, he says it dispels bad dreams.

The Cos is composed of a schistose argil. The Cos OJearia
would appear to have derived its name from requii'ing the use
of oil to answer the purpose of whetstone. See Pliny (H. N.
xxxvi, 47.)

It is impossible to determine accurately the nature of the
Hieracites. Aetius, who has given the fullest account of it,
describes it as a darkish green stone.

The Indian-stone would seem to be identical with the Arabian-
stone. Rhases (Cent. 1. ult. 401.)

The Lydian-stone is ranked by Dr. Thomson as a sub-species
of Flint-slate. He remarks that it was used as a touchstone
by the ancients.

The j^tites, or Eagle-stone, is a species of oxide of iron. Dr.
Hill remarks that custom has given the name of setites to
every fossil that has a loose nucleus within it. The ancients
used it very frequently as an amulet and incantation. See par-
ticularly Dioscorides and Aetius. The Arabians also confirm,
in the strongest terms, the imaginary efficacy of the Eagle-
stone when used as an amulet. That it accelerated the
delivery of woman in tedious labours, Serapion and Rhases de-
clare, from ample experience, and that it would produce this
beneficial effect on those who had faith in it we can readily
believe. Indeed, we have often regretted that such innocent
modes of working upon the imagination of women in labour
had given place to more dangerous methods of practice in such

228 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. cases. The Eagle -stone was retained in the English Dispensa-
tory with all its ancient characters as late as Quincy. (165.)

The Thyites, according to Fuchsius^ was a Turquoise; but
Matthiolus is of a different opinion. Sprengel thinks it may
have been a species of turquoise, although not the common
one. Dr. Hill says it contains a small quantity of copper,
which rendered it a valuable ingredient in collyria. It is pre-
scribed for this purpose by Dioscorides. (v, 153.)

The Atniantus is composed of talc, calcareous and siliceous
earth, clay, and a small proportion of iron. It is often confounded
with the Alumen plumosum of the ancients, to which it is com-
pared by Dioscorides. He does not mention any medicinal use
to which it was applied, but merely states of it that it was used
for forming the linum asbestinum. (v, 155.) See further Harduin
in Phn. H. N. (xxxvi, 31.)

The Sapphirus of the ancients is supposed by Beckmann to
have been the Lapis lazuli. (History of Inventions.) This
opinion is now pretty generally established, and yet there is a
difficulty attending it ; for the Arabians, in treating of the
Lapis lazuli, do not quote the descriptions of the sapphirus
given by Dioscorides and Galen, but apparently refer to the
cyanus. Dioscorides recommends the sapphirus as an alexi-
pharmic, and a remedy for internal ulcerations and diseases of
the eyes, (v, 156.) Galen merely recommends it as an antidote
to the stings of scorpions. Rhases, iinder the head of " Lapis
lazuli," quotes Dioscorides as saying of it that it promotes the
growth of the eyelashes, that it restrains fungous flesh, is sep-
tic, caustic, and ulcerative; and Galen, as saying of it, that it has
abstergent powers, with a moderate degree of attenuating and
styptic virtues ; that it may be mixed in coll^^ria for the
eyes, and especially for the eyelids when affected ' with sharp
humours, which it represses, and also prevents the growth of
the hairs. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 404.) See also Serapion (c. 389) ;
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43) ; and Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 45.)

The Calais of Pliny and the ancients is said by Dr. Hill to
be the Turquoise, or Gemma Turcica, which consists principally
of lime and iron. See the Thyites.

The MempJiites contains bitumen and ethereal oil. It is
the retinasphaltum of Mr. Ilatchett, or retinite of Jameson.
(Mineral, iii, 178.) According to Dioscorides, when rubbed

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 229

smoothly upon places about to be burnt or cut^ it renders them Comm.
insensible without danger, (v, 157^)

The Selenites consists principally of a compact lamellated
gypsum. According to Eustathius^ it is the same as the
LycJtnitis, which Dionysius the geographer, describes as re-
sembling fire in lustre. (Orbis. Descrip. 328.) It is soft,
pellucid, and colourless. Dioscorides describes it minutely,
and mentions of it that it was given as a draught to epileptics,
and used as a phylactery by women. He adds, that it was also
appended to trees in order to make them keep their' fruit,
(v. 158.) Rhases, under the head of "lapis lunaris," copies
this chapter of Dioscorides. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 405.)

The Lapis Specularis was the same as the Moscovy talc.
It was much used by the ancients for windows in place of
glass. It is a variety of selenite, or sparry gypsum. See
Kidd and Jameson, We have treated of it under the head of
Gypsum in the Fifth Book.

The Smaraydus of the ancients is unquestionably referable
to our emerald, but there is every reason to believe, also com-
prehended coloured crystals and certain stones of the jasper
kind. It does not occur in the works of Dioscorides or Galen;
and, as far as we know, Aetius is the first medical author who
describes it. He says of it, that when roasted and levigated
with Attic honey, it cures dimness of vision ; that it is most
useful in elephantiasis, both extei'nally and internally ; and
that as an amulet it restrains bleeding, (ii, 39.) We are not
aware that any other ancient authority, whether Greek,
Roman, or Arabian, has noticed it.

We will treat of the Bezour-stone and Gall-stone of the bull
in the Appendix to this section.

AiBi>aiTf:^lxov (called also XnoaTro^i^iov jj jjpa/cXetoi'),
Lithospcrmon, Gromwel, is the seed of the herl) called
Acgouychus, of a stony hardness, and white, which, when
drunk with white wine, proves lithontriptic and diuretic.

Commentary. Without doubt it is the' LitJiospermum Comm.
officinale, or Grnmioel. Pliny expresses himself respecting it ' ' '
in the following terms : " Ncc quidquam inter herbas majorc
quidcm miraculo aspexi. Tautus est decor, velut aurilicum
arte alteriiis inter folia candicantibus margaritis : tarn exqui-

230 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. sita difficultas lapidis ex herba nascentis." (H. N. xxvii, 74.)
' • ' Dioscorides describes it minutely, and, like our author, calls it
lithontriptic and diuretic, (iii, 148.) Serapion and Avicenna
give it the same characters, which it maintained in modern
times, as long as it held a place in the Dispensatory. See the
works of Parkinson, Culpeper, and Quincy.

Aivoairepiiiov,
Lini Semen, Linseed, is heating in the first order, and
holds the middle rank of diluents and desiccants. When eaten,
it is flatulent, even although roasted.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the seed of the Linum usitatissimwn,
' * ' Angl. Linseed. Dioscorides gives a long account of its medi-
cinal virtues, recommending it externally for ephehdes, van,
and other complaints, and internally as an expectorant and
aphrodisiacal medicine. He further commends it as an
enema in pains of the bowels and womb, and as a hip-bath
in inflammations of the uterus, (ii, 125.) Galen, like our
author, treats of it in very general terms. The Arabians, and
especially A^-icenna, give a more circumstantial account of it.
(ii, 2, 598.) See Serapion (c. 21) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 426.)
Like Dioscorides, they recommend it as an external application
to apostemes of a hard character, and internally for the cm'e
of diseases of the chest and intestines.

AivoZ,(vcrTi^,
Mercurialis, the herb Mercury, is considerably laxative of
the belly, and applied in cataplasms it is discutient. It ought
to be known that when its seed is rubbed upon those preter-
natural excrescences of the body, which ,the \Tilgar call
narphia, it is found to make them disappear. But the seed
must be green, and they must be often rubbed with it.
CoMM. Commentary. Most of the botanical authorities agree that
" '' ' it is the Mercurialis annua, L. It occurs frequently in the
Hippocratic treatises as an article of diet and gentle laxative.
Dioscorides, who, describes it in two separate places of his
INIateria Medica, (iii, 130 and iv, 188), speaks of it as being
a laxative pot-herb, and a medicine of which the decoction
in water proves cholagogue and hydragogue. He also alludes
to the popular notion that the leaves of the female plant.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 231

when applied to a woman's parts of generation after her Comm.
menstrual period, will promote conception of a female, while ' * '
those of the male plant will promote conception of a male.
It does not occuj in the works of Celsus, nor, as far as we can
discover, in those of any of the Arabians, with the exception
of Averrhoes, who calls it a gentle purgative of the same class
as Cassia fistula, tamarinds, and the like, and says it evacuates
yellow bile and phlegm ; and boiled in wine proves an excel-
lent application to large sores, and in particular to the ulcers
produced by burns. He further recommends its leaves boiled
in vinegar for diseases of the spleen, and its flower in a masti-
catory and errhine. (Collig. v, 42.) What our author says of
its virtues in the diseases called narplna, by the vulgar, is
taken from Aetius (i), where, however, the reading is carplda.
Galen says of it, " everybody uses the herb mercury for purg-
ing the belly." (De Simpl. Med.) Notwithstanding this testi-
mony, which is, in fact, confirmed by that of all the ancient
writers who have treated of it, Bergius says, " Virtus suspccta:
vis emollicns nondum rite nobis constat." HoAvever, Moses
Charras, who appears to have written from experience, affirms
of it that " it loosens the belly, and provokes the menstruums.
The dose is from oz. j to iij." (Roy. Pharm. 106.) Alston
Kkewise acknowledges its laxative powers. Dr. Hill says of it,
" This plant is of an emollient nature, and is eaten by many
people in the manner of spinach, which, when cultivated in the
garden, it greatly excels. If eaten largely it gently opens the
bowels." (Mat. Med.) It held a place in our Dispensatory as
late as Quincy. (106.)

AlTpOl',

Nitrum, 'Nitre (or ^oda ?), is possessed of intermediate
powers between the aphronitrum and salts. When burnt it
becomes more attenuate and discutient. If taken internally
it cuts and attenuates the thick and viscid humours more than
any other. The Chalestrsean (so called from Chalcstra, a
place in Thessalonica) is more acrid and desiccative, so that
it is used for defluxions from the head, and for arthritic com-
plaints.

Commentary. The following extract from Pliny's descrip- Comm.
tion of the nitrum clcailv indicates the substance to which he ' "

232 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. applies it : " Non est differeuda et nitri natui'a^ non multum
" * a sale distans. Exiguum fit apiid Medos, canesceutibus siccitate
convallibus, quod vocant halmyrhaga. Optimum copiosumque
in Litis Macedonise quod vocaut Chalestricum, eaudidum,
purumque^ proximum sali. Lacus est nitrosus, exsilieute e
medio dulci fonticulo. In ^gypto autem conficitur multo
abundantiusj sed deterius. Fit psene eodem modo quo sol,
nisi quod salinis mai'e infunduut, Nilum autem nitrariis."
(H. N. xxxi, 46.) Compare the above with the following
account of the native cai'bonate of soda : " In Egypt it is
plentifully found in what are called the Lakes of Natron.
These lakes, six in number, are westward of the Nile, not far
from Terrana, in a valley surrounded by Umestone. The car-
bouate and muriate of soda exist together in these waters ;
but when the water is diminished by natural evaporation, these
salts are deposited in distinct layers." (Broguiart, inCleaveland^s
Mineral., 133.) It would be superfluous to bring any further
proof that the ancient nitrum generally applies to our natron
or the native carbonate of soda. Were the Greeks, Romans,
and Arabians then entii'ely ignorant of saltpetre or the nitrate
of potash ? This seems incredible, considering how largely it
is distributed in Europe, Asia, and Africa ; and, therefore,
we cannot bring ourselves to think that this mineral can
have entirely escaped the observation of the ancients ; and if
this were the proper place for such a disquisition, we believe
that we could state satisfactory reasons for drawing the con-
clusion, that "nitrum" was applied to it as well as to the
other mineral. But at the same time, as mentioned above,
we are quite satisfied that by Rtrum and nitrum the medical
authors generally, if not universally, meant the native carbo-
nate of soda. Dioscorides, with regard to its medicinal powers,
merely states of it that it has alterative or metasyncritic powers,
(v, 129.) We have given his views respecting the Aphronitrum
under that head. Our author abridges Galen's account of it,
but omits to mention, as stated by Galen, and also by Aetius,
that the diflPerent kinds of nitre were popularly used as
counter-agents in cases of poisoning by mushrooms. All the
Arabians treat largely of this substance generally under the
name of baurach. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 84) ; Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. iii, 115); Mesue (De Simpl. xvii) j Serapiou (c. 401);

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 233

Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 46, 487) ; Ebn Baitliar (i, 187.) Rhases Comm.
marks what it is : " Nitrum appellatur Arabice natrum et est ' ' '
simile sali gemmse." (Cont. 1. ult. ii, 508.) They used it ex-
ternally for the rure of prurigo and scabies, and as an appli-
cation to diseased joints, and along with figs to remove
dropsical swellings. They recommend an injection of it into
the ear for the ciu-e of deafness. The aphronitrum, or African
nitrum, is said by Avicenna to be possessed of emetic powers,
and that it was more incisive of gross humours than the other
varieties of it. It was used by them in cases of poisoning
with mushrooms, cautharides, and bull's blood ; and as an
application to the bites of mad dogs. Mesne, with his wonted
precision, states its powers very distinctly, recommending it,
when given by the mouth, in clysters, and in suppositories as
an evacuant of crude and viscid phlegm, for colic and affections
of the stomach. Like Avicenna, he says that it will sometimes
occasion vomiting. His commentator, Costa, has many in-
genious observations on the ancient nitrum, which will be
found very interesting to those who desire to become better
acquainted with this subject. Haly Abbas states that friction
with it before the hour of invasion will prevent an attack
of ague.

Aoyyr^iTiq,

Lonchitis, Rough Spleenwort ; the root of that species
which has triangular seed, like a spear, resembles that of the
carrot, and is diuretic. But the green leaves of that species
which resembles the scolopcndrium, are agglutinative of wounds j
and when dried, and drunk with vinegar, they cure indurated
spleens.

Commentary. Our author's account of the two species of Comm.
Lonchitis is taken from Dioscoridcs. Of these, the former, which ' *
has been conjectured to be the Serapias Lingua, he says is diu-
retic. The other, which would seem to be the species oiaspidium,
to which the name is still appropriated, he calls vulnerary and
anti-inflammatory, and recommends for reducing the size of
the spleen. Galen and the other authorities give a similar
account of it. Such of the Arabians as treat of it follow
Dioscoridcs. Sec Avicenna (ii, 2, 33G.)

234 SIMPLES. [book vii.

AvKoxpig,
Lycopsis, Hound' s-tongue ; having an astringent root,
Dioscorides says, tliat Avhen applied Avitli polenta in a cata-
plasm, it agrees with erysipelas, and that if rubbed in with oil
it is sudorific.
CoMM. Commentary. It is either the Echium Italicum, L., or
' ' ' the Lycopsis echioides, L., probably the former. Our author,
as he acknowledges, borrows from Dioscorides. Galen, Aetius,
and Oribasius, as well as Hippocrates and Celsus, do not treat
of it at all. If the Arabians notice it, they do so under the
head of Anchusa.

AvKlOV,

Lycium, Buckthorn, is composed of heterogeneous powers,
one part of its ingredients being heating, attenuate, and dis-
cutient, and the other, or terrene part, being cooling and
gently astringent ; so that it is desiccative in the second degree,
and calefacient and refrigerant in an intermediate degree.
They use it, therefore, as a detergent in obstructions of the
pupil, and as an astringent in cseliac and dysenteric cases and
ill-conditioned ulcers ; and in inflammations as a discutient.
The Indian is the best.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides gives a sufficiently distinct de-
' ' ' scription of the tree which produces the lycium, so as to leave
no doubt that he points to the Rhamnus infectorius. The
Lycium Indicum of the same author, is now satisfactorily de-
teiTQined to be the product of the Berberis Lycium. See Royle
(Antiq. of Hind. Med. 32), and ' Linn. Transact.' (x^ii, 83) ; also
Pereii-a (Materia Medica, 1152.) Dioscorides recommends
the former of these as an astringent for the cure of various
complaints, such as obscm'ities of the cornea, psoriasis, and
pruritus of the eyelids, punilent ears and tonsils, ulcers of
the gums, chapped lips, fissure of the anus ; in ceeliac
and dysenteric afi'ections, both in draughts and clysters ; in
haemoptysis and coughs ; in female fluxes, hydrophobia, and so
forth. The Indian, he states, cures inflammation of the spleen
and jaundice, prevents menstruation, purges water, and is a
counter-agent to deadly poisons, (i, 132.) Galen's account of
it being nearly the same as oiu* author's, we need not expound
at any length. He holds that the Indian species is far stronger

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 235

tlian the other. (De Simpl. ix.) Oribasius and Aetiixs in like Comm.
manner follow Galen. Celsus recommends lycium strongly in ' " '
ulceration of the throat, (iv^ 4, 3.) As far as we have been
able to discover, it does not occur in the works of Hippocrates.
The Arabians treat fully of this article. See Hhases (Cont. 1.
ult. i, 429) ; A^^cenna (ii, 2, 390) ; Serapion (c. 7) ; Averrhoes
(v, 42.) We do not find that they supply any new views re-
garding its medicinal A^irtues. In the modern Greek Pharma-
copoeia the extract of catechu is set down as being the Lycium
Indicum. We agree, however, with the authorities quoted
above regarding it.

Lysimachium, Moneywort ; its prevailing power is astrin-
gency; hence it agglutinates wounds, and is styptic, both
itself and its juice. It also relieves dysentery when drunk and
injected.

CoMMEXTARY. Tlic L. of Dioscoridcs and our author is Comm.
most probably the Yellow Loose-strife of our English herba- ' ' '
lists, namely, Lysimachia vulyaris, L. Our author abridges
Dioscorides, who recommends it as an astringent in various
cases, such as heemoptysis, dysentery, fluor albus, hemorrhage
from the nose, and as a vulnerary and styptic herb, (iv, 3.)
Galen and Aetius treat of it in nearly the same words as our
author. We have not been able to find it in the works of the
Arabians, except Ebn Baithar, and yet we do not assert that
it may not be treated of under some name whic.h we have
not been able to interpret. Ebn Baithar merely quotes Dios-
corides and Galen. The lysimachia, althoiigh not now in-
cluded in our Dispensatories, still holds a place in the shops
of the apothecaries, with the character of being astringent.
See Gray's Supplement, &c. (48.)

Lychnis, Campion ; the seed of that species which is used
for garlands is hot and desiccative, according to the second
order complete.

CoMiMENTARY. This plant is the Lychnis coronaria of Comm.
Dioscoridcs, and still retains this name. Dioscondcs recom- ' * '
mends it in the case of persons stung by scorpions. The wikl
lychnis of Dioscoridcs may be either the Lychnis dioica or

236 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Agrostemma githago ; it is said by Dioscorides to be a chola-
" * ' gogue, and a remedy in the case of persons stung by scorpions,
(iii, 10^-5.) Galen and the other authorities merely state the
characters of the Lychnis coronaria in general terms. We have
not found this article in any of the Arabians, not even in Ebn
Baithar.

^ AwToq,

Lotus, Bird's-foot Trefoil (?) ; the cultivated species is by
some called trifolium. It is possessed of detergent and mode-
rately desiccative poAvers, and is of a proper temperament as
to heat. The seed of the wild lotus belongs to the second
order of calefacieuts, and is also somewhat detergent. The
seed of the Egyptian lotus is also made into bread. The Lote,
or Nettle-tree, consists of subtile particles, and is moderately
desiccative and astringent. Hence it is applicable for the female
fluor, and for fluxes of the bowels, both when drunk with wine
or water, or when used in an injection. It also strengthens
the hairs that are falling out.
CoMM. Commentary. ^Ve need not enter further into the literary
' * ' history of this interesting subject, which we have given at
some length in the Appendix, already so often referred
to, than to mention that the Lotus, called also Trifolium, is
referable to the Melilotus officinalis, and probably some of its
congeners, and the Lotus Arbor to the Zizyphus Lotus, with
perhaps some other trees of the same tribe. Dr. Lindley says
of it, " The Lote-bush, which gave its name to the ancient
Lotophagi, is to this day collected for food by the Arabs of
Barbary, who call it sadar, and its berries nabk.'^ (^ eg. Kingd.
582.) The wild lotus of Dioscorides and the other authorities
has never been satisfactorily determined. Perhaps it was the
species of melilotus named carulea. The Egyptian lotus, there
can be no doubt, was the Nymph(Ba Lotus, L. Dioscorides
gives a striking description of this last, which, he says, the
inhabitants ofEgj^pt use for making bread ; and it is deserring
of remark that the rhizomes of the nymphsea are still roasted
and eaten by the jSTegroes of Senegal. See further under
Nymphaa in this section. Our author's characters of the
other loti are copied from Dioscorides or Galen, who agree, in
the main, under this head. See, in like manner, Aetius and

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 237

Oribasius. The Arabians treat at great length of the different Comm.
loti, and more especially of the L. Arbor, with which they must ' ' '
have been famiharly acquainted. See AAicenna (ii, 3, 298, 513);
Serapion (c. 120) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. nit. i, 487) ; Ebn Baithar
ii, 539.) They all recommend it as a powerful astringent in
looseness of the bowels, bloody flux, monorrhagia, ulcers of
the bowels, and in asthma and affections of the chest. One
of Serapion^s authorities calls it stomachic and a whetter of
the appetite. The lotus occm's in the Hippocratic treatises ;
indeed, from the fable of the Lotophagi, contained in the
Odyssey of Homer, there can be no doubt that the lotus had
been known and used as an article of food long before the time
of Hippocrates.

Ma /CEO,

Macer is a bark brought from India, being desiccative in
the third order, and intermediate as to heating and cooling
properties. It consists of subtile particles, and is astringent ;
hence it agrees with cseliac and dysenteric complaints.

Commentary. Under this head we cannot do better than Comm.
quote the words of an excellent living authority : " Macer, a " • '
bark from the Barbaric region, has been thought to be
Wrightia anticlysenterica, supposing this to be the macre de-
scribed by Crist. d'Acosta. (Clus. Exot. 266.) Though macer
is always described as a bark, I had given me as such the
highly aromatic leaves of Rhododendron lepidotum under the
name of talisfur. Mafur and mafurbooz are in Persian works
assigned as the Greek names of taUsafar, under which name
the macer of Dioscorides is alluded to by A\dcenna.^' (Antiq. of
Hindoo Med. 91, by Dr. Royle). Though the macer of
the Greeks, then, was different from mace, there can be no
doubt that the Arabians confounded the two substances to-
gether. Thus Avicenna, in his chapter on raace, quotes the
words of Paulus on the macer. (ii^ 2, 448.) Serapion in like
manner, under mace, which he correctly describes as the rind
or memljranc of the nutmeg, gives the characters of macer
from Dioscorides. (De Simpl. 2.)

M«Xnj3a0pov,
^Malabathrum 3 the leaf of it has powers like the spikenard.

238 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. Dr. Ainslie, treating of the Cassia Lignea, or
" ' ' Cassia bark, says, " the narrow-pointed leaves of the Lauriis
Cassia, as well as the oblong, ovate, shining leaves of the Cin-
namon-tree, are sold in the Indian bazaars under the names of
lav)angapatery and tejpat, from a notion that they are the
leaves of the Laurus Cassia. In commerce these leaves are
called Folia Indica, or Malahathra, a name which more espe-
cially applies to the leaves of the Laurus Cassia." (Med. Ind.
§ 35.) Geoffrey, Sprengel, and Royle also agree in holding
the Cassia, or Cinnamon-leaf, to be the Folium Indicum. Dr.
South eimer, then, in his translation of Ibn Baitar, makes it to
be a peculiar species of Laurus, calling it Laurus Malahathrum,
and Dr. Pereira does the same. In the modern Greek Phar-
macopoeia, the query is put whether the Cassia-buds be the
product of Laurus Cassia, or L. Malahathrum. Isidorus says
of it, " Folium dictum quod sine ulla radice innatans in Indise
littoribus colligitur." (Oi'ig- xviii, 9.) It is always simply
called Folium by Apicius. Horace applies the word to an oint-
ment. " Malabathro Syrio capillos," (Od. ii, 7) ; on Avhich
passage his commentator, Porphyrion, remarks, " Malahathrum
unguenti speciem esse scimus." This is the Unguentum
Malaljathrinum of Dioscorides. (i, 76.) The ancients, as Dr.
Hill remarks, have said much of the virtues of Malahathrum.
They call it stomachic, sudorific, and cephalic. Dioscorides
ascribes to it all the virtues of the Indian spikenard ; but he
says it possesses them in a superior degree. He also mentions
it as a scent, (i, 11.) Galen and the other Greek authorities,
like our author, dismiss it with a brief notice, comparing it to
spikenard. The Arabians treat of it at greater length, but do
little more, after all, than copy the characters of it given by
Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 253) ; Serapion (c. 53.) It
occurs only once in the works of Celsus (v, 23), as an ingre-
dient, in one of his antidotes ; and does not occur at all, we
believe, in the Hippocratic Collection.

MoXa/Tj,
Malva, Mallows ; the wild is moderately discutient and
emollient ; but the garden, as being more moistening, is
also weaker. Its fruit, however, is as much stronger as it
is drier.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 239

Commentary. There seems no reason to doubt tliat it ap- Comm.
plies to Malva sylvestris, but probably comprehended other ' ' '
species. Dioscorides describes minutely the cases to which it
is applicable, namely, as a cataplasm in incipient fistula lacliry-
malis, with oil for achores and furfures, and also so prepared
for burns and erysipelas ; its decoction as a hip-bath in diseases
of the uterus ; and as a suitable enema in pains of the bowels,
womb, and anus; its broth he praises in cases of poisoning, as
producing evacuation of the stomach, and says it is beneficial to
persons stung b}^ phalangia, and attracts milk to the breasts ;
its fruit, when the reed of the wild lotus is mixed with it,
allays pains about the bladder, (ii, 144.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities treat of it as a medicine in more general
terms, representing it to be gently discutient and demulcent.
It occurs in the works of Hippocrates and Celsus ; the latter
praises it as a pot-herb, and recommends it as a gentle laxative,
(vii, 27.) The Arabians treat of it fully ; but have little to
add to the excellent description of its medicinal powers given
by Dioscorides, whom they all copy. One of Serapion^s authori-
ties briefly commends it as a demulcent in afl'ections of the -
chest and bladder, and as a cataplasm in hot apostemes. (c.
149.) Avicenna's account of it is highly interesting, but too
lengthy for our purpose. He recommends it internally in
complaints of the lungs and liver, and externally as an emol-
lient application in a variety of cases, (ii, 2, 194.)

IMamiras, is a sort of radicle of a herb, having, as it were,
thick knots, which are believed to attenuate cicatrices and leuco-
mata, being of a decidedly detergent power.

Commentary. This article is not mentioned by Dioscorides, Comm.
Pliny, Galen, Oribasius, nor, we believe, by any of the Arabian
writers, with the exception of Avicenna, who calls it abstergent
and cleansing, and recommends it for clearing away albugo of tlie
eye, and for cleaning the nails ; he adds of it that it is useful in
jaundice and pungent pain of the belly, (ii, 2, 479.) It further
occurs in one of the antidotes of Nicholas IMyrcpsus (c. 138),
where, his commentator says, the description of it given by
Paulus applies very well to the root known otticinally by the
name of Doronicum.

240 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Mai'Spoyopoc,
Mandragora, Mandrake, belongs to the third order of cokl
medicines. But its apples have a certain share of heat and
humidity, and hence they are possessed of a soporific power.
The bark of the root of it being stronger is not only cooling,
but also desiccant ; but the inner part of it is weak.
CoMM. Commentary. Waiving disputed points regarding the
ancient INIandragora, we shall merely mention in this place
that we believe the M. Mas of Dioscorides to have been Man-
dragoras vernalis, Bertolin, and the M. Femina M. autumnalis.
The ancient authors make frequent mention of its nai'cotic and
soporific powers. Celsus directs its apples to be placed below
the patient's pillow in cases of obstinate insomnolency. (iii, 18.)
DioscorideSj in like manner, says, its apples are narcotic when
smelled to, and also their juice ; that if persisted in, they will
deprive the person of his speech. He mentions mandrake as
as ingredient in anodyne colly ria and pessaries, and says that
in an enema it induces sleep. He recommends the wine of
mandragora to be given to patients before they are subjected
to the operation of cutting or bui'ning. He gives minute
directions for making the various preparations of mandragora.
He concludes his chapter on it by giving from information an
account of another species of mandragora, called morion,
which he represents as being powerfully narcotic ; and hence as
being administered by medical men when about to operate by
cutting or burning. This plant we agree with Dodonseus and
Cordus in thinking must have been the M. of Theophrastus,
namely, the Atropa Belladonna. Considering the diligence of the
ancient herbahsts, it is not likely that they should have wholly
overlooked so prominent and important an article as the Bella-
donna. The objections stated to this opinion by Parkinson
(Theatre of Plants, 314) do not appear to us of much force.
The account of mandragora given by Pliny is mostly taken
from Dioscorides. (H. N. xxv, 94.) Our author and Aetius bor-
row almost word for word from Galen. Isidorus says of it,
'' Cujus cortex \dno mixtus ad bibendum iis datur quorum corpus
propter ciu'am secandum est, ut soporati dolorem non seutiaut."
Serapion in like manner describes it as a powerful narcotic,
and says that it was administered before the performance of
amputation to diminish sensibility, (c. 333.) Avicenna parti-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 241

cularly commends the narcotic and soporific powers of this Comm.
medicine. He says that it exerts its action in a suppository. '^
The milky juice of it, he adds, evacuates phlegm and yellow
bile. He states that if a young person, by mistake, partake
of its berries, they bring on vomiting, purging, and perhaps
death. The seed mixed with sulphur \-i\-um, is said by him to
stop menorrhagia. Like Dioscorides, he says, that mandi-ake
evacuates the stomach and bowels like hellebore, (ii, 2, 357.)
Averrhoes briefly says of its apples, that they are soporific, and
that its bark is desiccative, but its root weaker, (v. 42.) See
also E-hases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 446.) Ser\itor describes both a
concrete and an expressed juice of mandi'agora. The former,
which he calls lachryma, he says could not be procured every-
where. Even the non-professional writers allude to its sopori-
fic powers. Thus Lucian speaks of viro fiav^fuyopag KaOevSeiv.
(Timon.) Pollux says that it produces heanness of the head, that
is to say, stupor. Our old herbalists. Turner, Gerard, Parkinson,
and Culpeper, mention the soporific powers of the mandi'ake,
but in such a way as implies that they had not much practical
acquaintance with it. By the days of Boerhaave and Quincy,
its internal use had been abandoned, both in this country and
on the continent. Although it has now disappeared from our Dis-
pensatories, we see no good reason why its well-regulated use
might not be reA"ived. That the ancients have described its
operation on the animal economy correctly, is admitted by our
latest writers on Toxicology and the Materia Medica. See the
works of Orfila, Chiistison, and Pereira. In conclusion it may
be proper to state, that the modern Ai'abians and Persians
still use the maudragora as a narcotic and antispasmodic.
See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 1, 116.) It is not contained in the
Greek Pharmacopoeia of the present day.

Mai'va Xij3ai>ov,

^lanna Thuris, has similar powers to frankincense, but en-
feebled and gently astringent.

Commentary. Gesner says of it, " ]Manna thuris est Comm.
fragraina minora corticis ramentis permista." (Lexicon Rus-
ticum.) Dr. Hill calls it the fragments of the cluster frank-
incense broke off in the carriage. It is singular that the
Greek and Roman writers make no mention of the manna now

III. 16

242 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. ill use, namely, the concrete juice of tlie Fraxinus Ornus.
Actuarius had, no doubt, learned the use of it from the Ara-
bians. (Meth. INI. V, 8.) We will treat of the true manna
more properly in the Appendix to this section, among the
medicinal substances introduced bv the Arabians.

Foeniculum, Fennel, is heating in the third degree, but desic-
cative in the first ; it therefore forms milk and relieves suffu-
sions of the eye.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides gives a fuller exposition of the
" • ' medicinal properties of this substance [Anethum Foeniculum)
than any of the other authorities on the Mat. JNIed., represent-
ing it as being possessed of powers to promote the secretion of
milk; as being useful in complaints of the kidneys and bladder
as a diuretic, and in those of the uterus as an emmeuagogue ;
as being alexipharmic, and as a suitable application to the bites
of mad dogs ; and an excellent ingredient in collyria, and
more especially the gum of it, which is produced on the plant
in Spain, (iii, 74.) Galen, in the main, gives it the same cha-
racters, holding it to be diuretic, emmeuagogue, and a suitable
iueredient in collvria. Aetius and our author follow Galen,
It occurs frequently in the Hippocratic treatises. (551, &c. ed.
Foes.) Celsus ranks it among his diuretics (ii, 31), and among
the articles which at the same time repress and moUifj^ (ii, 33.)
The Arabians treat fully of the fennel in nearly the same
terms as the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 274) ; Serapion (c.
324) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ehases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 293.)
• They all represent it as being diuretic,- emmeuagogue, alexi-
pharmic, and an excellent application in diseases of the eyes.
They quote Democritus (?) as stating that vipers and other
venomous creatures rub their eyes upon fennel to improve
their sight. This species of fennel, namely, the Foeniculum
vulgare, is not now employed as a medicine in this country.
The other species, Foeniculum cliilce, or Sweet Fennel, although
Matthiolus takes it for the ancient Maratliron, would seem to
have been unknown to the ancients. The former species, how-
ever, held a place in our Dispensatory down to a recent period.
See Quincy (77.) It still holds a place in the modern Greek
Pharmacopoeia (68.)

sKCT. in.] SIMPLES. 2-13

jNIastiche, Mastich ; the Cliian is heating and dessieaut in the
second degree ; but it is possessed of complicated powers^ being
at the same time astringent and emollient; hence it agrees
with inflammations of the cesophagus and stomachy and those
of the intestines and liver ; but the Egyptian^ being darker^ is
moi'e desiccant and discutient, and less astringent; wherefore
it discusses furunculi.

Commentary. Mastich is correctly described as the resin Comm.
of the lentiscus by Dioscorides (i, 90), and Pliny (H. N. xxiv, ' ' '
28.) Both mention that it is used in the formation of agglu-
tinative plasters for the cure of trichiasis. Serapion joins the
Greek authorities in recommending it for haemoptysis. Its use
in medicine is as old as the time of Hippocrates. The " resina
ex lentisco^' is an ingredient in one of the discutient plasters
recommended by Celsus for the cure of phymata. (v, 18, 22.)
Honain, one of Serapion's authorities, recommends it in in-
flammations of the stomach, and in cough. Another of them
says of it, that when mixed with aloes it forms a good mastica-
tory, (c. 183.)

Mf'XaJ',

Atrameutum ; the Indian, as Dioscorides says, is of the
class of slightly refrigerating medicines, and of those which oc-
casion the rupture of phlegmons and swellings, and cleanse
ulcers.

Commentary. Dioscorides describes two distinct substances Comm.
by the name of 'Iv^ikov. The one is the vegetable pigment, ' ' '
still called Indigo; the other Avas probably a red mineral of
copper, some variety, we suppose, of the mineral called "tetrahe-
dral red copper ore" by Jameson, or '^ red oxide of copper'^ of
Philips. Dioscorides recommends it in much the same cases
as our author, (v, 107.) The other Greek authorities scarcely
treat of it. Om* author seems evidently to refer to Indian
ink. The Arabians confound together the dye-producing
plants, and accordingly treat of the woad (Isatis tinctoria)
along with the plant which produces indigo. See Serapion
(c. 47), and under Isatis in this section. Averrhoes^s descrip-
tion is very indistinct, so that it is difficult to know what to
make of his Indicum. (CoUig. v, 42.) Aviceuna in one place

244 SIMPLES. [book yii.

CoMM. alludes to the mineral pinguent of our author, which he calls
' " ' Tinctura Inda. (ii, 2, 689.) We beg to refer our readers to
Beckmann's ' History of Inventions^ for much curious informa-
tion under the head of Ind'iyo.

Atramentum metallicum, is powerfully astringent with sub-
tilty of parts.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides gives a pretty circumstantial
' ' ' description of three or four varieties of it, and yet none of
them can be recognized with any degree of certainty. One
thing only is certain, that they must all have contained more
or less of copper, being found in mines of copper. As far as
we can judge, the mineral named " ferruginous arseniate of
copper" by Cleaveland, is the most likely to be the melauteria
of Dioscorides. He says it has the same caustic powers as
misy. (v, 117.) Galen calls it only powerfully astringent
and of subtile parts ; and hence Sprengel inclines to set down
his melanteria as being different from that of Dioscorides ; but
between the action of a strong astringent and a weak caustic,
the distinction is not great. In describing the melanteria, Aetius
follows Galen, and Oribasius Dioscorides. There is no mention
of it in the works of Hippocrates, Celsus, and Pliny. The
Arabians confuse their description of it by mixing together
those of misy, chalcitis, and sori along with it, under the head
of Atramentum sutorium. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 47.) Serapion
also fails to give any distinct account of it. (De Miner.)

Mt'Xav (i) y^cKfyo/iiev, >
Atramentum scriptorium, IVriting Ink ; this, too, is decidedly
desiccant ; but when dissolved in oxycrate and rubbed in, it
straightway relieves burns.
CoMM. Commentary. Writing Ink. Dioscorides describes the
^ * ' composition of two different kinds of ink ; the former consist-
ing of the soot of pines with gum, and the other containing
the soot of rosin, bull's glue, and copperas. For a fuller ac-
count of the inks used by the ancients, see Pliny (H. N. xxxv,
6), Oribasius (Med. Collect, xiii), Isidorus (Orig. xix), and
Montfauyon (Palaeog. Greeca, c. i.) Dioscorides says of it that
it is adapted to the healing of putrid ulcers and burns, when

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 245

rubbed in thick with water and allowed to remain, until cica- Comm.
trization takes place ; for^ he adds, when the application falls off ^
the ulcers are healed, (v, 182.) Celsus alludes to the same
principle of treating aphthous sores in the throat, but directs
the crusts to be formed with alum, chalcitis, or the Atramentum
sutorium. The Atramentum scriptorium he only notices once,
in describing the operation of trephining the skull, (viii, 4.)
Avicenna alludes also to the practice of Dioscorides. (ii, 2, 689.)

MfAoi'0101',

Nigella sativa, Gith, is calefacient and desiccant in the
third degree. It is also distinguished for tenuity of parts ;
and hence when smelled to it cures catarrhs, and is most car-
minative when taken internally. It is also bitter, and hence
it is anthelmiuthic. It is also detergent and incisive, and
hence it agrees with orthopnoea, cleanses leprosies, ejects myr-
mecia, and promotes menstruation.

Commentary. It is the Nigella sativa, or Gith. Diosco- Comm.
rides, with great precision, and in his usual empirical style, ' — ' — '
enumerates all the cases in which this substance is applicable.
As these in the main are the same as those in which our
author recommends it, we need not enter much into an exposi-
tion of the views of Dioscorides on this head. He says it
promotes the secretion of urine, menses, and milk ; removes
dyspnoea when drunk with wine; remedies persons stung by
venomous spiders ; drives away reptiles, in the form of a fumi-
gation ; and that it is reported to prove fatal when drunk in
large quantity, (iii, 83.) Galen explains its medicinal virtues
most scientifically, upon the principles laid down by him in his
preliminary dissertation to the Materia INIcdica, of which we
have given an exposition in an extract from Aetius. Gith, he
says, is heating and drying according to the third ordei', and
seems to be attenuant, or of subtile parts ; wherefore it cures
catarrhs when applied hot in a linen cloth, so as to be con-
stantly smelled to. And it is most carminative, when taken
into the body, as is obvious from its being of subtile parts, and
of a substance fine-wrought l^y the heat, wherefore, also, it is bit-
ter ; for it was shown in the Fourth Book of these Commentaries,
that when a terrene substance arrives at an extreme tenuity and
elaboration, the bitter cpiality is formed. No wonder, then, if it

246 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. proves vermifuge, not only when eaten, but when applied ex-
' ' ' ternally to the belly ; for it was formerly shown that a bitter
juice does this. Nor that it removes leprosy, clavus, and myr-
mecia^ need it seem wonderful to one who remembers what was
formerly said. And thus it relieves orthopnoea^ and promotes
menstruation, when it is restrained by the thickness and
viscidity of the humours ; and, in a word, when we wish to
incide, cleanse, dry, and heat, it is a most useful medicine. (De
Sirapl. xdii.) Having given so full an exposition of Galen's
views, we must be brief on those of the other authorities. The gith
occurs in the INIat. INIed. of Hippocrates, but is not to be
met with in the Avorks of Celsus. For the Arabians, see
Avicenna (ii, 2, 516) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 496) ; Serapion
(c. 328.) They all follow closely in the footsteps of Dioscorides
and Galen. Though the gith has ceased for some time past to
be used in medicine, it is still sometimes sought after as a spice.
See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 123.)

MeXi,
Mel, Honey, is heating and desiccant in the second order,
and is also considerably detergent. When boiled it becomes less
acrid, detergent and cathartic, but more nutritious. But bitter
honey, like that in Sardonia, is of mixed powers, being terrene
and hot. The Sacchar (Sugar) Avhich is brought from Araby
the Blessed is less sweet than that with us, but is possessed
of equal powers, with the additional advantage of not injuring
the stomach and occasioning thii'st like it.

CoMM. Commentary. On the use of honey, see Book T, s. 69.

' ' ' " The honey of reeds" is mentioned in a fragment of Theo-
phrastus. (ed. Heinsius.) It is distinctly noticed by Dioscorides
(i, 104), Strabo (Geogr. xv), Pliny (H.N. xii, 17), Galen (Med.
Simpl. vii), Oribasius (Med. Collect, xi), Isidorus (Orig. xvii, 7),
Alexander Aphrodisiensis (Probl.), and Symeon Seth (in voce
Sacchar.) It is alluded to by Statins in the following line :

" Et quas praecoquit .Ebusita cannas." — Silv. i, 6, 15.

Lucan also mentions it. (Pharsal.iii,237.) All the Arabian medical
authors, in a word, make frequent mention of it. It is obvious,
however, as is remarked by Harduiii, Salmasius, Freind, Millward,
and Sprengel, that the ancient sugar was a concretion formed

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 247

upou the surface of reeds by the heat of the sun, and consequently Comm.
it was different from the sugar of the moderns, which is formed '"''"'^ '
by boiling. Symeon Seth says of sugar that it is heating and
humid in the first degree, detergent, and diaphoretic like
honey. Mesne recommends it for the composition of electu-
aries. Dr. Hill states that although the Bambu be the sugar-
cane with which the ancients were most familiar, it would ap-
pear that the " tenera arundo'^ of Lucan was rather the com-
mon sugar-reed of our times.

MeAm,

Fraxinus, the Ash, is a M^ell-known tree, the leaves of which,
when taken in a draught, agree with the bites of vipers. Its
bark, when burnt and rubbed in with water, removes leprosies.
The sawdust of the wood when drunk is said to be deadly.

Commentary. There can be no doubt of its being a species CoM.\f.
of Fraxinus, or perhaps both the F. Ornus and F. 7'otimdifolia. ' '
Our author's account of it is taken literally from Dioscorides.
(i, 108.) A\dcenna mentions it as a vulnerary herb, and re-
commends it in the same cases as Dioscorides does, (i, 108.)

MtXAwrov,

Melilotum, Melilot, is possessed of mixed powers, being as-
tringent, discutient, and digestive.

Commentary. It is the Melilotus officinalis, L. Dioscorides Comm.
says of it, that it has some styptic power, and is an emollient of '' '
all kinds of inflammations, especially about the eyes, womb,
anus, and testicles, Avhen boiled with must and applied, or along
with alljumen of an e^^, flour of fenugreek, &c. ; that it cures
meliceris when recent, achores, and pain of the stomach, and
earache when injected into the ear, and headache when used
as an embrocation with vinegar and oil of roses, (iii, 41.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities state its application in
general terms like our author. For the Arabians, see Avicenna
(ii, 2, 41,j); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i,
4G5) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 18.) They scarcely suggest any
new cases for its administration, but borrow Avhat they say of
its medicinal poAvers from Dioscorides and Galen. The
melilot was used in medicine, and held a place in our English
Dispensatory even as late as the time of Quincy. (118, 204.)

248 SIMPLES. [book vii.

MfAtcTcro^yXAoi',
Apiastrum, Baum ; its action is in every respect like that of
liorehound.
CoMM. Commentary. According to Dioscorides^ Baum {Melissa
officinalis) 3 when its leaves are taken in a draught with wine,
or when applied as a cataplasm, is alexipharmic in the case of
persons stung by scorpions or venomous spiders, and of those
who have been bitten by mad dogs ; the decoction in the
form of a fomentation (or effusion) does the same ; it makes
a good hip-bath for promoting menstruation; is a gargle for
toothache and a clyster for dysentery ; its leaves, in a draught,
cure those who have taken poisonous mushrooms, and those
suffering from tormina ; it forms a linctus in orthopnoea, and
along with salts a discutient application to scrofula and ulcers ;
and as a cataplasm it soothes pains of the joints, (iii, 108.)
Our author borrows from Galen, who, like him, gives its
characters in general terms. Aetius, under this head, copies
from Galen, and Oribasius from Dioscorides. We believe it
is not to be found either in the works of Hippocrates, or
those of Celsus. Serapion gives a full account of it, first
quoting from Dioscorides and Galen, and then from Abenmesuai
and Isaak ebn Amran ; the former of whom says it is exhi-
larating, and the other that it is useful in a cold and humid
intemperament of the stomach, promotes digestion, proves
cordial, &c. (c. 23.)

^lijLiaiKvXog,
INIemeecylus, being the Fruit of the Arbute, has been treated
of under the letter K.
CoMM. Commentary. It is, as here stated, the fruit of the wild
Strawbei'ry-tree, that is to say of the Arbutus Unedo, L.

MecTTr/Xa,
Mespila, Medlars (called also Tricocca) ; their fruit being
decidedly sour and scarcely edible, proves astringent of the
bowels : and its shoots and leaves are also decidedly sour.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides describes the two species of
^Medlar in such distinct terms as leaves no doubt that they are
the Mesjnlus Azarolus and Germanica. He represents their
fruit as being esculent and slightly astringent, (i, 169, 170.)

SECT, iij.] SIMPLES. 249

Galen says of the medlar, that it is acid and austere, and Comm.
barely esculent, and that it restrains fluxes. (De Simpl. vii.) ' ' '
The other Greek and Arabian authorities give the same account
of it. See in particular, Avicenna (ii, 2, 742) and Ebn Baithar
(i, 532.) The Arabians prepared an ointment from it for
making the hair black and curled. Casiri (Bibl. Arab. Hisp.
330.) The term azarolus is borrowed from the Arabic. See
Avicenna (1. c.)

INIedium ; the powers of the root are contrary to those of
the fruit, for the former is austere and astringent of fluxes,
so as to restrain the female fluor. But the seed even promotes
menstruation, being possessed of attenuating and incisive
powers.

Commentary. The description of this article given by Comm.
Dioscorides is sufficiently precise to decide its belonging to the ' • '
genus Campanula. It was at one time generally referred to
the species called Medium^ but, as Sprengel remarks, the ap-
pearance of the leaves does not agree with those of the medium.
Sibthorp, therefore, in his ' Flora Grteca,^ has decided that it
is the C. laciniata. (i, 141.) Dioscorides and Galen agree in
giving it the same medicinal powers as oui' author. We are
at a loss to determine whether or not it occurs in the ^Materia
Hedica of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar,
who merely gives the descriptions of it by Dioscorides and
Galen, (ii, 541.)

Mj/zcwvec,

Papavera, Poppies ; there are several species, but of the
garden poppy, which they call Thylacitis, the seed is edible,
and when eaten Avitli bread is moderately soporific. That
species which is called R/iteas, because its seed soon falls off",
is stronger than the garden. It is therefore not eaten by itself,
but a small quantity of it is mixed with much honey. That
which has a sessile head has seeds which are Ijlack and strongly
medicinal, being considerably cold. That tlie top of which
is longer and more contracted, is the most strongly medicinal
of all, so as to induce torpor even to mortification. For it and
its juice, which is called, per excellentiam, opium, belong to the
fourth order of congealing medicines. But that variety which
is called Cornutum is possessed of detergent powers, so that

250 SIMPLES. [book vii.

the decoction of it when drunk is serviceable in hepatic com-
plaints. Its leaves and flowers cleanse foul ulcers and remove
eschars. That species which is called Heracl'mm and Spumosum,
has seeds which purge phlegm.
CoMM. Commentary. In the Fifth Book we have treated fully of
the diflPerent species of poppy known to the ancients. See also
Schulze (Toxicol. Vet.) The Rhceas would seem to be the
Papuver duhmin, the sativum is the P. Wiceas. The Papaver
cornutum appears to be the Glaucium luteum, Scop. The P.
spmnemn may be the Gratiola officinalis, Angl. Hedge Hyssop.
The ancients distinguished two kinds of the inspissated juice
of the poppy: the one was the juice obtained by wounding the
poppy-heads, and was called f.ii']KMvoQ ottoc, and ottiov ; the
other was an expressed juice, much weaker than this, called
fxrjKwviov. The second sort is not known at present. We
will treat more fully of opium under that head, and therefore
we shall dismiss the present subject with a briefer notice than
we should otherwise have thought it necessary to bestow upon
it. The views of tlie Arabians regarding the different kinds
of poppy may be best learned from Avicenna (ii, 2, 563.)
He copies, however, almost all his information from Dioscorides.
He recommends the application of the Papaver cornutum in
diseases of the eye, with certain cautions, explained under opium.
He follows Dioscorides in strongly commending the leaves of
the same as an ajiplication to foul ulcers, when he says they
have the effect of removing all the eschars upon the sores.
Dioscorides, by the way, mentions that the veterinarians
used the horned poppy for removing the albugo and nebulae
on the eyes of cattle. He speaks favor{j,bly of the effects
of the poppy in general for the cure of hot catarrhs, defluxions
on the breast, and haemoptysis. See further Serapion (c. 72);
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 533); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) The
last of these joins Avicenna in approving of the poppy for af-
fections of the chest. Ebn Baithar, in different parts of his
great work, treats of the several species of poppy noticed under
this head.

Mr/Xa,
Mala, Apples ; a common property of all apples is that of an
excrementitious and cold juice, but those which are dissolved
and watery are colder and more humid than the others. The

SECT. iJi.J SIMPLES. 2.51

sweet are waterV;, but not sensibly cold. Those wliicli are
austere are colder than the sweet_, but less humid. Those
which are acid are also cold, and cut the thick humours in the
stomach. The seur, such as Quinces, and that species of them
called Stncthiu, are of a cold and terrene temperament, and,
on that account, prove astringent of the belly, and aggluti-
native of wounds. Thus the leaves, juices, and barks of trees
ditfer from one another.

Commentary. By Mala, as Macrobius states, the ancients Comm.
understood all kinds of fruit which have their hard part or
kernel in the middle, and their esculent part Avithout. (Satur-
nalia, iii, 19.) The malum cydonium is undoubtedly the Quince.
The Struthia is a species of it. See Dioscorides (i, 160); Pliny
(H. N. XV, 10) ; Casiri (Bibl. Arab. Hisp. i, 329.) These,
namely, the Struthia, according to Harduin, are the same as
our Pear-quince ; it is an astringent, stomachic fruit. There
is more difficulty in determining for certain what the Malum
Persicum was. Stackhouse makes it to be the Citrus auran-
tium, or Orange, but we are disposed to think that the evidence
preponderates in favour of the opinion of ]\Iatthiolus, E.
Stephens, and Harduin, w'ho held that it is the Peach [Amyg-
dalus Persica.) That species, or rather variety, which Pliny
calls Duracina, was probably the Nectarine, as Harduin suggests.
The INIalum Armeniacum, or praecocia, was undoubtedly the
Apricot. See Harduin in Plin. H. N. (xv, 31) ; Casiri (Bibl.
Arab. Hisp. i, 330) ; and Gesner (Lex. Rust.) Contrary to the
opinion of the etymologists, we have long thought that the
English name is a corruption of the Latin prcecocia. See,
however, Loudon (Encyc. of Garden. 806.) We have given
their characters as articles of food in the First Book. As to
their medicinal powers, little need be added to our author's
account of them, as it agrees entii'cly with that of the other
authorities. See in particular, Dioscorides (i, 160, 166); Galen
(l)e Simpl. vii); Avicenna (ii, 2, 562.) Galen makes mention
of the quince and pear-quince as being preserved with honey.
He recommends the leaves, the juice, and the rind of apple
trees in general, as being possessed of acid and austere qualities,
and tlius agglutinating wounds, restraining the defluxions of
incipient inflammations, and strengthening the stomach and
bowels when thev have lost their tone. Dioscorides aud, after-

252 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM, wards more fully^ Avicenna state that the immoderate use of
' — ' ' fruit is flatulent, and superinduces nervous debility. Dioscorides
describes accurately tbe mode of prej^aring a wine from quinces,
Avhicb, he says, is possessed of the same medicinal poAvers as
the parts of the quince. He also makes mention of an ointment
prepared from it. Avicenna represents all the fragrant kinds
of apples as being cordial and alexipharmic, and strengtheners
of the stomach. One of Rhases^s authorities gives an inte-
resting account of the medicinal powers of apples as cordials,
stomachics, and astringents. (Cout. 1. ult. i, 441.)

MjjXaja rifpfTiKJ?,
Malum Persicum, the Peach ; the shoots and leaves are
manifestly bitter, and therefore kill worms when triturated
and apphed to the navel. The fruit of it, which forms the
edible peach, is humid, and cold in the second degree.
CoMM. Commentary. See under MjjXa.

MjjXam AQf-iiviaKT},
]Malus Armeniaca, Apricot ; the fi'uit, which some call
Prsecocia, is possessed of the same powers as peaches.
CoMM. CoMMEXTARY. Scc Under ^MijXa.

jMeum, Spignel ; its roots are hot in the third degree, but
dry in the second. It is therefore diuretic and emmenagogue,
but occasions headache when taken often.
CoMM. Commentary. Without doubt it is the Meiim Athaman-
' ' ' ticum, which is the same as the LigusticwU Meum of Hooker,
Angl., Spignel, Men, or Bald-money. Our author and most
of the other authorities copy closely from Dioscorides, who
describes the roots of the meum as being fragrant, and heating
the tongue. These, he says, being boiled in water or given
in powder without boiling, prove soothing in diseases of con-
striction about the kidneys and bladder, relieve dysuria, flatu-
lence of the stomach, tormina, hysterical aff'ections, and pains
of the joints. When pulverized and administered with honey,
they are useful in pectoral defluxions as a linctus, and in a
hip-bath promote the flow of the menses. When applied as a
cataplasm to the region of the pubes in infants, they are said

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 253

by him to produce the discharge of the urine. But when Comm,
taken immoderately, the meum occasions headache, (i, 3.) In " '
the above extract, by " diseases of constriction" Dioscorides
alludes to a well-known dogma of the !Methodists. It would
appear^ then, that he was imbued with the principles of that
sect. None of the other Greek authorities treat of it so fully
as Dioscorides. As far as we have discovered, it does not
occur in the works of Hippocrates, nor in those of Celsus. For
the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 454) ; Serapion (De Simpl.
182) ; Rhases (Collig. 1. ult. i, 477) ; Averrhoes (CoUig. v, 42.)
They do nothing but copy from Dioscorides. In the works
of all our old herbalists aud authorities on the English Dispen-
satory, down to the days of Quincy and Lewis, the meum
retains a place with all its ancient characters.

MrXaS,

Milax or Smilax, Bindweed ; both the smooth, and the rough
species which twines round trees^ are possessed of acrid and
heating powers.

CoMMEXTARY. The two specics here noticed are most pro- Comm.
bably the Smilax aspera and Convolvulus sepiuni. Dioscorides ' *
commends the former of these principally as being alexipharmic,
and the latter as being soporific, (iv, 142, 143.) Galen and
the other Greek authorities, like our author^ merely give their
general characters. The Arabians would seem to confound
it with the other climbing herbs. See Serapion (De Simpl.
41) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 724.)

MitTU,

!Misy, is one of the cscharotic and caustic medicines, with a
strong astringency. It is less pungent than chalcitis, owing
to the greater tenuity of its parts. And Galen says that
chalcitis and sori, in the course of time, change to misy, the
change beginning at the surface.

Commentary. It appears strange that this mineral should Comm.
now be so little knoAvn, seeing it was well known as late as ' "
the days of Boerhaave, and is still used medicinally in the
East. Boerhaave savs of it, "Misv, a vellow mineral verv much
resembling the marcasite or mundick of our mines, but liglitcr,
and of a less compact nature . . It is a vitriolic mineral, and

2o4 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. is reduced by calcination to a colcotliar." (M. M. 184.) Dr.

' * ' Ainslie^ treating of the preparations of copper employed in
medicine by tbe natives of India, says, " INIisy is tlie name of
an oxide of copper used by the natives of India against the tooth-
ache, and to stain their teeth black. ^^ (]Mat. Ind. i, 513.) Dr.
Royle, treating of the misy and sory of Dioscorides, states that
they had been supposed by Rossius to be sulphurets of copper,
" but it is remarkable that mis is a Persian name for copper, and
that missy is a name frequently applied in India to sulphate of
iron.^' (Antiq. of Hindoo Med. 102.) From these descriptions
of it we find some difficulty in deciding what mineral substance it
was ; but see under Chalcitis. The following is Dioscorides^s de-
scription of the misy : " Of a golden appearance, hard, shining
like gold Avhen broken, and glancing like stars." (v, 116.)
He says it has the same powers as chalcitis. Galen gives
an elaborate description of misy and its cognate fossils
sory and chalcitis, but says little more than our author re-
specting its medicinal powers. (De Simpl. viii.) The other
Greek authorities supply nothing additional of any great
interest under tliis head. Serapion describes the three sub-
stances we have mentioned under the general head ''de
vitreola," calling the sory Zeg rubeum, the chalcitis colcothar,
and the misy Zeg viride. His account of them is taken entirely
from Dioscorides and Galen, (c. 386.) Avicenna confounds
them and other metallic preparations under the name of
" Atramentum sutorium." He throws no light on the subject,
(ii, 2, 47.) See Rhases (Cont 1. ult. 747.) Averrhoes, under
the head of Alcey, i. e. Vitriolum, gives a translation of Galenas
description already noticed. (Collig. v, 43.) Misy occurs in
the works both of Hippocrates and Celsus. The latter uses
it as a caustic, (v, 8, 9.)

MoXwpoaa'o,

Plumbago, has similar powers to litharge, but removed from

the middle temperament to the colder.

CoMM. Commentary. Several varieties of the Molybdaena are de-

""~^' ' scribed by Dioscorides, from which it would appear that the

ancients applied the term to more than one metallic substance;

the variety resembling litharge being most probably graphite

or plumbago ; and the one of a leaden colour, being the mo-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 255

Ij'bdate of lead, or "yellow lead-spar" of Jameson. It is named Comm.
Galena by his translators, but whether it, that is to sny, the ' * '
sulphuret of lead, was also comprehended mider it we are
unable to determ'lne. The molybdsena occurs in the works of
Hippocrates. Dioscorides recommends it as being incarnative
and epulotic in plasters. Galen and the other Greek autho-
rities treat of its medicinal powers succinctly like our author.
None of the Arabians appear to have distinguished the molyb-
dsena properly from litharge.

Mo'Xv/3goc,

Plumbum, Lead, is possessed of refrigerant powers, and has
also a considerably humid substance consrealed bv the cold. If
wine, the oil of unripe grapes, or any of the cooling juices be
rubbed with it, it will make an excellent application for ulcerous
inflammations about the pudenda and anus, A plate of lead
worn upon the loins restrains libidinous dreams ; and a piece
of lead put upon ganglia discusses them. Burnt lead being
more desiccative, ic also somewhat acrid. If washed it becomes
desiccative without pungency, and makes a good application
for ill-conditioned ulcers.

Commentary. We have already treated of this article as a Comm.
poison. (Book V, 62.) The ancients distinguished lead into two " '
kinds, the black and the white. Of these the latter is the
same as the cassiteros, that is to say, tin. The other compre-
hended several of our native ores of lead. Both kinds are
described in the works of Hippocrates and of Celsus. (v, 26, v,
18, &c.) See also particularly, Pliny (xxxiv, 47) and Isidorus
(Orig. xvi, 21), who have given accurate descriptions of the
ancient varieties of lead. Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion
agree in describing it as a powerfully cooling or refrigerant
medicine. Galen's account of it is lengthy but interesting.
(De Simpl. ix.) Oribasius says that it forms an excellent
application to ii'ritablc and malignant sores. Dioscorides re-
commends washed lead very much in rheums of the eye. He
gives a very circumstantial description of the process of pre-
paring washed lead. He further says of it, that it is a good
styptic, and an excellent application to fungated sores, hemor-
rhoids, condylomata, and ulcers about the anus. Averrhoes
treats of it in nearly the same terms as our author. (CoUig. v.

256 SIMPLES. [book rii.

CoMM. 43.) The Arabians, in general, prescribe it, in imitation of
" • ' Galen, as an application to cancer. See Averrhoes (1. c.) and
Avicenna (ii, 2, 12.) The latter joins Dioscorides in praising
lead as an application to the eyes. Serapion gives a very fnll
account of this article in extracts from Dioscorides and Galen.
(De Simpl. 419.) See also E-hases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 556) ;
Ebn Baithar (ii^ 128, et pluries.)

^lopaia

Morns nigra, the Midherry-tree ; the fruit, when ripe, loosens
the belly, and is useful in all complaints of the mouth which
require a moderate degree of astringency. The unripe, when
dried, becomes a very styptic medicine. The bark of the root
of the tree is also purgative, with a certain degree of bitter-
ness ; hence it kills the broad intestinal worm. The leaves
and tender shoots hold an intermediate place between purga-
tives and astringents.
CoMM. CoMMEXTAKY. Thcrc cau be no doubt that it is the Ficiis
' ' ' Morns, L., or the Black Mulberry -tree. It is the avKafxivoQ of
Theophrastus, which, however, was sometimes apphed by others
to the sycamore. See Celsus (iii, 18.) The mulberry is com-
mended by Pliny as an antidote to poisons, as it is in like
manner bv Dioscorides. The latter calls it laxative of the
bowels, but an article readily spoiled, and bad for the stomach.
He also ascribes astringent powers to its juice, which, he says,
when mixed with a little honey is useful in defluxious, spread-
ing ulcers, and inflamed tonsils. He also praises the leaves
when pounded with oil, as a good cataplasm to biu'ns. He
speaks of it also as being used for dyeing the hair, and the
decoction of its leaves as a gargle for toothache, (i, 180.)
Galen's account of it is the same as our authoi^'s, bv whom it
is abridged. Aetius ti'eats of it fully as an article of food, but
briefly as a medicine. He says, when taken upon a clean
stomach, it proves an excellent article of food ; but the very
reverse when the stomach is loaded and contains any noxious
humours. The Arabians, in treating of it, follow Dioscorides
and Galen. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 491) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 201) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 132.) The mulberry is described
as a medicine by all our old herbalists, and was retained in the
Dispensatory until after the time of Quiucy. (94, 198.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 257

Muaypov,

Myagrum ; the seed of it is fatty^ and the oily part of it is
possessed of an emplastic power.

Commentary. It is generally held to be the Camelina sativa, Comm.
Crantz., of which we think there can he no donht. Both Dios- " — " — '
corides and Pliny mention it as producing an oil from its seed ;
and it is well known that the Camelina, or Gold of Paradise,
is still noted as one of the oil plants. See Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 353.) The two authors mentioned above recommend
this oil in ulcers of the mouth. Our author borrows from
Galen. As far as we can discover, it is not treated of by the
Arabian authorities, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who
merely quotes the description of it given by Dioscorides and
Galen.

Musculi, Muscles, have the same power, when burnt, as the
bucciua. But they have the property, when washed, of re-
moving asperity of the eyebrows and leucomata Avhen apphed
with honey. Their flesh is applied with advantage to persons
bitten by dogs.

CoMMEXTARY. Called Mu'ec by Aristotle and Athenseus, Comm.
INIyaces by Pliny, and Musculi by Celsus, are the Mytili " ' '
edules, L., or ]\Iuscles. Celsus ranks them with those things
which open the bowels, (ii, 29.) He prescribes the soup of
muscles as a purgative in fevers, (iii, 6.) Dioscorides merely
recommends them externally as a stimulant and detergent
application in diseases of the e\e%, and their flesh for the bites
of mad dogs, (ii, 7.) The Arabians treat of them in general
terms along with the other Crustacea. See particularly Avicenna
(ii, 2, 529.)

Muopoi',

Myaron (called also Melampycnon) ; it is a branchy and
fatty herb. The oil extracted from it would seem to smooth
the asperities on the body.

Commentary. This is clearly the same as the nvay^ov Comm.
described above. See Jani Cornarii dollabella in P. JE. vii. ^-^— '

MvtXoc,
Medulla, Marrow ; it is possessed of the property of soften-
ing indurated and scirrhous bodies. The best is that of stags,
III. 17

2b8 SIMPLES. [book vtt.

next to it, tliat of calves. That of bulls and of buck-goats
is more acrid and desiccative. That from tlie limbs is more
fatt}' and emollient; but tliat from the spine is harder and drier.
CoMM. Commentary. According to Aristotle^ the Marroiv is a
" ' ' superfluity concocted from the nutritive blood of the bones.
He states that the spinal marrow is considerably different from
that of the other bones. (De Partibus Animalium, ii, 7.)
Pliny, copying from Dioscorides, thus delivers the general
characters of marrows : " Omnes molliunt, explent, siccant,
calefaciunt.^^ (H. N. xxviii, 39.) Dioscorides, Galen, and
Serapion concur in giving the preference to the marrow of
stags. Dioscorides gives minute directions for preparing it to
keep, (ii, 95.) He says that smearing the body with stag's
marrow drives away venomous reptiles. (Ibid.) The Arabians
recommend a suppository from marrows as a remedy for
scirrhus of the uterus. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 485), Rliases (Cont.
1. lilt, i, 460.)

Fungi, Mushrooms, are of a decidedly cold and humid tem-
perament. Some of them prove fatal when eaten, more par-
ticularly those which have a putrid quality mixed with their
nature.
CoMM. Commentary. We have alread}' treated of mushrooms as
' " ' articles of food (i, 77), and as poisons (v, 54) ; and shall, there-
fore, be excused saying anything more of them in this place.
In fact, we cannot see with what propriety the ancient autho-
rities assigned them a place in the Materia Medica, since, as
far as^we can recollect, they never prescribe them medicinally.

Mvoffwrj/,
Is described under Alsine.

Mu^a,

ISIyxa, tlie Sebesten-plum ; the fruit of this tree is smaller

than the bullace-plum, but of similar powers.

CoMM. Commentary. It would appear indisputably to be the

" * ' ^thesten-phmi, or fruit of the Cordia Myxa. Whether or not

this tree be also the Persea of Dioscorides (i, 187), has been

much disputed. See Sprengel (in Dioscor. 1. c.) and Lindley

(Veg. Kingd. 628.) We are inclined to doubt their identity.

SECT. iir.J SIMPLES. 259

and of this there can be no question, if the authority of Pliny Comm.
be held of any weight in this case, for he evidently distinguishes ' * '
between the persea and myxa. (H. N. xv, 11, 13.) Neither
Celsus, Galen, Aetius, nor Oribasius has noticed this article by
name. The sebesten-pluin is described by the Arabian autho-
rities without their making any reference to the Greek autho-
rities, as is their wont. See Serapion (c. 8) ; Avicenna (ii, 2,
638) ; and Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. iii, 42.) The barbarous
translation of Avicenna begins thus, under the head of sebesten:
" Sebesten et nominatur mukeita." For mukeita we suppose
the proper reading w^ould be myxa. The Arabians describe
the sebesten-plum as being a mild laxative fruit, which quenches
thirst and soothes the breast. It is praised by Serapion as a
laxative and cooling remedy in coughs; as a refrigerant medicine
for ardor urinae, and an anthelminthic. The sebestens con-
tinued long to hold a place in our English Dispensatory, and
retained the character which the ancients had given them.
See Quincy (130.)

Mi;pt/crj,

Myrica, the Tamarisk, is possessed of incisive and detergent
powers, without being manifestly desiccative ; it has also some
astringency. The decoction of it, therefore, when drunk, is
useful in diseases of the spleen; and it likewise cures the tooth-
ache. The fruit and bark of it nearly approach to galls in
powers. The ashes of the tree are more desiccative.

Commentary. We may briefly say that we agree with the Comm.
authorities who refer it to the Tamarix Gallica, L. Dioscorides, ' '
Galen, Averrhocs, and Serapion, like our author, recommend
it as a powerful astringent which may be substituted for galls.
Dioscorides accordingly enumerates a variety of cases in which
it is applicable, such as in remedies for affections of the mouth
and eyes, spitting of blood, cseliac disease, fluor albus, jaundice,
and the bites of venomous spiders, and to discuss swellings in
the form of a cataplasm. He further recommends its decoction
in wine for reducing the enlarged spleen; as a gargle in tooth-
ache ; a hip-bath in fluxes, and as a fit lotion for killing lice
and nits : the lixivial ashes of it, he adds, restrain a discharge
from the womb : some, he says, form goblets out of the trunk
of it, which they use as drinking-cups in diseases of the

260 SIMPLES. [book tii.

CoMM. spleen, drauglits taken -witli them being found to be service-
" ' ' able in such cases, (i, 116.) None of the other authorities
give by any means so satisfactory an account of this subject
as Dioscorides. Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius evidently follow
him. Celsus ranks the "tamarix^^ among his articles which
repress and soften, (ii, 33.) It occurs in the works of Hippo-
crates. (See Dierbach.) For the Arabians, see Serapion (c. 31);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 684) ; Ehases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 700) ; Averrhoes
(Collig. v, 42.) Serapion, after quoting the sections of Dios-
corides and Galen on the tamarix, says of it, on the authority
of Mesarugie, that it dries up all ulcers, especially those from
burns. He also relates, on the authority of Alchazi, the case
of a woman who was cured of a leprosy, by means of it.
Avicenna and Rhases say of it, that its fruit is beneficial in
chronic coughs. Avicenna says it cures the bite of the viper.
The curious reader will find it interesting to compare the
medicinal characters of the tamariscus as given in our English
Dispensatory by Quincy, with those given it by the ancients, as
stated above. (134.)

IMwoto^vAAoi',
Millefolium, MiUefoil, is desiccative to such a degree as to
agglutinate wounds.
CoMM. Commentary. It appears to be i\\e. Myriophyllum sjy'icatuni,
' ' ' Angl., spiked water millefoil. At least the description of it
given by Dioscorides evidently points to some species of
myriophyUum. He recommends it as a cataplasm with vinegar
to recent ulcers : and savs of it, that it is drunk with water
and salts in cases of falls, (iv, 113.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities, like our author, merely mention it as a
vulnerary herb. We have not found it in the works of
Hippocrates or Celsus, nor in those of the Arabians, with the
exception of Ebn Baithar. (ii, 500.)

Myrrha, Myrrh, belongs to the second order of calefa-
cients, and is also distinguished for tenuity of parts to a
certain degree. The root of it is fragrant and sweet. It is
emmenagogue, and promotes expectoration from the chest and
lungs.

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 261

Commentary. The Myrrhis odorata, as Spreiigel remarks, Comm.
agrees very well with Dioscorides's description of this plant. ' ' '
Dioscorides says of it, that Avhen drunk with wine it relieves
those who have been bitten by phalangia ; that it promotes
the menstrual and lochial discharges ; taken in draughts is
useful in phthisis ; and that some say, that when taken in a
pestilential season it preserves persons free from the disease,
(iv, 114.) None of the other Greek authorities supply any-
thing of interest under this head. We have not been able to
find it either in the works of Hippocrates or of Celsus. We
are at some loss to account for its being also overlooked, as far
as we, upon a cursory examination of their works, can discover,
bv the Arabian authorities. Was it that those illitei'ate
scholars could not distinguish it from myrrh and myrtle ? Our
old English herbalists, in like manner, seem to have known
little about it, and it has long ceased to hold a place in our
DisjDensatory.

Myrtus, the Myrtle, is composed of opposite ingredients.
But the cold and terrene prevails in it, and hence it is power-
fully desiccative. The myrtis, Avhich is a callous excrescence on
the trunk and branches of it, is strongly desiccative and
astringent. The dried leaves are more desiccative than the
green. The fruit and juice are possessed of similar powers,
both when administered externally and internally.

Commentary. It is the Myrtus communis. The myrtis Comm.
or myrtas of our author is the same as the myrtidanum of' *
Dioscorides, and most probably was some morbid excrescence
upon it. Dioscorides calls the myrtle astringent, and recom-
mends it in such a variety of cases that it would occupy too
much space to enumerate them all ; such, for example, as
haemoptysis, erosion of the bladder; as a stomachic and
diuretic ; an alexipharmic in the case of persons stung b}'^
phalangia or scorpions ; as a soothing application in inflam-
mations and extrasavated blood about the eyes ; for furfures,
achores, exantliemata, and so forth, (i, 155.) The excrescence
already mentioned possesses, he says, stronger powers than the
fruit or leaves, and is mixed with cerate, pessaries, hip-baths,
and cataplasms requiring astringency. (i, 15G.) Galen gives
a somewhat fuller, but not a materially different, account of the

262 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. myrtle from our autlior. He says it is a powerful astringent,
'"^^ — both iuternally and externally. Aetius abridges liim, as
Oribasius does Dioscorides. Celsus notices the berries and
boiled leaves of myrtle frequently as astringent and cooling
articles. The Arabians treat of them very fully. See Aviceuua
(ii, 2, 446) ; Ehases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 475) ; Serapion (De Simpl.
92) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 38.) Avicenna
recommends the decoction of its leaves as an astringent in
profuse sweats, fetor of the armpits, in hot apostemes, erysipelas,
herpes, &c. He also prescribes it in ulcers of the hands, and in
burns. He says it cures ophthalmy, and proves stomachic and
cordial. All the Arabians give it the character of being
alexipharmic. It is useful, according to Avicenna, in heat of
urine, and immoderate flow of the menses. He says it is useful
also in cases of ununited fractures when poured upon the
place ; stops the flow of blood from the nose, and cures
furfures and other ulcers of the head. Abenmesuai, one of
Serapion's authorities, says of the juice of myrtle, that it is
useful in the cure of pains of the breast and lungs, in cough,
and looseness of the bowels ; that it is a cordial, and strengthens
the internal viscera. Myrtle-berries were used as astringents
in fluxes down to a late period. See Quincy (94.)

MwXv,
Moly, Allium hirsutum, JVild Garlic (some call it Ruta
silvestris, others Armalan, and the SjTians, Basanan) ; it
belongs to the third order of calefacients, and is composed of
subtile particles. Hence it cuts thick and viscid humours, is
discutient and incaruant.
CoMM. Commentary. It was the species of garlic now called
"^^"^ Allium Moly, Monch. Mention is made of this plant by
Homer as a charm against incantation. (Odyss. x, 1. 302.)
It is probably the same as the /.lojXvla of Hippocrates. (See
Dierbach.) Dioscorides merely recommends moly pounded
with the ointment of iris as a pessary to promote the menstrual
discharge, (iii, 47.) On the mohj, see PHny (H. N. xxv, 8.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities mention it in nearly
the same terms as our author. It does not occur in the works
of Celsus, nor have we been able to find it in those of the
Arabian authorities.

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 263

Na(TKa(f)6oi',

(Called also Narcaplithon) is an Indian aromatic, and is
used in fumigations for constriction of the uterus.

CommentarV. Our author's account of this substance is
taken, with few alterations, from Dioseorides. Galen and
Serapion also copy from him. In the Appendix to this section
we shall have occasion to notice the opinion that it was mace.
All we need say of the Nascaphthon in this place amounts to
this, that it v.as an Indian aromatic, which the industry, even
of Royle, Ainslie, and Roxborough, has failed to determine.

NaTTV,

Sinapi, Mustard, is heating and desiccative in the fourth
degree.

Commentary. We may pretty confidently refer it to the Comm.
Sinapi nigrum. No author, ancient or modern, has treated of its ' "^
medicinal powers so elaborately as Dioseorides. He says it
has heating, attenuant, and attractive powers, and when
chewed, produces a discharge of phlegm ; when its juice is
mixed with hydromel, it forms a suitable gargle for enlarged
tonsils, and for chronic and callous asperities of the trachea ;
M'hen applied to the nostrils in a fine powder it acts as a ster-
nutatory ; benefits persons in epileptic fits, and rouses those
who are in hj^sterical fits ; it is useful in lethargic patients
when applied as a cataplasm to the shaved scalp ; when mixed
up Avith figs and applied until it reddens, it is fitting for ischi-
atic disease, and that of the spleen, and in general for all
chronic pains, by determining to the surface; it cures alopecia
in a cataplasm ; clears the countenance, and, with honey, suet,
or cerate, removes the spots of extravasated blood ; with
vinegar it is rubbed in upon places affected with leprosy, and
lichen agrius; it is taken in a draught as a powder, when
sprinkled like polenta on the drink, for periodical attacks of
fevers; it is mixed with advantage in epispastic plasters and those
for scabies ; when applied to the ear in powder with figs, it re-
lieves deafness and noises in the ears; its juice with honey is
suitable in dimness of vision and roughness of the eyelids
when rubbed in ; the juice of its seed, while still green, is
expressed and dried in the sun. (ii, 183.) Celsus recommends
it in a variety of cases both externally and internally ; as a

264 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. rubefacient, gargle, masticatory, &c. By the way, we have
" • ' never been able to satisfy ourselves that the late Dr. MiUigan
\ras right in setting down the sinapi of Celsus as the Sinajns
alba. (207.) 'We remark, however, that it is this species which
occurs in the modern Greek Pharmacopceia, Galen and his
followers dismiss this article with a very brief notice, hke our
author. The Arabians do little more than copy from Diosco-
rides. See particularly Avicenna (ii, 2, 674) ; Ehases (Cont.
1. ult. 644) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Serapion (c. 373) ; Ebn
Baithar (i, 355.) Mustard was much used by the ancient physi-
cians in cataplasms as a rubefacient. Ruffus, as quoted by Rhases
(Contin. xxxvii), recommends the seed of mustard as a laxative.
Macer directs, upon the authority of Menemachus, a sinapism
to be formed by pounding in a mortar mustard seed, with a
third part of the crumb of bread, dried figs, honey, and \dnegar.
He recommends an ointment made of figs and mustard, for
alopecia, i. e. porrigo decahans.

Spica Nardi, Spikenard ; the root of it is heating in the
first degree, and desiccative in the second. It is also some-
what astringent, acrid, and bitterish. It agrees with the liver
and stomach both when administered externally and internally.
It is diuretic, and dries up internal defluxions. The Indian
is stronger than the Syrian, and blacker.
CoMM. Commentary. For this article, Dr. Rovle informs us that
' * ' he obtained, in India, the hairy spike-like roots oiNardostachys
Jatamansi. (Antiq. Hindoo Med. 33.) Dr. Lindley says the
Xardostachys Jatamansi, or true spikenard of the ancients, is
valued in India, not only for a scent, but also as a remedy
in hysteria and epilepsy. (Veg. Kiugd. 698.) See further,
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 1, 318.) The Syrian kind was unques-
tionably some species of valerian, probably the V. Hardivickii.
Our author, in the present instance, borrows from Galen, who
in the main draws all his information from Dioscorides.
The latter holds the spikenard to be diuretic, stomachic,
hepatic, and carminative, (i, 6.) The Arabians treat fidly of
it, copying freely from Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 640) ;
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 669) ; Serapion (c. 52.) Avicenna re-
commends it strongly in affections of the liver, and in jaundice;

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 265

and calls it stomachic and deobstruent. Averrhoes joins liim Comm.
in ginng it these characters. (Collig. v, 42.) ' • '

' NofSoc KfXrt/crj,

Nardus Celtica, Celtic Nard, is possessed of similar powers
to the above-mentioned, but weaker, except with regard to its
action on the iirine ; for it is hotter than the former and less
astringent.

CoMMEXTARY. It is the Valeriana Celtica, or French Spike- Comm.
nard. Dioscorides gives an interesting description of it ; and, '' '
with regard to its medicinal powers, states of it, that it is
more diuretic and stomachic than the Syrian, and cures in-
flammations about the liver, and jaundice and flatulence of
the stomach when drunk with the decoction of wormwood; in
like manner, that it relieves the spleen, the bladder, and kid-
neys, and is alexipharmic with wine ; and finally, that it is
mixed with heating draughts and liniments, (i, 7.) It is the
Narclum Gallicum of Celsus, who assigns it a place with other
aromatics in one of his antidotes, (v, 23.) Galen and the
other authorities treat of it in the same general terms as our
author. This species of spikenard long held a place in our
Dispensatory. See Quincy (161) and Lewis (Dispensatory, ii,
125.) In the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia the Nardus and
the Phu are identified with the Valeriana.

Naoooc ooHiu

Nardus jMontana, Mountain Nard (called also Thylacitis
and Pyrites), is weaker than the aforementioned.

Commentary. It would seem to be the Valeriana tuberosa. Comm.
Galen and the other authorities state briefly of it, like our ' ' '
author, that it is weaker than the other species already de-
scribed.

Nao0rjH,

Ferula, Fennel-ylant ; the seed is attcnuant and calefacient.
The inner part, while still green, is astringent ; and, therefore,
agrees with haemoptysis and cicliac aflcctions.

Commentary. All the authorities, including the older and the Comm.
more recent, ai-e agreed that it is a species of Ferula ; and we ' ' '
are inclined to think that it was the communis, more especially

266 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. as its medicinal powers agree well with those assigned to the
' " ' article in question by Dioscorides. (Compare the latter, Mat.
Med. iii, 81, with Gray^s Supplement to the Pharraacop. 80.)
Dioscorides says, the pith of it, while green, relieves spitting
of blood and cseliac affections, and is given with wine to per-
sons bitten by vipers, and restrains bleeding from the nose
when introduced as a tent ; that the seed relieves tormina, and
produces sweating when rubbed in with oil, but that its stems
induce headache, and are prepared for pickles. (Ibid.) Our
author borrows almost word for word from Galen. We have
not been able to discover it in the Materia Medica of the
Arabians, but can scarcely believe that it had been wholly
overlooked by them. Ebn Baithar, in fact, under the head of
Kana, sets down the descriptions of the Narthex given by
Dioscorides and Galen.

Napfoj QaXaaait],
Torpedo ; when applied to the head, while still alive, in
cases of headache, it procures relief to the pain, probably by
its peculiar property of producing torpor; and the oil in
which the living animal has been boiled, when rubbed in,
allays the most violent pains of the joints. It is said to re-
medy prolapsus ani when applied.
CoMM. Commentary. Without doubt it is the Raia Torpedo, L.,
" " ' or Cramp-fish. See Artedi (Ichthy.) Frequent mention is
made of this fish in the works of the ancient writers on
Natural History. See in particular the poetical descriptions
of Claudian (Idyll.) and Oppian (Halieut, ii.) Galen repeat-
edly speculates on the nature of the singular power which it
possesses of stupefying every animal which touches it. He
denies that it has any narcotic effect as a medicine, unless
when applied alive. (De Simpl. vii.) Serapion copies his ac-
count of it. His translator renders it Piscis stupefaciens.
(c. 437.) See Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 49, 533.) Averrhocs
compares its narcotic powers to magnetism. (Collig. v.) We
have given some account of its application in this way else-
where. See Book III, 6.

Nop/ctcrtTog,
Narcissus, Daffodil ; its root is possessed of desiccative

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 267

powers so as to agglutinate large wounds, even to tlie division
of tendons. It is also somewhat detergent and epispastic.

Commentary. There seems no reason to doubt that it is Comm.
the Na7'cissus poeticus. Dioscorides says of it, that its root, ' ' '
when boiled and eaten or drunk, proves emetic ; that triturated
with honey it is a good application to burns j that in a cata-
plasm it agglutinates nerves that have been cut asunder ; that
it relieves sprains and chronic pains about the joints, in a
cataplasm with honey ; that it clears ephelis and alphos,
Avitli nettle-seed and vinegar ; that it cleanses foul ulcers, and
breaks apostemes which are difficult to ripen ; and that in a
cataplasm, with the flour of darnel and honey, it extracts
thorns, (iv, 158.) Galen and the other Greek authorities
give its virtues in brief terms, like our author. The Arabians,
as they are wont, copy freely from Dioscorides and Galen.
See A\icenna (ii, 2, 503) ; Serapion (c. 188) ; Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. i, 489) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 552.) Rhases and Avicenna
ascribe to it strong powers as an uterine medicine, stating of
it that it produces delivery of the foetus either dead or alive ;
that it promotes the dilatation of the mouth of the womb, and
relieves pains of it. The narcissus occurs in the lists of
medicines used both by Hippocrates and by Celsus. Our old
herbalists, Gerard and Parkinson, repeat the characters of the
narcissus given by the ancient authorities ; but . it has long
ceased to have a place in our Dispensatory.

Ntupac,

Neuras (called also Poterium), is desiccative without pun-
gency, so as even to agglutinate divided tendons. The roots
have the same efl'ects both when applied externally and when
drunk.

Commentary. There are few articles in the INIatcria Comm.
Medica of the ancients which it is more difficult to determine. ' * '
Sprcngel conjectures that it was the Astrayalus Poterium.
Dioscorides says its roots exude tears like gum, and that tliey
are highly beneficial in wounds of the nerves, (iii, 18.) Galen,
and all tlie other Greek authorities that treat of it, give exactly
the same account of it as Dioscorides. We have not been al)le
to find it in the works of the Arabians. Our old English
herbalists give a figure and description of it, as being a species

268 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. of tragacantlia. See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 996) and
' ' ' Gerard (History of Plants, 1328.) It has long ceased, how-
ever, to hold a place in any Dispensatory with which we are
acquainted.

N?;ptov »/ PoooSa^i'jj,

Nerium, Rosebay or Oleander, when applied externally is
possessed of discutient powers j but when taken internally it
proves fatal.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Nerium Oleander, L. "We have
' " ' treated of it as a poison in another place. (T. ii, 24,2.) That the
plant actually possesses the poisonous properties ascribed to it
by the ancients is now very well ascertained. See Lindley
(Veg. Kingd. 600.) Dioscorides assigns it a place in his
Materia INIedica, and says of it that its flower and leaves are
destructive to dogs, asses, mules, and most quadrupeds, but
are preservative of men, when drunk with wine, from the bites
of reptiles, if mixed with rue ; but that the weaker animals,
such as goats and sheep, when they drink the decoction of it,
die. (iv, 82.) Galen, like our author, in treating of this article,
does little more than abridge the fuller account of it given by
Dioscorides. The Arabians extend the use of this medicine to
several cases in which it was not applied by the Greeks. Thus,
they say of it, that its leaves form an excellent application to hard
apostemes, and are good for prurigo, scabies, and desquamations,
more especially the juice of them ; that in the form of a plaster
they are applied with advantage in chronic pains of the back
and knees, and that its flower forms a sternutatory. Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. iii, 31) and Avicenua (ii, ^, 522.) We have
given the opinions of the Arabians respecting it as a poison in
the place referred to above. There is no mention of the
oleander, as far as we have been able to discover, in the works
either of Hippocrates or Celsus. The term oleander is derived
from the Arabians. It is treated of by our recent authorities
on toxicology, but has long been unknown to our Phar-
macopoeia.

Nu/U(^aca,

Nymphsea, the Water-lily, is possessed of desiccative powers
without pungency. It, therefore, constipates the belly and its
seed is desiccative. But that species which has the white

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 2G9

root is stronger^ so that when drunk with dark and austere
wine, it cures the female flux. But that which has a hlack
root is also somewhat detergent, so as to cure alphos with
water, and alopecia, when rubbed in with liquid pitch.

Commentary. It is quite manifest that the plant here Comm.
described comprehends the two well-known species of the " ' '
Water-lily, now named Nymphcea alba and Nuphar luteum.
The two species, the one having a white root and the other
a black, are no doubt mere varieties. Our author abridges
his account of this article from Galen, who, in his turn,
borrows freeW from Dioscorides. (iii, 138-9.) For the Arabians,
see E-hases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 493) ; Serapion (De Simpl. c.
144) ; Avicenna (ii, 3, 508) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.)
The Arabians administered it in the same cases as the Greeks,
and also recommend the syrup for coughs and pleurisy, and
say of the plant that it induces sleep and cures acute vertigo,
but is debilitating. They compare the nature of the nymphsea
to that of the mandragora. Though the two Water-lilies have
long ceased to hold a place in our Dispensatory, they are still
used medicinally by the oriental nations. See Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 411.) "^

'B.avBiov i] (^aayaviov,
Xanthium, Clutburr, has fruit of discutient powers.
Commentary. It would seem to be the Xanthium struma- Comm.
rium, a plant of the natural order of Ambrosiea. Our author ' "
takes his brief notice of it from Galen. Dioscorides gives a
minute description of it, but merely mentions its being used
for a dye and a cataplasm for swellings, (iv, 136.) It does
not occur in the works of Hippocrates or Celsus, nor, as far as
we can discover, in those of the Arabians.

Xyris, Wild Corn-flay, is possessed of attenuating, discutient,
and attractive powers, and of truly desiccative, especially the
seed, so that it is diuretic, and cures scirrhus of the spleen.

Commentary. It is the Iris fa'tidissimu. It is still used me- Comm.
dicinally in (h'opsy and scrofula. Sec Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 161) ' * '
and Gray (Suppl. to the Pharmacop. 25.) Dioscorides recom-

270 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. mends it as a vulnerary^ and application to swellings and boils ;

' • ' and further prescribes it internally in bruises, ruptures, sciatica,
and diarrhoea. Its seed, he says, is very diuretic, and reduces
enlarged spleen when drunk in vinegar, (iv, 22.) Galen notices
it in the same brief terms as our author. We have reason to
believe that it is not wholly overlooked by the Arabians, but
we cannot find it, while writing this, in their authorities on the
Materia Medica, not even in the copious list of Ebn Baithar.

Xiphium, Bulbous Iris ; its root is possessed of attractive,
discutient, and desiccative powers.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides gives such a minute description
' " ' of it as clearly identifies it with the Gladiolus communis. He
recommends it on his own authority as forming an excellent
cataplasm with wine and frankincense for extracting stings
and thorns, for discussing the tumour called phygethlon, and
as an emmenagogue in pessaries ; and says it was reported to
be aphrodisiac, and a suitable draught in the intestinal hernia
of children, (iv, 20.) Galen, like our author, merely states its
medicinal virtues in general terras. The Arabians treat of it
under the general head of Lilimn, along with Iris. See
Serapiou (c. 189.) His account of it is made up entirely of
extracts from Dioscorides and Galen. It is also briefly noticed
by Ebn Baithar. (i, 423.) His German translator sets it down
as the Gladiolus Byzantinus. We have not had time and
patience to hunt out any other notices of it in the writings
of the Arabian authorities on the Materia ^ledica. Its name
in the barbarous translations of their works is Kasijion,

"Or,,

Sorbus, the Service Tree (the fruit of which is by some

called oa, by others ova, Sorba) ; it is possessed of astringent

powers, but less than the medlar.

CoMM. Commentary. It is the Sorbus domestica. All the ancient

" • ' authorities recommend the fruit as an excellent astringent.

Dioscorides prescribes it with this intention both in fruit and

in decoction, (i, 173.) Our author^s account of it is taken

pretty closely from Galen. Avicenna treats of it confusedly

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 271

under the head of Cornu vel Sorbas. (ii, 2, 315.) Serapion Comm.
treats of the Sorba, but does not seem to apply the name to ' — * '
the article we are treating of. See De Simpl. (c. 109.)

OBovva,

Otlionna ; some say that it is the juice of a herb growing in
Araljia^ where it borders with Egypt, and others that it is an
Egyptian stone. It is detergent and pungent^ clearing away
everything that obscures the pupil.

Commentary. The Tagetes Erecta, African or French Comm.
Marigold, seems likely enough to be this herb. Regarding ' ' '
the stone of the same name, nothing is known for certain.
Our author borrows from Dioscorides. Galen does not treat
of this article at all in his work on Simples. The Arabians
appear to have been ignorant of it.

OivavBy],

ffinanthe, the Wild Vine ; ample experience has shown that
the flower of the wild vine is considerably astringent, and that
it acts as a tonic, particularly in affections of the belly. Dios-
corides describes another having powers quite opposite to this;
and hence, he says, that it expels the secundines, and cures
strangury and jaundice.

Commentary. The former is evidently the flower of a wild Comm.
species of the Vitis Vitifera, L. It is still used for giving a ' ' '
flavour to wine. Dioscorides gives an ample account of its
medicinal virtues. Its power, he says, is astringent, and
hence it is stomachic and diuretic, restraining fluxes of the
beUy and spitting of blood ; it acts beneficially when applied
dry, as a cataplasm for loss of appetite and acidity of the
stomach ; it forms an embrocation with vinegar and rose-oil
in headache ; a cataplasm that restrains inflammation, when
applied to recent wounds ; to incipient fistula lachrymalis, and
ulcers in the mouth, and spreading ulcers in the pudenda,
when rubbed in with honey, saffron, rose-oil, and myrrh : it
is made an ingredient of pessaries for restraining bleeding,
and for defluxious of the eyes and burning of the stomach it
is applied as a cataplasm with the flour of wheat and wine :
when burnt upon heated coals in a shell it forms an ophthalmic
application, and cures whitlow, pterygia, loose and bloody

272 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. gums, with honey, (v, 5.) This account of it is copied lite-

' * ' rally by Serapion, (De Simpl, c. 35.) See also Avicenna

(ii/2, 723) and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 745.) This would

certainly appear to us to be the CEnanthe of Celsus, who gives

it a place among the diuretics, (iii, 21.)

With regard to the herb of the same name, which, as our
author remarks, is described by Dioscorides, various conjectures
have been advanced. It is certain that it cannot be the
(Enanthe crocata, but may be the O. Pimpinelloides. We
have nothing to add to the account of its medicinal powers
given by our author from Dioscorides. In fact, with the ex-
ception of Oribasius, whose description of the articles in the
Materia Medica is professedly taken from Dioscorides, we
are not aware that any other ancient authority has noticed it.
AVe may mention, in conclusion, that the CE. Pimpinelloides,
although it has no place in our Dispensatory, is still not un-
known to the collectors of drugs. See Gray (Suppl to the
Pliarm. 79.) It grows in abundance on a spot in Banchory
Ternan, and we have ascertained that it is not wholly innocuous
even to cattle when eaten by them.

01.1' oc,

Vinum, Wine, belongs to the second order of heating and
desiccative medicines. But that which is considerably old
belongs to the third, and the sweet wine to the first.
CoMM. Commentary. We have treated fully of the ancient Wines
' • ' in Book I. For an ample enumeration of their medicinal
properties, the reader is particularly referred to Pliny (H. N.
xxxiii, 19 et seq.), and to Dioscorides (v, 1-16.) It being out
of place for us to give a long commentary under this head,
we shall merely give a succinct exposition of it from Aetius.
Wine, he says, is of the second class of calefacients ; but that
which is moderately old, is of the tliird ; as in like manner the
new and sweet is of the first. Their dryness is analogous to
their heat. Since we find many varieties in wine, we shall
describe them as briefly as we can. Of all wines, then,
those which are at the same time red and thick are the most
suited for the formation of blood, requiring but little change
in order to be converted into blood. Next in order to these
are such as are dark, sweet, and thick at the same time; then

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 273

those which in colour are red and black, in consistency thick, Comm.
and have some acid quality at the same time. Less than
these are the white, thick, and austere, in regard to nutritive
powers. But of all others the least nutritious are those which
are white in colour and thin in consistency, being in so far
hke to water. But the sweet are sooner digested and more
readily diffused over the system than the austere, being of a
more heating nature, and they are more laxative of the bowels.
But those which are very thick are more slowly digested and
more slowly distributed ; but when the stomach is strong so
as to digest them properh', they furnish more food to the body
than any other; and it is clear that they bind the bowels and
are not of a diuretic nature, engendering a thick humour in
some. And some from them have obstructions of the liver,
spleen, or kidneys, and hence those become affected with
dropsy or calculus who use them much, and especially old
men. But of all wines, the best, and best fitted for persons
in good health, and to those who are convalescent from dis-
eases, is that which is red in colour, thin in consistence, and
gently astringent, (i.)

OiavTTog,

CEsypum, Unscoured Wool, is treated of under wool.

Commentary. The CEsypum was the sordes collected from Comm.
wool. It was used medicinally in the Hippocratic age (De ' '
Morb. Mulier. ii), and continued to hold a place in the jNIateria
Medica down to a late date. See Rutty's Mat. Med. (357.)
It would appear, from Dioscorides's description of the mode of
preparing it, that it Avas the scum collected on the surface of
water by boiling wool in it. (ii, 66.) See also Phny (H. N.
xxix, 2.) The ancients used it frequently in the practice of
medicine. Sec in particular Dioscorides (1. c.) and Avicenna
(ii, 2, 355.)

OXvvOoi,

Grossi Ficulnei, Green Fir/a, are possessed of acrid and
discuticnt powers, owing to the juice which is in them. When
boiled, therefore, they discuss hard swellings ; but when raw
thev remove mvrmecia and thvmi.

CoMMEiNTARv. Thcy ai'c the unripe fruit of the fig tree. Comm.

III. 18 '—^

274 SIMPLES. [book vii.

C'oMM. Dioscorides and most of the ancient authorities recommend
them as a stimulant appHcation to various tumours. Our
author^'s account of them is abridged from Dioscorides, who
further recommends them in a cataplasm with salts and vine-
gar for achores, furfures, and epinyctis, and as an application
to the bites of mad dogs, (i, 185.) They are the Grossi Ficulnei
of the Arabians, who treat of them under the general head of
figs. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 276.)

OAocrrioi',
Holostium, is possessed of desiccative powers with astrin-
gency. Hence they use it for fractures.
CoMM. Commentary. There are few articles in the Materia Medica
' ' of the ancients about which there is so much doubt. See
Parkinson (Theatre of Plants), and Sprengel in Dioscor. (iv,
11.) It has been set down as the Holosteum umbellatum, but
all upon mere conjecture. Our author here copies from Galen,
who in his turn borrows from Dioscorides. We are not aware
of its being described by any of the Arabian authorities^ nor
have we found it in any modern Dispensatory.

0(U(j^o/ciov,
Omphacium is the Juice of the Unripe Grape, being con-
siderably astringent and desiccative in the third degree.
Hence it applies to defluxions, and especially those of the
stomach.
CoMM. CoMMENTARv. The juicB of unripe grapes is called Agresto
' * in Itah^, where it is still used in affections of the throat.
Dioscorides recommends it in such cases, Pliny says of it,
"Prodest dysentericisj sanguinem excreantibus, anginis." (H. N.
xxiii, 4.) This is a literal translation from Dioscorides, who
recommends it in these cases, and also for various others
in which astringents are indicated, such as aphthae, loose gums,
fistulse, old ulcers, spreading sores, and as an application to
asperity and ulceration of the eyelids, (v, 6.) Celsus prescribes
the omphacium in a variety of cases, as a cleansing medicine,
(v, 5), as one that corrodes (v, 6), and as one that determines
outwardly, (v, 12.) None of the other Greek authorities nor
the Arabians supply any additional information of interest after
Dioscorides.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 275

Ovaypa,

Onagra, Tree Primrose (called also GEnothera and CEnothyris),
is a sort of plant resembling a tree, the root of wliicli^ wlien
ajiplied as a cataplasm, proves soothing to the bites of venomous
animals.

Commentary. It would appear to be either the CEnotJiera Comm.
Onagra, Tournefort, or the Epilobhmi angustifolium L.. Narrow-
leaved "Willow-herb, as Sprengel supposes. Dioscorides describes
it minutely, but, like our author, merely recommends it in malig-
nant sores, (iv, 116.) Galen strangely, as we would suppose,
says of it, that its juice is of a venous nature, and of the same
power as wine. As far as we have been able to discover, it is
not to be found in the works of Hippocrates, Celsus, or any of
the Arabians. It is worthy of remark that the Epilobmm
angustifolium, although it does not hold a place in our Mat.
Med., is still know^n to the vendors of medicines, and retains
the characters which it obtained from the ancients. See Gray
(Suppl. to Phannacop. 84.) This confirms the conjecture that
the onagra is this plant. We would further mention, as con-
firmatory of this opinion, that the E. angust. has been cultivated
about gardens in this country from time immemorial, so that
there is every reason to beheve that it had been introduced by
the Romans, no doubt on account of its supposed efficacy in
medicine.

' Ovo/Lia r] Ovo/.iig,

Onosma, or Onomis, Stone Bugloss (called also Phlomitis or
Ononis), is acrid and bitter, and hence the leaves of it when
drunk with wine kill and expel the foetus.

Commentary. That it was a species of Anchusa, or one of Comm.
its congeners, is obvious, from the description of it given by ' ' '
Dioscorides, who says, the stalk, the fruit, and the flower, are
very like to the anchusa. It seems probable, then, that it w^as
some species either of Anchusa or Lithospej'mum. The Onosma
of Linnaeus, as Sprengel justly remarks (Ad Dioscor. iii, 137),
is altogether a plant of a different character. Dioscorides,
like our author, says it has great powers in procuring abortion ;
nay, that it was alleged that if a pregnant woman walked upon
the plant she would miscarry. (1. c.) It is said that Aretaius
recommends it in nephritic complaints. Pscudo-Dioscor.
(Euporist. ii, 112.) Galen and the other authorities who

276 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. notice itj do so in nearly the same language as our author.
' ' ' We have not been able to discover any traces of it in the
■works of the Arabians.

Onobrychis^ Cockshead, is possessed of aromatic and dis-
cutient powers. It therefore discusses phymata^ cures strangury,
and proves sudorific,
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides describes it as having leaves
" ' ' like the lentil, or a little longer, a stalk a fathom long, a pur-
ple flower, and small root, and grows in wet and uncultivated
grounds. This description seems clearly to point to the Ono-
brychis sativa, a plant of the tribe FabacecB. Dioscorides holds
it to be diuretic and sudorific, and discussive of tumours, (iii,
160.) It appears to have been generally used as a diuretic.
Pseudo-Dioscor. (Euporist. ii, iii.) Galen gives exactly the
same account of it as our author; indeed, both borrow from
Dioscorides. The Arabians would appear to have rejected it
from their Mat. Med. Although it has long ceased to occupy
a place in the Dispensatoiy, the sainfoin, or cockshead, is still
known to the vendors of medicines, and retains its ancient
characters of being " ripening, discussive, useful in strangury."
Gray (Pharmacop. 96.) Our old herbalist, Culpeper, ascribes
to it the same virtues. (Complete Herbal, 52.)

' Ol'OI,

Aselli,]Millepedes, or Slaters; those found under water-vessels,
which roll themselves into a ball when touched, are possessed
of discutient and desiccative powers. Therefore, when drunk
with wine they cure dysuria and jaundice, and in cases of
cynanche they are rubbed in with honey : and for earache
they are triturated with rose oil, and being warmed in the
shell of a pomegranate ai'e injected into the ear.
CoMM. Commentary. The Millepedes are thus described by
" ' ]Marcellus Empiricus : " In locis humidis et sordidis sub
lapidibus inveniuntui' bestiolse multipedes quae contactcC contra-
liuntiu' et rotundantur." (De ]\Iedicamentis, c. xxxv.) They are
the Porceliones of Caslius Aui'eliauus (i, 4), who calls them
" animalia qure humectis et aquosis locis ssepe nascuntur, a
Grsecis appellata onisci." (Tard. Pass.) Almost all the ancient

SECT. III.] ■ SIMPLES. 277

authorities on the Materia Medica from Dioscoridcs down- Comm.
wards, recommend them in the same cases as our author does. ^ * '
In fact, almost, all the authorities take the characters of the
millepedes from Dioscorides. (ii, 37.) See in particular
Serapion (De Simpl. 4, 29), Avicenna (ii, 2, 718.) They par-
ticularly commend the use of them in jaundice. In English
they are called Slaters or Cheslops. They held a place in the
Edinburgh Dispensatory until after the edition of it in 1811.
In fact, the highest modern authorities testify to the medicinal
virtues ascribed to them by the ancient authorities. Moses
Chai'ras, who makes frequent mention of them, says, that a
volatile salt is obtained from them w'hich is highly diaphoretic.
Dr. Hill calls them aperient, attenuant, and detergent. Dr.
Mead recommends them strongly for their diuretic property. He
directs us to put them into "wine, and afterwards to strain off
the liquor, and sweeten it with honey or sugar. (Momtu et
proecejjta.) It Avould appear that they are still used in France
as diuretics. In Dr. Pemberton's edition of the London Dis-
pensatory, 1746, it is directed to inclose them in a thin canvass
cloth, and suspend them within a covered vessel over the steam
of hot spirit of wine, by which they will be killed and ren-
dered friable. Lister calls them lithontriptic.

Onyches, are the covers of Indian shell-fishes. These, in a
fumigation, rouse those affected with uterine suffocation and
epileptics. But when drunk they disorder the belly.

Commentary. Dioscorides says of the Onyx, that it is the CoM\f.
operculum of a shell-fish, like that of the Pui-pura, being found ' — ' — '
in India in the lakes that produce nard ; and that it acquires an
aromatic smell from the shell-fishes feeding on the nard ; it
is gathered, he adds, when the lakes are dried up l)y the
drought ; the kind brouglit from the lied Sea is ditterent,
being whitish and fatty ; the Babylonian is black aiul smaller,
but both form- a fragrant fumigation, resembling castor some-
what in smell. He concludes with stating, regarding their
medicinal properties, that both rouse persons in hysterical con-
vulsions, and also in epileptical, when applied in fumigations ;
that taken internally, they soften the belly ; and that the
shell-fish itself, when burnt, has the same powers as the pur-

278 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. pura and raurex. (ii, 10.) Avicenna gives a very accurate
account of this article under the name of Blacte Byzantie ;
but except that he does not attribute the fragrancy of the
shell to the nard it feeds on, his description is nowise dissimilar
to that by Dioscorides. The medicinal ^drtues which he assigns
to it are exactly the same, (ii, 2, 78.) Serapion gives a literal
translation of the chapter of Dioscorides on the onyx. (De
Simpl. 443.) One of Rhases's authoiities says of the Blactice
Byzanti(E, that they are of a hot and dry temperament,
being possessed of astringency and subtilty of parts, and that
they are stomachic, hepatic, emmenagogue, and cordial. (Cent.
1. ult. i, 127.) From the above account of this article, it will
readily be seen that it is the cover of the Strombus lentiginosus:

' Oi'hJi'ig,
Ononis, Restharrow, has a root which is desiccative in about
the third degree, but the bark of it is detergent and incisive ;
and hence it is lithontriptic.
CoMM. Commentary. See ''Ai'wi'tc-

"O^og,
Acetum, Vineyar, is possessed of mixed powers, namely, cold
and hot, both arising from tenuity of parts ; but the cold
prevails over the hot. It is a desiccant of the third rank.
CoMM. Commentary. It is also called -yXuAcaSior, as the SchoHast
" * on Nicander says, per eupheraismum, from yXvKvg, sweet. But
we are rather inclined to think that it is the diminutive of
yXhVKOQ, must, vinegar being the juice of the grape which has
lost its strength. Hence Pliny calls it " vitium vini." All
the ancient authorities maintained that vinegar is at the same
time refrigerant and discutient. Galen discusses the question
regarding the nature of it at great length and ^vith much in-
genuity. (De Med. Simpl. i.) He, Pliny, and Celsus mention
the fact that an effervescence is produced when it is poured on
earth, meaning, no doubt, certain carbonates. PHny and
Celsus commend it in the strongest terms as an antidote to
the sting of the asp. Serapion and the other Arabians copy
Galen's account of it. Symeon Seth gives an interesting
abstract of the ancient opinions on this subject. Dioscorides
and AAdcenna recommend it as an application to ecchymosis

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 279

of the face ; but the latter remarkSj if too long continued Comm.
it renders the part yellow and weakens the sight, (ii, 2, 71.) ' ' '
See also Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 18.) These two Arabian au-
thorities say of it, that it congeals the womb ; but that a clys-
ter of hot vinegar and salt proves soothing in the spreading
ulcers of the intestines. Both the Greek and Arabian autho-
rities commend it as an antidote in cases of poisoning with
opium and cicuta. They also recommend an embrocation
with vinegar and olive oil or rose oil to the head iu affections
of it. Dioscorides recommends vinegar for chronic conglis
and orthopnoea, and also for defluxions of the throat and quin-
seys. (v, .21.) The Greek and Arabian autliorities further
agree in recommending it in erysipelas, herpes, and whitlow.

O^VUKClvBoQ,

Oxyacantha, Evergreen Thorn ; the tree is like the wild
pear in appearance and powers, having also some tenuity of
parts. The fruit of it resembles myrtles.

Commentary. Matthiolus, Dodonseus, and Sprengel agree Comm.
in referring it to the Mespilus PyracantJia, or Evergreen ' *
Thorn. The commentators on Mesne make it to be the Berberis,
i. e. the Berberry. See the Appendix to this section. Dioscorides,
after giving a botanical description of it, says, with regard to
its medicinal powers, that Avhen pulverised and applied in a
cataplasm it extracts thorns and prickles, and that its root is
said to possess the power of occasioning abortions, when the
abdomen is gently stroked or rubbed with it. (i, 122.) Galen
says of it, that its root is attenuant and incisive, resembling
that of mvrtles : and that whether eaten or drunk it restrains
all fluxes. (De Sim pi. viii.) Although the similarity of names
might lead us to suppose that this must be the Spina acuta
of the Arabians, this does not appear to be at all the case.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 11.)

' Ottiov,

Opium, is treated of under poppy.

CoMMKNTARY. Although we treated of the deleterious Comm.
effects of opium on the animal economy in the Fifth Book, *
and have given a general description of the medicinal proper-
ties of the poppy in the proper place, we shall avail ourselves

SIMPLES.

[book VII.

CoMM. of tlie present opportunity to supply some important informa-
" * ' tion regarding the ancient use of opium in the practice of
medicine. Though mention is made of " the juice of the
poppy," and of " meconium" as soporifics in the works of
the Hippocratists (De Mulieribus, ii), it does not appear that
these articles were much in use until a later age. " The juice
of the poppy" is noticed likewise by Theophrastus (Fr. 20, 35),
and the process of gathering this juice is briefly alluded to
by him (H. P. ix, 8, 2) ; but the nature of his work did not lead
him to say anything of its medicinal uses. There can be no ques-
tion, we presume, that the " j)apaveris lacryma" of Celsus was
opium, i.e. the concrete juice of the poppy. He prescribes it on
many occasions, both externally and internally. For example, as an
ingredient along with hyoscyamus, burnt lead, and other ingre-
dients for an emollient plaster to be applied in arthritic pains
(v, 18, 29, 35), and as an injection with alum, acacia, and
heubane in earache (vi, 7) ; as an ingredient in various coUyria
for complaints of the eyes (vi, 6) ; as an injection in complaints
about the anus (vi, 18), and in many other cases. The famous
INIethodist, Cselius Aurelianus, is very guarded in his use of
opiates, and he appears to approve of the opinion of those who
held that poppy does not induce sleep, but oppression of the
senses; "papavera autem pressuram nou somnum faciunt."
(i, 1.) See also Pass. Tard. (i, 5.) Dioscorides, then, is the
first authority that gives a detailed account of opium and its
uses in medicine. Treating of the cultivated poppy, he says,
that its juice is very congeahng, incrassative, and desiccative,
when taken in small quantity, to the size of a vetch, is
anodyne, soporific, concoctive, and is useful in coughs and
cseliac affections. Taken in greater quantity, it proves in-
jurious, inducing lethargy and death ; it is beneficial in head-
ache when rubbed in with rose oil ; and in earache when in-
jected with almond oil, safl'ron, and myrrh; in inflammations
of the eyes with the roasted yelk of an egg and safl'ron ; and
for erysipelas and wounds Avith vinegar ; for gout with a
woman^s milk and saffron ; and when applied as a suppository
per anum it induces sleep. The best kind is that which is
dense, has a heavy stupefying smell, is bitter to the taste,
readily incorporating with water, smooth, white, not rough, nor
grumous, nor moulding like wax in the process of straining ;

SECT. HI.] SIMPLES. 281

when laid in the sun softening, and when appHed to a lamp Comm.
not burning with a smoky flame, and after being extinguislied " '
preserving its powers in its smell. He then mentions several
modes of adulterating it which were practised in his time, and
then adds, it is I'oasted for oplithalmic medicines upon a recent
shell until it becomes s'oft and of a tawny colour. Erasistratus
says that Diagoras condemned the use of it in diseases of the
ears and eyes, as inducing dimness of sight and coma. And
Andreas savs, that if it had not been adulterated those that
rubbed it in wovild have been deprived of sight by it. But
Mnesidemus says, that the only proper use of it is by the
smell, as thus disposing to sleep, for that otherwise it proved
injurious ; but these statements are false, as is proved by ex-
perience ; for the operation of the medicine is attested by its
effects. He concludes by describing the modes by which
opium and meconium were prepared, but it will be sufficient
for our purpose to state that his description of the former of
these is exactly the same as the method now commonly prac-
tised. See Ksempfer (Amren. Exost. 643), and Pereira (M. M.
1274.) The meconium was the expressed juice of the leaves
and head, and is not now in use. Dioscorides states that it is
much weaker than the other, (iv, 65.) Plim^^s description of
the opium and meconium is obviously taken from Dioscorides,
or both these authors must have copied from some pre-
ceding authority. He thus describes the meconium : " cum
capita ipsa et folia decoquuntur, succus meconium vocatur,
multum opio ignavior." (H. N. xx, 76.) Opium it is certain
was freely used by the Empirics, and accordingly it will be
found that it is a very common ingredient in the prescriptions
of Scribonius Largus, and Marcellus the Empiric. The latter
gives several formuhe for collyria, in which opium occurs, and
he is at pains to state that it is the concrete and not the ex-
pressed juice which must be used. (Dc Medicamentis, viii.)
He also presci-ibes it internally for pains of the kidneys (xxvi),
as an enema in colic (xxix), and in many other cases. Galen
wouhl ai)pear to have had very sound opinions respecting the use
of opium in the treatment of diseases. He professes, indeed,
never to have had recourse to it when he coukl help it. (Dc
Comp. med. sec. loc. iii) ; but yet lie prescribes it in cailiac
and certain stomach affections (i])id. viii), and even in intense

282 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. pains of tlie eyes (Meth. Med. ii), although in general he condemns
the application of it in collyria. (]Meth. ]SIed. iii ; and De Comp.
m. s. 1. ii.) He often mentions that castor counteracts the preju-
dicial effects of opium. (De med. sec. loc. iii, and viii.) Of all
kinds of opium he pronounces the Theban to be the best. (De
Antid. i.) Avicenna, besides treating of opium as a poison,
and gi^■ing the general properties of poppy, under that head,
has a very interesting chapter on opium in his Mat. Med. He
defines opium to be the juice of the black Egyptian poppy
dried in the sun. He says it proves fatal if given in a
larger dose than two drachms ; but the proper dose he states
to be the size of a tare. He states in parenthesis that opium
is also formed from the juice of the wild lettuce (lactucarium?).
He calls it narcotic and sedative of all pains, whether taken
internally or rubbed in. It is useful, he says, in apostemes,
especially in those of an inflammatory nature. He says of it,
that it dries up ulcers ; with the yelk of an egg forms a liniment
for gout ; it proves soporific if a cloth smeared with it be placed
below the head; allays pain if injected into the ear affected,
along with myrrh and saffron ; allays chronic pains of the head,
and sometimes cures them ; soothes the pains of ophthalmy,
and the apostemes of the eyes, with the milk of a woman ; but
yet he adds, that many of the ancient authorities had con-
demned the use of it in such cases as proving injurious to the
sight; it allays incessant coughs, and often cures that kind which
is noisy; improves the stomach in peculiar cases, when debili-
tated by excess of heat and humidity, is braced by it ; but in
many constitutions, opium, so administered, impairs digestion ;
it stops diarrhoea; is useful in dysentery, and in ulcerations
of the intestines. It proves fatal, he says, by congealing the
vital powers and extinguishing the innate heat ; and its anti-
dote is castor. He concludes by saying, that three times the
amount of the seed of hvoscvamus, or double of the seed of
mandragora may be given as a substitiite for it. (ii, 2, 519.)
Haly xVbbas treats of opium more briefly, stating in general
terms that it is a soporific and sedative medicine. He seems
to say that from half a drachm to a drachm will prove fatal.
(Pract. ii, 40, 318.) Serapion^s account of opium is mostly
made up of extracts from Dioscorides and Galen, with a few
brief notices of the opinions held by Arabian authorities, which

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 283

do not contain anything of much interest, (c. 374.) Rhases's Comm.
chapter upon the poppy contains many extracts from the " ' '
Greek authorities on opium, with a few from Arabian writers,
which, however, contain nothing of much interest after what
we have given from Dioscorides and Avicenna. Like Serapion,
he says, from half a scruple to a scruple is a dose, and that two
drachms Avill prove fatal. His authority. Mesne, says it forms
semen. Another of them, Joannitius, seems to say that it
binds the bowels in general, but yet has some laxative power.
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 533.) In the ' Book of Experience,^ as quoted
by Ebn Baithar, poppy -juice is recommended in complaints of
the eyes, and in pains of the head when applied to the fore-
head. One of his Arabian authorities mentions its good
effects in diarrhoea; and it is also spoken favoralily of as an
application to bm-ns. Ebn Baithar's account of this article is
otherwise mostly made up from Dioscorides.

Ottoq,

Succus Cyrenaicus, Medicus, and Sja-iacus, are so named
per excellentium, being considerably hot and flatulent. The
Cyrenaic is hotter aud more attenuate than any of the others.

Commentary. The high interest which attaches to these Comm.
articles might well dispose us to wake our classical recollections, ' — ^ — '
in order to illustrate the nature of them, if the narrow limits
to which we feel that we are restricted did not restrain us from
such an undertaking. We beg, however, to quote the words of one
of our ablest authorities in illustration of this subject. Dr.
Lindley, treating of the plants which peld assafoetida, says,
"assafcctida is the milky juice of various species of Ferula in-
habiting Persia and neighbouring countries. Of these, F. assa-
foitida is the plant described by Ksempfer. (Amsen. Exot. 535) ;
but F. Perscia and others, are no doubt also the origin of this
drug. The Asa dulcis or Laser Cp-enaicum was yielded by a
Thai)sia, and probably Thapsia Garganica. This drug was
in high reputation among the ancients for its medicinal uses ;
it had miraculous powers assigned to it — power to neutralize
the effect of poison, to cure envenomed wounds, to restore sight
to the blind, and youth to the aged ; these were only a part
of its reputed properties ; it was also reckoned antispasmodic,
deobstrucnt, diuretic, &c., &c. So great was its reputation,

284 SIMPLES, [book vii.

CoMM. tliat the princes of Cyrene caused it to be struck on the re-
' ' ' verse of their coius : and the C\Teneau doctors were reckoned
among the most eminent in the world/^ (^ eg. King. 776.) See
further Pereira (Mat. Med. 1041), and most especially Sprengel
in Dioscor. (iii^ 85.) From what we have stated^ our readers
will readily comprehend that the Median and Syrian juices were
varieties of the gum resin of Ferula assafoetida; Avhile the
Cyreuean juice was the gum resin of a congener, namely (as
stated above), the Thapsia Garganica, called silphium by the
ancients. That the Cyrenaic juice was the product of the
silphium, is positively stated by Strabo. (Geogr. xvii, 3.) We
shall reserve what we have to say on its medicinal properties
till we come to that article. It is the laser and laserpitium
of the Roman authors. It occurs in the Hippocratic collec-
tion. (De Morb. iv.) By the Arabian authors it is generally
treated of under the name of Assa, and hence its modern ap-
pellation.

Opi-yavoq,
Origanum, Origamj, or Wild Marjoram ; all the species of
it are possessed of incisive, attenuant, desiccative, and cale-
facient powers in the third degree.
CoMM. Commentary. Apuleius enumerates three species and re-
commends them for coughs, (c. 122.) Galen and Dioscorides
also describe the same number of species, Avhich may be
referred — the 1st, to the Origanum Heracleoticum, L. ; the 2d, to
the 0. onitis ; and the 3d, to 0. sylvestre album. Dioscorides de-
scribes the particular uses of these plants so fully that we
cannot find room for his separate articles ,on each. Suffice it
'to say, that he sets down the first as being laxative, emmena-
gogue, and expectorant, (iii, 29, 30, 31.) Galen, like our au-
thor, merely states the properties of the Origana in general
terms. The Arabians call the origanum diuretic and vermi-
fuge. They copy, as usual, from the Greeks. See Serapion
(c. 310), Avicenna (ii, 2, 526), and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 125.)
The Origanum Smyrnceum occurs in the modern Greek Phar-
macopceia (121.)

OpfOCTfXll'Ol',

Apium montanum, Mountain Parsley, has powers like those
of parsley, but stronger.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 285

Commentary. Dioscorides says of this article {Selinnm Comm.
Oi^eoselinum? or Athamunta Libanotisl:), that it is diuretic ' '
and eraraenagogiie, and an ingredient in antidotes, and in
diuretic and heating remedies, (iii, 69.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities treat of it in general terras along with
its congeners ; and the Arabians do the same under Apium,
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 55) ; Serapion (De Simpl.
290) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 69.) Serapion's Arabian autho-
rities represent the Apium montanura as being laxative, car-
minative, deobstruent, diuretic, and, in some cases, emetic.
The Athamanta Libanotis is still to be found in the shops of the
apothecaries, where it retains its ancient characters. Gray
(Suppl. to the Pharmacop. 81.) Some of the commentators
on Dioscorides take it for the article we are treating of.

'Opo/3aK:)(jj,

Orobanche, Holly Rose, belongs to the fii'st order of the
desiccative and cooling temperament.

Commentary. It appears unquestionably to be the Oro- Comm.
hanche CaryophyUea. See Sibthorp. (Fl. Grteca. i, liO.) " "
Dioscorides merely states of it, that it was eaten as a potlierb
both raw and boiled. The other authorities treat of it very
succinctly. ATe have not been able to discover any traces of
it in the works of the Arabians.

''Opo^oc,

Ervum, Bitter Vetch, or Tare, is heating in the first degree,
and desiccative in the second. It is also bitter, and therefore
is incisive, detergent, and deobstruent. When taken in too
great a dose it occasions bloody urine.

Commentary. It is the Ervum ErvUia, Bitter Vetch. Comm.
Dioscorides enumerates its medicinal virtues at considerable " ' '
length, recommending it as being good for the bowels, and
diuretic, but in large doses inducing bloody discharges from
the belly and bladder ; as being a cleansing application in ob-
stinate diseases of the skin, and in carcinoma and gangrene ;
as being alexipharmic and forming a good fomentation for
chilblains and pruritus, (ii, 131.) Our author copies word for
word from Galen. The Arabians treat of it at nmch greater
length, but add little to what Dioscorides had delivered under

286 SniPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. this liead. When dnink with Adnegar, they say it relieves dif-
' • ' ficulty of urine, tenesmus, and acute pain of the bowels ;
promotes expectoration, and softens indurated mammte. See
in particular Avicenna. (ii, 342.) Though this plant has long
been omitted from our Dispensatory, it is still not wholly un-
known in the shops. See Gray (Pharmacop. 96.)

' Op/bllVOU,

Horminum, Clarij^ is like horehound in appearance, and hot,
moderately desiccative, and detergent. It therefore is a pro-
vocative to venery ; and along with honey clears any thickness
of the coats of the eyes, dispels oedema, and extracts sharp
instruments. The wild is stronger than the cultivated.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author borrows his account of this
' ' ai'ticle [Salvia Horminum) from Dioscorides. (ii, 135.) It is
not treated of by Galen, Aetius, nor Celsus. It is fully treated
of by the Arabians, who recommend it as an application to
cancerous and other sores, as a collyrium in ulceration of the eyes,
and as a plaster in cases of gout. They further hold it to be
aphrodisiac. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 692) ; Rhases (Cont. 1 ult. i,
727.) Even of late years, it has been reported as possessing
the virtues ascribed to it by the ancients. See Kutty (Mat.
Med. 238.)

Orj'za, Rice, is somewhat astringent, and therefore it binds
the belly in a moderate degree.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Oryza sativa. Dioscorides, Galen,
and the other authorities state its virtues in the same brief
terms. For the views of the Arabians, see Serapion (c. 13) ;
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 583) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 567.) The
Arabians recommend it boiled in milk, which, they say, takes
away its astringency, and it becomes more nutritious and forms
semen.

Orchis ; the herb is also called Dog's Orchis, or Testicle,
having a double bulbous-shaped root. The powers of the
greater orchis are humid and heating, and therefore it is a
provocative to venery. But those of the lesser are heating
and desiccative, and therefore, on the contrary, it restrains
venery. That species which is called Sarapias, and otherwise

SECT. III. J SIMPLES. 287

TriorcMs, is more desiccative than the former. It therefore
discusses oedematous swellings, cleanses foul and putrid ulcers,
and cures herpes. When dried it is more desiccative. Owing
to its sub-astringency, it binds the belly when drunk with
wine.

Commentary. The modern botanists have described many Comm.
species of it, and it is difficult to determine from among them '~~'~'
those which are applicable to the two species described by
Dioscorides and our author. Sprengel is pretty confident that
the former is the Orchis papilionacea. He is undecided re-
specting the Sarapias, but we may venture to refer it to the
Orchis Morio. Regarding the medicinal vii'tues of the former
of these, Dioscorides merely relates the vulgar belief, namely,
that one of its bulbous roots had the virtue of rousing to
venery, and the other of blunting the venereal appetite, and
that the one promoted the generation of male children, and
the other of female. However nonsensical all this may appear,
the same properties are ascribed to the orchis by our herbalist
Culpeper. (130.) The other orchis he represents as being an
ingredient in appHcations to fistulse, mortifications, ulcers of the
mouth, and so forth, (iii, 31, 32.) Galen attempts to explain
the reputed aphrodisiacal virtues of the orchis upon its sensible
qualities. Our author copies from him. The Arabians de-
scribe these two plants under the names of Testiculus Yulpis and
Testiculus Canis, or Chasi altahb and Chasi alchelb. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 706) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 714) ; Serapion
(De Simpl. 90, 91.) They ascribe the same real and imaginary
powers to the two species as the Greeks had done.

Osiris, Toad-flax, from which besoms arc made, is bitter and
removes obstructions in the liver.

Commentary. Dioscorides biiefly notices this plant (Osyris Comm.
alba?), and recommends it in jaimdice. Our author copies lite- "^""^
rally from Galen, as does also Aetius. Oribasius borrows from
Dioscorides. It does not appear to be treated of by the
Arabian authorities at all.

OfTra,
Ossa, Bones, when biu'ut are possessed of discutient and

288 SIMPLES. [book vii.

considerably desiccative powers^ especially^ they say^ those of
men. The ankle-bone of a sow when burnt^ is said to cure
flatulence and tormina. And some cure epilepsy and arthritis
by giving burnt bones to drink. The burnt ankle-bone of an
ox is said to fasten loose teeth ; but if drunk with honey, it
removes round worms, and with oxymel it reduces the spleen,
an4 when rubbed in relieves leuce. It is also an aphrodisiac.
The burnt thigh-bones of an ox if taken in a draught, stop
hemorrhages and fluxes of the bowels.
CoMM. Commentary. The other authorities give nearly the same
' " ' account of their medicinal properties. See Galen (De Simpl.
11); Serapion (c. 464); Avicenna (ii, 2, 528.) The Arabians
borrow from Galen and our author.

' Oar^aKa,
Testae, Shells, from furnaces, when triturated, are possessed
of desiccative and detergent powers. Hence they are used as
a dentifrice, and when rubbed in with vinegar cure itch, exan-
themata, and gouty complaints, and with cerate dispel enlarged
scrofulous glands.
CoMM, Commentary. It is now well ascertained that burnt shells
" — « — ' consist principally of lime. They, may, therefore, be supposed
to form a good stimulant application to certain cutaneous
diseases and tumours of an indolent nature, as recommended
by our author and Dioscorides. (v, 177.) Oribasius says, that
they are ver^^ efiicacious in repressing fungous flesh when
sprinkled in the form of a fine powder.

t

OfTT^fa,
Ostrea, Oysters; the biu-nt shell is possessed of similar powers
to the buccina, but is not of so gross a consistence. It is used,
therefore, as a detergent to the face, and whitens the teeth.
When washed it is freed from pungency, and is useful for
incarnating and cicatrizing ulcers attended with a copious
discharge.
CoMM. Commentary. Galen gives the same account of the burnt
' — * — ' shells of oysters or snails. He says, that if a shell be washed
and burnt it imparts an empyreuma to the water, Avhich ren-
ders it heating and attenuant ; whereas, what remains is devoid
of pungency and terrene, and it is useful for the filling up

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 289

and cicatrization of ulcers. He recommends the aslies of all Comm.
burnt shells as a dentifrice, in which case they do not require " '
to be finely levigated as they should be when applied to sores.
(De Simpl. 11.) This article is not treated of by Dioscorides,
the reason of which probably is, that in his time the word
ocrrpeo was a term applied to the whole class of the darpciKoSspiia.
See Commentary (i, 91.) They are treated of in the same
terms by the Arabians as by the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii,
2, 529) / Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 224) ; Serapion (c. 443.)

'Ovpov,

Urina, Urine ; all kinds of it are hot and acrid, but that of
man is weaker than the urine of other animals, Avith the ex-
ception of castrated boars, but it is considerably detergent ; and
it is said that some who have drank it in the plague have re-
covered. It also cures leprosy, putrid ulcers, achores, and
furfui'es ; and likewise sprains of the feet when not inflamed.
That of boys not come to puberty is stronger, and from it the
chrysocoUa is formed. The urine of mules suits with arthritic
remedies. That of goats and of camels is laxative of the belly,
and hence is given in dropsical complaints.

Commentary. The account given by our author of the Comm.
medicinal properties of Urine is abridged from Dioscorides and ' — » — '
Galen. Galen rejects, with disgust, the internal use of it.
Some, he says, have given the urine of a boy for the cure of
orthopncea ; but he justly remarks that there is no want of
other remedies for this affection, and that in fact the article in
question has no peculiar virtue in the complaint. Most of the
other authorities, however, sanction the use of it in this case,
as for example, Dioscorides, Avicenna, and Rhases. Tliey also
recommend urine to be drunk for the cure of the bite of the
viper, for deadly poisons, and incipient dropsies. Dioscorides
recommends the sediment of urine as an application to erysi-
pelas ; upon which practice Galen remarks that Avhen the
affection is still hot such an application must be quite un-
suitable ; but that when cooled, it or any other discutient is
indicated. Those who desire to know more fully the views of
the ancients on this subject, are referred to Dioscorithj^ (li,
99) ; Galen (De Simpl. 10) ; Serapion (c. 44S) ; Avicc^-tla (ii, 2,
716) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 7 19) ; llaly Abljas (Pract. ii, 517) :

HI. 19

21)0 SIMPLES. [book vtt.

CoMM. Ebn Baithar (i, 191.) The last of these is particularly full
' ' mider this head.

YJayKpariuv,
Pancratium, Sea-daffodil, in appearance and po^Tcrs is like
the squill, but is weaker.
Coinr. CoJiMEXTARY. There ai'e two varieties of the Sdlla mari-
' • ' tuna, or Sqnill, namely, the white and the red. The pancration
would appear to be the red variety. See Alston (Mat. ]Med.) ;
Pereira (Mat. jNIed. 651) ; and Lindley (Veg. King. 203.)
Dioscorides, like om^ author, states of it, that it has the same
powers as the squill, but in a weaker degree ; and that it is
prepared in the same manner, and used in the same affections ;
for example, in diseases of the spleen and dropsies, (ii, 203.)
Galen and Aetius treat of it in nearly the same words as our
author. We are in doubt whether the pancration be treated
of by the Arabian authorities, with the exception of Ebn
Baithar, who, it would appear, describes it under the name of
Kebal. He, however, merely gives extracts from Dioscorides
and Galen, (ii, 309.)

riaAiouon^,
Palinrus, C/irist's- thorn ; the leaves and root of it arc as-
tringent, and hence they stop fluxes of the belly, and discuss
phymata when they are not of a very hot nature. The fruit
is of so incisive a nature as to break down stones, and relieve
expectorations.
CoMM. Commentary. It would seem to be the Palinrus australis,
' * ' Gaertn. Dioscorides ascribes to it nearly the same medicinal
properties as our author. Thus, he says, it is expectorant,
lithontriptic, and alexipharmic, its leaves and root being astrin-
gent, so as to stop looseness of the bowels, and that it is
diuretic and discutient externally, (i, 121.) Galen and Aetius
treat of it in nearly the same terms as our author. We have
not been able to detect it in the Mat. Med. of the Arabians.

YlavciKeg,

Panaces, All-heal ; it is from that species called Heraclium,
from Avhich the substance named opoponax is produced, being
heating in the third degree, desiccative in the second, emollient

SECT. TIT.] SIMPLES. 201

and discutient. The bark of the root being weaker than the
juice, is somewhat detergent and incarnative, but the fruit of
it is emmenagogue. The species of Panaces which are called
Asclepium and Chironium, are more heating than the former^
and hence their leaves and fruit are used for ill-conditioned
ulcers and phymata.

Commentary. Dioscorides decides that the Heraclium is the Comm.
tree which produces the famous opoponax. It has now got the ' "
scientific name of Opojmnax Chironium, Koch. See Pereira
(Mat. Med. 1040), and Lindley (Veg. King. 776.) Dioscorides
gives a most excellent account of the process by which the
opoponax is collected, and describes the marks by which that
which is genuine may be recognized. He ascribes to it cale-
facient, attenuant, and emollient powers, and recommends it
in a great variety of cases, such as periodical fevers, rigors,
con^^llsions, bruises, pains of the sides, tormina, strangury,
scabies vesicre ; as an emmenagogue, and a medicine which
destroys the foetus ; as a liniment in sciatica ; a good applica-
tion to the holes of carious teeth ; as forming a good plaster
to bites of mad dogs ; as an incarnant when applied to ulcers
connected with exposure of the bone ; and as being alexipharmic,
and remedial in hysterical convulsions, and in many other
cases, (iii, 48.) Galen also gives an interesting account of
opoponax, which he represents as being hot in the third de-
gree, and drying in the second. He recommends it particularly
in ill- conditioned ulcers complicated with exposure of the bone.
He says the fruit of the tree is emmenagogue. Aetius treats
of it in similar terms. The Arabians treat of this article at
considerable length, as usual following in the footsteps of
Dioscorides. See AA'icenna (ii, 2, 521) ; Khases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 521) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 252) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.)
Tliey recommend it in hardness of the spleen, in })lcuritic
pains, and chronic coughs. They say it softens hardness of
the uterus, and is useful in stillicidium min?e. Both when
taken by the mouth and in a suppository, they say it occasions
abortion. Avicenna says that galbanura is used as a succcda-
neum for it, and that gum ammoniac is nearly allied to it.

The authorities are much divided whether the Asclepium
be Cucliryx Lihanotis, or Echinoptiora (cntiijh/if/. The for-

292 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. mer of these would appear to be the Libanotis of the ancient
Mat. Med., and therefore the latter would seem to have pre-
ferable claims. Dioscorides recommends it externally as a
discutient application to ulcers and tumours, and internally
"with wine as being an antidote to reptiles, (iii, 49.)

Sprengel inclines to think that the Chironium is the
Hypericum origanifolium, Willd. Why modern botanists have
applied the specific term Chironium to the first of these plants,
we are at a loss to explain. Dioscorides recommends it both
internally and externally for the bites of reptiles. Galen and
the other authorities treat of it in general terms, like our
author. The Arabians in like manner give its medicinal pro-
perties under the head of Panaces.

YlciTTV^og,
Papyrus, when unburnt is only simply the vehicle of other
substances. But when burnt it is desiccative like burnt paper,
but the ashes of the papyrus are weaker.
CoMM. Commentary. It is marked Cypems Papyrus by Linnseus.
From burnt papyrus and burnt paper prepared from it, the
ancients procured an impure carbonate of kali, which they
used as a caustic. It is frequently mentioned by Celsus. Pliny
says of it, " Charta quae fit ex Papyro, cremata inter caustica
est.^^ (H. N. xxiv, 51.) See also Dioscorides and Galen. The
papyrus was much used by the ancients for dilating fistulae in
the same manner that prepared sponge now is. Avicenna re-
commends it for this purpose, and also as a styptic to stop the
flow of blood. Its ashes, he says, stop the spitting of blood,
(ii, 2, 536.) See also Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 132), and Ebn
Baithar (ii, 244.)

Ylaptovvyria,
Paronychia, Mountain Knotgrass, is so named because it cures
paronychia (whitlow). Its powers are those of an attenuate
and desiccative substance without pungency.
CoMM. Commentary. The commentators are divided between the
Paronychia Hispanica, Cand., and the Draha verna, or Whitlow-
grass. See Sprengel (Ad Dioscorid. iv, 54) ; Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 105.) Dioscorides and Galen join in commending

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 293

it for the cure of whitlow. Galen argues that it acts in this Comm.
case by being possessed of discutient powers. We have not ' '' '
been able to defect it in the works of the Arabians. Neither
Hippocrates nor Celsus has noticed it.

YlevTa(f)vWo<;,

Quinquefolium, Cinquefoil, is desiccative in the third order,
but by no means acrid. It is therefore greatly in use.

Commentary. Although this article be minutely described Comm.
by Dioscorides (iv, 42), Theophrastus (H. P. ix, 13), and by ' ' '
Democritus (Ad Geopon. ii, 6), there has been considerable
difference of opinion respecting it. See Parkinson, Sprengel
(Ad Dioscor. 1. c), and Rutty (Mat. Med. 38.2.) We think that
the well-known plant Potentilla reptans, Angl. common creeping
Cinquefoil, answers well to the descriptions above referred to.
Dioscorides recommends it for a great many purposes : its decoc-
tion for the cure of toothache, and mortifications in the mouth as
a wash; for roughness of the windpipe as a gargle; for diarrhoea
and dysentery; as a discutient application to many tumours
and cutaneous eruptions; in intermittent fevers, epilepsy, and,
in short, as our author remarks, it would appear to have been
much used in ancient times. Galen, like our author, merely
states its general properties as a medicine, without defining the
particular cases in which it is applicable. It is the cinque-
folium of Celsus, who places it in his list of things which are
gently repressing and emollient, (ii, 33.) It occurs in the
Hippocratic treatises. It is recommended by Apulcius for
pains of the bowels, epistaxis, angina, &c. For the Arabians,
see Avicenna (ii, 2, 545) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 544) ; Ebn
Baithar (i, 174.) They do little more under this head than
repeat the cases in which it is recommended by Dioscorides.
The cinquefoil is highly commended by all our old herbalists,
Parkinson, Gerard, and Culpeper, and it held a place in our
English Dispensatory down to the time of Quinc}', who, treat-
ing of it, says, " Schroder runs through most chronical distem-
pers in commendation of it, says that it is astringent and
vulnerar}', that it cures coughs, &c." (137.) Quincy here does
not seem to have been aware that Schroder was merely con-
firming the character of it as given by Dioscorides and Ebn
Baithar.

294 SIMPLES. [book vii.

IlfTrXoc-
Peplus, called by some Papaver spumosum. And this shrub
has a juice and purges like the spurges.

YleirXiov,
Peplium; this too has a juice^ and grows by the sea-side; for
the most part, it is of no use, but the seed of it purges flatus
like that of the peplus.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be no doubt that they are two
" " ' species of the Euphorbia or Spurge ; probably the E. Peplus
and E. Peplls, that is to say, the petty spurge, and small purple
sea spurge. These articles are frequently mentioned as drastic
purgatives in the Hippocratic collection. (Epidem. vi., &c.)
Ruffus Ephesius gives them the character of being safe
phlegmagogues and cholagogues. (De Med. Purgant.) Diosco-
rides gives them the same characters, (iv, 65, 66.) They are
also mentioned by Pliny (H. N. xx, 20), but are not noticed
by Celsus. Galen gives their seed the character of purging,
and at the same time of expelling flatulence. All the Greek au-
thorities on the Mat. Med. down to Actuarius (Mat. Med. v),
give them exactly the same character. The Arabians briefly
say of them that they purge like the Tithj^malle. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 103, 104.) We may be allowed to mention, that although
the E. Peplis and Peplus be now excluded from our Dispensa-
tory, they are still to be found in the shops of the apothecaries.
We concur in the opinion thus stated by Boerhaave while
treating of spurge root : " We have declined these rough
medicines too hastily.^^ (Mat. Med.) ■ See further Rutty
(Mat. Med. 520.)

Piper, Pepper ; its root resembles the costus in power. But
the fruit of it, while yet germinating, forms the long pepper,
beingr more humid and hot. But that which is as it were the
unripe fruit is the white pepper, being more acrid than the
black, because it is over-heated. Both are heating and desic-
cative.
CoMM. Commentary. Sohnus gives the following account of it :
' ' ' " Quod incorruptum est Piper album. Quorum cutem rugo-
sam et torridam calor fecerit, Piper nigrum. Qui demum

SECT. III.] JS1MPLE8. 29.)

caducus torretur fervido sole, vocamen traliit de colore. At Co.mm.
quod ex ipsa arbore stringitur, ut est, album Piper dicitur.'^ " '
(Polyliist. 65.). This is not quite a correct account of tlic
matter. Black pepper is tlie fruit gathered before it is
ripe, and dried in the sun. White pepper is the fruit of the
same plant, gathered after it is fully ripe and freed of its ex-
ternal coat by maceration in water. Isidorus says further,
" quod immaturum est piper lougum vocatur." (Orig. xviii, 8.)
It is now ascertained that the Piper lonyum is a distinct species.
Frequent mention of the peppers is made in the Hipjiocratic
treatises. (De Morb. Mul., &c.) Dioscorides gives };n excel-
lent account of the pepper, and on the whole a very correct
one, except that he does not recognize the P. longum as a dis-
tinct kind from the black and white varieties. He says of it
in general terms, that it is calefacient, diuretic, digestive, and
detergent of obscurities of the cornea, and recommends it in
a great variety of cases, beginning with its use as a remedy in
intermittent fevers, (ii, 188.) The use of peppers for the cure
of intermittents is strongly recommended by Stephanus in his
commentary on Galen. (Therap. ad Glauc.) Celsus prescribes
pepper for a great many purposes, as being calefacient, diuretic,
opening the pores, &c. (v, 4, &c.) Galen, in treating of the
pepper in his work on Simples, merely says of its medicinal
powers, that it is strongly calefacient and desiccative. Aetius
and the other Greek authorities copy from Galen. Avicenna
treats separately of the Piper and the Piper longum, and
although in one place he quotes Galen as saying that the
latter is a variety of the former, he speaks of them as if he
held them to be distinct plants. He says of the former,
that it increases the appetite, promotes digestion ; and of the
other, that it is aphrodisiac. He says the white kind is the
most stonuxchic; but the long the most laxative. On tlie
whole, lie agrees with Dioscorides and Galen as to its medicinal
uses, (ii, 2, 519, 550.) Sec further Serapion (c. 357), Rhases
(Cont. I. ult. i, 550), Averrhoes (CoUig. v, 42.)

Pepo, Pompion, is possessed of detergent powers. Hence
that part which is as it were the flesh of it, cleanses away
freckles and the like. But the seed of it removes obstructions
of the kidneys.

296 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. It appears to be the Cucurhita Pepo, L,
See Book First,, sect. 80. Alexander mentions tliat the seed of
the pepo is possessed of an emetic quality, (^di, 14.) Dioscorides
and Avicenna agree in ascribing the same property to its root.
The Arabians treat of this article at considerable length, re-
commending it externally as an application to obstinate
diseases of the skin ; and internally as an excellent diuretic
and laxative medicine. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 89)^ Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. iii^ 20), and Serapion (De Simpl. 251.) It is clear from
Avicenna^s section on the Pepo, that the term was also applied
to the melon. Indeed, as we have stated more than once be-
fore, it is difficult to distinguish the summer fruits of the
ancients from one another.

Periclymenon, Woodbine ; the leaves and fruit are possessed
at the same time of incisive and heating powers, so as to oc-
casion a discharge of blood by urine when drunk for seven
days. The seed is desiccative, and if drunk for forty days,
relieves affections of the spleen and dyspnoea.
CoMM. Commentary. There can be no doubt that it is either the
Lonicera jierichjinenum, or the L. caprifolium, that is to say,
either the "Woodbine or the Honeysuckle. Sprengel decides
in favour of the latter. Dioscorides recommends it in nearly
the same cases as our author, and also says of it, that it accele-
rates delivery in labour, (iv, 14.) Oui' author's account of it is
condensed from Galen. It is not found in the works of Celsus.
The Arabians give rather a confused account along with other
climbing plants. See Serapion (c. 41.)

neptarf^Ewi',
Yerbenaca, Vervain, is so desiccative and astringent that
it aggkitinates wounds, and therefore stops hemorrhage.

CoMM. Commentary. It is undoubtedly the Verbena officinalis.

'^~" According to Apuleius,it is styptic, agglutinative, and abstergent.
He recommends it as an application to the bites of serpents,
phalangia, and mad dogs. Dioscorides, and most of the suc-
ceeding authorities down to Macer, recommend it internally
for the cure of jaundice, and externally for foul ulcers. He
describes two species, of which the second is the Verbena

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 297

supina. (iv, 60^ 61.) Galen describes only one variety, and Comm.
merely recommends it as being a vulnerary herb. Ebn ' " '
Baitliar^s description of this plant is entirely made up from
Dioscorides and Galen, (i, 498.) We are inclined to think
that it is the plant described in the translation of Aviceuna
under the names of Pastus columbarum, s. palea. He recom-
mends it as an application to erysipelas, (ii, 2, 551.) See also
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 530.) On its use by the Hindoos, see
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 314.)

Persica {the Peach ?), is an Egyptian tree, the leaves of which
are desiccative and astringent, and therefore stop hemorrhage.

Commentary. It has been generally acknowledged as the Comm.
peach tree, but, as Alston and Woodville state, this supposition ' ' '
is attended with many difficulties. Sprengel is by no means
decided ; but, upon the whole, inclines to the Cordia Myxa.
With this opinion we are not disposed to agree, as we have
stated in another place. See under Myxa. We would
hesitatingly, then, admit it as the Persica vulgaris, Miller.
Dioscorides merely recommends the dried powder of the leaves
as a good styptic in cases of hemorrhage. Galen and the
other Greek authorities give the same character of it. The
Arabians, in like manner, follow Dioscorides. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 22.)

W^TaaiTriq,

Petasites, Butter-burr, is of the third order of desiccants ;
hence it is used for iU-conditioned and phagcdsenic ulcers.

Commentary. Dioscorides's description of this plant with Comm.
its petasiform leaf, leaves no doubt of its being the Tussiluyo ' *
petasites. He recommends it only for malignant and phage-
daiuic ulcers (iv, lOG.) Galen and the other Greek authorities
say the same of it. We have not been able to find it in the
•works of any of the Arabians except Ebn Baithar, who, under
this head, merely gives extracts from Dioscorides and Galen.
It is still used by the country people as an application to foul
ulcers. It was retained in the Dispensatory as late as the
time of Quiucv.

298 SIMPLES. [book vii.

TIeTOoaeXivop,
Petroseliiium, Stone Parsley ; tlie seed is hot and desic-
cative in the third degree, being incisive; and hence it occa-
sions copious urinary and menstrual discharges. It is also
carmiuative.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the species of Parsley called the Mace •
' • ' donian, and known bv the different botanical names of Pefro-
selinum Macedonicum, Buboii Macedoniciim, and Athomanta
Macedonicum. As Miller remarks, " the INIacedonian parsley
is a stranger to our country, and not to be found except in
curious botanical gardens.^' (Gardeuer^s Dictionary.) It is
cultivated, however, on the continent, and its seeds are still to
be found in the shops of our apothecaries. See Gray (Suppl.
to Pharmacop. 79.) It had not wholly disappeared from our
English Dispensatory in the time of Quincy (145.) Our
author borrows his characters of it from Galen. Dioscorides
says its seeds are fragrant, aromatic, diuretic, and emmena-
gogue; that it is beneficial in flatulence of the stomach aud
colon, and in tormina, for pains of the side, of the kidney's,
and of the bladder Avhen taken in a di'ink ; and that it is an
ingredient in diuretic antidotes, (iii, 70.) It occurs in the
works of Celsus, who mentions it as an ingredient in a con-
fection for colic, and in other cases, (iv, 14, &c.) Galen has
a curious passage on the places where this plant Avas cultivated
for the market in his time. (De Antidot. i.) The Arabians in
general treat of it along with other species of parsley under
the head of Apium. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 55) ; Serapioii (c.
290) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 69) ; Averrhoes (CoUig. v, 42) ;
Ebn Baithar (ii, 388.) The Arabians do little more than repeat
the characters of it given by their Grecian masters.

Peucedanum, Hog' s-fennel ; we use the concrete juice and
sap as being considerably heating, discutieut, aud atteniuint,
both when smelled to and in a potion for affections in the
lungs and chest occasioned by thick humours, and also for
scirrhous spleen. When put into a tooth eaten wdth caries
it straightway allays the pain ; and it agrees with nervous
affections. The root promotes the exfoliation of scales of

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. L^'JO

bonesj and cures ill-couditioned ulcers, proving calefacient and
desiccative in the third degree.

Commentar;v. It appears to he the Peucedanum officinale, Comm.
AngL Hog's-fennelj or Sulphur-wort. Dioscorides gives a very
correct account of this plant, and of the well-known gum, or
rather resin, which exudes from it. He says the gum is pos-
sessed of a strong smell, is of a tav.ny colour, and heats the
taste, and when rubbed in along with vinegar and rose oil
proves beneficial in cases of lethargy, phrenitis, vertigo, epilepsy,
chronic headaches, paralytic attacks, sciatica, and convulsions,
and in all nervous affections when rubbed in with oil and
vinegar; that when sraelled to it rouses from hysteric conA^ul-
sions, and from catalepsy, &c. He speaks also of its being
efficacious in coughs, dyspnoea and tormina ; says that it
loosens the belly gently, reduces swelliug of the spleen, and
greatly assists in cases of difficult labour ; that it is useful in
pains of the kidneys and in those of the bladder, and that its
root is useful for the same purposes, but is less energetic, (iii,
182.) Galen also has a very interesting section on this article
in his work ' On Simples,^ explaining its action upon the
principles of his system. Aetius, like our author, follows
Galen. Celsus recommends it in pains of the joints as an
external application. (211, ed. Milligan.) The Arabians give
it the same characters as the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 86);
Serapion (c. 28G.) The root and gum resin of peucedanum,
although now rejected from our Dispensatory, are still to be
found in the shops of the apothecaries, where they retain their
ancient characters. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 80.)

Picea, the Pitch Tree, has similar powers to the pine, but
more moderate.

Commentary. We think there is no doubt that it is the Comm.
Pimis Cembro, L., or Aphernousli pine. The fruit of it, namely, ' "
the Cembro nuts, are called <TTpo/3(Aot by the Greek authorities.
Dioscorides says when di'unk with must or the seed of cucumber
they are diiu-etic, and allay irritation of the bladder, kidneys,
and stomach. Taken fresh from the tree and bruised, and
Ijoilcd in must, he says, they suit old and consumptive coughs.
(See further undei it[tv(\)

[book vit.

Y\r]-yai'oi>,
Ruta, Rue ; the wild belongs to the fourth order of cale-
facients and desiccants ; but the cultivated to the third, dividing
and discussing the thick and viscid humours. It also promotes
the urinary discharge, and is composed of subtile parts and
carminative ; hence it restrains venereal appetites.

CoMM. Commentary. The wild rue is the Peganum Harmala, L.

" • ' The other species is the Ruta graveolens. According to
Florentinus, it kills the foetus in utero (Geopon. xii, 25.)
Dioscorides^s two chapters on the Peganum are so long that
we can scarcely attempt an abstract of them. Both species,
he says, are caustic, calefacient, ulcerative, diuretic, emmena-
gogue, astringent, and alexipharmical. (iii, 45, 46.) It occurs
in the Hippocratic treatises, and in the works of Celsus. Our
author abridges the interesting account of it given by Galen.
The Arabians treat of the two species very elaborately, but in
the main follow Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 571) ;
Serapion (c. 300) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) We may just
mention that the Ruta graveolens still retains its place in our
Mat. Med., and that the seeds of the other, Peganum Harmala,
are still kept in the shops. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop.
116.) The Turks use its seeds as a spice, in like manner as
they were used in the time of Pliny. (H. N. xx, 51.)

CoMM

Wiaaa,

Pix, Pitch ; dry pitch is desiccative in the second degree,
but less calefacient, while the liquid is contrariwise. They have
some detergent and digestive powers, and also discutient and
acrid. They therefore remove leprous nails, cleanse lichen,
and digest swellings. But the liquid is more powerful, so as
to be serviceable in a linctus for asthma and empyema. The
dry is more agglutinative of wounds.

Commentary. Pliny says of pitch, " Phthisicis etiam
cyathi mensura qui dam dederunt, et contra veterem tussim."
(H. N. xxiv, 24.) Averrhoes also recommends it in such
cases. (Collig. ii, 42.) See, however, more fully on the virtues
of pitch, Dioscorides (i, 94), who recommends the liquid pitch
in phthisis, empyema, coughs, asthma, and cases of difficult
expectoration ; also as an external application to leprous nails,
hard tumours of the uterus, fissures of hands and feet, &c.

SECT. Til.] SIMPLES. 301

The liquid pitch of the ancients was evidently tar ; the dry Comm.
was the same boiled until it became hard. The latter is often " ' '
called TraAt/uTTiffffo. See Dioscorides (i, 94, 97) and Pliny
(xxiii, 1.)

n«o-(TfAotoi',

Oleum picatum. Pitched Oil, is formed from liquid pitch
consisting of a more attenuate substance than it.

Commentary. According to Sprengel, the tt. of Dioscorides Comm.
is the same as Tar-water, so celebrated as the grand panacea ' '
by Dr. Berkley in his ingenious work called ^ Siris.^ It is
called opo7ri(T(7rj by our author in another place, (iii, 74.) The
Pissasphaltum of the ancients, according to Dr. Hill, was the
Pix Mineralis, or Earth Pitch of the moderns.

YliaraKia,

Pistachia, Pistachio Tree ; its fruit when eaten is moderately
stomachic, and removes obstructions of the liver, and more
especially a decoction of the light and aromatic parts of it in
wine. It also relieves those who have been bitten by reptiles.

Commentary. We have treated of the Pistachio nuts in comm.
the First Book. They are the fruit of the Pistachia vera. It ''~^ '
is hardly worth while to give the opinions of the other autho-
rities under this head, as none of them supply any additional
information to that given by our author. See Dioscorides
(i, 167.) We may just mention in this place, that the oil of
pistachio nuts was much used as an application to the cica-
trices of small-pox. See Rhases (Contin. xxxii, 2.)

Pityides, the Fruit of Pines, being possessed of mixed powers,
the astringent and acrid, hence it assists expectoration from
the chest.

Commentary. Pliny restricts it to the fruit of the Pinaster Comm.
or Wild Pine, but the Greeks apply it to the fruit of all the ^"^^ — '
pine tribe. Pliny, like our author, recommends it as a remedy
for coughs. Here, however, as is usual with him, he merely
translates Dioscorides (i, 87.) Our author is principally in-
debted to Galen. (De Simpl. viii.) Celsus places the " nuclei
pinei" in his list of things which are particularly good for the
stomach, (ii, 24.) The Aral)ians treat of these under the

302 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. general head of piniis. See in particular^ Avicenna (ii, 2, 301)
' " ' and Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) The latter enlarges on the
virtues of them beyond his wont, ascribing to them powerful
effects in disinfecting a pestilential state of the air, in resis-
ting putrefaction, preventing impregnation, and procuring
abortion. He also calls them vermifuge.

VliTVOKa/LiTrai.
Erucse pinorum, the C anker -ivorms of Pines, are possessed
of the same powers with cantharis and buprestis.
CoMM. Commentary. We have treated of the Er7icce pinorum in
' * ' the Fifth Book. As thev were seldom or never used in the
practice of medicine, it is difficult to see why they should have
been allowed a place in the ]Mat. Med.

Pini cortex, the Bark of Pine ; its prevailing power is as-
tringcncy, by which it proves a useful application for intertrigo
and burns. In a potion it restrains the belly. The leaves
of it are also agglutinative of wounds.
CoMM. Com:mentaky. It is the Plnus Pinea, L., Stone Pine. Our
' — * — ' author would appear to have condensed and abridged the more
lengthy account of this article given by Dioscorides. He says
it is a species of the same genus as the picea, and that the bark
of both being astringent, is a suitable application to excoria-
tions, to superficial ulcers and burns, with litharge and the
manna of frankincense ; that it stops hepatic diseases when
pulverized Avith copperas ; in a fumigatio-n promotes the ex-
pulsion of the foetus and secundines, and in a draught binds
the belly and proves diuretic. The leaves he recommends ex-
ternally as a soothing application in cases of inflammation and
toothache, and internally with hydromel in diseases of the liver.
(M. M. i, 86.) Of the fruit of pines, and of the torch prepared
from it (SaStoi'), we have treated in their proper places. Galenas
notice of this article is to the same effect as our author's.
Frequent mention of the pine occurs in the works of Hippo-
crates and Celsus. The latter recommends its flowers in
diseases of the liver, (iv, 8.) The Arabians treat of the pine,
and the virtues of the different parts of it, at great length.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 280, 301, 555, 093); Serapion (De Simpl.

SECT. JIT.] SIMPLES. 303

G3) ; Rliases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 311); Averrlioes (Collig. v, 42); Comm.
Ebn Baitliar (ii, 137.) They borrow freely from tlie Greeks, ' " '
and further recommend the different parts of the pine very
much in diseases of the kidneys and bladder, especially calculus
and haematuria.

Ylnvovaa,

Pityusa ; some say that this is a species of spurge, because
it has a juice and purges like them.

Commentary. There can be no doubt of its being the Comm.
Euphorbia Pityusa. It is briefly noticed by all the other
Mriters on the Mat. Med. as possessing the same virtues as the
spurges in general.

Platanus, the Plane Tree, is possessed of a humectating and
refrigerant power. Hence the green leaves are of use in in-
cipient inflammations. But the bark and spherical balls are
more desiccative, so that when one has been boiled in \dnegar
it relieves toothache. They also cure burns by fire along with
fat. The burnt bark is more desiccative and detergent, so as
to cure leprosies and hnmid ulcers.

Commentary. It is the Platanus orientalis, L. The seed Comm.
forms into spherical balls, which are called Pilulce by Pliny.
He recommends them for the bites of serpents and for burns ;
also when pounded with acrid vinegar, as a styptic for stop-
ping bleeding. (H. N. xxiv, 29.) Pliny, however, merely
copies from Dioscorides, who further recommends the leaves
boiled in wine in defluxions of the eyes, and as an application
to swellings and inflammations ; and its rind boiled in vinegar
as a gargle in toothache, (i, 107.) Our author is evidently
much indebted to Galen, who commends it for the same medi-
cinal purposes, and wai^ns his readers to guard against the
down which grows on its leaves, as it may prove prejudicial to
the windpipe, eye, or ear, if admitted into them. (De Simpl.
viii.) Aetius, like our author, copies very closely from Galen.
Not much additional information can be drawn from the Ara-
bians, who, under this head, do little more than copy from
Dioscorides and Galen. See Aviccnna (ii, 2, 209) ; Serapion
(c. 1 12) ; Ebn Baithar {ii, 122.)

304 SIMPLES. [book vit.

Pulmo, Lungs; those of lambs and swine are believed to cure
the skin Avhich has been chafed by shoes. But the lungs of a
fox when dried are said to cure asthmatics. The Pulmo
marinus, when fresh and pounded, cures gout and chilblains.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides, Galen, and Serapion give nearly
the same account of the medicinal properties of lungs. The
Pulmo marinus is the species of Medusa which bears this
scientific name. Our author and all the others follow
Dioscorides in defining its medicinal properties, (ii, 39.

Polemonium, Greek Valerian (called by some Philetserium),
is attenuate and desiccative. Hence some give the root of it
in wine for ischiatic disease, dysentery, and scirrhus of the
spleen.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Polemoniwn caruleum, Greek Vale-
' ' ' rian. It occurs in the Hippocratic treatises (Hippiatr. 108,
ed. Basil), but is not found in the works of Celsus. Dioscorides
recommends it to be given for the bites of venomous reptiles,
for dysentery, dysuria, sciatica, and diseases of the spleen, and
also as a masticatory for toothache. He further mentions
that it was used as an amulet for the sting of the scorpion,
(iv, 8.) Our author copies from Galen, as does also Aetius.
We have not been able to trace it in the works of the Arabians,
with the exception of Ebn Baithar, whose account of it is made
up entirely of extracts from Dioscorides and Galen, (i, 186.)
Though it disappeared from our Dispensatory long ago, its
root is still to be found in the shops of our apothecaries, where
it retains the character of being astringent, vulnerary, and
anti-dysenteric. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 55.)

YloXiov,
Polium, Foley ; the smaller, which we use for antidotes,
belongs to the third order of calefacients and desiccants. It
therefore removes obstructions of all the viscera, and proves
diuretic and emmenagogue. While green it agglutinates large
wounds, and when dried it cures ill-conditioned ulcers if
sprinkled upon them.
CoMM. Commentary. The species indicated by our author is evi-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 305

dently the first species of Dioscorides, namely, tlie Teucriwn Comm.
Poliiim. The other is the Teucrium Creticum. Both these ' " '
plants retained a place in our Dispensatory down to the days
of Quincy (118), and both of them are still to be found in the
shops of the apothecaries. Gray (Pharmacop. 49.) See further
Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 23), and Rutty (Mat. Med. 402.)
Dioscorides says of both, that their decoction taken internally
is beneficial to the bites of venomous reptiles, in cases of dropsy,
jaundice, and diseases of the spleen along with vinegar; that
it loosens the belly and is emmenagogue, but induces headache
and is bad for the stomach ; that in fumigations and placed
below a couch, that they drive away reptiles; and in a cataplasm
are vulnerary. Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius, give them nearly
the same characters. Celsus barely notices it once as one of
the ingredients in the celebrated theriac of Mithridates. (v,
23.) The Ai'abians treat of the two species at greater length
than the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 537) ; Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. i, 558) ; Serapion (c. 165) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.)
They agree with the Greeks in considering it diuretic, emme-
nagogue, and a gentle purgative, and recommend it further as
being anthelminthic and a remedy in cases of protracted fever.
Serapion, by the way, quotes Dioscorides as calling the polium
aphrodisiacal, but there is nothing in the chapter of Dioscorides
on the poley to this effect.

rioAuyoAoi',

Polygalon, the Milkwort, has leaves which are moderately
austere. When taken in a draught it seems to engender milk,
being of a hot and humid temperament.

Commentary. That it is the Polyyala amara seems quite Comm.
certain. Dioscorides and Galen treat of it in nearly the same * '
language as oiir author. We have not been able to find it in
the works of the Arabians except Ebn Baithar, who merely
copies Dioscorides and Galen, (i, 186.)

rioXvyovarov,

Polygonaton, Solomon's Seal, is a mixture of astringency,
acrimony, l)ittcrncss, and a certain indescribable nauseous prin-
ciple, and therefore it is not much used. Some sprinkle the
root of it upon woundsj and clear away spots on the face with it.

III. 20

306 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. It has been usually taken for the Conval-
' ' ' laria Polygonatum, which has obtained the same character as
a medicine in modern works on the Mat. Med. See Rutty
(M. M. 403) and Gray (Suppl. to the Pharraacop. 23.) Our
author copies almost word for word from Galen, who, in his
turn, borrows from Dioscorides. None of the Arabians have
noticed it, as far as we can discover, except Ebn Baithar, who
merely gives the descriptions of it by Dioscorides and Galen.
It is not to be found in the works either of Hippocrates or
Celsus.

TVoXvyovov,
Polygonon, Knot-grass, has some astringency, but a cold
watery principle of the second order is what prevails in it.
When applied cold externally, it therefore relieves ardor of
the stomach, erysipelas, and hot inflammations. Being of such
a nature it repels defluxions, and thereby appears to be desic-
cative. The male is stronger than the female.
CoMM. Commentary. Of the two species described by Dioscorides,
' ' the mas is undoubtedly the Polygonum avicidare, and the
feminine probabh^ the P. maritimum. How the latter could
be the Hippuris vulgaris, as several of the older commentators
on Dioscorides had supposed, we are at a loss to comprehend.
Two plants so dissimilar as the knot-grass and the mare^s-tail,
could never have been classed by the ancients as male and
female. Dioscorides gives a most interesting exposition of
the medicinal powers of the former species, but as our author
borrows from him, we need not dwell upon the other. It is
possessed of an astringent and refrigerant power, and its juice
(decoction) is suited to cases of hsemoptysis, fluxes of the belly,
chorea, strangury, and so forth, (iv, 4, 5.) Galen taxes Dios-
corides with not stating precisely what the particular cases of
strangury are in which it is applicable. Otherwise his cha-
racters of this article agree exactly with those of Dioscorides
and our author. Celsus ranks "herba sanguinalis, quam
Greeci TroXn'-yoi/ov vocant," among things which are at the same
time gently repressing (astringent ?) and emollient, (ii, 33.)
The Arabians who treat of the polygonum follow Dioscorides.
See in particular, Avicenna (ii, 2, 725) and Ebn Baithar (ii,
195.) Our quaint old herbalist Culpeper, under the head of
knot-grass, assigns to it exactly the same medicinal virtues as

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 307

Dioscorides does to the Polygonum Mas and although the Comm.
Pohjfjonum aviculare was ejected from our Dispensatory more ' " '
than a hundred years ago^ it is still to be found in the shops
of our apothecaries, where it has the reputation of being " a
vulnerary and astringent herb/^ Gray (Suppl. to the Pliar-
macop. 42.)

YlokvKvimov,

Polycnemon, is heating and desiccative in the second degree,
so as to agglutinate wounds.

Commentary. It has been supposed to be the Mentha Comm.
arvensis, but nothing is known of it for certain. Nicander ' "
notices it in two places. (Alex. 57, and Theriac. 359.)
Dioscorides calls it a vulnerary herb, and a remedy for stran-
gury and inward bruises, (iii, 98.) Galen gives the same
account of it as our author. The Arabians do not appear to
have treated of it.

TloXuTTo^tov,

Polypodium, Pohjpodij, is possessed of considerably desic-
cative powers without pungency. When drunk it purges
downwards.

Commentary. Dioscorides says of the root of the tt. [Poly- Comm.
podium vulgar e\ that it is purgative, and is given to evacuate ' " '
phlegm and bile ; that it makes a good application to sprains
and fissures in the hands, (iv, 185.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities merely state its properties in general terms,
like our author, with the exception of RuflFus, who treats of it
more elaborately. He says it evacuates phlegm, bile, and
water ; that it should be taken in mulse or water before a
meal, when it will pm'ge gently, and thus prove an excellent
laxative, especially to children ; but that in disease it is not
a purgative possessed of much efficacy. (Opera, 11.) The
Arabians, and especially Mesue, seem to have attached more
importance to it. See Mesue (De Simpl. 5) ; Serapion (c. 248) ;
Avicenna (ii, 2, 535) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar
(i, 227.) Mesne recommends it in joint diseases, colic, hard-
ness of the spleen, fevers connected with black bile, and fissures
of the hands. The polj^ody retained its place in the Dispen-
satory with its ancient characters as late as the time of Quincy
(137), and even in the age of Lewis it had not been wholly

308 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. rejected, (ii, 244.) There seems no good ground for questioii-
' ' ' ing its efficacy as a gentle laxative. See Gray (Suppl. to Phar-
macop. 13.)

VloiLKpoXv^,
Pompholyx, is desiccative without pungency, so that it is
useful for carcinomatous and other ill-conditioned ulcers. It is
also an ingredient in ophthalmic remedies.
CoMM. Commentary. What this substance was is well stated hy
' * — ' a comparatively recent writer on the Materia Medica. Dr.
Lewis, treating of zinc, says, " Moderately pure white flowers
sublimed from it in the brass or other furnaces, wherein zinc,
or its ores are melted with other metals, were formerly kept
in the shops and distinguished by the names of pompholix and
nihil album." (Mat. INIed. ii, 485.) A still later authority on
the Pharmacopoeia describes it thus: ^' Pompholix Nihil album.
Collected in the smelting furnaces wherein zinc ores or brass are
melted; used in ointments for tutty." Gray (Suppl. &c. 234.)
It is also distinctly described by Geoflroy (Treatise on Fossil,
&c. Subst. 185), and by Quincy (201.) The latter writes as if he
had been familiar with this article; but it appears singular that
the former says that in his time (that is to say, about 150 years
ago) it was unknown in the shops. For the ancient authorities
on it, see in particular Pliny (H. N. xxiv, 33), and Dioscorides
(v, 85.) The latter calls it styptic, cooling, and to a certain
extent escharotic. Galen recommends it in carcinomatous and
all ill-conditioned ulcers, for those about the parts of genera-
tion and anus, and for ocular collyria. (De Simpl. ix.) The
Arabians treat of it under the head of Tutia. See in particu-
lar Serapion (c. 422) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 695) ; Averrhoes (Collig.
V, 43) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 217.) Hardly one of them does any-
thing more than copy the description of it given by Dioscorides
and Galen, only comprehending under one name what the
Greeks had delivered regarding pompholyx and spodium sepa-
rately.

Purpura, when burnt are possessed of the same powers as
shells. The part which serves as a cover to them when boiled
in oil, strengthens hairs that are falling out. When drunk
with vinegar, they cure swelling of the spleen. As a furaiga-

SECT. m.J SIMPLES. .'-iOf)

tioii; tliey rouse in cases of uterine suffocation^ and expel the
secundines.

Com:\ientary. The shell-fishes which supply the purple Comm.
dye. It is got from various fishes, but more especially the ' ' '
Helix ianthina, Murex brandaris and trunculus. For an ac-
count of them, see particularly Aristot. (Hist. Animal, v, 14),
and Pliny (H. N. ix, 60.) Our author borrows from Dioscorides
(iii, 4), and Galen (De Simpl. xi.) We have not been able to
detect this article in the works of the Arabian authorities.

WoTafioyuTioVf

Potamogiton, Pondweed, is cooling and astringent, like Poly-
gonum, being possessed of similar powers to it.

Commentary. It is the Potamogiton natans, L. Dioscorides Comm.
says of it, that it is cooling and astringent, and is aj)plicable
in cases of pruritus, and in spreading and inveterate ulcers,
(iv, 99.) In some of the editions of his works, another species
is described and recommended in dysentery, colic, and the red
fluor of females. It cannot be so decidedly determined. Galen
and the other authorities treat of it in general terms, like our
author. Such of the Arabians as treat of it borrow from
Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 352.)

Poterrhium, (called by some Phroenium) ; its roots when
cut into slices agglutinate divided tendons and wounds ; and
the decoction of it when drunk relieves affections of the nerves.

Commentary. Matthiolus confesses his ignorance of it. Comm.
Sprengel is inclined to think that it is the Astragalus Poter'mm, ' • *
Pall. But Dr. Lindley holds it to be Astragalus Creticus.
(Veg. King. 548.) Dioscorides says it has stalks like those of
tragacanth, and accordingly Linnaeus holds this plant to be a
species of tragacanth. He recommends it in exactly the same
cases as our author. Galen describes it l)y the name of Neuras.
"We have not been able to detect it in the works of the Ara-
bians.

^larmbium, Iforehound, is calefacient in the second degree ;
but more desiccative. It removes obstructions about the liver
and spleen, and those of the chest and lungs. It also pro-

310 SIMPLES, [book vii.

motes menstruation. In a cataplasm it is detergent and dis-
cutient, and otherwise it is detergent and incisive,
CoMM, Commentary. The MatTubium vulgare. Dioscorides has
' * ' an elaborate section on the virtues of this article^ which he re-
commends particularly in phthisical^ asthmatic, and catarrhal
complaints, as being an excellent expectorant, for promoting
the menstrual and lochial discharges, as an alexipharmic, &c.
He adds, however, that it is unsuitable in affections of the
kidneys and bladder, (iii, 109.) Galen writes thus of it :
" Horehound, as it is bitter in taste, so, by general admission,
it has the virtue corresponding to that taste, being a deob-
struent of the liver and spleen, clearing away matters about the
chest and lungs, and promoting menstruation.^^ He also men-
tions its use in a cataplasm and in other cases, as stated by
Dioscorides. Aetius and Oribasius state its virtues in nearly
the same terms. It is the " Marrubium" of Celsus, who pre-
scribes the juice of it in phthisis (iii, 22), in paralysis (iii, 27),
in ulcers of the throat (iv, 4), and for other purposes. For the
Arabians, see in particular Serapion (c. 198) ; Avicenna (ii, 2,
553) ; AveiThoes (Collig, v, 42.) Avicenna recommends it as
deobstruent, emmenagogue, and an application to the eyes.
Serapion also praises it as a deobstruent, and recommends it
particularly in ulcers of the lungs, asthma, and such like com-
plaints. It woidd seem to deserve the characters which the
ancient authorities give it from Hippocrates down to Macer
Floridus and Serapion. See Rutty (Mat. Med. 309.) Even
yet it holds a place in the Dispensatory.

Porrum, Leek, consists of unwholesome juice and is acrid ;
but Dioscorides says, that it induces disagreeable dreams, agrees
well with the bowels, is diuretic and attenuant. It is also de-
tergent, for it proves expectorant when boiled in ptisan. The
seed of it is mixed with nephritic remedies. But the leaves
have some astringency, and therefore the juice of it proves
styptic.

CoMM. Commentary. Without doubt it is the Allium Porrum, L.

' * ' Diphilus, as quoted by Athenseus says, " it is attenuant,
nutritious, and flatulent." (Deipnos, ix, 3.) Dioscorides re-
commends it in the cases enumerated by our author, and also

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 311

in several others, (ii, 178.) Galen does not treat of it at all Comm.
in his work on Simples. The Arabians attach more import- ' '
ance to it, recommending it as being emmenagogue, diuretic,
aphrodisiac, and so forth. They say of it that it hurts the
eyes, the gums, and the teeth. See in particular Avicenna
(ii, 3, 540) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 562) ; Serapion (c. 361) ; .
Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 339.)

Ilex, the Holm Oak, has powers resembling those of the
oak, but it is much stronger.

Commentary. It is the Quercus Ilex, or Evergreen Oak, Comm.
All the authorities speak of it as being a powerful astringent. ' — • —
The Kermes, or Scarlet Grain is produced upon the ilex by a
certain class of insects. It is described by Theophrastus and
Pliny, as stated under that head.

rTpoTToXtc,

Propolis, Virgin-wax, or Bee-glue, is calefacient in the
second degree and moderately detergent. It is also possessed
of attenuant and deobstruent powers.

Commentary. Scribonius Largus calls it, ^' Propolis quam Comm.
quidam sacram ceram vocant." Dioscorides and Galen give " ' '
nearly the same account of Bee-glue as our author. It is
the glutinous substance with which the working bees block
up the holes in their hive. They gather it from poplars and
other resinous plants. It occurs frequently in the works of
the ancient writers on Pharmacy.

rirapyiu/o),

Ptarmica, Sneezeivort ; the leaves are sternutatory; but
the whole part, when green, removes hypopion and other kinds
of ecchymosis, for it is hot and desiccative. The green belong
to the second order, and the dried to the third.

Commentary. Dioscorides^s description of it agrees well Comm.
with the Achillea Ptarmica, except that (as is remarked by ^~^~"
Sprengel) its favorite locality is meadows, and not mountainous
and rocky situations as indicated by Dioscorides. All the
Greek authorities, from Dioscorides downwards, give it exactly
the same characters as our author. We have not been able to

312 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. discover any traces of it in the works of tlie Arabians. Its
" ' leaves are still kept in the shops of apothecaries, and are held
to be sternutatory. Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 80.)

YlTeXaia,
Ulmus, the Elm, is possessed of desiccative and detergent
powers, so as to agglutinate wounds ; but the bark of it still
more, if, when in a fresh state, it be wrapped like a bandage
about the wounds. It also cures leprosy with vinegar, and
the roots of it are possessed of the same powers, so that frac-
tures which will not unite are to be bathed with the decoction
of it.
CoMM. Commentary. Most probably the Ulmus campestris. Our
' ' ' author^s statement of its medicinal virtues is closely copied
from Dioscorides (i, 112.) Galen and most of the authorities
represent it to be an agglutinative medicine. Pliny, like the
others, recommends it as an application to leprosy. No men-
tion of it occurs in the works of Celsus. The Arabians treat
of it fully, but in the main follow Dioscorides. See Avicenna
(ii, 2, 71, 9G, 212) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 250.) They re-
commend it in all cases requiring astringents and abstergents.

Filix, Fern, is desiccative in its powers, and bitter. Hence
it destrovs the foetus, and kills the broad intestinal worm when
taken to the amount of four drachms in honeyed water. Be-
cause it is moderately astringent, it di'ies up ulcers without
pungency.
CoMM. Commentary. Apuleius says, " Grsefci pterin, Latini filicem
" " ' nominant.^^ (De Herbis.) We need not hesitate to refer it to
the Aspidium Filix Mas, which has been long celebrated as a
vermifuge medicine. See Book IV, 67, of this work, and
Rutty (Mat. Med. 201.) Dioscorides recommends it merely
as an anthelminthic medicine, and as one which is calculated
to promote convalescence in diseases of the spleen. For the
former purpose he directs it to be given with scammony or
white hellebore, along with a diet consisting principally of
garlic, (iv, 183.) Galen acutely remarks, that there is no
wonder that it should be anthelminthic, seeing it is possessed
of a bitter taste with some astringency. None of the other

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 313

Greek or Arabian authorities supply any additional informa- Comm.
tion respecting it. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 620) ; ' ' '
Serapion (De Simpl. 56.) The " filicula" of Celsus (ii, 12)
would appear to us to have been rather the Polypodium than
the Filix Mas. In the modern Greek PharmacopcEia it is
marked as being the Aspidium Filix Mas.

TlvKVUKOJLlOV,

Pycnocomon, is possessed of discutient, attractive, and acrid
powers. The leaves of it, therefore, discuss phyma and furun-
culus. The fruit, in addition to these properties, also extracts
sharp-pointed weapons. Its root purges yellow bile.

Commentary. Although Dioscorides has given a pretty Comm.
minute description of it, there are few articles in the ancient ' '
Mat. Med. about which there is so much uncertainty. See
the Index Latinus to Parkinson's ' Theatre of Plants,' and
Sprengel (in Dioscor. iv,173.) The latter decides that it is neither
the Leonurus Marrublastrum nor the Succisa pratensis as had
been supposed. "Whether it may be the Cephalaria Fycnocomon
we are unable to determine, as w^e have no acquaintance with
this plant. Our author borrows his medicinal characters of it
from Dioscorides (1. c.) Galen does the same. The Arabians
have not noticed it, as far as we can discover.

Pyrethrum, FtUitory ; the root has caustic powers, and
allays the pain of teeth affected with cold ; and before the
occurrence of periodical rigors it is rubbed in with oil, and re-
lieves those who are affected with torpor and paralysis.

Commentary. It seems to be the Antheniis Fyretlirum, comm.
although Sprengel is not quite satisfied. It was much used in " — « —
stimulant embrocations. Dioscorides, Galen, Macer, and
Serapion, and, in a word, all the authorities, recommend it
strongly as a plilegmagogue for toothache. Dioscorides says
further of it, that when rubbed in with oil, it is sudorific, being
serviceable in chronic rigors, for parts which have lost their
natural heat and are paralysed, (iii, 37.) Celsus also mentions
it in a list of stimulants, to be applied externally for tooth-
ache (vi, 9), and ranks it among his caustics, (v, 8.) The
Arabians treat of it at considerable length, but borrow much

314 SIMPLES. [BOOK vii.

CoMM. from Dioscorides. See in particular Avicenna (ii^ 2, 547) ;

' ' ' Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 553) ; Averrlioes (Collig. v, 42.) Tliey
all in particular recommend it as a sialogogue in cases of
toothache. We need scarcely remark that the pellitory (now
called Anacj/clos Pyrethrum) still holds its place in the Dispen-
satory as a sialogogue and masticatory. We see no good
reason, therefore, for questioning its identity with the
pyrethrum of the ancients, more especially as it still retains a
place in the modern Greek Pharmacopceia.

Ylvpog,
Triticum, TVJieat, is heating in the first degree, but is inter-
mediate between dry and humid substances. It is also some-
what glutinous and emplastic.
CoMM. Commentary. Without doubt it is the Triticum cBstivum.
' ' ' We have treated largely of it among the dietetical articles in
the First Book, and have also treated of the farina, leaven,
and pollen of wheat separately. We need not, then, enlarge
further upon this article at present.

WiTva,
Coagulum, Rennet ; all sorts of it are possessed of acrid,
attenuating, discutient, and decidedly desiccant powers. But
that of hares is represented as curing epilepsy if drunk with
vinegar, and as curing the female discharge, and pro^dng a
solvent of coagulated milk in the bowels, and of blood in hke
manner. Some say that it restrains spitting of blood from the
chest. The rennet of a horse is described as proving service-
able in cseliac and dysenteric affection's. That of the seal is
said to have the properties of castor.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author^s account of the medicinal pro-
' ' perties o^ Rennet is taken from Dioscorides and Galen. Indeed
he has copied from the latter almost word for word. The
Arabians treat of the rennets very fully and with much judg-
ment. See in particular Bhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 221) ; Avicenna
(ii, 2, 115) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 444) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 604.)
They follow Dioscorides very closely, among other things re-
commending rennet to be applied on a pessary for promoting
the menstrual discharge, and for the hysterical convulsion. All
rennets, they say, are alexipharmic, and especially those of

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 315

the kid, of the antelope, and of the camel. As stated by us Comm.
iu the Fifth Book, the ancients administered rennet in cases ' " '
of poisoning with curdled milk. It appears remarkable that
an article imquestionably capable of being applied to so many
medicinal purposes as rennet, should have been entirely ex-
cluded from our modern Dispensatories.

'VaKog,

Panniculus, Rags ; when those from wool are burnt they
have similar powers to burnt wool. Linen, when burning,
sends forth a subtile smoke, so as to prove deobstruent in
catarrhs, and agree with risings of the womb. When burnt,
its powers are nearly the same as those of wool.

Commentary. These things are so Avell known as not to Comm.
require further illustration.

Vafxvoq,

Rhamnus, BucktJiorn, is desiccative in the second degree,
but cooling in the first. Hence it cures herpes and erysipelas
when not very hot. Its tender leaves are to be used.

Commentary. This appears to be the first species of Comm.
Dioscoiides, which we may decide to be the Lycium Eurojjmim. ' ^ ~
The second is the Lycium Afi-um. The third is not well ascer-
tained, but probably is a species of paliurus. See Parkinson
(Theatre of Plants, 1006), and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. i, 119.)
Dioscorides recommends the leaves of all the three kinds for
herpes and erysipelas, and also mentions that the twigs of them
were placed in doors and windows to avert sorcery, (i, 119.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of this article in
nearly the same terms as our author. Pliny recommends it
as a cooling and refrigerant application. (H. N. xxiv, 7(S.) The
Arabians borrow their account of it entirely from Dioscorides and
Galen. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 23G) ; Rhascs
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 591) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 315) ; Ebn Baithar (ii,
223.)

Rhaphanus, Radish, is heating in the third degree, and de-
siccative iu the second. The wild is more powerful. The
seeds of both are stronger, and therefore they discuss hypopion
and other lividities.

310 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides, like our author^ describes two
' * specieSj of which the former is certainly the Rhaplianus sativus,
and the other probably the R. maritimus. Dioscorides gives
so long a catalogue of the medicinal properties of the former
or common radish, that we can scarcely venture upon an expo-
sition of it. He says of it, that its seed is emetic, dim'etic,
and a cleanser of the spleen, when drunk with vinegar; that it
is beneficial in cynanche, and alexipharmic both when taken
internally and applied externally. Florentinus (Geopon. xii,
22) and Pliny (H. N. xx, 13) praise the radish as an antidote
to poisonous substances and venomous animals. It was much
used by the ancients as an emetic, and for this purpose it was
taken before a meal as described by Celsus. (i, 3.) See also
Dioscorides (1. c.) and Pliny (1. c.) Hence it is frequently
prescribed by Nicander, as a remedy in the case of poisoning,
as in that by henbane, and in that by mushrooms. It is also
recommended in these and similar cases by Scribonius Largus
(Compos. 198.) The radish we are confident is the "radicula"
of Celsus, who prescribes it for various purposes, as being laxa-
tive, diuretic, and, as we formerly stated, emetic. (See Vol. II,
31, &c.) The Arabians attach much importance to this article,
but do not supply much information regarding it but what they
acknowledge to be derived from the Greeks. See Serapion
(c. 307) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 574) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 571) ;
Averrhoes (CoUig. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 246.) They agree
in stating of it, that taken before other food it renders vomit-
ing easy ; and after food that it loosens the bowels. AU re-
commend it in cases of poisoning. They also prescribe it as a
deobstruent in obstructions of the liver and in jaundice. The
radishes, the garden and the wild, retain their ancient charac-
ters in the works of our old herbalists, and even in the time of
Quincy they still held a place in our Dispensatory, although,
as he says, " little used in medicine." (i, 5, 409.)

Pjjoj',
Rheum (called by some Kha), is composed of a terrene,
cold, and subtile substance, and of a vaporous, hot, and
slightly acrid one. Hence it relieves sprains and ruptures,
and orthopnoea, and also liridities, by its discutient powers;
and by its astringency, spitting of blood, cseliac and dysenteric
affections. By both it cm'cs hepatic complaints.

SECT. Til.] SIMPLES. ?,\7

Commentary. Our author manifestly copies from Galen ; Comm.
and whoever -nill carefully compare his account of it Nvith ' ' '
Dioscorides^s chapter on Rha, cannot fail to come to the con-
clusion that both apply to the same substance, namely^ the
Rheum RJiajmnticum. "We therefore shall confine our attention
in this place to it, reserving to the Appendix what we have
got to say on the knowledge possessed by the ancients of the
purgative rhubarb. Dioscorides says of it, that its prevailing
power is astringency, with a certain degree of heat ; and he
recommends it to be taken in a draught for flatulence of the
stomach, atony, all kinds of pain, spasms, diseases of the spleen,
liver, and kidneys, tormina, affections of the chest and bladder,
distension of the hypochondria, diseases of the uteras, sciatica,
haemoptysis, asthma, hiccough, dysentery, cseliac affections,
iutermittents, and the bites of venomous animals; also for
lividity and leprosy when rubbed in with ^-inegar, and for dis-
cussing all chronic inflammations in a fomentation, (iii, 2.)
Galen's account of it, as already stated, is exactly the same as
our author's. Oribasius evidently takes his description of it
from Dioscorides ; and Aetius, Uke our author, as clearly
abiidges Galen. There is no mention of the RM in the
works either of Hippocrates or of Celsus. Pliny's descrip-
tion of it (he calls it Rhacoma) is manifestly imitated from
Dioscorides. (H, N. xxvii, 105.) As already stated, we shall
reserve our exposition of the views of the Arabians to the
Appendix.

Vr]TLX'ai,

Resinse, Resins, are all calefacient and desiccative ; but the
turpentine holds the first place, being discutient, emolHent,
and attenuating, and also detergent, whereby it cures itch;
and that of larch is hke to it. The resin of the pitch-tree,
and still more that of the wild pine, are more acrid, but
neither more discutient nor attractive. Those of the pine
and fir hold an intermediate place.

Commentary. On the formation oi Resins see in pai'ticular Comm.
Thcophrastus (H. P. ix, 2) and Pliny (H. N. xxiv, 22.) Phny ~^'—'
thus sums up his account of them : " Summae species duae ;
sicca et hquida. Sicca e pinu et picea ; liquida e terebintho,
larice, lentisco, cupresso.'' The Rcsina sicca pini is the Fix
arida of the Old London Pharmacopoeia, or the Fix Abietina

318 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. of the New. The Resina liquida laricis is now generally called
' ' ' by the name of Venice Tmyentine. The Resina lentisci is well
known by the name of Mastich. The Colophonian rosin, which
is often mentioned in this work, is the same as the black
fiddler's rosin. The Cypress rosin does not appear to be much
known now. Pliny correctly observes that all these resins
act on the bowels and the urine. The mode of burning or
roasting resin is described by Dioscorides. (i, 93.) He gives
a very interesting account of the f'esina in general, which he
represents to be emollient, calefacient, dissolvent, cleansing,
suited for coughs and consumptions, in electuaries by themselves
or with honey, clearing away matters from the chest j and as
being diuretic, digestive, laxative of the bowels ; adapted for
the operation on trichiasis (see Book VI, 8), and for leprosy,
with verdigris, copperas, and natron; for purulent ears with
honey and oil, and for itching of the pudendum. They are
mixed, he adds, with plasters, liniments, and acopa, and relieve
pleuritic pains either when rubbed in or applied by themselves,
(i, 91.) All the other authorities prescribe the resins freely,
but none give so full a description of them as Dioscorides.
See, however, Celsus (plm'ies), who appears to have been par-
ticularly fond of them. He recommends turpentine rosin with
butter and honey in phthisis (iii, 22), in dyspnoea (iv, 4, 2), and
in various other cases. Our author's account of them would
seem to be principally taken from Galen. The Arabians, as
usual, copy from the Greeks, and supply little additional of
their own. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 242) ; Serapion (De Simpl.
325) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 580,
&c.) ; Ebn Baithar (pluries.) All the resiuse here described
occur in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia (160, 161.)

PoSa,
Rosse, Roses, are naturally composed of a watery substance,
which is heating, astringent, and bitter. The flowers are still
more astringent, and hence are desiccative.
CoMM. Commentary. It comprehended the R. lutea, Derlech, R.
' ' ' arvensis, and probably other species of the Rosa, L. Diosco-
rides gives a careful exposition of the particular uses of Roses
in medicine. He says they are cooling and astringent. In
preparing the flowers for use, he directs the nails or white

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 319

portions to be clipped off with a pair of scissors^ and the re- Comm.
mainder compressed and pounded in a shade in a mortar, imtil
they form into a ball. He recommends them in diseases of
the eyes, headache, affections of the ears, gums, anus, and
womb, &c,, also when sprinkled in powder on intertrigo, and
as an ingredient in the ointments called calliblephara. (i, 130.)
We need not devote time to the exposition of what the other
authorities have written on this subject. See Celsus (pluries) ;
Galen (De Sim pi. viii, et alibi) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 568) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 585) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 108). The Arabians
say of rose-water that it is stomachic and hepatic; and of rose-
oil, that it relieves inflammation of the stomach and loss of its
tone. They recommend rose-water further both in syncope
and in hsemoptysis. Like the Greeks, they make it an ingre-
dient in their collyria to the eyes and eyelids. Hhases and
Avicenna give particular directions for preparing an ablution
with roses to remove fetid perspiration.

PoSta piCa,

Rosea radix, is heating in the second degree, and is at-
tenuating and discutient.

Commentary. The older commentators and herbalists are Comm.
by no means satisfied that it was the Rhodiola Rosea, or rose- ' '
wood ; but the later authorities are pretty much agreed upon
this point. See Sprengel (in Dioscor. iv, 45) and Lindley
(Veg. Kingd. 631). Dioscorides merely recommends it along
with valerian as an application to the forehead and temple
in cephalalgia. The other authorities, like Paulus, are content
with barely stating its general characters.

Voiai,
Mala Punica, Pomegranates; the prevailing quality of all
the species of them is an astringent power, by which they act
as refrigerants and desiccants. But the sweet have this pro-
perty in a less degree than the others. The austere arc more
refrigerant, but are of a drier nature and stomachic. Those
which are acid are cooling in a greater degree, but have also
something incisive in their nature. The kernels are more
astringent and desiccative than the juice, but still more so the

320 SIMPLES. [book vii.

outer membrane or rind called Malicorium. The flowers called
Cytini have similar powers.

CoMM. Commentary. It is evidently the Punica granatum L.

' * — ' Woodville says, "Hippocrati arbor audit ct/Sj/ uude cortex fruetus
ai^iov." They frequently occur in the Hippocratic treatises.
(De Diseta, ii, &c.) Cytini is generally put for the flowers of
the cultivated pomegranate, and balaustia for those of the wild.
The bark of the root called malicorium by Celsus was much
used. Pliny, like the medical authorities, speaks of them all
as being excellent astringents. He recommends them particu-
larly in cpeliac aff'ections and haemoptysis. (H. N. xxiii, 57.)
The most interesting of the ancient authorities on this head is
Dioscorides, who says of the sweet pomegranate that it en-
genders heat and flatulence in the stomach, and hence is un-
suitable in fevers ; and of the acid, that it relieves ardor of the
stomach, and is more astringent and diuretic, being unsavourj'^
and styptic ; that the vinous has an intermediate nature ; that
the kernel of the acid pomegranate, when dried in the
sun and sprinkled on food and boiled with it, restrains fluxes
of the stomach and bowels ; that when macerated in rain-water
and drunk, it is beneficial in haemoptysis, and in a hip-bath is
suitable in dysentery and other fluxes ; and that the expressed
juice of the kernels, when boiled and mixed with honey, is
suitable to ulcers in the mouth, on the pudendum and anus ;
for pterygia on the fingers, spreading ulcers, fungus, earache,
and complaints in the nose, and more especially those of the
acid pomegranate, (i, 141.) He also treats separately of the
flowers and the bark, recommending the latter as an anthebnin-
thic medicine. Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of
the pomegranate in nearly the same words as Paulus. It would
exceed our hmits to give a notice of the various cases in which
Celsus prescribes this medicine. Suffice it to say, that he calls
it stomachic, cooling, and styptic, and recommends the flowers,
the bark, and the root for these and various other purposes.
For the Arabians see Avicenna (ii, 2, 109,313); Serapion
(De Simpl. 129) ; Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 443) ; Averrhoes
(Collig. V, 42); Ebn Baithar (i, 499). One of Serapion's
authorities, Ruffiis, recommends the acid pomegranate in cardiac
disease, and another, Aben Mesne, in cholera and syncope.

SKCT. III.] SIMPLES. 321

which attends it. All praise it as a stomachic, more especially Comm.
in the loss of appetite attending pregnancy, and in vomiting. ' — * '
Rhases and Avicenna say that pomegranate wine relieves in-
toxication. Both the sweet and the acid are held to be diuretic,
but especially the latter. The flesh of the sweet purges yellow
bile and strengthens the stomach. They all represent the rind
as being anthelminthic. On this use of it, see Book IV, 58,
and Pereira (Mat. Med. 1101). It has been a question, by
the way, whether the malicoriuni or ai^iov of the Greeks, was
the rind of the fruit or the bark of the root. "We used to
think it the former, but the examination of a passage in
Avicenna (1. c.) has satisfied us that the latter was also some-
times included. In the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia both
the bark of the root and the rind of the fruit are described,
the term ai^iov being restricted to the latter.

Pong pvpaociipiKTi),

Rhus Coriaria, Sumach ; the fruit and juice of it come prin-
cipally to be used by physicians, being considerably astringent
and desiccative of the third order, but detergent of the second.

Commentary. It is the Rhus Coriaria, or Elm-leaved Co^.iyi.
Sumach. This also was much used as an astringent. Pliny " "
briefly says of it, " vim habet astringendi refrigerandique.^^
The Arabian writers on husbandry mention that in times of
famine bread was sometimes made from sumach. Dioscorides
says of it that its leaves are astringent, being applicable in the
same cases as acacia. He recommends it in dj'sentery when
given by the mouth, in a lavement and hip-bath, as an injection
in cases of purulent discharges from the ears, and for many
other practical purposes. He concludes with mentioning that
it bears a gum which is put into the holes of carious teeth to
relieve pain, (i, 147.) Celsus notices it but once, and then as
an application to aphthous ulcerations of the mouth, (vi, 11.)
It is mentioned as an astringent medicine and condiment in
the Hippocratic treatises. (De Mulieb. and de Liquid, usu.)
Galen, and the other Greek authorities after him, merely state
its general properties as a medicine. The Arabians treat of
it under the name of sumach, which it still retains. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 635) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i. 695) ; Serapion
(De Simpl. 225) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 46, 163.)

in. 21

322 SIMPLES. [book tii.

PvTTog,
The Sordes, from copper statues or vessels, in which a con-
siderable quantity of oil has been kept, having also some verdi-
gris, is discutient, moderately desiccative and emollient. It
therefore discusses unconcocted phymata. But the sordes in
the palestra (which some call paton), has been described under
the head of sweat. The sordes in the ears is said to cure
whitlows.
CoMM. Commentary. Sprengel gives a long dissertation on the
' ' ' sordes palestrse. (Ad Dioscor. i, 36.) Suffice it to say in this
place that it was collected from the bodies of the wrestlers
in the palestra, and consisted of oil, sweat, dust, and any
powder used for cleansing the skin. Sprengel, from a passage
in the works of Theophrastus (H. P. v, 9), infers that the
sordes gymnasiorum were collected from statues made of cedar,
but he appears to have overlooked the account of it given by our
author, from which it must be obvious that it was collected from
statues of copper, or rather of bronze. The sordes balneorum,
which is treated of by Dioscorides (i, 34), will be readily under-
stood from the description which we have given in another place
(Vol. I, 68), of the preparatory process which the bathers went
through before going into the bath. It must have consisted then
of human sweat and other impurities extracted from the skin,
mixed up with soda, flour of beans, or any other substance used in
cleansing the skin by means of the comb (strigil.) Dioscorides
says it is heating, emollient, and discutient, and is used as a lini-
ment to fissures and condylomata. These articles are treated of
by most of the other authorities. On the sordes palestrse, see in
particular Galen. (T. ii, 136, ed. Basil.) For the Arabians see
Avicenna (ii, 2, 648), and Serapion (De Simpl. 169).

^ayairrfvov,
Sagapenum, Sagapen, is the juice of a sort of ferula, being
hot and attenuate. It is also somewhat detergent, so as to
agree with cicatrices in the eyes and suffusions.
CoMM. Commentary. It has never been disputed, as far as we are
aware, that the ancient sagapenum was the same substance as
the modern. However, it is not even yet well ascertained by
what tree it is furnished, but it is generally supposed to be
either the Ferula Persica or F. Szoivitsiana. See Lindley

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 323

(Veg. Kingd. 776). We know no more about it, then, at tlie Comm.
present day than what was known of it by Dioscorides, who '^^
describes it as being the juice of a plant resembling the ferula,
having a smell intermediate between the juice of silphium
(assafoetida) and galbanum. He recommends it for various
medicinal purposes ; for affections of the chest, epilepsy, hys-
terical convulsions, for promoting menstruation, and destroying
the foetus in utero ; as an alexipharmic, and for discussing
films on the eyes, cataracts, &c. (iii, 85.) Galen, Aetius, and
Oiibasius give much the same account of it as our author.
Galen says it is the juice of a certain ferula resembling panax.
(De Antid. i.) It occurs in the works of Celsus as an ingredient
in the famous antidote of jSIithridates, and also as an ingredient
in one of his collyria. (vi, 6, 24.) For the Arabians see
AveiThoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 629) ; Rhases (Cout.
1. ult. i, 631) ; Serapion (192) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 37.) They
recommend it in a good many moi^e cases than the Greeks do.
For example, they all say that it is a gentle laxative. Modern
authorities, however, have denied that it is possessed of this
property. See Hill (jNIat. Med.) Rutty, notwithstanding,
seems to agree with the ancients. (Mat. Med. 447.)

Salamandra, Salamander ; when burnt its ashes are by some
mixed with corrosive medicines and remedies for lepra and
scabies.

Commentary. It is the Salamandra terrestris. The story Comm.
of the salamander's being proof against the operation of fire
is mentioned by Nicander, Aristotle, and Theophrastus ; but
the truth of it is questioned by Dioscorides. Sprengel remarks
that the real fact is, that the salamander is a black ugly lizard,
from whose body a cold viscid fluid is secreted, which may be
capable of extinguishing a small coal. Agricola says, its body
is as cold as ice, and therefore capable of extinguishing a coal.
M. I'Abbe Bonnaterre likewise states that the humour which
it secretes from its body prevents the operation of coals from
affecting it for a short time. (Encycl. Method.) Our author
borrows his medicinal character of the salamander from
Dioscorides, who says it is possessed of septic, ulcerative, and
calefacient powers, like cantharidcs. (ii. 67.) None of the

324 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. otlier authorities o-iye anv additional information of much
' ' ' interest under this head. The Arabians Avould appear not to
have included it in their Materia Medica.

Sampsuchum (a species of marjoram), is calefacient and
desiccative in the third degree. It also consists of subtile
parts, and is discutient.
CoMM. Commentary. Although Galen and our author distinguish
" the Amaraciis from the Sampsuclms, there seems no reason to
doubt their identity. See Needham (Ad Geopon. xi, 27) ;
the Synonymes of Dioscor. (iii, 41) ; and Sprengel (ibid.)
Dioscorides describes it [Origamim majjorana) minutely, and
says its decoction is drank ^itli advantage in cases of dropsy,
dysui'ia, and tormina ; that its dried leaves, in a cataplasm vrith.
honey, remove suggillations ; and that in a pessary it is em-
menagogue. lie also recommends it as an external application.
to the stings of scorpions, sprains, (Edematous swellings, in-
flammations of the eyes, and as a calefacient inscredient in
acopa and malagmata. (Ibid.) Galen and the other Greek
authorities treat of it in general terms. For the Arabians, see
Aviceuna (ii, 2, 466) ; Serapiou (c. 286) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 439) . They recommend it in the same cases as the Greeks ;
and also in hemicrania, vertigo, earache, in embrocations and
injections. They also speak well of the oil of it as an appli-
cation in cases of paralysis. The " Thymus Cyprius" of Celsus
is set down by C. Bauhin as being the Thymus mastichius ;
but whether it be any other than the maijoram seems doubtful,
although Celsus certainly mentions them as distinct sub-
stances, (v, 11.) Compare our account of this article with
what Quincy says of the marjoram in the ' Complete English
Dispensatory^ (60.)

Sai'caoa V7J,

Sandaracha, Red Arsenic, is possessed of caustic powers like

orpiment.

CoMM. Commentary. That it was the sub-species of sulphuret of

' • ' arsenic, called realgar, namely, "the red orpiment" of Jameson,

can admit of no question. In om* Appendix to this section, we

shall have something to say relative to the sandaracha of the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 325

Arabians. Dioscorides says it has the same general powers as Comm.
arsenic (yellow orpiment), and recommends it externally in ' '
alopecia, leprosy, phtliiriasis, hard boils, ulcers in the nose and
mouth, other exanthemata and cond3domata ; and also internally
in cases of empyema with mulse ; in fumigations with resin in
chronic cough, when its steam is inhaled into the mouth by
means of a syphon. He concludes by saying of it, that in a
linctus with honey it clears the voice, and along with dry
pitch makes an excellent pill for asthmatics, (v, 121.) Galen,
Aetius, and Oribasius give but a very brief and general account
of it. Celsus places it in his lists of cleansing and corroding
substances (v, 5, 6), and often prescribes it as a septic and
caustic application. Avicenna treats of the white, the yellow,
and the red arsenic in the same chapter. What he says of
the last, or realgar, is taken from Dioscorides. (ii, 2, 48.)
Serapion also treats of the yellow and red arsenic in the same
chapter, and merely gives extracts under this head from
Dioscorides and Galen. See further Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i,
610) j Averrhoes (Colhg. v, 43) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 48,
503) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 527.) The last of these gives an inter-
esting description of tliree kinds of arsenic, namely, the yellow,
the red, and the white. The red of course is the article now
under consideration. He says of the yellow and red, that when
calcined they become white, and when melted with a certain
red ore lose their disagreeable smell. The Avliite is said to be
a mortal poison. The yellow and the red he recommends in
phagedsenic sores of the mouth and nose and elsewhere, and as
an inhalation in asthma and orthopnoea.

Sandyx, or Siricon, consists of subtile parts, and has dcsic-
cative powers, but not heating.

Commentary. Galen says that when ceruse is burnt, that comm.
is to say, calcined, it becomes sandyx. (De Sirapl. ix.) See also ' * — '
Pliny (H. N. xxxv, 23.) He calls it burnt ceruse mixed with
an equal proportion of rubrica. See also Alston and Sprengel.
Dioscorides treats of it under the same head as ceruse, and de-
scribes the process by which the latter is converted into sandyx.
The Ai-abian authorities, in like manner, treat of it along with
ceruse. See Serapion (c. 378) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 117.) From

326 SIMPLES. [book tii.

CoMM. M'hat has been said^ then, it vrill be readily seen that it was
merely a peculiar preparation of ceruse.

Caries lignorum, Carious Wood, and especially that of the
elm, cleanses and fills humid ulcers.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author's account of the Caries or Rot
" ' ' of wood is taken from Dioscorides, who recommends it in the
same cases as Carbo ligni is now applied, namely, to ulcers, but
more especially spreading ulcers, (i, 143.) It is the Ligno-
rum mai'cor of the Arabians, who recommend it in the same
cases as the Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 617) ; Serapiou (c.
48.)

Sapo, Soap, is possessed of detergent powers.
CoMM. Commentary. The first author, we believe, who makes
mention of Soap is Pliny. He calls it an invention of the
Gauls. It is made, he says, of suet and ashes, (H. N. xxviii,
51.) Aretseus likewise calls it a Gallic composition, prepared
from soda, and used for cleansing clothes. He recommends it
as an application to the skin in elephantiasis. (De Curat. Morb.
Chron. ii, 13.) Serapion praises it as an application to abscesses.
The only Greek authority which he quotes under this head is
Pavilus. (De Simpl. 368.) See also Avicenna (ii, 2, 650) ;
Ehases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 609, ii, 628) ; and Ebn Baithar (ii, 119.)
One of Baithar's Ai'abian authorities commends soap in leprosy
and scabies ; also in favus and the cutaneous diseases of the
scalp, Ebn Baithar further gives a very curious account of the
process of dyeing the beard by means of a mixture of soap and
sandyx. This was a very ancient use of soap, and is frequently
alluded to by the classical authors. (0"S"id. Ars. Amand. iii,
163.) This subject is treated of very ingeniously by Beckmann
in his ' History of Inventions,^ The author, however, is mis-
taken in supposing that there is no mention of soap in the
works of Galen, with the exception of that work ' De Simplici-
bus,' universally admitted to be spurious, whereas Galen fre-
quently makes mention of it in works about the authenticity of
which there has never been any question. As for example,
(Meth, Med, viii); (De Comp. med. sec. loc. T, ii, 225.) In
the latter passage he makes distinct mention of Gallic soap.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 327

^aptcoKoXXn,

Sarcocolla, is the tear of a Persian tree^ being emplastic and
desiccative without pungency, and therefore it agglutinates
Avounds.

Commentary. There is not, we presume, the slightest reason Comm.
to doubt that the ancient Sarcocol was the same as the modern, ' '
namely, the gum of the Pencea Sarcocolla, Dioscorides men-
tions only its external use in agglutinating Avounds and re-
straining defluxious on the eyes, (iii, 89.) The Greeks con-
fined the use of it to external applications ; but the Arabians
sometimes administered it internally as a purge. Thus Serapion,
Rhases, and A^dcenna say that it purges crude humours and
gross phlegm, especially from the joints. They recommend it
with honey as an application in diseases of the ear. They say
it corrodes putrid flesh, and heals recent wounds, and restores
parts that are distorted. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 592) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 617) : Serapion (c. 15.) Even as late as the
time of Dr. Lewis the sarcocol was still retained in our English
Dispensatory with the characters assigned to it by the Greeks
and Arabians, Of late years it has been entirely omitted.

Saxifraga, Saxifrage, is diuretic and lithontriptic.

Commentary. There has been great diversity of opinion Comm.
respecting it, as Sprengel has shown in a very learned dis- ' * '
sertation. (Ad Dioscor. iv, 15.) It is, therefore, by no means
certain that it is the Pimpi?iella Saxifraga, but we incline to
this opinion. Apuleius says that it is lithontriptic, and in-
deed it appears to have derived its name from this real or sup-
posed property. The chapter of Dioscorides on it is of
doubtful authenticity. It is not contained in Galenas work
on Simples. We doubt also if it is to be found in the
works of the Arabians. Not many years ago the Burnet
saxifrage held a place in the Dispensatory with the character
of possessing the virtues ascribed to this article by the ancients.
See Quincy (147.)

^arvpiov,
Satyrion, or Trifolium, is of a humid and hot temperament,
and flatulent ; hence it is a provocative to venery. Some say

328 SIMPLES. [book vii.

that it cures opisthotonos when drunk with austere wine ; but
Galeuj in his treatise ' De Theriaca/ says, that the trifolium,
which is like tlie hyacinth, when it becomes pregnant with
the spring, has a seed like the wild cnicus, and that when the
decoction of it is poured upon the bite of the phalangium. or
viper it cures the same ; but when applied to a sound part^ he
says, that it induces an affection similar to that of those who
have been bitten by one of those creatures.
CoMM. Commentary. It is very difficult to determine ; and it
' ' ' would be useless to mention the variety of conjectures which
have been advanced respecting it. Sprengel inclines to think
that it was a species of tulip, and suggests that it probably was
the TuVipa Gesneriana. This is the species which Dioscorides
further distinguishes by the name of Trifolium. The other
named by him Erythronhim is probably the Erythronium Dens
Canis. A^Tiat confirms this conjecture very much is, the cir-
cumstance that liie Dens Canis is still reputed to be aphrodisiac,
as the Erythronium is reported to be by Dioscorides. (iii^ 134.)
See Lindley (Yeg. Kingd. 204.) Galen gives nearly the same
account of it as our author. The Arabians scai'cely appear to
distinguish it properly from the orchis, but otherwise they
give the same characters of these plants as the Greeks. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 706, 707) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 7, 14.)

Lacerta, the Lizard ; the liver and head have been treated
of in their proper places. When an entu'e one has been cut
in pieces and applied^ it cures persons bitten by scorpions.
CoMM. Commentary. It seems not unlikely that it may have
' * ' been the Lacerta Gecko. See the translation of Ebn Baithar
by Sontheimer (ii, 3), where the chapter of Dioscorides on the
Saura, is arranged under this head, along with another to the
same effect from Avicenna. Dioscorides, and indeed all the
authorities who treat of it, recommend it for the bites of scor-
pions. Pliny recommends it in complaints of the eyes.
(H. N. xxix, 38.) The Arabians recommend it in the same
cases as the Greeks, and also say of it, that its liver soothes
the pains of toothache, and that its urine and blood are use-
ful in the ruptures of childi'en. See AA-icenna (ii, 2, 639.) In
the East it is still used medicinally. Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii;
276.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 329

Apimn, Parsleij, is hot to sucli a degree that it promotes the
urinary and menstrual discharges. It is also carminative and
especially the seed of it.

Commentary. There seems little or uo doubt that it is Comm.
the Common Parsley, namely, Apium 2^^t^'oselmu'm, which ' ^
long held a place in our Dispensatory, and retained in it its
ancient characters. Dioscorides recommends it in a great
many cases ; for inflammations of the eyes in cataplasms ; for
heat of the stomach ; as a diuretic and antidote to venomous
animals ; and for various other medicinal purposes, (iii, 77.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities merely state its virtues
in general terms. The Arabians treat of it under Apium, not
distinguishing it very accurately from its congeners. See
A^dcenna (ii, 2, 55) ; Serapion (c. 290) ; Averrhoes (CoUig. v,
42) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 69.)

Seris, Endive, is a bitterish potherb, being considerably
refrigerant and diluent. It has also some astringency.

Commentary. It comprehends the Cidiorium Intybus and Comm.
the C. EncUvia. It is now known by the names of the Endive,
or Garden Succory. We have treated of it as an article of
food in the First Book, and as a medicine it is not deserving
of much notice, after what we have said of its congener under
the head of Cichorium. It was generally held to be a good
hepatic medicine. See Dioscorides (ii, 125) ; Galen (De
Simpl.) ; AA-icenna (ii, 2, 229) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i. 266.)

Seriphon, is heating in the second degree, but desiccative
in the first, being like wormwood, only it is less astringent
and more calefacient than it. It is also anthelminthic, and to
a considera1)le degree bad for the stomach.

Commentary. From Dioscorides^s description we may con- Comm.
fidently refer it to the Artemisia maritima, Angl., Droopin(j- ' •
flowered Sea Wormwood. Dioscorides gives it exactly the
same characters as our author, namely, that of being bitterish,
astringent, and a good vermifuge, (iii, 24.) Galen says of it,
that it is more powerfully anthelminthic than the absinthium.

[book

CoMM. The Arabians treat of it along with the absinthium. It
" " ' not to be found in the works of Hippocrates and Celsus.

IS

Seseli^ Hard Meadoio Saxifrage (?) or Hariwort ; the root,
and more especially the fruit, is considerably heating with
tenuity of parts, and is also diuretic. It agrees with epilepsy
and orthopnoea.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author, it will be remarked, gives only
' * ' one species of Seseli, which there can be no doubt is the same
as the Seseli Massiliense of Dioscorides (iii, 53), about which,
notwithstanding its being long held to be an important article
in the INIat. ]\Ied., there is considerable difference of opinion.
We, for reasons which we have not room to state, were in-
clined to refer it to the Laserpitium Siler; but the authority
of Clusius, Lewis, and Sprengel has determined us to recog-
nise it as the Seseli tortuosum. The other two species we are
quite satisfied are the BiqjJeurum fniticosum and Ligusticum
Peloponnesiacum. Compare Sprengel ad Dioscor. (1. c.) with
Gray (Suppl. to the Pharm. 80.) Dioscorides represents the first
species as being a diuretic, expectorant, and uterine medicine.
He says it was given not only to women, but to goats and
other animals to assist parturition. Of the other two species,
he merelv says that they are possessed of the same \irtues.
Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius merely give the general cha-
racters of the first species, in nearly the same terms as our
author. This, beyond dispute, is the " Sil" of Apicius (c. 34),
and of Celsus (v, 23.) The latter merely mentions it as an
ingredient in the celebrated antidote of ^lithridates. (Ibid.)
AYe can find little or no additional information respecting it in
the works of the Arabians. See Avicenua (ii, 2, 626) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 654) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Serapion (De
Simpl. 190.) Aben Mesuai, one of Serapion^s authorities,
thus sums up its cliaracters : it is hot and dry in the end of
the second degree ; cuts and dissolves -s-iscid and congealed
phlegm, and therefore opens all the pores and passages which
are shut up ; provokes urine and the menstrua ; and is bene-
ficial in asthma and all cold pituitous ailments. The seeds of
seseli held a place in our Dispensatory as late as the times of
Quincy (158), and of Lewis (ii, 366.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 331

Sepia^ the Cuttlefish ; its sliell has powers like those of an
ojstcrj but is attenuant and more detergent ; hence, if burnt,
it attenuates pterygium along with fossil salts. When unburnt
it clears away s} cosis when rubbed upon the part, and proves
detergent to the skin.

CoMMENTxVRY. It is the Sejiia Loligo, L. We need scarceh' Comm.
mention that the shells of fishes consist principally of lime. ' ' '
As represented by the ancients, therefore, they form a deter-
gent application to the skin. All the authorities recommend
it in nearly the same cases, namely, as an ingredient in stimu-
lant collyria, and in obstinate cutaneous diseases, and as a
dentifrice. See Dioscorides (ii, 23) ; Galen (De Simpl.) ;
Celsus (v, 29) ; Aetius (ii, 190.) Aetius gives the fullest ac-
count of this article. (1. c.)

2)ja-ojtto£tc£Cj

Sesamoides ; the seed of the white species heats, is deter-
gent, and procures the rupture of abscesses.

Commentary. This article, which occurs in the Hippocra- Comm.
tic treatises, and of which two species, the great and the small, ^—^■—'
are described by Dioscorides, has been the subject of much
controversy. See Parkinson, Sprengel, and Dierbach. We
are willing to acquiesce in Sprengel's decision regarding
them, namely, that they are the Reseda Mediterranea and
canescens. It appears that they were used principally in com-
bination M'ith hellel)ore, and that the one evacuated upwards,
and the other downwards. (Dioscor. iv, 150, 151.) Ruffus
treats only of the small, which he represents to be cholagogue
and pblegmagogue, when its. seed is taken to the amount of
an acetabvdum. (De jNIed. Purg.) It does not occur in the
works of Celsus, and does not seem to have been much in
repute. Galen gives nearly the same account of it as
Dioscorides. We have not found it in the works of the
Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, one of whose
Arabian authorities speaks of its being used in paralysis,
(i, 252.)

Sesamum, OUy-grain, is glutinous and fatty in no small
degree ; hence it is emplastic, emollient, and moderately calc-
facient.

332 SIMPLES. [book vii.

c MM Commentary. All tlie avithorities acknowledge it as the
" — V — • Sesamum orientale. Pliny ranks it among the summer corn
of India. He says^ that an oil is procured from it, and that
it forms a good application to burns. (H. N. xviii, 22 ;
xxii, 64.) This account of it in fact is condensed from
Dioscorides, -who recommends both the plant and the oil in
various external complaints, including burns, inflammations of
the eyes, the bites of venomous animals, &c. (i, 41, ii, 121) ;
Celsus ranks it among his emollients, and recommends it
as an hepatic, (iv, 8.) Galen and Aetius give nearly the same ac-
count of it as our author. The Arabians treat of it at great
length, both as an article of food and of medicine. See Serapion
(De Simpl. 86) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 642) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 650) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 254.) They
all recommend it for the same purposes as the Greeks, and as
a good application to fissures and suggillations.

Seps (which some have called the Chalcidic Lizard), when
drunk in wine cures those who have been bitten by it.
CoMM. Commentary. It is called ^u'yi'ic by Aristotle. (H. A. viii^
' — ' — ' 23), and hence it has got the name of Zyynis tr'idachjla.
Solinus says of it, " Ictus sepium putredo sequitur.^-' (Polyhistor.
c. 40.) Our author's account of it is taken literally from
Dioscorides. (ii, 72.) It is briefly noticed by Aetius, but
we have not found it treated of by any of the Arabian autho-
rities on the Mat. Med. except Ebn Baithar, who merely gives
an extract from Dioscorides under this head, (ii, 199.)

2toXoi',
Saliva; that of men in a fasting state is particularly dis-
cutient and detergent ; it therefore clears away the lichen of
children when the parts are anointed with it. It also con-
cocts furunculus when applied along with wheat that has been
masticated in it. It removes hypopion. It is likewise most
destructive to those venomous animals which prove fatal to

men.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author's account of the medicinal pro-
^"■^ — ' perties of Saliva is abridged from Galen, who gives a very

elaborate disquisition on the virtues of it. Phny's statement is

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 333

fuller^ but contains many superstitious notions. (H. N. xxviii, Comm.
71.) Serapion copies from Galen, (c. 447.) It was princi- " " '
pally as an application to cutaneous eruptions and sores that tlie
ancient physicians made use of saliva_, and it would appear to
be not ill adapted to that purpose. Dr. Thomson, in his work
on Chemistry, has the following remarks on it : " Saliva has a
great affinity for oxj'gen, absorbs it readily from the air, and
gives it out again to other bodies ; hence, in all probability,
the reason that saliva is a useful application to sores of the
skin. Dogs and several other animals have recourse to this
remedy, and with much advautage.^^ (Book v, c. ii, sect. 13.)
Galen contends strongly that human saliva is destructive to
animals, and appeals to Nicander in confirmation of this venomous
opinion. He further mentions having seen an instance of a
scorpion being killed by human saliva alone. All the Arabian
authorities ascribe this virtue to it. See in particular Avicenna
(ii, 2, 599, 613) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, G02) ; Ebn Baithar
(i, 144.) These all, in fact, do little more than copy from
Galen. Redi, in opposition to all the ancient authorities,
denies that human saliva is destructive to the viper. " Non
nostrum inter eos tantam componere litem V

Sideritis, Iromvort, the Heraciean, called also Helxine, has
been treated of. The Achillean Sideritis is like to it, but more
astringent. Hence it agrees with fluxes.

Commentary. This is one of the articles in the ancient Comm.
Materia ]\Iedica which has never been satisfactorily determined. ' ' '
See Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, pluries) and Sprengel (Ad
Dioscor.) The first species of Dioscorides, namely, the
Ilerculia, is the same as the Helxine of our author, and has
been already treated of. The other two we would hesitatingly
set down as the Sanyuisorha officinalis and Geranium Roberti-
anum. The reputation which the latter has enjoyed in modern
times, as a vulnerary, appears to us strongly confirmatoiy of
the opinion that it was one of the siderites of the ancients.
See Hill (Mat. Med. 407) and Lewis (Mat. Med. i, 404.)
So striking and important an article as the Robcrtianum is
not likely to have escaped the observation of the Greek and
Arabian Rhizotomi. Apuleius says that the Latins call it

334 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Ferraria. Dioscorides commends it as a vulnerary medicine.

" * ' Galen does the same^ and further praises it as an astringent
application in cases of hemorrhage, dysentery, and female
flux. We find difficulty in discovering traces of it in the
works of the Arabians, although we incline to the belief that
they have not entirely overlooked it. The burnet is still
cultivated in gardens. See Loudon (Encycl. of Garden. 744.)

Ferrum, It^on ; when frequently extinguished in water it
imparts a considerably desiccative power to it. When drunk,
therefore, it agrees with affections of the spleen. But, if ex-
tinguished in wine, it is useful in cseliac and dysenteric affec-
tions, cholera, and resolution of the stomach.
CoMM. CoMMEi^TARY. Our autlior's account oi Iron is mostly taken
from Dioscorides. He says the serugo ferri astringes, and
hence it stops the female flux in pessaries, and when drunk
prevents impregnation ; when rubbed in along with vinegar it
cures erysipelas and exanthema ; it is very useful for whitlow,
pterygia, asperities of the eyelids, and condylomata ; it
strengthens the gums, is a useful liniment in gout, and
thickens the hairs in alopecia; and he concludes with what
our author says of the virtues of water in which heated iron
has been extinguished, (v, 93.) Pliny, in like manner, says
of it : " Calefit ferro candente aqua, in multis vitiis, privatim
vero dysentericis.^' (H. N. xxxiv, 4i.) Celsus commends
chalybeate water in enlargement of the spleen, (iv, 9.) Cselius
Aurelianus mentions it among the remedies for epilepsy.
(Chron. i, 4.) Scribonius Largus calls it a wonderful remedy
for diseases of the bladder. (Comp. 146.) The Arabians borrow
their account of the aerugo ferri almost entirely from Diosco-
rides. See Serapion (De Simpl. 403) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 247) ;
Hhases (Cont. 1. ult. 295.) They give nothing original under
the present head. The aTOfifojua, according to Pollux, is hard
iron, that is to say, steel. The scales or rust of the edges of
weapons made of steel were much used by the ancient physi-
cians, both internally and externally, as astringents and
styptics. See a full account of their medicinal properties in
Pliny. (H. N. xxxiv, 66.)

SECT. HI.] SIAIPLES. S35

Cucumis, the Cucumber ; the esculent, when green, is cool-
ing and diluent ia the second degree ; and the flesh of it
soothes hot inflammations. The seed is detergent and incisive,
promotes the discharge of urine, and clears the body. But
when dried, both the seed and root prove desiccative in the
first order, and more detergent. The juice of the fruit of the
wild cucumber is called Elaterium. That of the root and
leaves is like to elaterium, but weaker. The root is detergent,
discutieut, and emollient, but the juice is desiccative.

Commentary. We have already stated more than once that Comm.
the 2. of the Greeks or Cucumis of the Latins was applied * '
to several species of the summer fruits. Our author, we pre-
sume, applies it here to the Cucumis sativus. His account of
its medicinal qualities is abridged from Galen. Dioscorides
calls the seed of the Cucumis sativus moderately diuretic,
along with must answering well in ulcerations of the bladder,
and says that its leaves, in a cataplasm with v.ine, are
useful in the bites of dogs. The Arabians give the same ac-
count of it, but evidently mix it up with the characters of the
gourd, as given by their Grecian masters ; it is, therefore,
almost impossible to discover when they are treating of the
one and when of the other. See Avicenna (ii, 3, 89) ; Sera-
pion (De Simpl. 143) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 43) ; Ebn Baithar
(ii, 300.) The seeds of the cucumber long held a place in our
modern Dispensatories, and were ranked as one of the greater
cold seeds. See Quincy (107) and Lewis (Mat. Med. i, 380.)
Elaterium, or the fruit of the wild cucumber, was much
used by the ancient physicians from Hippocrates downwards.
Thcophrastus and Pliny affirm that it is the most durable of
all medicines, and that it had actually been known to retain
its virtues for two hundred years. It was given internally as
a hydragogue, and applied externally in cases of lichen, scabies,
impetigo, and the like. Of it, however, we have treated fully
under elaterium, as a medicine in this section, and as a poison
in Book V (64.) Dioscorides gives an account of the virtues
of its leaves and roots, the juice of which he recommends as
an external application in leprosy and other cutaneous diseases,
and as an hydragogue and cholagogue in dropsy. Galen treats

336 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. of them iu more general terms_, like om' author. RuiFus says
" ' ' its root is suitable to dropsical cases. It is the Cucumis
sylvestris, sen asiniuus, of the Arabiaus, who treat of all parts
of it at great length. See Aviceuna (ii, 2, 177) ; Serapion
(c. 204) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 143) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42);
Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 54, 567) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 210.) One
of Rhases's authorities says, that in a pessary the wild cucumber
kills the foetus. Another of them says an external application
of it to the head is of great use in headaches. Haly Abbas
recommends it as a purge in paralysis and colic. One of
Serapion^s authorities is an Arabian, named by him Habix,
who giA'es a very interesting account of the wild cucumber,
which he describes as being more sharp and bitter than the
wild gourd.

2/AXvpo!',
Sillyburri, is a thorny shrub, like the white charaseleon,
but edible. The juice of the root of it, when drunk with
honeyed water to the amount of a drachm, is emetic.
CoMM. Commentary. Matthiolus admits that it Avas totally un-
' — » — ' known to him. Is it not the Carduus Marise, or Common
Milk-thistle ? See Alston (Lectures) and Parkinson (Theatre
of Plants, 976.) Sprengel joins Lobelius in acknowledging it
as the Sillybinn mariamim, Gaertn. Harduin makes it to be
the Cardo Marie of the Italians. (Ad Plin. xxxvi, 25.) Pliny
says of it, that its concrete juice evacuates bile. (H. jST. xxvi, 25.)
Our author's character of it is taken from Dioscorides (iv, 156.)
Xone of the other authorities give any more distinct descrip-
tion either of the plant itself or of its virtues. Galen has
omitted it altogether, and we have not been able to find it in
the works of the Arabians, unless it be the plant treated of by
Serapion. (c. 305.) Though this article (supposing it actually
to be the Carduus Marianus) has long ceased to hold a place
in our Dispensatory, it would appear that it is not wholly
unknown to the shops of the apothecaries. See Gray (Suppl.
to Pharmacop. 64.) An eminent authority of his day, Crantz,
describes the Carduus Marise as being sudorific, diuretic, and
deobstrueut, and a remedy to ill-conditioned sores. (Mat. Med.
ii, 157.) It must be admitted that this character does not
well agi*ee with that of the Silhjbum as given by Dioscorides.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 337

Silurus, the Shad-fish, pickled and eaten, clears the trachea
when in a humid state. In a cataplasm it extracts sharp
weapons of wood.

Commentary. Artedi calls it, Silurus cims quatuor in Comm.
meuto, — yXai'ic (Aristot.) ; glanus et glanis (Plin.) ; Angl. ' ""^
"the Sheat-fish" (Descr. spec, pise.) In the Linnsean arrange-
ment it is called Sihinis glanis. We have treated of it as an
article of food in Book I. Dioscorides recommends it as a
medicine in the same cases as our author, and also says of it
that its brine is useful in dysenteric affections as a hip-bath,
by determining the defluxion to the surface, and that in
clysters it cures sciatica, (ii, 29.) We have not been able to
find any account of it in the works of the Arabians, with the
exception of Ebn Baithar, who gives a pretty full account of
it from both Greek and Arabian authorities, (ij 245.)

Blatta Pistrina, or the moth found in bakers^ shops, the
entrails of which, when boiled and pounded, cure earache.

Commentary. It is evidently the Blatta orientalis. Pliny Comm.
and Dioscorides also recommend it in cases of earache, (ii, 38.) " * '
None of the other authorities make much account of it.

Silphium or Laserpitium, Lasei^ivort, is an excellent cale-
facient medicine; but it is also flatulent and indigestible. When
applied externally to the body it is more active, <ind especially
its juice, being possessed of attractive powers. It has also some
purgative property.

Commentary. It has long .appeared to us that one passage in Comm.
the works of Dioscorides is of itself quite decisive of the question ' * '
as to the identity of the ancient silphium and our assafoetida.
Treating of the gum-resin, sagapenum, he says, " in smell it
is intermediate between galbanum and the juice of silpliiura.'^
(iii, 85.) Now, in Duncan's Edinburgh ^latcria ]\Iedica, it is
said of sagapenum, tliat " it holds a kind of middle place
between assafcetida and galbanum.'' (Sixth edition, 387.) Its
juice, that is to say, its concrete juice, or gum-resin, was assa-
foetida, of which the Cyrenaic and IMedian juices, already

III. ' 22

338 SIMPLES. [book vit.

CoMM. treated of by us, were varieties. The stalk, the leaves, and
' • ' the juice are all treated of by Dioscorides, in his chapter on
Silphium, wherein he has given so full an account of them
that we dare scarcely venture upon an abstract of it. He
says of the varieties of the juice, that the Cyrenean is the most
fragrant, so that when tasted it scarcely affects the breath,
whereas, the Median and Syrian are weaker, and have a more
offensive smell. He says of it, that of the different parts of
it, the most efficacious is the juice, then the leaves, and then
the stalk. He recommends it, both externally and internally,
for a great variety of medicinal purposes, in diseases of the
eyes, in toothache, as an application to the bites of venomous
animals, as an application to gangrene, corns, and callus ; in
affections of the bronchi, and of the tonsils, in cynanche,
catarrhs, pleurisy, jaundice, and dropsy ; in rigors, along with
pepper, frankincense, and wine, in cseliac affections, and in
short, in a great many other complaints, (iii, 84.) But long
before his time the silphium had been introduced into the
practice of medicine, and used in procidentia and other com-
plaints. See Hippocrates (De Fistulis ; de ratione vict. in
acut., &c.) It is indisputably the laser and laserpitium of the
Latin authors. See in particular Celsus (iv, 2) ; Pliny (H. N.
xxii, 49.) The latter passes an elaborate encomium upon it,
foinided, however, for the most part on the contents of Dios-
corides's chapter on the Silphium. From it the identity of
the Greek silphion and the Roman laser is clearly made out.
Passing by Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius, who supply nothing
very interesting on this head^ we now turn to the Ai'abians.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 9, 52, 474) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 50) ;
Serapion (De Simpl. 251) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ebn
Baithar (i, 84.) A^dcenna describes two varieties of the
Assa seu Laser, namely, the foetida and the odorifera, the
^drtues of which he gives in nearly the same terms as Diosco-
rides. He savs distinctly that the fetid or black kind is not
used in the cooking of food. He praises them as procm'ing
eructations and acting as carminatives, and as proving sto-
machic. There appears to be a disagreement among the Arabian
authorities of Serapion regarding the \drtues of the assa, some
of them representing it as good for the stomach and liver, and
others as bad. One of them, Habix, mentions that it was

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 339

used as an application to the wounds of poisoned arrows, and Comm.
to preserve meat from putrefaction. Ebn Baithar's Arabian ' ' '
authorities describe very accurately the two varieties of the
assa, namely, the fragrant and the fetid, and commend both
very highly as medicines, more especially as carminatives, and
as acting veiy beneficially on the stomach, liver, and uterus.
Some of them say that assa promotes menstruation, and even
procures the expulsion of the foetus. The assafoetida still
retains the name of siljjhion in the Greek Pharmacopoeia.
(Athens, 1837.) M. Pacho says that the Arabs call it derias,
and he proposes to class it as a species of laserwort, under the
name of Laserpitium derias.

Sison, Bastard Stone -parsley, is heating, diuretic, and
digestive. It likewise promotes menstruation and removes
obstructions of the viscera.

Commentary. It appears to be the Sison Amomum, called Comm.
by Miller the Stone-parsley or German Amomum. Our author
copies from Dioscorides, who further mentions of it that the
natives of Syria, where it grows, use it as a condiment. Galen
commends it as being bitterish, and hence proving diuretic,
digestive, emmenagogue, and deobstrueut. We do not find it
in the works of the Arabians.

Slum, Water Parsnip or Celery (?), is hot, diui-etic, and dis-
cutient. It breaks down renal calculi and promotes menstru-
ation.

Commentary. It appears to us higlily probable that it is Comm.
the Sium latifolium, or Upright Water-parsnip, which once ' * '
held a place in modern Dispensatories, and not the *S^. nodi-
jiorum, as Dierbach decides the a. of Hippocrates to be. It is
the laver of the Romans, and is recommended by Pliny as a
cure for tormina. (H. N. xxvi, 33.) See Harduin (Annot. 1. c.)
Dioscorides says it is useful in dysentery, and is diuretic,
emmenagogue, and lithontriptic. (ii, 153.) Galen gives the
same account of it as our author. It does not occur in the
works of Celsus. The Arabians, in treating of it, borrow
almost everything from Dioscorides. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 556,

340 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. 633) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 290.) The latter describes it as a
" • ' species of apium wliieh grows in water.

^'icrapov,
Sisarum, Garden Parsnip ; the root, when boiled, is sto-
machic and diuretic, being heating in the third order. The
seed consists of subtile particles, and is powerfully discutient.
It is, therefore, given to persons aflFected with hiccough and
tormina, in wine.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Pastinaca saliva or Garden Parsnip,
" " ' according to Sprengel. In the translation of Rhases it is said
to be the same as nifje/Ia, but this would seem to be a mistake.
(Contin. xxxvii.) Dioscorides briefly says of it, that it is pala-
table, stomachic, diuretic, and a whetter of the appetite,
(ii, 139.) Galen says it is calefacient, with a certain degree
of bitterness and astringency. It appears certainly to be the
siser of Pliny and Celsus, the latter of whom places it in his
list of diuretics, (ii, 31.) The Arabians, in treating of it, copy
from Dioscorides and Galen. See in particular Avicenna
(ii, 2, 652.) From the account we have given of this article
it will be seen that recent authorities hold that it is tiot the
same as the Sinm Sisarum, Skerret, as has been generally
held, but the Parsnip. It would follow from this that it is
identical with the eXo^o'/Soa/coc of Dioscorides (iii, 73), which
we must say that we are scarcely prepared to join Sprengel in
admitting. After mature dehberation, then, we fear we must
rank this with the undetermined articles in the ancient
Materia Medica.

Sisymbrium, Wild Mint, called also Cardamine, because it
is Hke the Cardamus. When dried, it belongs to the first
order of calefacients and discutients ; but when in a humid
state, to the second.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides says of his first species that it
" * ' resembles the gai'den mint, and PJiny states that it degenerates
into calamintha or wild mint. It would appear, then, to be
a species of mint. Stackhouse inclines to this opinion.
(Index to Theophrastus.) The other, called also cardamine
and sium, can be no other than the Nasturtium officinale.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 341

Dioscorides says of the former species^ tliat it is useful in stran- Comm.
gury, calculus, tormina, and singultus ; and that in a cataplasm '""'"'
it reheves headache, is useful in the stings of wasps and bees,
and stops vomiting. His other species he recommends as an
application to certain diseases of the skin, (ii, 155.) Galen,
in like manner, treats of the two species in nearly the same
terms as our author, whose description of the former species,
by the carelessness of transcribers, is given under the head of
the preceding article, Sisarum. The Arabians treat both of
the sisymbrium and the nasturtium, but it is not clear that
they apply these terms to the same substances as Dioscorides
does.

Scammonia, Scammony, has the properties of heating, dis-
cussing, and clearing away bilious matters, more especially the
juice of it, which discusses phymata, kills the foetus when
applied in a pessary, and removes leprosy. As an embrocation
with vinegar and rose-oil, it cures chronic headaches ; and the
root, when drunk, acts as a purgative both by itself and in
decoction. Boiled Avitli vinegar and barley-floiu', it is applied
to diseased hip-joints.

Commentary. Without doubt it is the Convolvulus Scam- Comm.
monia. Dioscorides likewise describes another species, which '
Sprengel supposes to be the C. farinosus, L. The scammony
is called ZIik^v kojumvoq by Nicander, and ^uKpvSiov by Alex-
ander, (i, 10.) All the Greek, Latin, and Arabian authorities
who make mention of it, state that it is a powerful purgative,
which evacuates phlegm and bile. Marcellus Empiricus cor-
rectly remarks, that it does not answer when the stomach is
Aveak. Celsus prescribes it for the broad intestinal worm,
and in other cases, (iv, 17.) It also occurs in the Hippocratic
collection. This is an article which the Arabians treat of very
fully. See Serapion (Do Simpl. 303) ; Aviccnna (ii, 2, 628) ;
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 612) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 54, 554) ;
Mesne (De Simpl. i) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar
(ii, 27.) The last of these writes of it at very great length.
Haly Abbas says scammony purges bile, attracts humours
from the distant parts of the body, but is injiu-ious to the
stomach and liver. Avicenna and Serapion agree that it hurts
the stomach, liver, and heart. They also state that it is a

342 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. purgative, but one not in general to be depended upon, as
different preparations of it act with different degrees of
activity. They recommend it as an external application in
cases of leprosy, scabies, and other cutaneous diseases. One
of Serapion^s Arabian authorities gives a very minute descrip-
tion of the different varieties of it. He says the dose of it is
from 6 to 20 grs. In large doses, one of Rhases^s authorities
states that it brings off biUous and bloody discharges, but in
small doses, it is said to be diuretic without acting upon the
bowels at all. An overdose, Avicenna remarks, may prove
fatal. Mesne treats of it at great length and with much
judgment, giving very minute directions about the choice of
the different kinds of it, and the correction of any bad qualities
they may possess.

Scandix, Shepherd' s-needle, is a wild potherb, heating and
desiccative in the second order. It is diuretic, and removes
visceral obstructions.

CoMM. Commentary. We have treated of this potherb in Book I.

' * ' It is the Scandix australis. Our author takes his character
of this plant from Dioscorides. (ii, 1G7.) Galen infers from
its being sHghtly acrid and bitter, that it is diuretic and de-
obstruent. None of the Arabians, we beheve, treat of it, with
the exception of Ebn Baithar. (ii, 23.)

Scincus, Skink ; the parts about the kidneys are drunk to
occasion erection of the pri^y member. The seed of lettuce,
when drunk with Avater, is supposed to counteract them ; and
likewise the decoction of lentils with honey.
CoMM. Commentary. The Skink is a small animal, like a lizard,
" * ' of the shape of a crocodile, and from ten to twelve inches in
length. It was described by Hay and Gesner under the name
of Crocodilus te^^restris. Its Linnaean name is Scincus officinalis
or algeriensis. Dioscorides calls it a land crocodile, and recom-
mends it in the same complaints as our author. He concludes by
saying of it that it is an ingredient in antidotes ; and, in fact,
its principal use was in the composition of the famous Theriaca.
Such of the Arabians as notice it give it the same medicinal cha-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 343

racter as the Greeks, that is to say, they represent it to be Comm.
strongly aphrodisiac. See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 596) ' * '
and Ebn Baithar (ii, 32.) The latter gives a lengthy and in-
teresting account of it. Rhases briefly notices it without
saying anything of its medicinal uses. (Contin. 1. ult. ii, 681.)
In the East the skink is still eaten as a restorative and aphro-
disiac. See Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 278.)

Squilla, the Squill, is possessed of incisive powers, and is
calefacient and desiccative in the second order. It is better
to take it roasted or boiled.

Commentary. It is the Scilla inaritima. It is mentioned Comm.
by Hippocrates, and was a favorite medicine of the ancient *
physicians. Dioscorides's chapter on the Squill contains much
valuable matter. His description of the process of baking squills
is so like that given in Pemberton^s edition of the ' London Dis-
pensatory,^ that one may take the latter as a translation of it :
"Scillce coctio, the baking of squills. Inclose the squill in paste of
wheat flour, having first separated the outer skin and the hard
part, from which the fibrous roots grow ; then bake the squill
in an oven till the paste is dry, and the squill is rendered soft
and tender throughout," He recommends it in cases requiring
a copious evacuation of urine, such as dropsies, diseases of the
stomach, those cases in which the food floats on the stomach,
in jaundice, chronic coughs, asthma, &c. He also says of it
that it is alexipharmic. (ii, 202.) Celsus frequently prescribes
" scilla cocta," as in tympanites and in anasarca, (iii.) It is
frequently recommended and described, in a word, by all the
authorities, Greek, Roman, and Arabian, in the same class of
cases. See Galen (De Simpl. viii) ; Aetius (i) ; Oribasius
(Med. Coll. 12) ; Apuleius (De Herbis) ; Columella (De R.
Rust, xii, 33) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 304); A^acenna (ii, 2, 590) ;
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 680); Mesne (De Simpl. vi) ; Ebn
Baithar (ii, 216, 309) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 43). Serapion^s account of its medicinal properties
is particularly full. It is given, he says, as a laxative in fevers,
and in dropsy as a diuretic ; as a remedy for indigestion, for
jaundice and tormina of the bowels ; for an old cough, asthma,
and spitting of blood ; and for cleansing the breast of gross

344 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. humours. It is to be avoided, lie says, when there is an ulcer
' * ' in any internal part. Apuleius recommends it along ^dth
vinegar and honey in dropsy. He adds, that it evacuates by
urine. Columella gives a receipt for making a vinum scilliticum,
which is useful, he says, '' ad concoquendum, ad corpus refi-
ciendum, itemque ad veterem, tussim et ad stomachum." (1. c.)
Mesue particularly commends it as an expectorant, and re-
commends the vinegar, the oxymel, and the syrup for this and
other medicinal purposes. Avicenna treats of it with his wonted
accuracy, recommending it in complaints of the gums, teeth, and
mouth; for asthma, and all inveterate coughs; in epilepsy, and in
melancholy. He moreover particularly commends it in diseases
of the spleen, and in dropsy and jaundice. He forbids it to be
used in ulceration of the viscera. Ebn Baithar gives very
copious extracts from preceding authorities, both Greek and
Arabian. He treats separately of the scilla and pancratium.
See under the latter.

S/CoAoTTiVSpa,

Scolopendra ; the sea scolopendra, when boiled in oil and
rubbed upon a part, acts as a depilatory. When burnt it occa-
sions pruritus.
CoMM. Commentary. See Book V. The sea scolopendra is the
" " ' Aphrodite aculeata. All the authorities who notice it recom-
mend it for the same purposes as our author. See Dioscorides
(ii, 16.)

S/CoXoTTiVSptOI',

Scolopendrium, the same as asplenium.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Asplenium Ceterach. See under
Asplenium.

'^KoXvf.lOQ,

Scolymus, Golden Thistle, is a calefacient and desiccative medi-
cine of the second order. The root of it, when boiled with
wine, brings off a quantity of fetid urine, and cures the fetid
smell of the armpits and of the whole body.
CoMM. Commentary. From the descriptions of it given by
Theophrastus (H. P. vi, 4), and Dioscorides (iii, 14), one can
scarcely entertain a doubt that it was the Scolymus Hispanicus,
or Spanish Cardoons, an esculent root, well known in the
southern parts of Europe. Compare Sprengel (Ad Dioscor.

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 345

iii, 14) with Lindley (Veg. King. 709), and see Beckmann Comm.
(Hist, of Invent, under Articlioke). Dioscorides gives exactly " ' '
tlie same acceunt of its medicinal virtues as our author. (1. c.)
Galen writes elaborately of it, but his conclusions, as to its
properties, are the same as those of Dioscorides. We have
not been able to trace it out in the works of the Arabians,
unless it be their harsef. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 332) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 168). The truth is, that the term scolymtis was
a puzzle to the ancient authorities and to their modern com-
mentators, being sometimes, as is supposed, applied also to the
Cynara Scolymus, or artichoke. See Parkinson (pluries).
We have treated of the scolymus as a potherb in the First
Volume, p. 114. We have hinted our belief that the harsef
or harxaf of the Arabians was identical with the 2. of the
Greeks. We are confirmed in this opinion by a comparison of
Dioscorides with Avicenna (1. c), although we find that
Salmasius referred it to the artichoke.

Scordium, Water Germander, is composed of varied powers,
being bitter, sour, and acrid. It therefore at the same time
purges and heats the viscera ; promotes the urinary and
menstrual discharges, warms parts which had been affected
with cold, agglutinates and cleanses wounds, and proves in-
carnative when sprinkled dry.

Commentary. It is clearly the Teucrium Scordium, or comm.
Water Germander. Dioscorides commends it for its diuretic, ' — - — '
emmenagogue, and expectorant powers, when given internally ;
and for cleansing foul ulcers. Compare his account of it Avith
its characters as stated by Dr. Hill. Our author condenses
Galenas statement of its medicinal properties. Galen remarks
that it would appear to have got its name from its resemblance
in qualities to the scorodon or garlic. The Arabians would
seem to have confounded the scordium with the scorodon.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, G22), and Scrapion (De Simpl. 331).

Allium, Garlic, is healing and dcsiccative in the fourth
degree. But the ophioscordon, or wild garhc, is stronger than
the cultivated.

346 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. We are inclined to set down the two va-
' * ' rieties of this substance as being Allium sativum and arenarium.
See Parkinson (vii, 29), and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. ii, 181).
Dioscorides gives a lengthy statement of the medicinal virtues of
the garlic, which, as Galen somewhere says, was the great
theriac of rustics. Dioscorides says it is the best of all medi-
cines in the bites of vipers when taken along with wine, and
that it forms an excellent cataplasm for the bites of mad dogs.
He also recommends it as an application to various cutaneous
complaints, such as leprosy and furfures ; as an emmeuagogue,
both in the form of a hip-bath and fumigation ; as a diuretic
and remedy in dropsical diseases, (ii, 81.) Galen, like our
author, merely states the general characters of the two species.
It is frequently mentioned in the works of Hippocrates and
in those of Celsus. The latter ranks it among the things
" mali succi,^^ and calls it acrid, flatulent, heating, laxative of
the bowels, &c. (ii, 21, 26, et alibi.) The Arabians treat of it
at great length. See Serapion (De Simpl. 331) ; Averrhoes
(Collig. V, 42) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 72) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i. 36.) They recommend it in eructations, in dropsy as a
laxative and diuretic, and as an emmeuagogue. They say a
clyster of it relieves sciatica, and a gargle of it is useful in
toothache, and clears the voice. Avicenna affirms, from per-
sonal experience, that it is an excellent medicine in the case
of persons stung by venomous reptiles. Ruffus, as quoted by
Serapion, says it is hurtful to the ears, the liver, the lungs,
and the kidneys. Fresh garlic, he says, is diuretic, loosens
the bowels, and is vermifuge. Another of his authorities
says, raw garlic is vermifuge, and useful in strangury.

^KopSoTrpocroi^,
Scordoprason, Garlic-leek, in taste and powers is compounded
of the garlic and leek,
CoMM. Commentary. We are disposed to set it down as being
' — • — ' Allium Scorodoprason. None of the authorities suj)ply any
interesting information under this head.

2/cop7rio£t§fC,
Scorpioides, Caterpillar, is heating in the third order, and
desiccative in the second.

SECT. III.] • SIMPLES. 347

Commentary. We suppose it to be the Scorpiurus sulcatus, Comm.
L., which is synonymous Avith the Scorpioides, Touruefort. ' ' '
Dioscorides merely recommends it as an apphcation to the
bites of scorpions, (iv, 193.)

2/cop7rioc,

Scorpius^ the Scorpion ; the land one, when applied raw, is
a remedy for its own bite, and in like manner, when eaten
roasted. The sea scorpion^s bile is useful in suffusions.

Commentary. See Book V. Avicenna recommends the
oil of scorpions in diseases of the ear. (ii, 3, 64.) The sea-
scorpion is the Coitus scorpius. Dioscorides recommends its
gall in cataracts, albugo, and dimness of sight, (ii, 14.)

2/cwota,

Recrementum, Dross ; all kinds are considerably desiccative,
but that of iron more than the others. This, when pulverized
and boiled in vinegar, cures purulent discharges from the ears
in a wonderful manner; and when taken with oxymel, proves
a remedy to those who have drunk aconite. That of lead is
similar to lead itself, but more astringent.

Commentary. It is called recrementum by Celsus. (v, 15.) Comm.
It is the dross of a metal which is collected on the outside of ' "
the furnace while the metal is purified by heat. See Pliny
(H. N. xxxiv, 37) and Matthiolus (Ad Dioscor. v, 54.) Dios-
corides says of the recrementum plumbi that it has the same
powers as burnt lead (v, 97), and of the recrementum ferri,
that it is a remedy in cases of poisoning with aconite, (v, 94.)
Celsus ranks the recrementum plumbi among the emolUents.
(Ibid.) Avicenna recommends the recrementum ferri as an
astringent in cases of hemorrhoids and other fluxes. Like
Dioscorides and our author, he says that it is an antidote to
aconitum. One of Serapion^s authorities, Adamasti, says of
the recrementum argenti, that it is cooling and desiccative,
and useful in cardiac disease, and another, Alcanzi, says it is
good for scabies and prurigo. His other extracts are from
Dioscorides, Galen, and Paulus. Ebn Baithar gives an inter-
esting exposition of this subject, but it is mostly made up from
the authorities already quoted by us. (i, 318.) Rhases treats
of it in like manner. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 334.)

348 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Smilax or Taxus, the Yew, is a tree of deleterious pro-
perties.

CoMM. Commentary. It is the Taxus baccata, L. See Book V.

' — * — ' (48.) It appears remarkable that Dioscorides should have
allowed this article a place in the Materia Medica, seeing that
he himself says that he had noticed it merely to guard against
it. He says that in Narbonia (Languedoc or Savoy), the
yew-tree was possessed of such a power as to prove fatal to
persons sitting or sleeping in its shade, (ii, 80.) We have
stated, hoAvever, elsewhere (v, 48) that great difference of
opinion has prevailed regarding this reputed noxious power of
the yew.

Myrrha, Myrrh, is of the second order of calefacients and
desiccants. It, therefore, agglutinates Avounds of the head
when sprinkled upon them. It has also some bitterness ; and
hence it kills worms and tlie foetus ; and it is detergent, and,
therefore, is mixed with ophthalmic remedies. It is likewise
expectorant without roughening the trachea. Boeotian myrrh
has calefacient, emollient, and solvent powers.
CoMM. Commentary. That this is the same as our myrrh is in-
' — ' — ' disputable, and the best botanical authorities are now pretty
well agreed that it is the product of a dwarf shrub, to which
they have given the name of Balsamodendron Myrrha. See
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 460) ; Pereira (Mat. Med. 1187.) It is
mentioned in what is perhaps the oldest literary production in
existence (Genesis xxxAii, 25), and is frequently noticed as a
medicine in the works which bear the name of Hippocrates.
(De Superfoet. ; de Muhebr.) See further 'fficonom. Hippocrat.^
(347) and Dierbach (Arsn. des Hipp. 224.) In short, this
gum-resin was much used in the ancient practice of medicine.
According to Dioscorides it is calefacient, soporific, agglutina-
tive, desiccative, and astringent. He recommends it in chronic
coughs and asperities of the trachea. He also states that it
was used in ulcers of the eye and other complaints of a like
nature. He further says of it that it is authelminthic ; that it
cures fetor of the mouth, and likewise of the armpits when
used as an ointment with liquid alum ; that in a gargle
with oil it strengthens the gums and teeth. He describes two

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 349

kinds of liquid mjTrh, which he calls Stacte ; the finest was Comm.
that which runs fluid from the tree without cutting. The other " '
was a fluid myrrh, taken out of the midst of the larger pieces
of the sohd kind. See Hill (Mat. Med.) The account which
Pliny gives of myrrh is highly interesting, but does not con-
tain much that would answer our present purpose. (See H. N.
xii, 33-6.) Celsus makes mention of the stacte (v, 23), and
prescribes the mp'rh frequently as a concocting and aggluti-
nating substance. Galen describes it in two of his works.
(De Simpl. 109, and De Antidot. T. ii, 433, ed. Basil.) Our
author's account of this substance is condensed from the
former of these works. Aetius in like manner borrows from
him, as Oribasius does from Dioscoiides. For the Arabians,
see Avicenna (ii, 2, 468) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 474) ; Aver-
rhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 292) ; Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 41) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 496.) Our limits prevent us
from venturing upon an exposition of what these authors have
written upon this subject, but this is the less to be regretted,
as we do not find that they add anything of much practical
importance to the information supplied by their Grecian masters.
They confirm, however, by their authority, all that the Greeks
had stated regarding the virtues of myrrh as an emmenagogue
and a medicine capable of accelerating delivery. They are also
agreed that it is diuretic and expectorant. One of Serapion's
authorities says it evacuates fluids from the belly when applied
as a plaster. Another of them says that in a masticatory it
evacuates the brain.

It would appear that the Boeotian myrrh mentioned by
Dioscorides, Galen, and our author, was the Alexanders or
Smyrnium Olusatrum.

Smyrnium, Alsander (called also Hipposelinum and Apium
silvestre) is heating and desiccative of the third order, being
stronger than parsley, but weaker than stone-parsley. It is,
therefore, emmenagogue and diuretic.

Commentary. This, it would appear, is not the Smyrnium Comm.
Olusatrum, but either the Smyrnium Dioscoridis, or, as supposed ' '
by Dodonseus, the perfoliatum. In another place we have set it

350 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. down as the latter, and treated of it as an article of food. (Vol. I,
' ' ' 114.) All the authorities give it nearly the same character

as our author. See Dioscorides (iii, 72) ; Galen (De Simpl.) ;

Avicenna (ii, 2, 55.) All agree that it is an excellent

diuretic and emmenagogue. It is the olusatrum of Scribo-

nius Largus.

Sonchus, Sow-thistle, is astringent and sensibly cooling
both when applied externally and eaten. But when dried, it
is moderately calefacient.
CoMM, Commentary. It would appear to be the Sonchus oleraceus,
' ' ' but this is not quite certain. Dioscorides describes three
species, of which the first two are, perhaps, but varieties of
the Sonchus oleraceus, although some of the authorities would
refer the first to some distinct species, not well determined.
Galen and our author describe only one species, which would
certainly appear to have been the S. oleraceus, a well-known
plant, w^liich held a place in our Dispensatories until a late
date. See Quincy (i, 11, 510.) Dioscorides calls it sub-
astringent, and recommends it in a cataplasm for heat of the
stomach and inflammations, and its juice for stomach-ache and
to attract milk ; when applied on wool, he says it relieves
inflammations of the anus and uterus ; and that its root and
stem are useful to persons bitten by scorpions, (ii, 158.)
Galen merely states its temperament and qualities in general
terms. "We are not aware that it is described by any of the
Arabians, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who merely gives
the descriptions of it from Dioscorides and Galen, (i, 211.)

27rapyavtov,
Sparganium ; this also is possessed of desiccative powers.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Sparganium simplex. Phny re-
" * commends it as an antidote to the sting of serpents. (H. N.
XXV, 63.) He, as usual, borrows from Dioscorides. (iv, 21.)
Galen treats of it as briefly as our author. Few, if any of the
other authorities, notice it. Its congener, the >S'. ramosum, is still
kept in the shops with the reputation of curing the bite of the
viper. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 15.)

SECT. iTiJ SIMPLES. 351

^Traprocj

Genista, Broom, by which they bind vines ; the fruit and
flower of it, when drunk with honeyed water to the amount of
five oboli, purge upwards, like white hellebore, without danger.
But the fruit also purges downwards. The twigs remedy
ischiatic diseases.

Commentary. Without doubt it is the Spartium junceum. Comm.
It is the genista of the Latins, as Silvius states in his com- ' * — '
mentary on Mesne. He says that it is a powerful diuretic,
and its seeds are still sometimes used with this intention.
INIesue further commends it as an emetic in gout and other
arthritic diseases. Dioscorides and Pliny give nearly the
same account of its medicinal properties as our author. Dios-
corides further commends it in sciatica and cynanche, and when
given as a clyster in the former complaint, (iv, 155.) It is not
easy to trace it in the works of the other authorities, except
Ebn Baithar, who copies principally from Galen or Dioscorides.
(i. 489.)

STTE/cAaptoi/ ij a<^iK\apiov,

Lapis specularis, which some use instead of specula in
their windows, and hence it has been called diaphanous.
Being of the nature of gypsum, it has powers like burnt shells
or oysters.

Commentary. It is the Gypsum speculare or Selenite, as Comm.
is evident from our author^s description of it. Seneca says ' — • — '
that in his time it had come to be used in windows from its
transparency. (Ep. 60.) See further, Pliny (H. N. xxxvi, 45.)
See Book V, 58. The Arabians praise its virtues in the cure
of all fluxes ; and Agricola mentions that in his time it was
frequently given for the cure of dysenteries.

Spongia, Sponge; the recent, which still preserves the smell
of the sea, when applied with water, wine, or oxycrate, agglu-
tinates wounds ; but if })m'nt, it has acrid and di sentient powers.
WTien burnt with asphaltos or liquid pitch, and applied hot, it
stops hemorrhages.

Commentary. Aristotle, Pliny, Philoponus, Phile, and Comm.
Avicenna acknowledge the animal nature of sponges, and yet " * '
we find it stated in most of our modern treatises on natural

352 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. history that the ancients supposed them to be vegetables, Ebn
' ' ' Baithar, we believe, stands alone among the ancient authorities
in maintaining that there is no truth in the opinion that the
sponge is an animal, but that, on the contrary, it is decidedly
a vegetable which grows from the rocks, (i, 45.) Avicenna
recommends the use of sponge in the same cases as our
author does. Serapion gives nearly the same account of it. He
says that the stones found in sponges are lithontriptic. Of the
two species described by Dioscorides, the hard is the S. fasci-
culata, Pall., and the soft the S. officinalis. He recommends
sponge tent for dilating fistulous ulcers. He says they may be
applied like tents to sores; that with vinegar they restrain
hemorrhages ; and that burnt sponges are useful in dry
ophthalmy, and whenever you want to deterge or astringe ;
hut that when washed, they apply better in ophthalmic reme-
dies ; and that, when burnt with pitch, they are suitable in
hemorrhages, (v, 137.) In the Hippocratic treatises this term
is generally applied to the tonsils or glands of the neck, as at
' Epidem.' (iv.) But in one passage of a work, certainly not
genuine, it appears to be used for the sponge. (De Morbis, ii.)
Celsus prescribes a sponge squeezed out of oil, vinegar, or cold
water as an application to relieve the swelling and heat of
the gout (iv), and for other medicinal purposes. Galen gives
an interesting article under this head, and describes an inge-
nious process by which, he says, that he had known a hemor-
rhage stopped. A sponge dipped in asphaltus, or, in the absence
of it, in tar, having been laid on the bleeding place, it was set
fire to until it formed an eschar on the surface, while the
remainder of it was left as a farther cover to the vessels. (De
Simpl. xi.) The Arabians treat fully of the " Spongia maris,"
and quote what Dioscorides and Galen had written respecting
it. Avicenna decidedly says that sponge was supposed to be
an animal possessed of motion. He and Rhases recommend
it principally for cleansing sores and stopping bleeding, (ii, 2,
595, and Cont. 1. ult. 676.)

Spodium has similar powers to the pompholyx.
CoMM. Commentary. It is nearly the same as the Pompholyx.
' * ' Pliny thus states the difi'erence between thein : " Etiamnum

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 353

in serariis reperiuntur, quae vocant pompholygem et spodon. Comm.
Differentia quod pompliolyx lotura paratur, spodos illota est." ' — * — '
(H. N. xxxiv^ 33.) The name, in modern times, lias been ap-
plied to burnt ivory. See Gray (Suppl. to Pliarm. 260), and
Platearius (De Simp. Med. 250.) The ancient spodium was an
impure oxyd of zinc. The term, however, was sometimes applied
to other recrements, as we are informed by Pliny (1. c), and
Dioscorides (v, 85.) He gives a more minute description of the
preparation of it and of pompliolyx. The Arabians treat of both
under the general name of Tucia or Tutty, Avliich was long re-
tained in modern times. They used it very freely in diseases
of the eyes, and also in those about the genital organs. See
Serapion (c. 422) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 695) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i,
730) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 45, 474.) The spodium occurs
frequently as an ingredient in the collyria and ointments de-
scribed by Celsus (v, 6), &c. We need scarcely remind the
reader that tutty ointment has continued to be used as an
ophthalmic even to our own times. The spodos of the Hip-
pocratic writers would appear to have been applied in a more
general sense to various recrements of the metals. (De Ulceri-
bus.) The spodium of the Arabians would seem to have been
the ashes of the privet. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 609) ; Khases (Cont.
1. ult. 675.)

Staphylinus, Carrot, is diuretic and promotes menstruation,
particularly the seed and root. But the leaves being possessed
of detergent powers agree with phagedsenic affections when
applied green along with honey. The wdld is for all purposes
stronger than the cultivated.

Commentary. As Sprengel states, it is undoubtedly a Comm.
variety of the Daucus Carota, L., or Wild Carrot. Diphilus, — » — '
as quoted by Athenseus, says that it is acrid, nutritive, mode-
rately stomachic, laxative, flatulent, indigestible, diuretic, and
aphrodisiacal. (Deipnos. ix, 2.) Pliny mentions that it proves
useful in strangury, dropsy, and several other complaints. (H. N.
XX, 15.) Plinius Yalcrianus says of it that it had been given
in diseases of the liver, spleen, loins, and kidneys, in hydromel.
(iv, 32.) Our author's account of its medicinal properties is
mostly condensed from Dioscorides. He recommends it strongly
as a diuretic, cmmenagogue, and aphrodisiac, and says of it,

III. 23

354 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. that applied per vaginam it procures the expulsion of the fcetus.

' * ' (iiij 5.2.) Galen and Aetius give nearly the same account of
it as our author. The Arabian authorities speak of it in the
same terms. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 287) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
iii, 18) ; Serapion (c. 265.) The commentator Eustathius
mentions its aphrodisiacal properties. (Ad Iliad, xviii, 560.)
According to Dierbach^ the a. of Hippocrates comprehends both
the Daucus Carota and guttatus. It would appear to us that
this is the "Pastinaca agrestis^' of Celsus (ii^ 31)^ although his
editor^ Dr. MilHgan, decides otherwise with regard to it. In
confirmation of our opinion we refer to Pliny (1. c), and to
Beckmann's ingenious disquisition on our kitchen vegetables in
his ^Hist. of Invent.' He seems clearly to make out that the
daucus, staphylinus, carota, and pastinaca were all merely
varieties of the Daucus Carota. He is in some doubts, however,
whether the "pastinaca" was not also sometimes applied to the
parsnip. See, however, under Daucus.

Stachys, Base Horehound, is a shrub resembling horehound,
and is calefacient in the third degree. It therefore promotes
menstruation, kills the foetus, and expels the secundines.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Stachys Palestina, or Base Hore-
' — * — ' hound. Our author gives exactly the same account of its
medicinal properties as Dioscorides and Galen, the latter re-
marking of it that it not only promotes menstruation, but is a
drug used for procming abortion. Pliny, by confounding
TTOCLGQV and TT^aaiov, says of it that it resembles the pori'um
instead of the marrubium; so that his celebrated editor, Harduiu,
holds that the stachvs of PHnv is different from that of
Dioscorides. (Ad H. N. xxiv, 86.) It is quite clear, however,
that the plants are identical, and accordingly Pliny, like the
other, says of his stachys, that it is emmenagogue. The
Arabians do not seem to treat of it.

Adipes, Fats, or Grease ; all kinds dilute and warm the
human body, but their powers vary according to the different
temperaments of animals. That of swine, then, is the most
humid of all, its powers being like those of oil. Hence it

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 355

blunts sharp pains. That of goats is drier and sooner coagu-
latedj and therefore is used as an injection to those who have
sharp pains in the rectum. That of geese is hotter and more
attenuate ; that of domestic cocks and hens being intermediate.
That of Hons is the hottest of all and the most attenuate^ hence
it is most discutient. That of oxen has an intermediate tem-
perament between swine and lions. That of bears cures
alopecia, that of foxes, earache ; as that of vipers is said to
remove hairs and prevent suffusions from forming. Upon the
whole, that of males is the hotter and more desiccative, and of
them those which have their testicles more than those which
have been cut, and of those which are full-grown than that of
the others. All sorts of grease when long kept become hotter.

Commentary. Fats. Our author^s account of their medi- Comm.
cinal properties is sufficiently ample. For further information, ' ' '
however, the reader may consult Dioscorides and Galen. The
former gives very minute and seemingly important directions
for the preparations of all these animal fats. We may just
mention here a httle piece of criticism Avhich Galen bestows
in this case upon his much admii'ed predecessor. Dioscorides
says of the grease or lard of goats, that it is more styptic
(ffruTTTt/ctuTEoov) thau that of swine. Upon which Galen re-
marks that although Dioscorides had written much and well
on the jMateria jNIedica, he often uses words in a wrong signi-
fication, as he does in the present instance, for that the above-
mentioned term, which properly signifies astringent, must here
be understood to mean acrid or pungent. Now we think that
Galen is here correct, and that SprengeFs attempt to bring
his author, Dioscorides, clear off in the present case is not
successful. Indeed, as we firmly believe that a greater master
of the Greek language than Galen never existed, we may
always feel secure that where the exact meaning of Greek terms
is concerned, one may safely trust to him. The Arabians
under this head merely give extracts from Dioscondcs and
Galen. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 4G1) and
Aviceuna (ii, 2, 70.)

Antimonium, Antimony, in addition to its desiccative powers,
has also astringency. Hence it is mixed with collyria for the
eves.

356 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. This is evidently the sulphiiret of antimony.

' • ' The native antimony is so rare a mineral that it is not likely
the ancients had any acquaintance with it, and the factitious
antimony is not described bv anv ancient author. For an
account of the ancient antimony, see in particular Dioscorides
(v, 99) and Pliny (H. N. xxxiii, 33.) It was much used by
the ancients in the composition of the medicines called calli-
blephara. " Vis ejus astringere et refrigerare principalis autera
circa oculos." Pliny (1. c.) In the Old Testament the Jewish
women are censured for this use of it. None of the Greek
or Latin authors speak of giving it internally except Serapion,
who quotes Badigorus (Pythagoras ?) as stating that it proves
a remedy for epilepsy and gross superfluities, (c. 249.) In its
calcined state it was made into pastils of a square form, and
hence the metal itself is called rErpoywvov by Hippocrates, as
has been supposed by his expositors. See Galen (Exeg.) and
Foes (fficon. Hippocrat. 371.) Hippocrates recommends it
as a medicine for purging the head (De Intern. Affect.), that
is to say, as an ingredient in cajnitpurrjia, or errhines, to the
use of which he was partial. (See Vol. I, pp. 59, 60 of this
work.) But with the authorities subsequent to him its prin-
cipal use would seem to have been confined to collyria. See
in particular Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 48) ; Averrhoes (CoUig. v,
43.) Celsus frequently uses it for this and other purposes.

2ro(j3};,
Stoebe, Knapweed ; the fruit and leaves are desiccative in
the third degree, being possessed of astringent powers. Hence
they agglutinate large wounds ; and the decoction of them
relieves dysentery, hemorrhages, and discharges of pus from
the ear; and in a cataplasm it is of use in suggillations of
the eye from a blow.
CoMM. Commentary. There has been considerable difference of
' ' ' opinion among modern authorities on this head, as is fully
stated by Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 998), and by Sprengel
(Ad Dioscor. iv, 12.) We acquiesce in the judgment of those
who hold it to be the Poterium spinosum. See Galen (De
Antidot. 426, T. ii, ed. Basil.) Our author^s notice of it is mani-
festly taken from Galen, who, in his turn, is much indebted to
Dioscorides. (iv, 12.) None of the others add anything of

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 357

interest respecting it. It does not occur in the works of Comm.
Hippocrates nor of Celsus, nor have we been able to detect it "
in those of the Arabians, except Ebn Baithar, who quotes only
Dioscorides and Galen under this head, (ii, 19.)

^rpovdiov. It appears singular that our author should
have omitted the Struthium, which is noticed in this place by
Dioscorides and Galen. This is the celebrated soap-plant used
bv the fullones or cleansers of cloth in ancient times. The
reader will find a very interesting disquisition on it in
Beckmann's ' History of Inventions.^ We think there is every
probability that it was the Saponaria officinalis. Dioscorides
represents it to be diuretic, emmenagogue, and lithontriptic,
a remedy for diseases of the chest, the liver, the spleen, and
for jaundice; a discutient application to indolent tumours,
a sternutatory, and a masticatory, (ii, 192.) By the way,
the famous writer Lucian mentions an amusing example of its
use as a masticatory. (De Alexandro.) Galen states its virtues
in general terms ; he says it is acrid and detergent, and hence
it acts as a sialogogue. We have not been able to find it in
the works of Hippocrates. See Pliny (T. ii, 341, 161, 410, ed.
Harduin) and Celsus (v, 18.) The Arabians treat of it very
fully. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 133) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 362) ;
Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. iii, 38.) They all hold it to be emetic,
and when it cannot be procured they recommend in its place
nux vomica. They also recommend it for all the medicinal
purposes enumerated by Dioscorides. The soap-Avort has been
used medicinally in modern times. See Culpeper (172), Lewis
(M. M. 339), and Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 115.) Quincy
gives a very confused account of it. (138.) In the modern
Greek Pharmacopoeia it is still retained. (144.)

Stcechas, Cassidony, or French Lavender ; it is dcobstruent
attenuant, detergent, and strengthens all the viscera and the
whole habit of the animal.

CoM.MENTAiiY. It appcars to be the Lavandula Stcechas, or c
French Lavender. See Tournefort (M. M.) Phny says that
it is an odoriferous herb of a Inttcr taste. He adds that it
promotes menstruation and relieves pains of the breast. (11. N.

OMM.

358 SIMPLES, [book vit.

CoMM. xxm, 107.) Dioscorides recommends it for diseases of the
' " ' chest and for antidotes, (ii, 28.) Galen has some very sensible
remarks on its qualities as perceived by the taste, and recom-
mends it in the same cases as our author. See also ' De
Antidot.' (i.) Ancenna and Rhases recommend it for epilepsy
and melancholy. According to the Arabians it is purgative
and alexipharmic, but Dr. Hill denies that it possesses these
powers in any considerable degi'ee. It stiU held a place in
our Mat. Med. when Lewis wrote, (ii, 389.) It is retained in
the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

^TOCtTltOTT]^,

Achillea, Yarroiv ; that which grows in water is possessed
of cold powers, but the land has astringency ; hence it agglu-
tinates ulcers. Some use it for hemorrhages and fistulse.
CoMM. Commentary. The land is decidedly the Achillea Mille-
' ' 'folium, the river the Pistia Stratiotes. The millefoil got the
name of Achillea from being supposed the herb used by AchiUes
in dressing wounds. Y. Eustathius (ad Iliad, xi, ad finem.)
Our author copies almost word for word from Galen, who,
however, is equalh' indebted to Dioscorides for the characters
of the yarrow. Regarding the water plant, Dioscorides says
that it preserves wounds free from inflammation, and cui'es
erysipelas and oedema in a cataplasm with vinegar, (iv, 100,
101.) These plants are not to be found in the works of
Hippocrates, Celsus, nor of the Arabian authorities, as far as
we can discover, with the exception of Ebu Baithar, who merely
gives extracts under this head from Dioscorides and Galen (ii,30),
and of Rhases, who merely quotes Galen. (Cont. 1. ult. 637.)
The Pistia Stratiotes is still used by the Hindoo physicians as a
demulcent in dysuria, and as a cataplasm for hemorrhoids.
See Lindley (Veg. King. 125.) The yarrow held a place in
oiu: Dispensatory with its ancient character down to a late
date. See Quincy (92) and Lewis (M. M. 108.) It still holds
a place in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia (109.)

Strychnos, Solanum (?), Nightshade (?), or Alkekengi, i. e.
Winter Cherry ; the garden and esculent sort is astringent
and cooling in the second degree. The halicacabum is like

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 359

the garden, haAnng a diuretic fruit like the grape of a vine.
The bark of the root of the Strychnos somnifera when druuk
Avith wine to the amount of a dram is soporific. And it has
a diuretic seed, being of the third order of refrigerants ; hence
when druuk in greater quantity than twelve clusters it occa-
sions madness. The fourth species is not used internally, but
when applied externally it cures spreading ulcers, belonging
to the second order of refrigerants and desiccants.

Commentary. We must not venture upon the discussion Comm.
of disputed points respecting the Strychni of the ancients, for ' *
which we beg to refer our readers to the Appendix to Dunbar's
Greek Lexicon, and we shall merely state our conclusions so
far as they are interesting to the professional reader. Of the
four species described by Dioscorides, the, 1st, or Strychnus
hortensis, is the Solanum nigrum, or its variety S. miniatum ;
the 2d, or Halicacabum, is the Physalis alkekengi ; the 3d, or
S. somniferum, is the Physalis somnifera ; and the 4th, or
Furialis, is the Solaniim Sodomeeum. Several learned autho-
rities, however, have taken the last for the Atropa Belladonna,
Our author in the main follows Dioscorides, who treats of the
virtues of the Strychni at so great length that we dare not at-
tempt to follow him in the present instance. The first he does
not administer internally, but recommends it very largely as
an external application for erysipelas, herpes, headache, heat
of the stomach, affections of the eye, the siriasis of chilch*en,
earache, the fluor albus, &c. The second, he says, resembles
the first in virtue. The third, he says, has the same powers
as the juice of the poppy. The fourth brings on phantasies
and dehrium, and in large doses proves fatal. The best
counter-agent to it is undiluted wine drunk and afterwards
vomited, (iv, 72-5.) Celsus frequently prescribes "solanum
quam arovyvov Graeci vocant," and ranks it among those
things Avhich repress and soothe, (ii, 33.) He recommends it
as an application in phrenitis and various other diseases, (iii,
18.) Galen and Aetius give nearly the same account of it
as our autlior. Oribasius confessedly borrows his description
from Dioscorides. The Arabians treat fully of the solanum,
of which Avicenna mentions that there are five species, (ii, 2,
646.) See Serapion (Dc Simpl. 138) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i,
662) ; Avcrrhoes (Colhg. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 212.) The

360 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. characters which they give of these plants agree in the main
so well with those given to them by the Greeks, that we need
not stop to note slight differences. The Latin writers of the
middle ages call solanum by the name of maurella. See jNIacer
rioridus. He says of the strychnos that it is possessed of
powerfully narcotic properties. The Solanum nigrum held a
place in our Dispensatories, and retained the characters trans-
mitted down with it from antiquity as late as the end of the last
century. See Lewis (M. M.) All our old herbalists, Gerard,
Parkinson, and Culpeper, speak of its virtues in the same terms
as Dioscorides. Oiu' toxicologists have decided that it is a
powerful narcotic. See Orfila. The Physalis somnifera is still
used in India as an application to inflammatory tumours. See
Lindley (Veg. King. 621.) The alkekengi is still admitted to
be possessed of a diuretic power, as stated by Dioscorides.
(Ibid.) We are not aware of the Solanum Sodomasum having
ever been used medicinally in modern times, but we need
scarcely say that of late years the Atropa Belladonna has oc-
cupied no imdistinguished place in our Dispensatories. On
the Strychnos furiosu as a poison, see Vol. II, p. 224.

SruTTTJjpta,
Alumen, Alum ; all kinds of it are very sour, and consist
of gross particles. But the alumen scissile, or Stone Alum,
consists of more subtile parts than the others. After it is the
Alumen rotundum, or Round Alum, and the astragolotum.
The Alumen liquidum, or Liquid Alum, consists of gross parts ;
and so also the varieties called placitis and plinthitis.
CoMM. Commentary. After ha\ing read much that has been
wTitten by the best authorities both ancient and modern upon
this subject, we still approach the discussion of it with very
great diffidence. Having deliberately considered what Beckmanu
has written regarding the ancient alum, we cannot agree with
him in setting it down as being copperas or the green sulphate of
iron. The ancients, indeed, may not always distinguish accu-
rately the latter from " the sulphate of alum and potash,'^ but
considering how common this mineral is in the countries bor-
dering upon the Mediterranean, we cannot conceive how the
ancients could possibly have remained ignorant of it, and we
need scarcely add that it has never been pretended that it has

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 361

been descrilDecl by tliem under any other name. But its Comm.
varieties diftered much from one another. The Alumen ' *
pkimosum, called Tpiyjrig by the Greeks, was no doulit the
Hair salt of Werner, which, according to the anah^sis of
Klaproth, contains a large mixture of the sulphates of mag-
nesia and iron. GeofFroy remarks that '^of liquid, alum two
kinds are taken notice of by the ancients ; the one pure and
the other impure. The solid or concreted kind was by the
ancients distinguished, according to the figure of its parts, into
fissile and round. The fissile natural alum was either in form
of a compact, uniform globe, or appeared divided into small
hairs or filaments. The round kind was of a more rare texture.^'
The Alumen Jameni of the Arabians was the plumose alum.
Pliny and Octavius Horatianus recommend alum as an appli-
cation to burns when pounded with oil. Alum was used in
the practice of medicine from the earliest times. Hippocrates
prescribes it in ulcers of the womb, diseases of the gums, and
for various other purposes. (Epid. vii, De Mulieb., De Ulcer.,
&c.) Our author borrows from Galen. Dioscorides gives a
most elaborate description of the different kinds and of their
uses in medicine. They are all possessed, he says, of a heating
power, and also of an astringent, and hence they clear the ob-
scurities of the cornea, melt down fungous flesh on the eyelids
and elsewhere, the schistose being more powerful than the
round ; they stop mortifications and hemorrhages, repress
flaccid gums, strengthen loose teeth with vinegar or honc}^ ;
are beneficial in aphthse ; and, in short, he states most
minutely the various purposes to which alum may be applied.
On the alumen see also PHny (H. N. xxxv,52) and Celsus(iv, 18),
with the note of ]Milligan. For the Arabians consult Avicenna
(ii, 2, 68) ; Averrhoes (Colhg. v, 43) ; Serapion (De Simpl.
420) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 44) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. 38) ;
Ebn Paithar (ii, 83.) All of these authors, even including the
last, do little more than copy from Dioscorides and Galen
under this head. Geber, however, treats of the subject witli
some appearance of originalit}^, and describes the kinds of alum
with considera])le accuracy. (Invention of Verity, c. 4.) The
process of burning alum for medicinal piu'poses, which is barely
alluded to by Dioscorides, is described by Gebcr and by
Servitor, (i.)

362 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Storax, is calefacient, emollieut, and digestive. It there-
fore is useful in coughs, catarrhs, and defluxions; and promotes
menstruation both when drunk and apphed on a pessary.
CoMM. Commentary. It is clearly our officinal storax, or Shjrax
' " ' officinale. Dr. Pereira has given the ancient history of this
substance so correctly, as to leave us little further to add under
the present head. (]Mat. Med. 931.) As he states, the storax
has been described by Hippocrates, Theophrastus, Pliny, and
Dioscorides. The several varieties described by the last of
these, Dr. Pereira ingeniously refers to kinds of storax, Avitli
which we are still acquainted. The Stijrax Calamita is
mentioned by our author in the eleventh Section ; according
to him it is but a variety of the amygdaloid storax, which was
formerly imported enveloped in a monocotyledonous leaf.
Dioscorides's description of its medicinal properties agrees well
with our author's, but is considerably fuller, (i, 79.) Galen
and the other Greek authorities treat of it like our author.
Celsus prescribes it frequently as an emollient, discutient, con-
coctive, and suppurative medicine, (v, 18, 2.2, c. &c.) The
Arabians ti'eat of it at considerable length, but do not add
much of any practical importance to what had been written on
it by Dioscondes and Galen. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 423) ;
Serapion (c. 46) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ehases (Cont. h
ult. i, 687) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 428.) Upon the Avhole, Serapion's
account appears to us most interesting. His Arabian autho-
rity, Isaac Eben Amram, mentions that it was used by the
Chi'istiaus in their churches for fumigations. AAdcenna, accord-
ing to Dr. Hill, is the only one among the Arabians who dis-
tiiiguishes the solid storax, which we have been treating of
from the liquid, or Styrax Uquidus. It is quite a different
substance, being procured from the Liquid amher orientcde,
according to Dr. Lindley. (Veg. King. 253.)

2u/ca,
Ficus, Figs ; those which are dried possess heating powers
in about the second degree. But those which are fatty rather
digest hard tumours ; those which are more acrid prove deter-
gent and discutient. The decoction of them, when made of
the consistence of honey (which some call siraeon), is similar

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 363

in powers to honey. The powers of the green are weaker, but
both loosen the belly. The figs of the wild tree are possessed
of acrid and discutient powers like those of the cultivated.

Commentary. See Book I (s. 81.) Pliny enumerates the Comm.
medicinal properties of figs at great length. Ripe figs are ' '
said to be diui'etic, laxative, and diaphoretic. Externally they
were used as an appUcation to boils and scrofulous swelhngs.
(H. N. xxiii, 63.) See also Dioscorides and Serapion, both of
wliom give the characters of figs in nearly the same terms as
Pliny. No ancient author, however, has treated so elaborately
of figs as Avicenna (ii, 2, 276.) His account of them is so
lengthy that we dare not venture upon an analysis of it.

2v/C7J,

Ficus, the Fig-tree, is of a heating and attenuating tempera-
ment, so that the juice of it and the sap of the leaves are not
only pungent and strongly detergent, but also occasion ulce-
ration, open the mouths of vessels, and remove mp-mecia. It
is also cathartic. The wild- fig, called caprificus, is in every
respect more powerful than the cultivated.

Commentary. See the authorities referred to in the pre- Comm.
ceding article. Phny recommends the juice of the caprificus ' * '
or wild fig-tree {Ficus Carica), as an application to leprosy,
psora, and lichen. All the authorities, Greek, Latin, and
Arabian, praise it as an application to the wounds of venomous
animals. The wild fig-tree is the'EozVeoc of Homer. V. Eustath.
' Comment, in IHad.' {\i, 433.) The commentator describes
accurately the process of caprification.

^VKOfXOOOQ,

Sycomorus, the Sycoinore ; the fruit is innutritive, and bad
for the stomach. The juice of the tree has powers which are
emollient, agglutinative of wounds, and discutient of tumours.
It is taken in a di-aught and rubbed in for the bites of reptiles,
for scu-rhous spleens, pains of the stomach, and rigors.

Commentary. Of course there can be no doubt of its being Comm.
the Ficus Sycoiiiorus. Galen, Dioscorides, and Serapion detail ' — ' — '
its medicinal properties in nearly the same terms as our author.
Nothing else of any interest can be gathered from the others
under tliis head.

364 SIMPLES. [book vii.

Symphytum, Comfrey ; the rock comfrey is composed of
opposite powers. For it has some incisive powers by which
it cleanses the pus in the chest and tlie kidneys; and it has
also some constringency which renders it a suitable remedy
for haemoptysis, sprained and ruptured parts^ the red flux in
women^ and intestinal hernia. It contains also some hot
humidity, by which it quenches thirst and cures asperities in
the trachea. The other species, called the Great Comfrey, is
glutinous and prurient like squills. It is used for the same
purposes as the rock.
CoMM. Commentary, The second species is indisputably the
* • ' Symphytum officinale, a plant which the Romans, no doubt,
naturalized in this country. The other has been the subject
of more controversy. See Parkinson (526) and Matthiolus
and Sprengel (Ad Dioscor. iv, 9.) We are satisfied that it
was the Coris monspeliensis. Our author manifestly abridges
Galen, who borrows from Dioscorides, but improves what he
takes. They all agree in commending both as being possessed
of great virtues as expectorant and vulnerary medicines. Dios-
corides particularly commends the latter as an application to
inflammations about the anus in a cataplasm, with the leaves
of senecio. Neither of these plants is mentioned by Celsus,
nor, we believe, by Hippocrates. Avicenna writes hesitatingly
about them, but in the main agrees with Dioscorides with
regard to their medicinal Adrtues, more especially in haemoptysis,
ulcers of the intestines, meuorrhagia, and as an application to
external injuries, (ii, 2, 634.) The Arabians in general seem
not to have attached much importance to the Symphytum, for^
after a cursory examination while writing this article, we have
not been able to find it in any of the others except Ebn
Baithar, who merely gives extracts from Dioscorides and
Galen, under the present head. Apuleius mentions that the
Latin name of the Symphytum is consolida. De Hill calls
it a famous vulnerary both internally and externally, and as
such it is highly commended by all our older herbalists. See
Parkinson, Culpeper, and Gerard. It would appear also that
the other species, the Coris monspeliensis, was employed in
the medicine of the Spanish monastic orders as an efiicacious
vulnerary. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 645.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 365

Spondylinm, Coio-parsniji ; the fruit and root are possessed
of acrid and cutting powers, so as to cure asthma, epilepsy,
and jaundice. The root, Avhen stripped of its bark and put
into a fistula, removes its callus. The juice of the flowers of
it are injected into the ears as agreeing with chronic ulcers.

Commentary. There seems no reason to doubt of its being Comm.
the Heracleum Sphondylium. Dioscorides and Pliny recom- " * '
mend it as an application to fistulous ulcers, and in the other
cases mentioned by our author. Galen and Oribasius give it
the same characters as our author. We have not met with it
in the works of Hippocrates, Celsus, and Aetius. Avicenna
draws the characters which he gives it entii'ely from Dioscorides.
(ii, 2, 643.) Ebn Baithar, in describing it, merely gives ex-
tracts from Dioscorides and Galen, (ii, 24.) Rhases does the
same. (Cont. 1. ult. i, G36.) The sphondylium is described as
a medicinal herb, possessed of the virtues ascribed to it by the
ancients, in the works of our old English herbalists, but it has
long ceased to occupy a place in our Dispensatory. Neither
is it to be found in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

Lentiscus, the Lentisk, in all its parts, belongs to the full
second order of desiccants. As to heating and cooling, it holds
an intermediate place. It is astringent to such a degree as to
approach nearly, in this respect, to the juice of the hypocistis.

Commentary. It is t\\e Pistacia Lentiscus, \j., according Comm.
to the admission of all the commentators. We need scarcely ' • '
mention that it is the tree from which mastich is procured.
Hippocrates was well acquainted with the medical use of it,
Pliny says that it acts as a diuretic, but occasions constipation
of the bowels. He also mentions that it was used in toothache,
and that a decoction of its leaves in a gargle fastened loose
teeth, (xxiv, 28.) The same is stated of it by Plinius Valerianus
(i, 30), and by Dioscorides (i, 89.) Nay, it would appear, from
the following epigram of jNIartial, that peculiar virtues were
ascribed to a toothpick made of the mastich tree :

" Dentiscalpium
Lcntiscum melius : sed si tibi frondea cuspis

Defuerit, denies penna levare potest."— (xiv, 22.)

[book VII.

CoMM. Dioscorides is tlie author wlio has written most elaborately
' — ' ' on this article, which he recommends in haemoptysis, diarrhoea,
dysentery, menorrhagia, prolapsus uteri and ani, in affections of
the mouth, as already stated, and, in a word, he concludes by
saying of its oil, that it is beneficial in all cases requiring
astringency. (1. c.) Galen also gives a very sensible account
of this tree, which he represents to be an astringent of the
same class as hypocistis. Celsus prescribes it on various oc-
casions, as, for example, a decoction of its leaves to suppress
immoderate suppuration, (vi, 18.) He ranks it among the
astringent and emollient substances, (ii, 33.) All the Arabians
treat largely of it, but copy most of their information from
Dioscorides and Galen. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 453) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 457) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 159) ; Averrhoes
(Collig. V, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 518.) In particular aU re-
commend it as a dentifrice and odontalgic, and we need
scarcely mention that it still is used in the East for these pur-
poses. See Paris (Pharm. t. ii, 323) and Pereira (1184.) It is
stated in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia that it is cultivated
in Chios.

'S.yoivog,
Juncus, the Rush ; its flower is moderately calefacient, but
astringent in a less degree, and is not removed from the
nature of attenuating substances. Hence it is diuretic, em-
menagogue, and deobstruent in fomentations, potions, and
cataplasms. The root of it is more astringent, but the flower
hotter. The marsh-rush consists of two varieties. The fruit
of the oxyschoenus or Hard-rush, as it is called, is soporific,
but that of the holoschoenus less so, and it also occasions head-
ache. Both varieties, if toasted and drunk with wine, dry up
fluxes of the belly and restrain the female discharge.
CoMM. Commentary. It requires some attention not to confound
' — " — ' the Schceni with one another. The Schoenanthus, then, is
decidedly the Andropogon Schoenanthus, or Lemon-grass. See
Dr. Royle (Antiq. of Hindoo Med. 82) and Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 113.) The a. aXna is the Schoenus Holoschoenus ; the
oXo(7/oivoCj the Schoenus maris cus ; and the h^vdy^oivoq, the
Juncus acutus. The first of these is the species most cele-
brated as a medicine. Thus it is the schoenus of Dioscorides,
who represents it as being useful in vomiting of blood, pains

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 367

of the stomachy lungs, liver, and kidneys, and as being pos- Comm.
sessed of diuretic, eramenagogue, carminative, subastringent, ' * '
and other powers. Its decoction, he says, is useful as a hip-
bath in inflammations of the womb, (i, 16.) Galen gives a
similar account of its virtues. (De Simpl. viii, and De Antidot. i.)
The other Greek authorities treat of it very succinctly. Is
not this the " flos junci rotundi'^ of Celsus ? (v, 24.) Accord-
ing to Dierbach and, indeed, all the best authorities, it is the
a. ivoGfioQ of Hippocrates (De Mulieb. i. 111), who recom-
mends it along with other aromatics in diseases of the uterus.
The Arabians display an intimate acquaintance with the
schoenanths. See Avicenna (ii, 2) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 681);
Serapion (De Simpl. 103) ; Averrhoes (ColHg. v, 42 ) ; Ebn
Baithar (i, 19.) The last of these gives a particularly full
account of it, mostly from Arabian authorities. They all
agree in representing it as being diuretic, emmenagogue, and
alexipharmic, and in recommending it particularly in apostemes
of the anus, and in scabies. Its oil, they say, is efficacious
in remoAdng lassitude. The schoenanth held a place in our
Dispensatory as late as the times of Quincy (i, 1, 12) and
Lewis (ii, 20.) Upon consulting the modern authors quoted
above, it will be seen that it is still well known in the East.

Sori, resembles misy in its powers, consisting of much
grosser particles.

Commentary. We feel that we must still add something Comm.
to what we have said of this substance under the head of ' — • — '
Misy. The following description of it, by a great modern
authority, who appears to have been well acquainted with it,
deserves not to be overlooked : " Rusma or Sory. A mixt
mineral, blackish, hard, heavy, and of a cavernous or spongy
structure, of a disagreeable smell, and nauseous, vitriolic taste;
and often covered with dusty efflorescences on the surface.
It is composed of Aatriol, sulphm*, and an earthy matter. The
ancients called it sory. We have it in our Derbyshire mines,
but it is not regarded. It was used as a depilatory by the
Greeks, and is so by the Turks at this time. Taken inwardly
it vomits instantaneously and very roughly ; it contains a
cupreous \^triol, and hence its emetic quality.^' — Boerhaavc's

368 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Materia INIedica^ translated by Goade (227.) See under
" — • — ' Chalcitis, Dioscorides calls it blackish^ fetid, and nauseating,
and possessed of caustic powers : lie recommends it in tooth-
ache, as an application to vari, as an injection with wine in
sciatica, &c. (v, 118.) Galen says it is not soluble like misy
and chalcitis, but does not materially differ from them in
medicinal powers. Celsus prescribes it along with opium,
pepper, and galbanura as a stufl&ug to carious teeth, (vi, 9.)
Avicenna, like Galen, says it is insoluble in water, and, like
Dioscorides, he prescribes it in sciatica and diseases of the
teeth, (ii, 2, 47.) We have stated above that Serapion de-
scribes the soiy along with the other two under the general
head of vitriolum, and the specific name of Zeg rubeum ; and
that he merely translates Dioscorides and Galen, (c. 386.)
Rhases, in like manner, gives from Dioscorides and Galen a
description of misy, sory, and chalcitis under the general head
of vitriolum. He calls the sory, vitriolum ruflfum, and, like
Dioscorides, recommends it in carious teeth and in sciatica.
His only Arabian authority, Bimasui, says of the \dtriolum
that it dries the lungs strongly, and in this way may prove
fatal. (Cont 1. ult. i, 747.) It is the vitriolum rubeum of
Averrhoes. (CoUig. v, 43.) In the most barbarous translation
of Haly Abbas it is scarcely possible to extract any proper
meaning from his description of the three vitriols. (Pract. ii,
48.) The lengthy account which Ebn Baithar gives of them
is mostly made up of extracts from Dioscorides, Galen, and
Avicenna. (ii, 510.) Some have thought the sory of Pliny
different from that of the others, but, as far as we can see,
without any good reason. Like Dioscorides, he recommends
it in diseases of the teeth and spreading ulcers of the mouth.
He says it is a thing so offensive to the stomach, that the very
smell of it will sometimes excite vomiting. (H. N. xxxiv, 30.)

Tapis^ot,
Salsamenta, Pickles; their flesh is possessed of acrid and
desiccative powers. They are given, therefore, to persons
bitten by the viper prester, that they may eat as much as
possible, and drink of wine freely, and vomit. They also are
suitable to the regimen of acrid food ; and ai'e applied with
advantage to persons bitten by dogs and other reptiles.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 369

Commentary. Pickled Fish. It appears from Dioscorides Comm.
and Xenocrates that the tunny {Scomber Thynnus) was ac- " """^
counted the best pickle, and it was accordingly most used in
medical practice. Galen recommends the brine of pickled fish
as an injection in dysentery, and a stimulant lotion to sores
on all parts of the body. Serapion gives the same account of
it as Dioscorides and Galen. Svmeon Seth forbids us to eat
pickles after venesection, as they are apt to occasion alphos
and scabies. It seems highly probable that indigestible sub-
stances, if taken into the stomach when the veins are empty,
may be rapidly absorbed, and give rise to the formation of
humours, of which natm'e may endeavour to free the system
by casting them forth by the skin.

TavooKoWa,

TaurocoUa (called by some XylocoUa), is a glutinous sub-
stance made from the hides of oxen, and is of considerably
detergent powers. Hence, when dissolved in vinegar, it re-
moves lichen and superficial leprosies ; and it prevents biu-ns
from getting inflamed when dissolved in hot water. It is also a
suitable application for wounds Avhen triturated with oxymel.

Commentary. Pliny says of it, " Glutiuum prastantissi- Comm.
mum fit ex auribus taurorum et genitalibus. Nee quidquam
eflScacius prodest ambustis." (H. N. xx\iii, 72.) Dioscorides
and Avicenna recommend it in the cases mentioned by our
author. It will readily be perceived that it was a species of
gelatin. See KoAXa.

TfXXii'ca,

Tellinse, Limpets ; when pickled and burnt, their ashes are
caustic ; when mixed with cedar rosin and applied to the parts
from which the hairs of the eyebrows have been torn out by
the roots, it prevents them from growing again.

Commentary. According to INIatthiolus, they are a species CoM\f.
of mussels. They are different, however, from the Mytili ' ' '
eclules, L. Our author^s account of them is taken from Dios-
corides, and is repeated by Avicenna.

Tcrebinthus, Turpentine, is heating in the second degree,
111. 24

370 SIMPLES. [book VII.

and desiecative, when green, in the first, but when dried, in
the second. The fniit, when dried, belongs to the third order
of desiccants. It is, therefore, diuretic and useful for the
spleen.
CcMM. Commentary. It is the Pistacia Terebinthus L. Dios-
" " ' corides states that its fruit is hot, diui'etic, and aphrodisiacal.
He recommends it internally for the bites of the phalangia.
Of the turpentine resin we have treated under the head of the
Resinae. The ancients, as we have stated^ were very familiar
with the hroitm or hJack rosin, called cohphony. (i, 91.) Accord-
ing to Dr. Hill, the Chian turpentine rosin was the tui'peutine
of the ancients. Pliny likewise recommends it in retention of
urine, and as a gentle laxative. He adds, " venerem excitat.^^
(H. N. xxiv, 18.) Our author^s account of it is condensed
from Galen. The turpentines, and more especially the resin,
are frequently prescribed by Celsus. They occm" also in the
Hippocratic treatises. Turpentine was much used in applica-
tions to cutaneous diseases and ulcers. See Avicenna (ii, 2,
303) and Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 342.) Serapion treats of
this article under the same head with the lentiscus. He
copies from Dioscorides. (De Sim pi. 153.) See Ebn Baithar
(ii, 144.)

TfTTtysCj
Cicadas ; some, having dried them raw, give them to drink
in colic affections to the number of three, five, or seven, with
an equal number of grains of pepper. Others roast them
and give them to drink to those who have affections of the
bladder.
CoiiM. Commentary. The t'^tti^ of the Greeks and the cicada of
" " ' the Romans was not the grasshopper, as has been often re-
presented, but the insect which has been more properly called
the tree-hopper in English, namely the cicale of the Italians.
The species here noticed was most probably the Cicada orni.
Dioscorides merely recommends them in diseases of the
bladder, (ii, 56.) Pliny gives a very interesting description
of them, but it contains nothing which, in a medical point of
view, would suit our present purpose. (H. N. xi, 32.) Our
author foUows Galen. (De Simpl. xi.) They do not occur in
the works of Celsus, nor have we been able to discover traces
of them in an}^ of the Arabians, with the exception of Ebn

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 371

Baithar, who, in treating of them, merely gives extracts from Comm.
Dioscorides and Galen, (i, 555.) " * '

TsvtXov,

Beta, Beet, is of a nitrous natui'e. Hence it is detergent
and discutient, and pm'ges by the nose ; but especially the
white species. When boiled it becomes anti-inflammatory and
slightly discutient.

Com:mextary. It evidently is the Beta vulgains L. The Comm,
white and black kinds were, we presume, merely varieties ; ' ' '
but this does not seem sufficiently clear. See Parkinson
(Theatre of Plants, 752) and Lewis (Mat. Med.) Dioscorides
recommends the beet for various medicinal purposes, for clear-
ing the head by occasioning a discharge from the nose, as
a remedy for earache ; a decoction of its leaves for eruptive
diseases and chilblains ; and also as an application to exanthe-
mata, burns, and erysipelas, (ii, 49.) Galen gives the same
account of it as our author. Aetius is fuller ; he further
recommends it particularly as a deobstruent in diseases of the
liver and spleen. The beet is mentioned as an edible plant
by Hippocrates. (De Vict. Acut.) See also Celsus (ii, 18.)
Serapion (c. 148) and Avicenna recommend the leaves of
beet as an application to burns and impetigo, (ii, 2, 636.)
See also Rhases (Cent. 1. ult. i, 127.) All the authorities say
that the beet is possessed of nitrous properties, by which they
probably mean saline, the ancient nitrum being a species of
native soda, resembling salt. It is now well known that beet-
root by boiling yields a saccharine salt in considerable abun-
dance. The beet held a place in our Dispensatory as late as
the time of Lewis. We have treated of it as an article of food
in Book I.

Tfu/cptoc,

Tcucrium, Tree Germander, is a calefacient of the second
order, and a desiccant of the third. Its powers are also in-
cisive and subtile, and hence it cures the spleen.

Commentary. It is not well decided whether it be the CoM.\f.
Teucrium Marwn or the Teucrium flavum. Pliny's account of" " '
it is very confused, and Harduiu thinks that his T. is the
hemionitis of Dioscorides. (Ad H. N. xxv, 20.) Apuleius, in
like manner, identifies the hemionou and the teucrium. (De

372 SIMPLES. [book vir.

CoMM. Herbis, 56.) Dioscorides, like our author, recommends it for
' • ' reducing the spleen, both when given internally and when ap-
plied externally in a cataplasm, and also as an application to
the bites of venomous animals, (iii, 110.) Our author borrows
from Galen. 'We have not been able to discover it in the
works either of Hippocrates or of Celsus. IS'either have we
found it in the works of the Arabians. Dr. Sontheimer, the
German translator of Ebn Baithar, identifies the Teucrhun
Murum with the Chum^dnjs of Dioscorides, and the T. flamim
with his Teucrium. {\\, 466.) It is long since the Teucrhun
Mariim disappeared from our Dispensatory, but it is still not
wholly unknown in the shops of the apothecaries, where it is
reputed to be emmenagogue. The T. flavum is also to be
found in the shops, and has still the reputation of being useful
in diseases of the liver and spleen. See Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 49.)

Ticpoa,
Cinis, Ashes; all kinds have not exactly the same tempera-
ment, but thev varv according to the difference of tlie wood
that has been burnt. The ashes, then, of sour things, such as the
oak and the ilex, ha^e no small degree of astringency, so that
they will restrain hemorrhage when no other remedy is at
hand. That from acrid substances^ such as the ashes of the
fig and the spurge become more acrid and detergent.
CoMM. Commentary. These Cineres were pearlashes, consisting
' — ' ' of the carbonate of potass mixed with various impurities.
Galen remarks, that they are the residue of vegetable sub-
stances which have been burnt, being composed of contrary
qualities, for that they have something terrene in them, and
also something of a fuhginous nature. When, then^ they have
been dissolved in water and strained, what remains is terrene
and devoid of pungency. Our author borrows from him his
particular characters of the different cineres. They were
much used by the ancient physicians as caustic and stimulant
applications, Rhases says that they possess an igneous nature,
and are useful in dissoMng soft tumours. (Ad Mansor. iii, 47.)
See also (Cont. 1. ult. i, 214.) In the latter work he borrows
principally from Galen and our author. Avicenna recommends
the ashes of mezereon in quinsy, and as a stimulant to the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 373

sight. The aqua ciueris, he says, is one of the septic medi- Comm,
cines. (ii, 2, 188.) The burnt lees of wine belong to this " ' '
class. See Kovta* and Tpu^ onov.

Telephium^ Orpine, is a calefacient of the first order, but a
desiccant of the second. It is also detergent ; and hence it is
a suitable application to putrid ulcers, and cures leuce and
alphos with vinegar.

CoMMENTARV. We think with Sibthorp and Sprengel, that Coxmm.
it is not the Sedum Telephium, but the Cerinthe minor. See ' ' '
also Parkinson (520.) Dioscorides recommends it principally
in the forms of leprosy, (ii, 217.) Galenas characters of it
agree with those of our author. It does not occur in the
works either of Hippocrates or of Celsus, neither have we
been able to observe any distinct traces of it in those of the
Arabians, unless, which seems highly probable, it be the
thelopium of Ebn Baithar, as his German translator conjec-
tures, (ii. 161.)

Tj^Aic,

Foenum Grsecum, Fenugreek, is heating in the second order,
but desiccative in the first ; hence it expedites the progress of
all hot phlegmons ; and those which are less hot, and such as
are scirrhous, it cures by discussing them.

Commentary. Without doubt it is the TrigoneUa Fosnum Comm.
Grcecum. It occurs in the works of Hippocrates. (De jSIulieb. " * '
i, 617.) It is, unquestionably, the " Foenum Grsecum'^ of
Celsus, who enumerates it as an ingredient in an emollient
pessary (v, 21), and in a soothing cataplasm, (ii, 33.) It is
prescribed repeatedly by Arctseus, both internally and exter-
nally. Dioscorides recommends the powder of it in the form
of a cataplasm to various inflammations, both internal and
external ; as an ingredient in a medicated bath for diseases
of the female organs, and as a pessary in the same, an injec-
tion of its decoction for tenesmus and fetid discharges from the
bowels, and for other purposes, (ii, 125.) Pliny gives a full
account of its medicinal virtues, in which a considerable por-
tion but not the whole is derived from Dioscorides. He says
that Damon gave its seeds in a draught to promote menstrua-

374 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. tion. He also mentions its being taken in ulceration of the
^"^^ ' chest and chronic coughs, (xxiv, 120.) Galen, Aetius, and
Oribiisins give its characters in nearly the same terms as our
author. For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 246) ; Serapion
(De Simpl.) ; Rhases (Cont 1. nit. i, 294) ; Averrhoes (Collig.
V, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 333.) Though these authors, and
especially Avicenna, treat at great length of this article, it does
not appear that they applied it in many more cases than as they
had been taught by the Greeks. They recommend it, how-
ever, with oil of roses, as an appKcation to burns, and as an
ingredient in coUyria. They say the oil of it cures fetor of
the breath and the perspiration, and of the alvine discharges.
They all commend it as being diuretic, emmenagogue, and
promoting impregnation. They further represent it as being
an excellent expectorant in diseases of the chest. Upon refer-
ence to Quincy (i, 4, 219), it will be seen that in his time the
fenugreek still maintained the characters assigned to it by
the ancient authorities. It has now disappeared from our Dis-
pensatory, but is still retained in the Greek Pharmacopoeia.
(Athens, 1837.)

T^idv/LiciAXoi,
Tithymalli, Spurges ; all the species of it are of the fourth
order of calefacients, with acrimony and strong bitterness ; but
the root being weaker, when boiled with vinegar, allays the
pains of carious teeth. The juices being stronger are appHed
to the hollow of teeth ; but if they touch the rest of the body
they burn it ; and therefore they remove the hairs if rubbed in
for a short time. They also remove myrmecia, acrochordoues,
and the like, and clear away affections of the skin, and cure
ill-conditioned and phagedainic ulcers. There being seven
species of this plant, the strongest are the Characias {Wood
Spurge), and the Myrsinitis [Myrtle-leaved Spurge), and that
growing upon rocks, Arboreus {Tree Spurge) ; but next in order
are, that species which resembles PettymuUein {Broad-leaved
Sjmrge), and the Cyparissias {Cypress Spurge), and then the
Maritimus {Sea Spurge), and the Helioscopius {Sun Sjmrge or
Wurtwort.)
CoMM. Commentary. That the Tithymalli of the ancients are all
^'^ — ' referable to the genus Euphorbia or Spurge, cannot admit of

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 375

any doubt, Dioscorides, Pliny, Apiileins, and, in a word, Comm.
most of the ancient autliorities, like our Paulus, describe seven ^
medicinal species, to wliicli we may venture to give the follow-
ing names in the botanical nomenclature of the present
time. 1. Eiqjhorbia characias. 2. E. myrsinites. S. E.paralias.
4. E. helioscojna. 5. E. cypcmssias. 6. E. dendroides.
7. E. platypliyUos. See Sprengel (Ad Dioscor.) ; Lindley
(Veg. Kingd. 277) ; German Translation of Ebn Baithar
(ii, 525) ; Miller (Gard, Diet.) Besides these, the medical
authors treat of several other species of spurge by particular
names, as lathyris, peplis, thymelsea, &c. The tithymallus was
called "lactuca marina" by the Romans (Celsus v, 7), and
also " lactaria" and '' lactuca caprina." See Pliny, who gives
a full account of the spurges. (H. N. xxvi, 39, 46.) These
plants are treated of at so great a length by Dioscorides and
the other authorities, that we cannot possibly find space for an
exposition of their particular views. All, however, agree in
giving them nearly the same characters as our author, who, in
the present instance, is indebted in part to Dioscorides, and in
part to Galen. Several of them are noticed by Hippocrates.
For the Arabians, see Serapion (De Simpl. 360) ; Avicenna
(ii, 2, 421) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 718) ; Averrhoes (Collig.
v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar (1. c.) They recommend them in the
same cases as the Greeks, without supplying any new views of
much importance. They prescribe a few drops of the juice of
spurge poured upon a fig as a phlegmagogue. They further recom-
mend them in malignant ulcers and those attended with caries
of the bones. And here, by the way, we may be allowed to
mention that a modern authority confirms Avhat the ancients
say of the efficacy of the spurges in this case. See Hildanus
(x, c. ii, 2.) In the present age, we have discarded such purga-
tives as the spurges, whether wisely or not we will not take
upon ourselves to say.

TtVai'Ot,',
Calx, Lime ; the Calx viva {Qmcklime) burns strongly so as
to form eschars ; when slacked, it forms eschars at first, but
not so after some days. It contracts, however, and wastes the
flesh. When washed it loses it pungency, if this is often done
with water; but if in sea-water, it becomes decidedly detergent.

376 SDIPLES. [bookvti.

CoMM. Commentary. It appears from Dioscorides that tlie Lime
" ' ' used by tlie ancient physicians^ -was prepared by calcination
from sliellsj pebbles, or marble, Avliicb last is the best of all.
Pliny, Vitruvins, and Palladius say, that the best lime is got from
hard, white stone. Lime was much used as a caustic and
stimulant application. The '' Xa^iaroq of the Greek Mat. Med.
invariably, we beheve, signifies quicklime, and is never applied
to the mineral which now bears that name. Dioscorides says,
all kinds of quicklime have a fiery, biting, caustic, and escha-
rotic power ; when mixed with other things as suet or oil,
it becomes digestive, emolKent, depilatory, and epulotic ;
and that which is recent and free from water is more efiica-
cious. (v, 132.) Pliny recommends it in the same cases,
and also as an application to luxations and strumse. (H. N.
xxxvi, 57.) See also Plinius Yalerianus (iii, 20.) Celsus
places it in his list of coiTOsive and caustic substances, (v, 6, 8.)
Our author's account of this article is condensed from Galen.
Aetius and Oribasius give nearly the same account of it as
Dioscorides and Galen. Quickhme was used as a medicine in
the Hippocratic age. (See Erotianus.) For the Arabians,
consult Avicenna (ii, 2, 144) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. iii, 20, i,
445) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 412) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 44) ;
Averrhoes (CoUig. v, 43) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 387.) All these
authorities, including even the last, who is by far the most
original of their writers on the Mat. Med., borrow under this
head almost all their information from Dioscorides and Galen.
AAicenna praises it as an apphcation to burns.

Tragacantha^ Tragacanth, has similai* powers to gum.
CoMM. Commentary. The ancient Tragacanth was identical with
' • ' the modern, which is yielded by Astragalus venis, and similar
spiny species. See Lindley (Veg. King. 548.) According to
Sibthorp, the Astragalus aristatus is the one which most com-
monly grows in the Peloponnesus, and he holds that it pro-
duces the T. of Dioscorides. (Prod. Fl. Grsec. ii, 90.)
Dioscorides, like our author, states, that in virtue it resembles
gum, and recommends it in ophthalmic remedies, for rough-
ness of the windpipe, loss of speech, and epistaxis, in a hnctus
with honev. He also recommends it when allowed to melt be-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 377

low tlie tongue, for pain of the kidneys and bladder, when Comm.
mixed with hartshorn burnt and washed, and a little fissile ^""^'
alum, (iii, 20.) Galen and the other Greek authorities state
its virtues in very general terms. It is an ingredient in more
than one of the collyria of Celsus {xi, 6), and is prescribed by
him for various other purposes. Of the Arabians, Ebn Baithar
is the one who gives the fullest account of it. (ii, 350.)
See also A^dcenna (ii, 2, 220.) In the modern Greek Phar-
macopoeia the Astragalus aristatus is described as producing
the tragacanth. It is there said to be common in the
Pelepouuesus.

Tpu-yiov,

Tragium, Stinking St. John's Wort, is a plant in Crete re-
sembling the lentisk, being hot in the third degree^ and
possessed of attractive, discutient, and attenuant powers. It
extracts sharp-pointed weapons of wood, and proves lithontrip-
tic and emmenagogue when drunk to the amount of a di'achm.
Another species, which is bitterer than this, resembling the
ceterach, grows everywhere. It is sufficiently astringent so as
to a2:ree with fluxes.

Commentary. From the description which Dioscorides Comm.
gives of the former species, we need have little hesitation in ' " '
settiug it down for the Hypericum hircinum. In the other,
the name Tragium Columns has been assigned from the name
of a celebrated botanist. Dioscorides and Galen ascribe to it
very nearly the same virtues as our author. Neither of these
plants occurs in the works of Hippocrates or Celsus. Neither
have wc been successful in searching for it in the works of the
Arabians, with the exception of those of Ebn Baithar^ who merely
gives extracts from Dioscorides and Galen under this head,
(ii, 155.)

Tragoriganon, has powers resembling marjoram, with the
addition of some astringcncy.

Commentary. The two species described by Dioscorides Comm.
probably are the Thymus Tragoriganum L., and the Stachys ' ' '
glnthiosa. According to him, they are heating, diuretic, and
Avholesome when the decoction is drunk : thev occasion bilious
dejections ; arc useful in diseases of the spleen when taken
with vinegar, and also to persons who have swallowed ixia.

378 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. They are emraenagogue, and are given in coughs and
' ' pneumonia in a linctus with honey. It makes an agree-
able potion, and hence is given to persons affected with
nausea, indigestion, and acid eructations, and who are sub-
ject to anxiety, nausea, and heat of the hypochondria. In a
cataplasm with polenta they also discuss tumours, (iii, 32.)
Galen and the other Greek authorities treat of it very briefly.
Celsus calls it diuretic and discutieut. (iii, 21, &c.) We
have not been able to find these plants in the works of the
Arabians.

Tribolus, the Caltrop, is moderately refrigerant ; the land
species is strongly desiccative, but the water slightly so, and it
is moistening. Both are befitting remedies in incipient inflam-
mations and other influxes. The fruit of the land caltrop,
consisting of subtile parts, breaks renal calculi.
CoMM. Commentary. It seems to be clearly made out that the
' ' ' one is the Tribulus terrestris, and the other the Trapa nutans.
According to Pliny, then' juices are anti-inflammatory, and
form a proper application to phlegmons and ulcers ; an in-
gredient in collyria ; discuss strumee, and prove lithontriptic.
(H. N. xxii, 12.) He borrows this account of them, however,
mostly from Dioscorides. (iv, 15.) Our author manifestly
copies from Galen, and both Aetius and Oribasius do the same.
"We have not found them in the works of Hippocrates and
Celsus. The Arabians treat of them at more length than the
Greeks. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 382) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i,
721) ; Serapion (c. 112) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 307.) They recom-
mend both species as being aphrodisiac, lithontriptic, and
diuretic. Both the species here descril)ed, that is to say, the
Trapa nutans and Tribulus terrestris, although they have been
long excluded from our Dispensatories, are still not wholly un-
known in the shops. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 84-, 117.)

Tpayoc,

Tragus, a species of Frumentacea, is like far (spelt), but

more indigestible and laxative.

CoMM. Commentary. The method of preparing it is thus described

' ^ in the Geoponica. Spelt is to be steeped and stripped of its

hull, and dried in the warm sun ; then the same thing is to

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 379

be done until the skin and fibrous part of the grain drop off. Comm.
(Geop. iii, 8.) PHny, however, seems to make it a peculiar ' ^ '
species of grain. " Far sine arista est : item siligo. Adji-
ciuntur his genera, bromos, siligo excepta, et tragos, externa
omnia ab Oriente invecta, oryzse similia." (H. N. xviii, 20.)
Galen and Oribasius call it spelt deprived of the hull.
Dioscorides also describes a shrub of this name, which there
can be no doubt is the Ephedra clistachya. He describes it
as being very styptic to the taste, and recommends it in cseliac
affections and in fluor albus. (iv, 51.) It appears singular
that none of the other authorities, as far as we can discover,
has noticed it, with the exception of Ebn Baithar, who merely
gives a translation of the chapter of Dioscorides on it. (ii, 156.)
The Asiatic Ephedras were formerly kept in the shops as
styptics. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 234.)

TptyXa,

Trigla, the fish Surmullet, when frequently eaten, occasions
dimness of vision. When cut in pieces and applied raw, it
cures the bite of the sea-dragon, of the scorpion, and of the
spider.

Commentary. It is the Mullus barbatus L. According Comm.
to Coray (Ad Xenocrat.), it is the Surmullet. R. Stephens like- ' " '
wise calls it by this name. It is the " Barbatulus mullus" of
Cicero. (Paradox, v, 2.) We have treated of it as an article of
food in the First Book. Dioscorides, Galen, and all the au-
thorities that notice it, give it the same characters in a
medicine as our author. It does not appear that the Arabians
describe it.

TjOtTToAjOV,

Tripolium ; the root is hot in the third degree and acrid.

Commentary. We shall have an opportunity in our Ap- Comm.
pendix to discuss the question, whether or not this be the " ^"^
Turpeth of the Arabians, as has been often stated. We may
just mention in this place, that Sprengel is inclined to refer it
to the Plumbayo Europcea, a plant which seems to agree very
well with the characters of the present article, inasmuch as its
root is pccuHarly acrid. See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. C41.)
Dioscorides says of it, that its root is hot to the taste, and that
when drunk with Avinc it discharges water and urine from the

380 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. belly, and that it is used as an alexipharmic. (iv, 133.) Galen

' • ' and the other Greek authorities call it acrid to the taste and

hot in the third degree. For the reason already stated we

shall not enter upon an exposition of the views of the Arabians

in this place.

Pili, Hairs, when burnt have similar powers to burnt m^ooI.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author follows Galen. The Arabians
' — * — ' recommend burnt hairs as an application to foul ulcers, and

the bite of a mad dog. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 191), and Haly

Abbas (Pract. ii, 52, 552.)

Tpvywi' BaXaaaii],
Pastinaca marina ; its sting when pressed upon a weak tooth
breaks it, and makes it fall out.
CoMM. CoMMENTAKY. Wc havc treated of the Pastinaca marina
' — ' ' in Book V. Scarifications of the gums with the sting of this
fish in cases of difficult dentition are recommended by Mar-
cellus Sideta and Pliny (H. N. xxxii, 26.)

^vt, Oll'OU,

Fgex Vini, the Lees of Wine, when unburnt is compounded,
beinff decidedlv desiccative and discutient. But astringency is
superadded according to the species of wine from which it
is formed. It is, therefore, to be used in complaints of a
humid nature and fluxes. It discusses phygethla, and extin-
guishes the milk in over-distended breasts. The burnt lees
become caustic, so as often to be mixed with caustic appli-
cations. It, therefore, removes leprous nails with rosin, and
dves the hair yellow, when rubbed for a whole night with oil
of lentisk. When washed it is used as an ingredient in the
detergent remedies of the eyes ; that of vinegar is stronger in
every respect than the lees of Avine, and more astringent.
CoMM. Commentary. The lees of wine and of vinegar are strong
' — • — ' preparations of potass, and were among the most powerful
caustics with which the ancients were acquainted. Hence
Celsus ranks "fcex combusta" among the " adurentia.'' (v, 8.)
Dioscorides is the ancient author who gives the fullest descrip-
tion of this article. He says the best is that procured from

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 381

old Italian wine, or, failing it, from any similar wine ; and that Comm.
the fc£x aceti is possessed of intense powers. Some, he says, ' ' '
burn it npon fresh shells, and some upon heated coals. He
says it is possessed of strongly caustic, detergent, escharotic,
styptic, very septic and desiccative powers. The faex, must
be u&cd when recent, for it soon evaporates, and hence it
must not be left uncovered, nor without its vessel. It is
washed like pompholyx. The unburnt, he adds, discusses
tumours by itself, and with myrtle ; when applied as a cataplasm
it represses defluxions of the belly and stomach; and when applied
in like manner to the lower part of the abdomen and genitals,
it mitigates the female fluor ; it dissipates hard tumours which
are not ulcerated ; when rubbed in with vinegar, it represses
swelled breasts ; the burnt with rosin, removes leprous nails ;
rubbed in with oil of privet for a whole night, it makes the
hairs yellow ; when washed, it is applicable in diseases of the
eyes, like spodos, and thus clears away cicatrices and clouds
on the eye. (v, 131.) Pliny recommends it likewise as an
application to various cutaneous diseases, and complaints of
the eyes. He commends it as an antidote to mushrooms.
The lees of vinegar, he says, are more escharotic. Its strength,
he says, is increased by beiug burnt. When applied on a
tent it cleans the genital organ of females. (H. N. xxiii, 32.)
See in like manner Plinius Valer. (iii, 51.) Avicenua dii'ects
us to keep the lees in a close vessel, and not expose them to
the air. He says that the ftex aceti is a medicine of great
powers, and stronger than any of the others. In short, his
account of the lees of wine and vinegar is almost entirely
borrowed from Dioscorides (ii, 2, 241.) Rhases, in like manner,
copies from Dioscorides and om* author. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 290.)
See Serapion (Dc Simpl. 3G) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 419.)

TpwyXooi'rrjg,

Troglodyta, is a Sparroiv, the smallest of all birds, with the
exception of the one called regulus ; and living principally in
hedges. This animal when pickled, and eaten either roasted
or raw, breaks down stones in the kidneys; and its ashes when
burnt, if taken in a draught, do the same thing.

Commentary. We have mentioned in Book III, that Comm.
this small species of sparrow Mas supposed to possess great " *

382 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. powers as a lithontriptic. Drelincurtius calls it the wren.

'""'' (Mangeti Bibl. Chinu'g. i, 254.) We, however, are inclined
to think that it was the Accentor modularis or hedge-sparrow.
Our author, as far as we have been able to discover, is the
only one of the authorities who has included this animal in
the Materia Medica ; but he borrows his description of it
from Aetius, (iii, 3, 11.)

Tufoc;
Caseus, Cheese ; that which is new made, and soft, has re-
pellent powers, cooling gently, so as when applied to agglu-
tinate wounds. That called oxygalactinus acquires slightly
discutient powers in addition, and is more agglutinative of
wounds. Old cheese, especially such as is fatty, becomes dis-
cutient, so as to be a fit application to tophi in arthritic com-
plaints, particularly along with the decoction of swines^ flesh
pickled and fat.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author's account of the medicinal pro-
' ' perties of Cheese is mostly abridged from Galen. The kind
called oxygalactinus is the same, we suppose, as the '^ Caseus
acidus cum oxymelite" of Pliny. (H. N. xxviii, 34.) Galen
says that it was used about Pergamus ; see also Dioscorides
(ii, 79.) According to Avicenna, fresh cheese is a good appli-
cation to recent ulcers, and old cheese to ill-conditioned
ulcers. He recommends cheese with the brine of bacon as a
discutient application to arthritic chalk-stones. He speaks
favorably of fresh cheese as an application in ophthalmia,
(ii, 2, 123.) He treats more fully of this article than any
other writer on the Mat. Med., with the exception of Ebn
Baithar, who gives a long dissertation on the properties of
cheese, both as an article of food and as a medicine, (i, 239.)
Serapion merely gives extracts from Dioscorides and Galen.
(De Sirapl. 157.

YaKivBoQ,
Hyacinthus, Hyacinth ; its root being bulbous-shaped be-
longs to che first order of desiccants and the second- of
refrigerants. If applied in a cataplasm with wine, it is believed
to keep children long from coming to pubert3^ The fruit is
gently detergent and astringent. It is, therefore, given in

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 383

cases of jaundice with wine, being more desiccative hut less
refrigerant.

Commentary. Without doubt, as Sprengel and Matthiolus Comm.
state, it is the Hi/acinthus orientalis L. Pliny, Dioscorides, ' " '
and Avicenna enumerate its medicinal properties nearly in the
same terms as our author. They further recommend it as a
theriac and alexipharmic. It has long been unknown to
British Pharmacy.

' YaXoc,

Vitrum, Glass, when pounded and drunk with a thin white
"wine is said to break down stones in the bladder.

Commentary. Aiistophaues, we believe, is the first writer Comm.
who makes mention of glass, since the Orphic remains, in
which it is noticed, are now generally supposed of a later date.
In his comedy of " Acharnenses,^^ an ambassador from the court
of Persia is made to say that he had drunk undiluted wine out
of vessels of glass and gold. (Acharn. 1. 74.) In his " Nubes"
he mentions burning mirrors of glass. It is also mentioned
in the Timseus of Plato. Pliny gives an interesting account
of the invention of glass. (H. N. xxx^i, 65.) Glass appears to
have been in common use about his time and afterwards, for
we find Dioscorides directing to keep certain medicines in
vessels of glass; and Actuarius recommends to have pots- de-
chumbre made of glass in order to facilitate the observations
upon the urine. From a passage in Pliny it would appear
that imitations of the precious stones were commonly made
in glass in his time with foil or the like placed under it.
(H. N. xxvii.) On the glass cups of the ancients, see Strabo
(xvi) ; Athen. (xviii, 28, ed. Schw.) ; and Salmasius. (Ad Solin.
769.) From the following passage in the works of Lactantius
it appears that glass was used by the ancients in windows :
" ^lanifestius est, mentem esse, quae per oculos ea quae sunt
opposita transpiciat quasi per fenestras perlucente \itro aut
speculari lapide obductas." (De Opificio Dei, 8.) We need
scarcely say that glass has been found in the ruins of Pompeii
of late much more plenteous than was expected from the ideas
which were formerly entertained of its scarcity in ancient
times. The hyalus or vitrum, however, was a term applied

384 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. to crystal as well as to glass. By tlie medical autliors_, we
' • ' suppose, it is generally applied to the former ; for A\-icenna
says quaintly of vitrum, tliat it is among stones what a fool is
among men, that is to say, it is easily made to assume any
colour, and is easily broken into pieces. This article does not
occur in the Mat. Med. of Dioscorides. Galen prescribes it
medicinally on various occasions : thus like our author, he says
of burnt ciystal or glass, that it is lithontriptic (De Renum
Affect.), and recommends the same for drying ulcers (De Comp.
Med. sec. gen. iv), and also calls it a good diuretic (De
Simpl. V.) Our author borrows his paragraph on this subject
from Aetius. (ii, 31.) It is never prescribed medicinally by any
more of the Greek or Roman authorities. It is regularly
treated of, however, bv the Arabians in their svstems of the
Mat. Med. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 720) ; Serapion (De Simpl.
382) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 748) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 723) ;
Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 47.) (?) Of these Serapion is the au-
thority that treats most fully of this article. He quotes Galen
as saying of it, that it is hot in the fourth degree. He says
there are two kinds, the sandy and the stony ; that when
vitrum is set fire to, and a magnet is mixed up with it, it
becomes coagulated owing to its ductility. He says of it
that it has various colours, as white, like crystal, wliicli is the
colour of the best kind, red, yellow, green, and azure. He
then says, like Avicenna, that glass is among stones what a
fool is among men, and so forth. He adds that crystal is a
species of glass (vitrum) which is found in a mineral state.
As to its medicinal properties, he says it is hot in the first
degree, and dry in the second ; that it removes fiu'fures of the
head, and is applied to the head and beard as a depilatory.
When pounded and drunk with Avine, it is lithontriptic. One
of his Arabian authorities, Aben Mesuai, says glass is good for
the lungs and for baldness. Avicenna further recommends it
as a dentifrice, and as an application to remove albugo of the
eye, in which case, he adds, the biu-nt is most efficacious.
There is nothing of any interest further on what is written of
it by Rhases, Haly Abbas, and Ebn Baithar (1. c.) We may
mention in conclusion that although glass has long been ex-
cluded from the practice of the regular physician, we have

SECT. Til.] SIMPLES. 385

often heard of powdered glass having been used by empirics^ Comm.
and certainly in some cases with good effect, to remove opaci- '
ties of the cornea. See also Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 360.)

Tuber Terrae, Truffle, is composed of a very terrene sub-
stance, with a slight degree of attenuating power.

Commentary. We have treated of Truffles in the 77th Comm.
section of Book I. It is the Tuber Cibarium L.

Hydrargyrum, 3Iercury, is scarcely used for medical pur-
poses, being deleterious. But some having burnt it, so as to
reduce it to ashes, and mixed it with other articles, have given
it to drink in cases of colic and ileus.

Commentary. We have given some account of the ancient Comm.
opinions on this subject in Book V. From the statement of
our author it will be perceived that the Greek physicians made
little use of this important article in the practice of medicine.
Rhases, Avicenna, Haly Abbas, and Serapion recommend it as an
application for scabies, lice, and malignant ulcers. A\dceuna
says the vapour of it induces paralysis, tremblings, spasms, and
contractions of the limbs. He adds that the A'apour of it is
destructive of sight, and brings on fetor of the breath (ii, 2,
46.) Serapion gives exactly the same account of it. {De Simpl.
385.) See also Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 75) ; Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 48, 501) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 553.) Galen admits that
he had no experience of it as proving destructive, either in-
ternally or externally. (De Simpl. ix.) It is remarked by
Dutens that Dioscorides^s description of the method of prepar-
ing mercury from cinnabar is the first account of tlie process
of distillation which we possess, (v, 70.) Pliny copies the
same. (H. N. xxxiii, 8.)

YopOTTfTTEpt,

Hydropiper, Water-pepper, is a hot herl), but not so much
so as pepper. When applied green along with its fruit it dis-
cusses hypopia and scirrhous tumours.

CoM.MENTARY. It is the Polygonum Hydropiper, known by Comm.
the vulgar name of Arse-smart. The other authorities rccom- ' • '

III. 25

386 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. mend it as a stimulant application to discuss tumours and

' — ' — ' suggillations. See in particular Dioscorides (ii, 190), and

Galen (De Simpl. viii.) The Arabians treat of it succinctly in

mucli the same terms. See Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 551);

Avicenna (ii, 2, 551.)

Aqua, Water ; the best, and that which is unmixed with
other matters, is cooling and diluent by its own proper sub-
stance. Having got acquired heat, as long as it preserves
this it heats, but when it becomes cold, it cools. That which
has a certain admixture, such as of natron or bitumen, acquires
the property of the substance which is mixed with it. Rain
water has some astringency, for which it is mixed with oph-
thalmic remedies. The qualities of the best water have been
enumerated in Book I.
CoMM. Commentary. It is fully treated of by us in Book I. See in
^^^ — ' particular PHny (H. N. xxxi, 21) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 58) ; and
Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 70G.)

YoaKvaf^ioc,
Hyoscyamus, Henbane; that species which has black seed,
and that which has yellow, are deleterious. The fittest for
medicine is that species, the seed and flower of which are
white, being of the third order of refrigerants.
CoMM. CoMMENTAKY. Dioscorides describes with considerable pre-
' * ' cision three species of hyoscyamus, deriving their specific
diff'erences from the colour of the seed, the first being black,
the second yellow, and the third white. The first two he
rejects as being highly dangerous, by inducing delirium and
sleep. The first of these we are inclined to think must be
Hyoscyamus niger, a well-known plant, which was most probably
naturalized in this country by the Romans for medicinal pur-
poses. The second was probably a variety of it, or H. aureus ;
and the third the H. albus. He gives minute directions for
preparing the juice of it, which he recommends as an ingredient
in anodyne collyria, for hot and acrid rheums, earache, and
complaints about the uterus ; and with flour for inflammations
of the eyes, feet, &c. Its seed, he says, is applicable for
coughs, catarrhs, defluxions, and pains of the eyes ; for menor-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 387

rhagia, and other hemorrhages, when taken in a draught with CoM^r.
poppy-seed and hydromel. He recommends it as forming an " ' '
anodyne cataplasm, for gout, swelUng of the testicles, or
swelled mammse after parturition. He speaks highly of the
leaves in all these cases, and for every kind of pain. Three
or four leaves, he says, cure the remittent fever called
hepialus. He states that the leaves, if taken internally, and as
liad heen said, when applied as a clyster, induce mental
alienation. He concludes with stating that the root with
vinegar forms a gargle in toothache, (iv, 69.) The hyoscyamus
of Hippocrates was no doubt the albus. See Sprengel and
Dierbach. The leaves, the root, the seed, and the juice of
the henbane are all used by Celsus in the practice of medicine.
He gives a formula for a pill consisting of mandragora,
parsley-seed, and seed of henbane, which he says is soporific
(v, 25.) Pliny describes confusedly four or five species or
varieties of henbane. He says not much in favour of any of
them as medicines. (H. N. xxxv, 17.) See also Scribonius
Largus (c. 181), and Apuleius (c. 4.) Galen and Aetius treat
of it in nearly the same terms as our author. For the
Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 348) ; Serapion (c. 340) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 377, ii, 380) ; Averrhoes (Colbg. v, 42) ; Haly
Abbas (Pract. ii.) Of these Avicenna is the fullest on this
head, and yet he borrows almost everything from Dioscorides.
Of the three species which they all describe, he represents the
white as being the only one fit to be used as a medicine. Serapion
copies closely from Dioscorides and Galen. The ancient cha-
racters of the several species of henbane are given to them by
Platearius, and by our old herbalists Parkinson and Gerard.
It is singular that the black henbane has supplanted the
white, which was in common use 200 years ago. See Fran-
ciscus de le Boe (xx, 34.) It it also worthy of remark, that
about 100 years ago the henbane had wholly disappeared from
the Dispensatory. Thus Quincy does not treat of it at all, and
Lewis represents it as a medicine which had been deservedly
expelled from practice. In Greece at the present day the
white species is much more common than the black. Both
have a place in the Greek Pharmacopoeia, published at Athens
in 1837 (p. 81.)

388 SIMPLES. [book vi

I TreoiKou,
HTi^ericum, St. John's Wort, consists of two species, the first
of wliich, called Androssemum or Ascvroii, has been treated
of. The other is heating and desiccative, consisting of a sub-
tile substance. Hence the "whole frait of it is diiu'etic and
emmenagogue.. When appUed green along with its leaves it
cicatrizes Avounds. It cures sores "vvhen sprinkled diy upon
them. It is also given to drink in ischiatic complaints.
CoMM. Commentary. There is some difficulty in determining the
' • species. Sibthorp decides in favour of the Hypericum crispinn.
The other authorities, namely, Dioscorides, Galen, and Aetius,
give it the same characters as our author. Celsus recommends
it in calculus, (v, 21.) The Arabians in like manner commend
it as being emmenagogue and diuretic. See Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 371) ; Averrhoes (CoUig. v, 42) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 354) ;
Serapion (c. 267.) Rhases says it is called "herba sancti
Joannis,'' and hence the modem term St. John's wort.

1 TTr)KOOV,

Hypecoon, is cooling in the third degree, being neai'ly Hke
poppy.
CoMM. Commentary. The Hypecoum prociimbens would seem to
" • answer very well with the characters of it given by Dioscorides
and the other authorities. It is a genus closely alUed to the
poppies. The other writers on the Mat. Med. treat of it in the
same brief terms as our author. See Dioscorides (iv, 68); Ebn
Baithar (i, 63.)

Y7royXaj(T(70i',
Hypoglosson, is a shrub ; the root and juice of it are pos-
sessed of emollient powers.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Ruscus Hypoglossum. It appears to
' • have been little used. We are not sui'e that it is mentioned
at all by the Arabians, except Ebn Baithar, who copies literally
fi'om Dioscorides and Galen (i, 98) ; and the Greeks all treat
of it briefly like our author. Dioscorides mentions its being
used as an amulet in headache ; and that its root and juice
formed ingredients in softening plasters, (iv, 130.) It is not
even yet wholly unknown to the shops. See Gray (Suppl. to
Pliarmacop. 24.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 389

1 TTOKICTTIC,

Hypocistis, is the juice of certain substances like pomegra-
nate-flowers, growing under the roots of the cistus, otherwise
called cistharus, being an active remedy for all cases of de-
fluxions by diying and strengthening the parts.

Commentary. The Undei'yrowth of the Cistus. The term Comm.
is applied both to the parasitic plant, which grows on the roots ' ^
of the Cistus Ladanifera, and also, as is evident from the words
of our author, to the inspissated juice of the same. The plant
is the Cytinus Hypocistis. Dioscorides describes it accurately,
and also the process for prepanng the juice of it. He says it
is possessed of the same medicinal powers as acacia; but is
still more astriugent and desiccant, being efiicacious in cseliac
aff'ections, dysenteries, haemoptysis, and the female flux, both
when taken by the mouth, and in clysters, (i, 127.) Galen
Aetius, and the other Greek authorities state its properties in
general terms, like our author. It occurs in one of the Hip-
pocratic treatises (De Nat. Mulieb.), and is set down by Celsus
as an ingredient of several of his antidotes, but more especially
of that most famous one ascribed to jNIithridates. (v, 23.) The
Arabians assign it exactly the same characters as the Greeks.
See A^dcenna (ii, 2, 111); Serapion (c. 115); Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. ii, 754, i, 108, ii, 119) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) All
concur in giving it the character of being an astringent and
tonic medicine, both internally and externally. As late as the
time of Quincy, the hypocistis continued to occupy a place in
our Dispensatory, and it was retained as an ingredient in the
Theiiac of Andromachus or Venice Treacle (as it was latterly
called), as long as that once-celebrated composition "held a place
in the Pharmacopoeia. See Moses Charras (R. Phar. 114.) It
still retains in the shops the same character for astringency
as it received from the ancients. See Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 38.)

YtTO^OKTTOI',

Hj^ophsestura, is a species of thorn used by the fullers,
like the hippophaes. The juice of the head, leaves, and roots
of it when dried, and taken to the extent of three oboli with
honeyed water, evacuates water and phlegm. It agrees princi-
pally with orthopncEa, epilepsy, and aff'ections of the nerves.

390 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM, Commentary, It is the tTnro^atoTov of Dioscorides and Pliny.

" ' ' They recommend it in epilepsy. Like the whole tribe of car-
duinse it is difficult to define. Sprengel determines it to be
the Cirsium stellatum, Allien. Our author copies its characters
from Dioscorides. (iv, 160.) Few of the other ancient autho-
rities have noticed it and it has been completely lost sight of in
modern pharmacy.

1 aawTTOv

Hyssopum, Hyssop, is calefacient and desiccative iu the
third degree. It also consists of subtile particles.
CoMM. Commentary. Into the much controverted question re-
'""^ garding the hyssopus of the ancients, it is not our present pur-
pose to enter, and we shall content ourselves in a great
measure with giving a brief exposition of its characters and
medicinal \'irtues as delivered by the Greek, Romar;, and
Arabian authorities. It occurs repeatedly in the Hippocratic
treatises, as, for example, at ' De Diaeta' (ii, 26), where it is said
of it that it is hot and purges pituitous matters. Celsus
mentions it in various passages ; thus he calls it bad for the
stomach (p. 83), says it is diuretic (p. 86, 172), rouses the senses
(86), is hepatic (86), and useful in coughs (160, ed. Milligan.)
The following is an abstract of Dioscorides's important chapter
on the Hyssop. It is a well-known herb, of two kinds, for
one is the mountain, and the other the garden ; the best is
the Cilician. It has an attenuant and heating power ; when
boiled with figs and water and drunk along with honey and
rue, it is useful in pneumonia, asthma, chronic cough, catarrh,
and orthopnoea ; it is anthelminthic, in a linctus with honey ;
its decoction brings ofi" thick humours from the bowels
when drunk with oxymel; it is eaten along with green figs
pounded for mo\aug the bowels ; but it purges more strongly
when cress, iris, or hedge-mustard is mixed with it ; it im-
proves the colour of the skin ; it is applied as a cataplasm
with figs and natron for afi*ections of the spleen and dropsy,
and with wine for inflammations ; it discusses suggillations when
applied with boiling water ; it is a most excellent gargle in
cases of quinsy with the decoction of figs ; it soothes the pains
of toothache Avhen the mouth is rinsed with a decoction of it,
and it dissolves flatus about the ears in the form of steam, (iii.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 391

27.) Pliny recommends it in angina, asthma, as an applica- Comm.
tion to sores, and, in a word, lie gives it the same characters as ' " '
Dioscorides does. (PI. N. xxvi, 11, et alibi.) Our author and
Aetius copy word for word from Galen. Galen, however, in
other of his works prescribes it for various complaints, as a
medicine which purges the head and nose (De Cathars.), is use-
ful in the decline of inflammation of the liver (Meth. Med. xiii),
for discussing tumours (De Arte Cur. ad Glauc. ii), and for
other purposes (Meth. Med. viii.) The Arabians treat of it
very fully. See Serapion (c. 270) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 256) ;
Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 758) ; Mesne (De Simpl. 16) ; Ebn
Baithar (i, 545); Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42.) Avicenna evidently
derives his characters of it from Dioscorides ; he recommends
it as a phlegmagogue, vermifuge, a remedy for asthma, chronic
coughs, &c. One of Serapion^s Arabian authorities, Isaac ebn
Amram, calls it a herb growing in the mountains, having
branches in length a cubit or less, and leaves like marjoram.
Another of them recommends it in hardness and frigidity of
the womb, kidneys, bladder, and liver, and as a purgative
which evacuates crude humours. He also copies from Dios-
corides and Galen. Rhases and Ebn Baithar follow nearly
or altogether the same authorities as Serapion. Averrhoes
states its characters in general terms. Mesne, upon the
whole, is the most interesting and original of the Arabian
authorities on the hyssop. He says there are two kinds,
the garden and the mountain ; that the former rises above
the ground about half a cubit, and that its leaves are larger
than those of thyme, and its flower is purple ; the latter has
much smaller leaves, and its stem is not so round. He states
its medicinal virtues with much precision, recommending it as
a phlegmagogue, in asthma, and other aftections of the chest,
and in nearly all the cases mentioned by Dioscorides ; and
also, he adds, from personal experience, in epilepsy. Two
questions now come to be solved : 1st, Is the hyssop of INIesue
the same as that of Dioscorides ? We answer this question,
with little hesitation, by saying, we think it is ; INIesue merely
defines his plant better, but the agreement of these authors as
to its medicinal \drtues convinces us that both treated of the
same plant, 2d, Was the hyssop of the ancients, then, the
same as our Hyssopus officinalis ? With mucli deference to

392 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. the many eminent scholars who deny this, we hesitatingly
" ' answer this question in the affirmative, for the two following
reasons : first, the medicinal characters of the ancient hyssop, as
given by Dioscorides, Mesne, and the other Greek and Arabian
authorities, agree with those of the Hyssopus officinalis, as
given by modern writers on the Materia Medica. See Plate-
arius (de Simpl. Med.) ; Tournefort (Mat. Med. 223) ;
Boerhaave (Mat. Med. 148); Alston (Mat. Med. ii, 152);
Hill (Mat. Med. 364) ; Culpeper (Compl. Herbal. 95) ; Ainslie
(Mat. Ind. i, 177) ; Rutty (Mat. Med. 145) ; Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 47.) But, secondly, it is incumbent upon those
who deny the identity of the ancient and modern hyssop to
show when and how the H. officinalis came to be substituted
for a plant, the characters of which it now bears. But, further,
no competent judge, we believe, Avill dispute that the hyssop must
have been brought to Britain, and naturalized here by the
Romans. Is it likely, then, that they would have brought
a plant not described by their learned men at home, and not
the one which had the character of being possessed of so many
virtues? If, as Sprengel and others have maintained, the
Origanum ^gyptiacum be the true hyssopus of the ancients,
why was not it introduced into this country and not the
Hyssopns officinalis ? Since then the H. officinalis is what
our Roman conquerors brought us for their hj^ssop, we may
be pretty confident that it tinily is the ancient plant, the name
of which it bears.

Lentes, Lentils, (?) are desiccants of the second order, being

intermediate as to cooling and heating qualities. They have

also some astringency. They therefore dry the body and bind

the belly ; but the decoction loosens it. The first water, there-

• fore, is thrown away when it is taken to restrain the bowels.

The Lens palustris, Duck-meat, moistens and refiigerates in

the second order.

CoMM. Commentary. See Book I, 79. It is, undoubtedly, the

" ' ' Cicer Lens. The Lens palustris is the Lemna minor, Angl.

Duck-meat. Our author borrov.s from Dioscorides, who

treats of the virtues of the lentil more fully than it would seem

to deserve. It is simply a vegetable astringent, (ii, 129.) The

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 393

other authorities treat of both in the same terms as our author. Comm.
See in particular Avicenna (ii, 2, 711) ; Serapion (c. 9.) ' '

Phalaris ; tlie juice, leaves, and seed, when drunk, relieve
pains of the bladder. They are also remarkable for some
tenuity of partSj and are of a heating nature.

Commentary. Sibthorp refers it to the Phalaris Cana- Comm.
riensis. Our author borrows its medicinal character from " '
Dioscorides (iii, 149), and the same is repeated by Galen
and all the authorities who treat of it. None of the Ara-
bians, as far as we can discover, have noticed it, except Ebn
Baithar, who, in describing it, merely gives extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen. It would appear, that in the shops of
the apothecaries, it still is kept, and is reputed to be useful in
pains of the bladder. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 18.)

^aXa-y^'iTiq,

Phalangitis, Spiderwort, is so named because it is a remedy
for the bites of the venomous spiders called phalangia. It
also consists of subtile parts, and hence is supposed to prove a
remedy in cases of tormina.

Commentary. According to Sibthorp, it is the Anthericum Comm.
Gracum. Our author, Hke Galen and the other authorities ' '
that treat of it, copies almost word for word from Dioscorides.
(iii, 112.) Ebn Baithar, in describing it, merely gives extracts
from Dioscorides and Galen. It does not appear to be noticed
by the Arabians. It has been scarcely known in modern prac-
tice, and yet the Anthericum Liliastrum is still kept in the shops
and retains the name of spiderwort, with the reputation of
being useful against the bites of scorpions See Gray (Suppl.
to Pharmacop. 22.)

Suber, Cork, and particularly that from wine-vcsscls, when
burnt has very desiccative ashes. This is mixed up especially
with dysenteric remedies.

Commentary. Thcophrastus gives an accurate description Com
of the Quercus Suber. (H. P. iii, 16.) Cork, as Pliny states, " — ^
is formed from its bark. He recommends its ashes or char-

M.

[book VII.

CoMM. coal in hemorrhages. (H. N. xxiv, 8.) Q. Serenus recom-
' ' ' mends it in the same cases, (c. 22.) Dioscorides does not
describe this article. Galen also omits it in his list of simples,
but briefly notices it in a preliminary book (v), and recom-
mends the bui'nt cork of a wine-cask as an astringent. (De
Comp. med. sec. loc. v.) We have not been able to trace it in
the works of the Arabians.

Phillyrea, Mock Privet ; the leaves of the tree are astrin-
gent like those of the wild olive. They relieve ulcers in the
mouth when chewed^ and when the mouth is rinsed with a de-
coction of them. When drunk they prove diuretic and emme-

nagogue.

CoMM. Commentary. Stackhouse and Sprengel agree that it is
' • ' the Phillyrea lati folia L. Our author copies its medicinal
characters literally from Dioscorides. (i, 125.) None of the
other Greek authorities on the jSIat. ISIed. have described it.
Neither can we find traces of it in the works of any of the
Arabians, except Ebn Baithar, who gives nothing of any
moment imder this head but a translation of the chapter of
Dioscorides referred to above. It certainly is not the Mahaleb
of the Arabians, as we shall show in the Appendix.

<i>Xojuoc,

Verbascum, Petty Mullein ; there are many species, among
which is that called Thryalis. The leaves of all the kinds are
possessed of desiccative and moderately detergent poAvers, and
especially that with the golden flower. Being sour they suit
with all sorts of fluxes. Some also rinse the teeth with them.
CoMM. Commentary. It cannot be doubted that the genus is re-
' — ' ' ferable to the Verbascum, but the species cannot be well
determined. See Sibthorp (Flora Grseca), and Sprengel (ad
Dioscor. iv, 102.) The white female Plilomos would appear to be
the Verbascum Thapsus, and the black is indisputably the Ver-
bascum nigrum. The Pfdomis Lychnitis of Dioscorides is probably
the V. Lychnitis. The other species cannot be determined with
any degree of certainty. Our author abridges the medicinal
characters given to them by Dioscorides. (1. c.) Galen also, as
well as Aetius and Oribasius, borrow freely from Dioscorides.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 395

The mullein occurs in the Hippocratic treatises (Morb. Mulier.), Comm.
but we do not find it in the works of Celsus. Pliny describes " ' '
the verbascum in nearly the same terms as Dioscorides. (H. N.
XXV, 74.) See also Apulcius (De Herbis, 71.) The Arabians
follow Dioscorides in delivering its medicinal properties. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 98) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 184.) The verbascum
held a place in the Dispensatory as late as the time of Lewis.
(ii, 417.) The V. Thapsus, nigrum, Kud Lychnitis, although now
rejected from our Dispensatory, are still retained in the shops.
See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 91.) It is said that the juice
of their leaves, which is acrid and bitterish, is used to poison
mice and fish. Lindley (Veg. King. 683.) In the modern
Greek Pharmacopoeia, both the Verbascum Thapstis and thapsi-
forme stand for the female phlomos. (166.)

(Called by some Rhus), is a herb like the Darnel. It has
astringent powers, and when drunk with austere wine stops all
fluxes.

Palma, the Palm-tree, has a fruit which, when ripe, is mode-
rately hot, stomachic, and tonic, when taken internally or ap-
plied externally. The rest of the palm-tree is sufficiently
astringent, and hence is mixed up as an ingredient with
stomach and liver remedies. But the most astringent part
is the involucrum or cover, as it were, of the fruit while
growing.

Commentary. The herb is undoubtedly the Loliumperenne. Comm.
The tree is the Phoenix Dactylifera. We would refer to the
' Hierobotanicon' of Olaus Celsius and our own article on
this head, in the Appendix to Dunbar's Greek Lexicon, for the
general literature of this interesting subject. We need not
dwell particularly on the medicinal virtues of the herb, as all
the authorities are agreed that it is applicable in such cases as
astringents are indicated. See in particular Dioscorides (iv, 43.)
A decoction of different parts of the palm-tree was much used
by the ancient phj'sicians as an astringent. Pliny recommends
it particularly in discharges from the uterus and bowels. (H. N.
xxiii, 53.) He borrows, however, from Dioscorides, who re-
commends it as an astringent in these and various other cases,
such as hemorrhoids and wounds ; he adds, however, that they

396 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. induce headaches^ and when eaten in great quantity intoxicate ;
" ' and that the dried dates when eaten are useful in haemoptysis,
stomachic and dysenteric diseases, and complaints of the blad-
der, when applied in a powder as a cataplasm with the quince and
cerate of wild vine-flowers, (i, 148.) Celsus recommends a decoc-
tion of dates as an astringent gargle, (v, 22, 9.) Galen has a most
interesting article on the palm, which he recommends in gene-
ral as being possessed of an astringent quahty, in hepatic and
stomachic aflections, both internally and externally. Serapion,
INIesue, and E-hases likewise recommend it in such cases.
Rhases gives a most copious account of tliis subject borrowed
from various sources. One of his authorities says, dates spoil
the teeth and create obstructions in the liver and spleen.
Another says they create semen, and are useful in phthisis.
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 531.) Avicenua recommends them generally
as asti'ingents, and particularly in fluxes of the womb and in
hemorrhoids, (ii, 2, 87.) Ebn Baithar copies mostly from
Rhases under this head, (i, 211, 496.) The composition of
palm-oil is described by Dioscorides. (i, 54.) It is the only
preparation from the palm which is now retained in the Phar-
macopoeia.

Phormium, is possessed of attenuating, detergent, and at-
tractive powers. Its seed, therefore, attenuates leucoma, and
extracts sharp-pointed weapons of wood.
CoMM. Commentary. Our author's account of it is taken from
' ' ' Galen. It would appear to be a variety of the op^tivoi', i. e.
Salvia Hoi'ininum L., Purple-top Clary, as is stated by Sprengel.
(Notse in Dioscor. iii, 135.) We can find nothing interesting
regarding it in the other authorities.

Valeriana, Valerian, has a root which resembles the nard,
but is weaker for most purposes, only it is more diuretic like
Celtic.
CoMM. Commentary. It is the Valeriana officinalis, or perhaps the
' * ' V. Dioscor idis. We have mentioned akeady that the an-
cient nards were various species of valerian. All the ancient
authorities describe it as being diuretic and emmenagogue.

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 397

See in particular Dioscorides (i, 10.) Galen ascribes to it Comm.
diuretic powers (De Simpl. viii), and Pliny emmenagoguc ' ' '
(H. N. xxi, 80.) The Arabians give it the same characters.
See Avicenua (ii, 2, 255) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 62) ; Ebn
Baithar (ii, 2G5.) Bergius in like manner states its virtues
thus : " Virtus : emmeuagoga, abortiens, diuretica, sanguinem
amovens.^^ See also Rutty (]\Iat. Med.) Recent authorities,
however, are not so lavish in its praises. See Pereira (971.)

Folium, Leaf, the leaf of the Malabathrum, which has been
already treated of.

Commentary. Apicius, in like manner, uniformly calls the Comm.
leaf of the Malabathrum bv the name of FoUum. We still ' '
incline to the opinion which we deliberately formed and ex-
pressed some years ago, that it was the leaf of the cassia or
wild cinnamon tree. "We refer to a learned disquisition on it
by Olaus Celsius, in his •' Hierobotanicon,' and to GeoSroy
(Treatise on Fossil, Veg., and Anim. Subst. 318.) The ^. of
Dioscorides is quite a different substance, being the same as
the \ivot,ii)C!Tiq, which see.

Fucus marinus. Seaweed, cools and cbies in the second
order, haring also a moderate degree of astringency.

Commentary. Various species of Fuci are described by Comm.
Theophrastus and Dioscorides, but so briefly, that it is scarcely ' '
possible to determine them exactly. It is deservdng of re-
mark, however, that Galen, Aetius, and Oribasius describe
a species of Fucus, under the head of Ceruse, wliich is there-
fore supposed to have been a preparation of lead. The
article, however, which our author here treats of is unques-
tionably the vegetable, as is evident from Aetius. (p. 24,
ed. Aid.) Dioscorides says it is possessed of an astringent
power, which is efficacious in cataplasms for the cure of gouty
affections and inflammations. These plants are to be used in
a moist state before they are dried. He adds, that Nicander
says the purple fucus is theriacal, and that some persons took
its root to be the fucus which women use for painting their
faces, (iv, 98.) Pliny gives a very similar description of the

398 SIMPLES. [book vn.

CoMM. " Phycos thalassion, id est, Fucus marinus.'^ (H. N. xxvi, G6.)
' ' ' Galen treats of it in nearly the same language as our author.
It would appear to be the Muscus marinus of A\acenna, who
borrows the description which he gives of it from Dioscorides,
(ii, 2, 452, and 711.) Our old English herbalists, Parkinson
and Gerard, repeat the characters given to the fuci by the an-
cients, but these articles were long omitted from our Dispen-
satories, until of late some of them were readmitted, when it
was ascertained that they contained iodine. We have known
old practitioners, who used the Fucus vesiculosus, or Sea Wrack,
very extensively as an application to scrofulous sores. See
further Pereira (562), and Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 7.)
Beckmann gives a very ingenious disquisition on the Phycos
thalassion of the ancients, which he makes out to have been our
Archil or Lichen roccella, a sea-weed which has been exten-
sively used, both in ancient and in modern times for the dyeing
of wool. (History of Inventions.) It must be to it that
Horace alludes when he speaks of " lana medicata fuco,^' in his
famous ode on Regulus.

Phyllites, Hart's Tongue, is somewhat sour, and from this
quality it naturally pro\'es a remedy for diarrhoea when drunk.
CoMM. Commentary. There seems little reason to doubt that it is
' ' ' the ScoIopendriu7n officinale, or Spleenwort. It is the Lingua
Cervina of Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 1047.) Both Galen
and Dioscorides, like our author, recommend it in fluxes of the
bowels, as being possessed of astringent powers. It is not met
with in the works either of Hippocrates or Celsus. It was re-
tained in the Dispensatory in the time of Quincy (88, 123),
and even at the present day it is not an entire stranger to the
shops. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 12.)

Xo A pa I'll,
Galbanum, is heating almost in the third degree, and is de-
siccative almost in the second, being possessed of emollient
and discutient powers.
CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides says of Galbanum, that it is the
' " ' juice of a Ferula growing in Syria, by some called metopium.
Phuy describes it thus : " Quod maxime laudant, cartilagino-

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 399

sum, piiruin, ad similitudinem Hammoniaci." Now, in Dr. Comm.
Duncan's edition of the Edinburgh Dispensatory (1811), it is said — " — '
in like manner that " Galbanum agrees in virtue Avith gum
ammoniac;" and from this casual coincidence in the descriptions
of the ancient and modern galbanums, we infer their identity.
It would appear to be now settled, that galbanum is the pro-
duct of different umbellifers, the most common of which is tlie
Opoidla galhanifera. See the late publications of Royle,
Lindley, and Pereira. Dioscorides describes it as being pos-
sessed of a heating, fiery, epispastic, and discutient power, in
pessaries and fumigations as promoting menstruation and the
expulsion of the foetus ; he recommends it externally, for
furunculi and other complaints of the skin, and internally for
chronic coughs, dyspnoea, asthma, ruptured and sprained parts ;
its vapour rouses in cases of epilepsy, hysteria, and vertigo, and
drives away venomous animals. It is used in toothache for
filling the hollow of the teeth, (iii, 87.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities treat of it in general terms, like our author.
It occurs in the works of Hippocrates, and in those of Celsus,
who recommends it in nearly the same cases as Dioscorides, as
in furunculus, difiiculty of breathing, and so forth. (See v,
18, et pluries.) For the Arabians, see Avicenna (ii, 2, 312) ;
Serapion (c. 320.) They borrow their account of its medicinal
virtues from Dioscorides, recommending it as an alexipharmic,
an application to tumours, and a remedy in certain diseases of
the chest. Avicenna says it is less powerful than sagapenum.
The Arabian authorities of Ebn Baithar do not supply any-
thing of much importance in addition to what is fui'nished by
Dioscorides and Galen.

Chalcitis, is possessed of astringent, acrid, caustic, and
escharotic powers. In subtility of particles it is intermediate
between misy and sori ; l)ut when burnt its parts become still
finer.

Commentary, AVe will first give an abstract of the informa- Comm.
tion furnished by the ancient authorities themselves regarding " ' '
this much-disputed article in their Materia Medica, and reserve
what we have to say as to the substance itself to the conclu-
sion. Galen is the author who has given the fullest account

400 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. of the nature and formation of the misy, sori, and chalcitis
' ' ' (see Opera, ed. Basil, T. ii, 137) ; but as his description of them
is lengthy, we prefer giving the abstract of the same furnished
by Aetius. It is to be borne in mind then that what follows
is upon the authority of Galen, who visited the copper-mines
of Cyprus for the express purpose of ascertaining the nature of
the misy, sori, and chalcitis. "At the mine in Cyprus, in
the mountains of the Soli, there was a great cave dug in the
mountain, at the right side of which, that is to say, on our
left hand as we entered, there was a passage into the mine in
which I saw certain specimens of the three substances stretched
upon one another Hke zones, the lowest being that of sori,
upon it chalcitis, and then that of misy. In process of time
the chalcitis changes into misy by degrees, and the sori can
change into chalcitis, but requires a much longer space of time.
So that it is no wonder that these three substances should be
possessed of homogeneous (similar) powers, as differing from
one another only in tenuity and density of their parts, the
grossest being the sori, and the finest the misy, whereas chal-
citis possesses an intermediate power. When burnt they be-
come more attenuant, but less styptic." (p. 30, ed. Aldi.) Galen
(1. c.) states, distinctly that the misy is an efflorescence which
forms upon the chalcitis, similar to the verdigris which forms
upon copper (or bronze), and that the three substances in
question are convertible into one another. He also states that
a specimen of chalcanthos, when long kept, turns to chalcitis.
Pliny gives a very confused account of the misy, sori, and
chalcitis, which betrays evident marks of a very imperfect
acquaintance mth the subject ; but it is quite obvious that he
meant to describe the very same substances as those which
Dioscorides and Galen describe under these names, as is ob-
vious from his ascribing the same medicinal powers as they do
to each of these articles. (See H. N. xxxiv, 29, 30, 31, with
the notes of Harduin.) Dioscorides gives but a very brief
description of these substances, with the origin of which he
most probably was not so well acquainted as Galen. He de-
scribes the best kind as being like bronze or copper (^aX/coEtS^),
friable, free of stones, not old, and having long and glancing
fibres. He says of it that it has styptic, heating, and escha-
rotic powers, and that it clears away impurities about the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 401

canthi and eyes ; that it is one of the mild septics ; is useful Comm.
in erysipelas, herpes, hemorrhages of the uterus and nose, with " '
the juice of leeks ; that when dried it is useful in epulis,
spreading sores, and diseases of the tonsils ; that when burnt
it is more useful in ophthalmic remedies in the form of a
powder with honey; that it melts down and cleanses callus and
asperity of the eyelids ; and removes fistulse when introduced
in the form of a collyrium. (v, 115.) It occurs in one of the
Hippocratic treatises (De Ulceribus), but its meaning there is
not well defined. By blue chalcitis is probably meant chal-
canthos, or blue vitriol. Celsus prescribes it frequently as a
caustic and escharotic application, (v. 9, et pluries.) As stated
already (see Misy), Avicenna gives an account of these sub-
stances under the head of " Atramentum sutorium," the chal-
citis being further distinguished by the name of colcotar. He
refers to Galen's description of them already given, but either
he or his translator evidently misinterprets the original, for he
represents Galen as saying that the atramentum rubeum (sori)
is formed from the colcotar. He says of all the three sub-
stances that they are caustic, escharotic, and styptic; and he
recommends them in the same instances as Dioscorides and
Galen do. (ii, 2, 47.) Serapion, as already stated, describes
them under the name of vitreolum or zeg, including also the
chalcanthos in the same chapter. It may be interesting to
our readers to see his version of the passage of Galen given
above from Aetius. " Vidi in mineris tres venas extensas unam
super aliam per longum spacium, et vena inferior erat zeg
rubeum {sori ?), et secunda quse erat super eam erat colcotar
{chalcitis ?), et tertia superior erat zeg vu'ide {misy ?), et hoc
est quod zeg rubeum convertitur et fit colcotar et colcotar fit
zeg viride.^' He afterwards gives Galen's account of the me-
dicinal powers of chalcitis, which does not differ materially
from our author's. (De Simpl. 386.) Rhases, under the head
of vitreolum, gives, in abridged extracts from Dioscorides and
Galen, their descriptions of sori, c/ialcitis, and misy, which he
calls vitreolum ruffum, colcotor, and vitreolum viridc. (Coutin.
1. ult. 717.) Averrhocs quotes Galen's account of the origin
of the three vitriols which he calls vitreolum rubeum (sori?),
V. viride (misy?), and cliolcoiar (chalcitis?). (Collig. v, 43.)
And now, respecting the nature of the three metallic substances
III. 26

402 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM, misy, sori, and chalcitis, we have to state it as our deliberate
' — • — ' opinion, that, provided the authority of Galen be held decisive
of the question, there can be no hesitation in coming to the
conclusion that they were merely varieties of the chalcanthum,
arising principally from age or differences in the proportion
of the ingredients entering into its composition. (See below.)
Probably then the chalcitis was a specimen of pm'e sulphate of
copper which had contracted an efflorescence from age. The
misy or zeg viride of the Arabians no doubt owed its colour
to a predominance of the sulphate of iron ; while in the sori
we may suppose that zinc or other impurities gave it its pecu-
liar characters.

^aXKavQoQ,
Atramentum Sutorium, Copperas or Vitriol, is water con-
creted in the metal mines of Cyprus, having a very strong
astringency with no contemptible degree of heat ; and of all
substances it is the most effectual for pickling and drying
humid flesh. In process of time it changes to chalcitis.
CoMM. Commentary. No person who reads the account of this
' — * — ' substance given by Dioscorides and Pliny can doubt of its
being blue vitriol, or an impure sulphate of copper procured
by the evaporation of water found in mines of copper. Phny's
description of it is quite characteristic : " Color est coeruleus,
perquam spectabili nitore vitrumque esse creditur." He also
states that it is the same as the " atramentum sutorium."
(H. N. xxxiv, 32.) Celsus says the same of it, and ranks it
with styptics (v, 1) ; with coiTOsive substances (v, 6) ; with
caustics (v, 7, 8) ; with escharotics {\\, 11) ; and recommends
it when strongly heated or roasted to remove callus (v, 28, 12),
and for other purposes. "\Yhether the blue chalcitis of Hippo-
crates (De Ulcer. 13), alluded to in the preceding article, be
blue vitriol as some have supposed (Pereira, Mat. Med. 494),
we cannot pretend positively to determine, but we think it
probable. Galen describes most graphically his vdsit to the
copper mines of Cyprus, where, among other strange sights, he
witnessed the process of procuring chalcanthum. He mentions
that a specimen of it which he carried with him in the course
of twenty years was converted into chalcitis on its surface,
while its centre remained clialcanthum, and that he meant to

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 403

keep it until its centre should change likewise^ and until the Comm.
chalcitis should be converted into misy. Dioscorides describes " "
several varieties of the chalcanthum^ one of which is called
pectum, being procured by natural evaporation; and another
ephthon or codum, as being procured by boiling. The best
kind^ he says, is blue, heavy, compact, and translucent. He
says it is astringent, heating, and escharotic; kills the lum-
bricus latus when taken to the amount of a drachm; that it
is emetic, cures those who have swallowed mushrooms when
drunk with water, and that it purges the head when a piece
of wool smeared with it is introduced into the nostrils, (v, 114.)
Oribasius gives a minute description of the chalcanthum, but
it is confessedly taken from Dioscorides. (Med. Coll. 13.)
Aetius says distinctly that the water running from the copper
mines of Cyprus concretes into chalcanthum, and that it
changes into chalcitis. He, in fact, evidently borrows from
Galen. Avicenna, as formerly stated by us, gives a description
of this substance along with misy, sori, and chalcitis, under
the general head of " atramentum sutorium." (ii, 2, 47.) He
also treats of it separately under its proper name, but his
account of it is entirely made up from Dioscorides. (166.)
Serapion's, in like manner, is copied from Dioscorides. (c. 386.)
Halv Abbas's chapter on the vitriols is so barbarouslv trans-
lated, that we cannot pretend to unfold his account of this
substance. (Pract. ii, 47.) Though, as we have stated above,
we think there can be no doubt that the chalcanthos of
Dioscorides and Pliny was an impure sulphate of copper pro-
cured from the " waters of cementation " issuing from copper
mines, it is proper to mention that after mature consideration
of the subject, with the assistance of an esteemed authority on
the Materia jNledica in London, we have arrived at the con-
clusion that either the term must have been applied loosely
to other metallic sulphates, or the ancient sulphate of copper
must have contained a very large admixture of the sulphates
of iron and of zinc. Probably, then, the term chalcanthos was
used anciently in as loose a manner as the terms vitriol and
copperas have been in modern times. (See Tournefort's Mat.
Med.) It is further deserving of remai'k under this head, that
the description of the impure sulphate of copper, which is
given in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia, corresponds exactly

404 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. Avitli Dioscorides's description of the clialcanthos. In the
' " ' Pharmacopoeia it is directed that the sulphate of copper should
not contain much of the sulphates of zinc and iron. And
now, in conclusion, as this is one of the most important sub-
jects connected with ancient pharmacy, we shall briefly state
our reasons for holding, contrary to the opinion of many recent
authorities of high reputation, that the chalcauthum either
consisted principally of copper, or at least contained a large
proportion of that metal in its composition. 1st. The name
implies that the Greeks thought it a cupreous substance, and
Pliny seems to say that the name had been properly given.
(1. c.) 2d. Pliny's description of it applies exactly to blue
vitriol. (1. c.) 3d. Dioscorides's description of it tallies with
the description of the sulphate of copper given in the modern
Greek Pharmacopoeia. 4th. The chalcanthos was indisputably
formed from the evaporjition of waters issuing from mines of
copper, that is to say, from " waters of cementation.'^ Com-
pare Galen (1. c.) with Pereira (Mat. Med. 495.) 5th. It was
administered as an emetic. See Dioscorides (1. c.) 6th. It was
used externally as a powerful escharotic. See Dioscorides,
Celsus, and Galen (pluries.) 7th. It was ranked among the
poisons. See Cicero (ad Famihares, ix,) and the Arabian
authorities on Toxicology.

XoXkoc KiKavfikvoq,
M% ustum, Burnt Copper, is acrid, with a share of astrin-
gency. It therefore is the best of remedies for the cicatri-
zation of ulcers upon dry bodies; but if washed it agrees
better with tender bodies.

XaA/cov avQoq,
^ris flos, the Flower of Copper, is possessed of more sub-
tile powers than burnt copper, or than the squama seris.
Wherefore, when added to collyria, it clears away asperities
and sy coses of the eyelids.
CoMM. Commentary. Though there can be no doubt that this term
' " ' is generally used by the Greek classical authors to signify
bronze, or a combination of copper and tin in the proportion
of from 2 to 14 per cent, of the latter, it is also certain that
it was frequently applied to native copper, as it is in general

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 405

by the authorities on the Materia Medica. The ancients, it Com
may be proper to remark cursorily in this place, were ac- " ^
quaiutcd with the formation of brass, which they made by
compounding together copper and cadmia. See Watson's
' Chemical Essays/ and Beckmann's ' History of Inventions.'
Brass was their aurichalcura or orichalcum. The ^s ustum,
according to Geoffroy, " is copper reduced to a calx or crocus,
either by itself or mixed with sulphur or salt, by a long
calcination in a reverberatory furnace.'' " The Squama aris, or
flake of copper," he adds, "is little different from the jEs ustum,
being only the particles of burnt copper which fly oflF when it
is hammered." He says of the Flos at'ls, " it is nothing but
copper reduced to small grains like millet seed, which is done
by pouring cold water upon melting copper, which thereupon
immediately flies every way into grains." In short it was fine
granulated copper. These preparations of copper are described
by all the ancient authorities. See in particular Dioscorides
(v, 87, 88), who describes the process of making the flos seris
very minutely. He recommends it as a detergent and caustic
medicine for various pui'poses, such as removing dimness of
the cornea, wasting polypi in the nostrils, and protuberances
about the anus ; and also for the cure of deafness when blown
into the ear with a sj^ringe in the form of a powder, and in
complaints of the gums and tonsils. He also says that given
to the amount of three oboli it evacuates thick huraoui's. He
also describes several processes for burning the copper, and
recommends the ses ustum as a cleansing and detergent medi-
cine for various ulcers, especially those of the eye, and also as
an emetic when taken in a draught with hydromel, or in a
linctus with honey. None of the other Greek authorities
treat so fully of these preparations as Dioscorides. Celsus
prescribes them frequently as caustic and corrosive substances,
(v, 6, 7, et pluries.) The Arabians used these articles not
only as external applications, but as emetics and purgatives.
See Aviccnna (ii, 2, 231); Serapion (c. 414); Rhases (Cont.
1. ult. iii, 48) ; Avcrrhoes (Collig. v, 43) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii,
48) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 551.) The flowers of copper, and burnt
or calcined copper, are noticed in the works of all our earlier
w-riters on medicine, and recommended to be administered

M.

406 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. both internally and externally. See Platearius (De Simpl. Med.)
' ' ' The process of preparing calcined copper is minutely described
by -^Ioses Charras in his ' Royal Pharmacopoeia/ pubhshed at
Paris in 1676. They are briefly described by Dr. Hill, who
says of the ses ustum that " it was much used externally by
the ancients.^^ (]Mat. ISIed. 32.) Neither of these preparations
of copper occurs in the Complete English Dispensatory of
Quincy, jDubhshed in 1763. They are omitted also in Pem-
berton's London Dispensatory, published in 1746. They
would appeal', howcA^er, to have been longer retained in use
by the Continental physicians, since a formula for preparing
the Calx aris is given in Crantz's Mat. Med. (ii, 91. Vienna,
1765.) He says that the Flos ceris, and Squama oris, were
preparations not in use. Rutty ranks them among the ob-
solete medicines of the ancients. A formula for J^s ustum is
given in Grav's Suppl. to Pharmacop. (p. 242.) It is the same
as that of Dioscorides. (v, 37.)

Chamsedrys, Germander, is heating and drying in the third
degree. It therefore melts down enlarged spleens, proves
diuretic and emmenagogue, and removes visceral obstructions.

CoMM. Commentary. It clearly is the Teucrium Chamadrys L.

' — " — ' Theophrastus says that its fruit purges bile. (H. P. ix, 10.)
Dioscorides commends it in spasms, scin'hous spleen, dysuria,
and incipient dropsy ; and as an emmenagogue ; and, by the
way. Dr. Hill confirms this account of it. Galen and all the
other authorities treat of it in nearly the same terms. We
have not been able to find it in the works of Hippocrates.
For the Arabians, see particularly Serapion (c. 180); Avicenna
(ii, 2, 132) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 152.) One of Serapion's
Arabian authorities recommends the syrup in chronic coughs,
dyspepsia, and incipient dropsies, and the decoction in black
jaundice. Avicenna joins both Dioscorides and Serapion in
regard to the viriues which thev ascribe to it. "UTiether or
not this be the '' trixago^^ of Celsus (iv, 6) has never been
satisfactorily determined. The Arabian translators adopt this
name. It has still the reputation of being a pectoral medicine.
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 661.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 407

^(tjHaiKlCTCTOC,

Heclera, Ground Ivy ; the flower being considerably bitter,
removes obstructions of the liver. It is also given in ischiatic
diseases.

Commentary. "We see no good reason for disputing its Comm.
identity with Glechoma hecleraceum, or Ground Ivy, which we "^
believe to have been introduced into this country by the
Romans for the Chamacissos. Dioscorides gives it nearly the
same characters as our author, that is to say, he recommends
it in sciatica and jaundice, (iv, 124.) Galen and the other
Greek authorities treat of it in nearly the same terms as our
author. The Arabians notice it under the same head with the
other species of ivy. See Serapion (De Simpl. 41) ; Ancenna
(ii, 2, 169) ; Rhases (Contin. 190.) The ground-ivy maintained
a place in the Dispensatory Avith a high reputation as a hepatic,
splenitic, diuretic, and nephritic medicine in the daj's of
Quincy. (117.) In the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia the
glechoma hederaceum stands for the ^a/uaifCKxa-og. (75.)

^ajiiaiKEpadoq. This occurs in the " Euporiston " generally
ascribed to Dioscorides. It is referred by Sprengel to the
Convallaria majalis, or Lily of the valley.

Xn^totAtu/cr/,

Chamseleuce, Ground Poplar, is calefacient in the third
order and desiccative in the first.

Commentary. Sprengel maintains that we should read Comm.
yrai^aiTTivKr], and refers it to Stachelina Cham(Xpeuce L. In ' "^
Dioscor. (iv, 125.) Dioscorides merely recommends it in
lumbago. All the other authoiities assign it the same general
characters.

Xa/nntXewi',
Chamseleon ; the root of the black chamseleon is calefacient
and desiccative in nearly the third order. It is also a deter-
gent application to the skin, and a discutient and emollient
one to indurated tumours. AVhen applied in a cataplasm it
cures phagedenic ulcers. But when taken internally it is
poisonous. The root of the white chameleon is like that of
the black, but more bitter. When drunk with austere wine

[book VII.

to the amount of an acetabulum, it kills the broad intestinal
worms. It is also useful in dropsical complaints.
CoMM. CoMMENTARi. We Stated in the Fifth Book, Sections 37,
' * ' 46, that we were inchned to refer the black chamseleon to the
Carthamus corymbosus , and the white to the Carlina acaulis,
and we see no good reason for changing this opinion. Some
good authorities, however, prefer the C. gummifera. See
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 708.) The virtues, however, which Dr.
Lindley ascribes to the C. acaulis, agree very well with those
of the ixia, or white chamseleon, as stated by the ancient
authorities ; whether, however, it produces the gum resembling
mastich, as the white clianiseleon is described by Dioscorides
as doing, we are not so sure. Parkinson says it produces
such a gum '' sometimes, and in some places." (Theatre of
Plants, 968.) See also Gerard (1157.) Dioscorides recom-
mends its root as a vermifuge ; in dropsy and dysuria when
taken in wine, (iii, 8.) The root of the black chamseleon he
recommends with other articles for the cure of lichen, for
toothache, and various other purposes. (9.) Our author bor-
rows mostly from Galen under this head. Aetius remarks
that the root of the black species is poisonous, and hence is
to be applied only externally in scabies, lichen, leprosy, and
the like. This species is noticed in the Hippocratic works.
(De Ulcer.) The other occurs in the works of Celsus, who
prescribes it as an ingredient in a malagma for gout, (v, 18,
33.) The Arabians treat elaborately of both species. See
Avicenna (ii, 2, 197, 455) ; Serapion (c. 274, 275) ; Rliases
Cont. 1. ult. ii, 208) ; Averrhoes (CoUig. v, 42.) Upon the
whole their characters of them agree with those by Dioscorides
and Galen.

Chamsemelum, or Anthemis, Chamomile, heats and dries in
the first order. It is also attenuant, discutient, relaxant, and
aromatic.
CoMM. Commentary. It certainly applies to the Anthemis nobilis,
" " ' but probably is not restricted to it. It appears to be the
avSi/iiov of Theophrastus. (H. P. vii, 8, 14.) It is the avOif~uq
of Dioscorides, who describes three species, which it has been
found very difficult to distinguish and identify. He says the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 409

roots, the flowers^ and the stem are calefacient and attenuant, Comm.
that both when drunk and in a hip-bath they promote the ' '
evacuation of the menses, foetus, calculi, and urine ; that they
are drunk for tympanitis and ileus : cure jaundice and diseases
of the liver ; and that the decoction is used in a fomentation
for complaints about the bladder. He says the chamomiles
cure fistula lachrymalis in a cataplasm, and aphthae as a masti-
catory, and that the oil prepared in a manner described by
him, is useful in intermittent fevers when the body is rubbed
■with it. (iii, 143.) Aetius strongly recommends the whole body
to be rubbed with oil of chamomile in such cases to promote
perspiration. According to Galen this is the evavOeimov of
Hippocrates. (Morb. Mulier., i, 625.) We cannot find it in
Celsus. Galen, in the preliminary dissertation to his * Mat.
Med.,' strongly eulogises the oil of chamomile as being cal-
culated to soothe pain, relieve contracted parts, soften hardened,
and to dispel fevers not accompanied with visceral inflammation,
(iii, 133, ed. Basil.) The Arabians appear to have been very
partial to this plant, of which they treat at great length. See
Aviceuua (ii, 2, 118); Scrapion (De Simpl. 22); Rhases
(Contin. 1. ult. ii, 154, i, 15G) ; Averrhoes (CoUig. v, 42) ;
Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 34.) In a word, they entirely concur
in the characters given to the chamomiles by Dioscorides and
Galen,

Chamaipitys, Ground Pine, heats in the second order, but
di'ies in the third. It is therefore a cathartic and detergent
of the viscera, especially of the liver. It is diuretic and era-
menagogue, agglutinates large wounds, and cures putrid ulcers.
It also discusses scirrhous swellings, and the decoction of it is
useful in ischiatic diseases.

Commentary. It appears probable that our author's plant Comm.
is Ajuya chamaepitys, but here commentators are by no means " " '
agreed. It is briefly mentioned by Nicander (Alex. 05), and by
Celsus as a medicine which opens the pores or mouths of vessels
(v, 4), but it does not occur, we believe, in the Ilippocratic
ti-eatises. Of the three species described by Dioscorides, the first
is probably this plant, the second is a species of tcucrium, and the
third ('ji'(/a iva. His characters of the first agree in the main
with those given to it by our author, who, as well as Galen,

[book VII.

CoMM. Aetius, and Oribasius^ evidently copy from him. The other
' ' ' two species, he says, are possessed of similar powers. All the
Arabians concur in representing it as being diuretic, erame-
nagogue, a medicine that expels the foetus, and a laxative.
See Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 153); Avicenua (ii, 3, 131); Serapion
(c. 179) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 32.) Avicenna in particular
recommends it for the cure of sciatica and gout, and for this
virtue it was celebrated as long as it retained a place in our
Dispensatory. See Quincy (116.) It was an ingredient in
the famous Portland powder. It is still to be found in the
shops, where it bears the names of Iva arthritica and Teucrium
chamcepitys. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 49.)

Chameedi'ops ; some call this plant Chamaedrys, and some
Teucrium, being possessed of similar powers to the Chamsedrys.

CoMM. Commentary. According to Dioscorides it is the same as

" * the Xa^taiopuc.

XajuoiffVK)?,
Chamaesyce, Ground Fig, has detergent and acrid powers,
so that the twigs and juice of it remove myrmecia and acro-
chordones. They therefore clear away thick cicatrices in the
eyes with honey, and cure dimness of vision and incipient suf-
fusions,

CoMM. Commentary. From the place assigned to it by Dioscorides

" " ' it was evidently a spui'ge. It is acknowledged to be the
Euphorbia chamcecyce. Our author appears to have borrowed
the characters which he gives it from Dioscorides. (iv, 167.)
Galen and the others do the same. It does not occur in the
Avorks either of Hippocrates or Celsus, nor have we been able
to find it in those of the Arabians. "We are not aware of its
havins: been used bv modern authorities.

XaiiitXaia,
Chameleea, Mezereon, or Spurge Olive, is possessed of deter-
gent powers. It therefore cleanses foul ulcers and eschars
with honey.
CoMM. Commentary. Notwithstanding the difference of opinion
" * ' which has prevailed among the commentators regarding this
plant, we see no good grounds for doubting that it was the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 411

Daphne Mezereon, which we believe to have been naturahzed in Comm,
this country by the Romans for its medicinal uses. Dioscorides ' '
says of its leaves that they are like to those of the olive^ but
more slender and thick, biting to the taste and scarifying the
trachea. Its leaves, he adds, purge phlegm and bile down-
wards, especially if taken in a pill with double the quantity of
southernwood mixed with one part of the chameli3ea ; let it be
taken in water or honey as a pill ; but it is insoluble, for it is
evacuated as it was taken ; the powdered leaves mixed up with
honey cleanse foul ulcers, and such as are covered with eschars,
(iv, 1G9.) We do not meet with it in the works of Hippocrates
nor of Celsus. Galen and the other Greek authorities treat
of it in very general terms like our author. Beyond all doubt
is this the mezereon of Serapion, who commences his chapter
on it by giving extracts from the descriptions of the chamelcea
given by Dioscorides, Galen, and our author. He then gives
a very lengthy account of it from Arabian authorities, first
from Alcanzi and next from Aben Mesuai, which we regret
that our necessary limits prevent us from giving a proper
abstract of. He says that persons of a gross constitution, and
more especially old men, bear this medicine best, and he re-
commends us to administer it with myrobalans, or tamarinds,
or prunes. He further directs it to be given in water that has
been boiled. Altogether there is not a more important chapter
in Serapion than the one on Mezereon. (c. 373.) Mesne also
gives a very interesting account of the mezereon, which he
illustrates with extracts from Dioscorides and Galen on the
chamelsea. He assigns to it powers to purge yellow and black
bile, and says that its greatest use is in dropsy. It is also, he
savs, anthelrainthic. He recommends tents smeared with it
for fistulse and sinuous ulcers. (De Simpl. 22.) Haly Abbas
also gives an excellent account of it, representing it as a medi-
cine which purges phlegm, yellow and black bile. (Pract. 2,
54, 561'.) Rhases describes the two chamseleons and the
charaelsea together under the head of Laureola. He quotes
" the Book of Poisons" as stating that in the dose of two
drachms it proves fatal. He gives quotations from Dioscorides,
Galen, and our author. (Cont. 1. ult. i, 113.) Avicenna, in
like manner, describes the two chamseleons and the chameUiea
under the head of mezereon, but evidently recognised tlie dis-

412 SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. tinction between the last and the first two. He commends
" " ' the mezereon particularly in dropsy, (ii, 2, 455.) The above
sketchy it will be remarked, clearly proves the identity of the
y^afxlXaia of the Greeks, and the Mezereon of the Arabians,
We admit, however, that it does not prove their identity with
the Daphne Mezereon. To us it appears, however, that the
physiological effects of the mezereon, as described by our best
authorities of the present day, con'espond very well with the
effects of the chamelsea or mezereon as described by Dioscorides
and Serapion. In particular compare Pereira (805) with
Serapion (1. c.) It is proper to mention, however, that
Sibthorp held the yr. to be Daphne o/eoides. Both the Daphne
Mezereon, and D. Chiidium are retained in the modem Greek
Pharmacopoeia. (108.)

XeXtSoi'toi',
Chelidonium, Columbine or Celandine ; the great is cale-
facient in the third order, and powerfully detergent. The
juice of it contributes to acuteness of sight. The root when
drunk with anise removes icteric obstructions, and also when
taken with wine. 'V\Tien masticated it cures toothache. The
smaller species, which belongs to the fourth order of calefa-
cients, is more acrid, so as to ulcerate the skin in a cataplasm.
It also removes leprous nails. The juice of it purges by the
nose.
CoMM. Commentary. That the first species is the Chelidonium
' — ' — ' niajus L. admits of no dispute. The other would seem to be
the Ranunculus Ficaria, or Fig-wort. Pliny praises it as an
application to strumous tumours, and a remedy for impair-
ment of sight. From the experiments of Orfila, it appears
that the C. magus acts as a very acrid poison. Dioscorides
describes the great celandine very minutely, and recommends
it in javmdice and toothache, (ii, 201.) He gives the same
character of the less as our author, (ii, 212.) Galen and
Aetius treat of them like our author. Neither of them is to
be found in the works of Hippocrates. Celsus prescribes the
juice of the " chelidonia" as an application to enlarged tonsils,
(vi, 14.) Both species are distinctly treated of by the Arabians.
See Avicenua (ii, 2, 295, 727) ; Serapion (c. 196) ; Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 200.) They all recommend the juice of the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 413

greater celandine in jaundice, in tootliache, and in affections Comm.
of the eyes. It long: held a place in our Dispensatory, re- '-"^^~'
taining its character for curing jaundice and removing films
from the eyes. See Quincy (117.) Even at the present day
rustic farriers use the acrid juice of the celandine for removing
films from the eyes of cattle. The chelidonium majus occurs
in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia. (46.)

Hirundines, Sivallotvs ; when burnt their ashes, if rubbed
in with honey, cure inflammatory cynanche. They also con-
tribute to acuteness of sight.

Commentary. It is the Hirundo rustica. Celsus also re- Comm.
commends the ashes of swallows in cases of cynanche and
diseases of the eyes, (iv, 4.) Dioscorides speaks of their use
in these and in other cases, (ii, 6.) Galen gives the same
account of them as our author. The Arabians repeat the de-
scriptions given by Dioscorides and Galen. See Serapion
(c. 443) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 347); Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 741);
Ebn Baithar (i, 375.)

XoAjj,

Fel, Bile, or Gall, is the hottest of all animal juices, but
differs according to tlie colour, for the yellow is hotter than
the pale, and the violet-coloured than the yellow ; and also
according to the difference of the animals which produce it ;
forasmuch as that of swine is the weakest of all, so that it
agrees with ulcers in the ears, and does not prove pungent ;
but that of sheep is more acrid, and still more that of goats, to
which the galls of bears and oxen are allied. But the gall of
bulls is stronger, and still more so that of the hysena, next
that of the fish called callionymus, and that of the scorpion
which answers in suffusions, dimness of vision, and leucomata,
and likewise that of the sea-tortoise. The gall of the wild
goat is believed to cure nyctolopia. The gall of all fowls is
more acrid and desiccative than the gall of quadrupeds. But
of them the best is the gall of cocks and partridges. Those
of hawks and eagles are in so far more acrid and corrosive,
and of a violet colour, but sometimes black.

Commentary. Our author's account of the medicinal pro- Comm.

414 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. perties of bile is abridged from Galen. Bile is an article
" ' which, although now excluded from the British Pharmacopoeias,
still holds its place in the Continental. Scarpa recommends
the gall of certain animals for the removal of albugo. Pliny
thus states its ^irtues as a medicine : " Vis ejus excalfacere,
mordere, scindere, extrahere, discutere. Minorum animalium
subtilius intelligitur, et ideo ad oculorum medicamenta utilius
existimatur.^' (H. N. xxviii, 40.) See Dioscorides (ii, 96.)
Avicenna calls it a hot, abstergent medicine. Of quadrupeds,
he says, the strongest is that of a calf, and the weakest that
of a sheep. He treats largely of the subject, but draws libe-
rally from Dioscorides and Galen (ii, 2, 250.) See also Serapion
(De Simpl. 459) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 50) ; Ehases (Cont.
1. ult. i, 291) ; Ebn Baithar (ii, 510.) The gall of a bull is
retained in the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia.

Chondrile, Gum Succory, being a species of Endive, is bit-
terish, and is therefore so far more desiccative than it.
CoMM. Commentary. Without doubt it is the Chondrilla juncea,
' — ' — ' or Gum Succory. It produces a gum similar to Lactucarium,
for which it is still cultivated in Lemnos. See Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 708.) Dioscorides describes another species which is
supposed to be Apargia tuber osa. Dioscorides describes ac-
curately the gum of the former species which he compares to
mastich, and says of it that when applied on a linen cloth
with myrrha to the size of an olive it is emmenagogue ; that
along with natron it cleanses mild leprosy ; that the gum is
used for glueing the hairs of the eyelashes ; that the fresh
root does the same when a needle is dipped into it and applied
to the hairs ; that it is beneficial in the bites of the viper ;
and that its juice is an astringent of the bowels. He describes
the second species as being also glutinous, (ii, 160.) Galen
and the other Greek authorities treat only of the former species,
and that in very brief terms. Neither of them are described
either by Hippocrates or Celsus. We find difficulty in dis-
covering traces of it in any of the works of the Arabians,
except Ebn Baithar (i, 395.) The ChondriUa juncea is still
not wholly unknown in the shops. See Gray (Suppl. to Phar-
macop. 63.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 415

Xoi'OjOOC,

Cliondrus, is like wheat, but more glutinous than it.

Commentary. In the First Book we have explained its Comm.
nature. (Vol. I, 123.) It would appear to have been the article ' " '
now called Farro, being prepared from the spelt wheat, ex-
actly as pearled barley is from barley. See Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 16.)

Xf)i;(TOK:oAAo,

Chrysocolla ; one kind of it is found in metal mines, and
another is prepared in a mortar of red copper with a pestle of
the same, it being triturated with the urine of a boy not come
to puberty during the heat of the dog days. It therefore is
detergent, having discuticnt and desiccative powers greater
than those of the kind found in metal mines, so that it con-
sumes flesh without being pungent. It therefore agrees with
ill-conditioned ulcers. By burning it you may render it less
pungent.

Commentary. In order to understand this very complicated Comm.
subject, it will be necessary in the first place to give an ex- ' "
position of what the ancients themselves have written upon it.
Dioscorides writes thus of the Chrysocolla : " The best is the
Armenian, which is of an intense leek colour ; the second in
quality is the Macedonian; and then the Cyprian, of which
the kind that is pure must be selected ; but that which is full
of earth and stones must be rejected. The aforesaid article is
to be worked thus : Having pounded it, throw it into a mortar,
and having poured in water, rub strongly with the flattened
hand to the mortar; then allowing it to settle, strain; and
pouring in more water, again rub, and do this alternately until
it becomes clean and pure ; then having dried it in the sun,
lay past for use. But if you wish to burn (calcine ?) it, do so
in the following manner : Having triturated it sufficiently, put
it into a pan, place upon the coals, and do otherwise as we
previously said in the former cases. The chrysocolla has the
power of deterging ulcers, repressing and cleansing fungous
flesh; is styptic, calefacient, mildly septic, with a certain
amount of pungency. It belongs to the class of medicines
which excite vomiting, and which may prove fatal to life."
(v, 104.) This chrysocolla is evidently the same as that which

416 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Theophrastus has described as " being found in great quantity
' • ' in gold mines and the parts around them/^ (De Lapid. 47.)
Now we may here say at once that every person conversant
with mineralogy, must recognise the chrysocoUa, described
above, as being the mineral called " common copper-green "
by Jameson, being an impiu-e carbonate of copper. For a
clear description of it, see Cleaveland (Mineralogy, p. 570.)
This, it will be remarked, is the only substance to which
Dioscorides applies the name of ChrysocoUa; but in a pre-
ceding chapter, treating of the varieties of verdigris, he says,
" There is a certain kind of verdigris made by the goldsmiths,
by means of a mortar and pestle, of Cyprian copper and the
urine of a young person, ivWi ivhich they solder gold." (v, 9.2.)
Now to this variety of the verdigris, as we shall soon see, the
name Chrysocolla (from its being used in soldering gold) was
also applied by the writers subsequent to Dioscorides. Thus
Pliny (H. N. xxxiii_, 26, 27, 28) first gives a very elaborate de-
scription of the true chrysocolla ; and then in the following
chapter he briefly notices the other kind, which he says was
also called " santerna," and was prepared from Cyprian verdi-
gris, the urine of a boy, with the addition of nitrum (soda?)
pounded in a Cyprian mortar with Cyprian copper or bronze.
This, he adds, forms a solder to gold. This, however, he does
not say was ever used in medicine. The former kind or
true chrysocolla of Dioscorides, he says was used in medicine
for cleansing wounds along with wax and oil, and also in a
dry powder; that it was given in a linctus with honey for
orthopnoea and angina; that it was used as an emetic; was
added as an ingredient to collyria for specks on the eyes, and
to green plasters for relieving pain and contracting cicatrices.
This chrysocolla, he says, in conclusion, the physicians call
acesis (a term, by the way, synonymous with medicinal), and
was different from the orobitis which he had previously de-
scribed as being artificially tinged with a herb called by him
'^ lutum," meaning thereby, we suppose, woad, or the Isatis
tinctoria. (1. c.) Galen describes the two kinds together, and
treats of their medicinal powers as follows : This medicine,
chrysocolla, is one of those that consume the flesh, and is not
strongly pungent ; but it is moderately discutient and desic-
cant. Wherefore some call only the fossil bv this name, but

SECT. Til.] SIMPLES. 417

some also the substance which is prepared in a bronze (copper?) Comm.
mortar with a copper pestle by means of the urine of a boy, " *
which some value according to the differences of the verdigris.
But it is better to prepare it in summer, or at least in hot
weather, pounding the urine in the mortar. And it answers
more excellently if the bronze, of which you make the mortar,
be red, and the pestle too, for more is thus rubbed off" by the
turning round of the pestle when the bronze is of a softer
nature. This medicine is most suited to malignant sores, both
by itself and mixed with other substances. He concludes by
saying of the fossil chrysocolla, that the more desiccative the
less stimulant it is, as being so much the more attenuated;
and that when burnt (calcined), it becomes still more attenu-
ated. (De Simpl. ix.) It is clear from this statement that
Galen included under his list of Simples both the fossil chry-
socolla and the kind prepared from verdigris. Aetius merely
abridges the account of the chrysocolla given by Galen, (ii, 81.)
And as Oribasius professedly copies his descriptions of the
fossils used in medicine from Dioscorides, we need not say
anything further of his account of chrysocolla, than that it
coincides entirely with that of Dioscorides. (Med. Coll. xiii.)
Celsus ranks it with the corrosive (v, 6) and the caustic sub-
stances, (v, 8.) We now turn to the Arabians. Avicenna, in
the first place, treats of this substance under the name of
chrysocolla, of which he describes two species ; the one, the arti-
ficial, made with the urine of a boy in a bronze mortar, as
already explained; the other the fossil, of which he says he
will now treat. He describes its general characters, namely,
that it is abstergent, caustic, septic, and so forth. Referring
to Dioscorides and Galen, he calls it an emetic and astringent
medicine, and good for malignant sores, (ii, 2, 358.) He
there refers to sect. 696, where he treats of tincar, of which he
says that it consists of two kinds, the fossil and the factitious,
the latter of which is called the gold-solder (capistrum auri).
It is useful, he says, in toothache and carious teeth. Averrhoes
describes it under the names of La9acolaap, i. e. Consolidatura
auri ; in Arabic, Cumbur. He gives exactly the same account
of the two species as Galen. He says the factitious kind is
best prepared in a mortar of red bronze with the urine of a
young person ; which species is more efficacious than the other.
III. 27

418 • SIMPLES. [book VII.

CoMM. (Collig. V, 43.) Serapion in the portion of his work devoted
to minerals, writes thus of Tincar, i. e. Borax. " Ebn Amrain
says of it, it is of the species of salts, and is found with the taste
of baurach (nitrum ?), and has some bitterness ; and it is either
fossil or factitious. And the fossil is in the banks of the sea ;
it is hot, dry, and subtile ; is useful in toothache, and kills the
worm in them, and in stopping the throbbing in them it has
wonderful powers. Rhases and Aben INIesuai say of it, that
the basis (radix) of it is the urine of a boy, we mean of the
factitious, and it is the solder of gold (chrv^socoUa.) It would
appear to be the chrysocolla which is described by Haly Abbas
(Pract. ii, 48, 495), but we must admit ourselves incapable of
interpreting correctly his meaning as expressed in the barbarous
translation of his works. Ebn Baithar first treats of chryso-
colla under the name of Tankar in an extract from the works
of Ebn Amrara which we have given above as quoted by
Serapion. (i, 214.) And again in the 2d volume (434), he
first gives descriptions of the chrysocolla in extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen, and concludes with the remark that
some people called it the tankar chrysocolla, but that the clny-
socolla of Dioscorides and Galen was a totally different article
from the tankar. Rhases gives merely extracts from Dioscorides
and Galen. (Cent. 1. ult. i, 25.) He calls it adhesio auri.
From what has been stated above, we now draw the following
conclusions regarding the matters treated of under this head :

1. That the mineral known by the names of " copper green,"
" mountain green," '^ nati^'C carbonate of copper," was the true
chrysocolla of Dioscorides, the said term signifying Gold solder.

2. That Dioscorides further describes a preparation of ver-
digris which was also used for soldering gold, to which the
name chrysocolla was likewise applied by Pliny, Galen, and
others. 3. That under the names of Tincal, Tankar, and
Borax, the Arabians described a species of salt, which most
probably was our Soda Biboras, to which they sometimes
applied the name chrysocolla from its being used in the sol-
dering of gold, but their best authorities (as for example,
Avicenna, and Ebn Baithar) were well aware that this borax
was a totally different substance from the chrysocolla of Dios-
corides. The name borax is probably a corruption of Baurach,
which is the term applied by the Arabians to the nitrum of

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 419

the Greeks and Romans, that is to say, natron, or soda. If Comm.
the reader will take the trouble to read what has been written ' *
on the chrysocolla of the ancients by many learned men in
modern times, as, for example, Alston, Hill, Geoffrey, Quincy,
Sprengel, and Kidd, he will be the better able to judge whether
or not we have succeeded in illustrating what has always been
considered a very obscure subject.

Chrj^socome or Chrysitis; its root has at the same time
acrid and astringent powers, and therefore is not much used.
Only in peripneumonia and hepatic affections it is given boiled
in honeyed water. It also promotes menstruation.

Commentary. Pliny complains that it had no name in Comm.
the Latin language ; and Anguillara and Matthiolus were un- ' • '
able to make out what it is. It now holds a place in the
Linnaean system by the name of Chrysocnma Linosyris. Our
author borrows his characters of this article from Dioscorides
(iv. 55.) Galen describes it in almost the same words. It is
not to be found in the works of Dioscorides or Celsus, nor, as
far as we can discover, in those of the Arabians.

Pseudo-Bunion, Bastard Rape ; its properties being like those
of rape, it is heating, discutient, and detergent. It, there-
fore, removes tormina, stranguries, and pains of the sides. It
also discusses scrofulous swellings when applied along with
salts and wine.

Commentary. It would appear that it is the Pimpinella Comm.
tenuis or Slender Burnet. Our author copies from Dioscorides.
Galen treats very lightly of this article. It does not appear
that it is treated of by the Arabians.

■^PfuSo^tKrojuvoi',

Pseudo-Dictaranum, Bastard Dittany, has the powers of
weak dittany.

Commentary. We are inclined to join those who refer it Comm.
to the Marrubium Pseudodictamnum. Galen and Dioscorides
join in representing it as an article of little consequence.

420 SIMPLES. [book vn.

Cerussa^ White Lead, is refrigerant and eraplastic.
CoMM. Commentary. We have treated of it as a poison in Book
" "^ ' V. § 59. Alston says : " Our white lead is certainly the
^ij^ivQiov of Dioscorides and the Cerussa Plinii" (xviii.) The
ancient ceruse consisted of the carbonate of lead which had
been exposed to the vapours of vinegar^ and was, therefore,
little or nothing different from the modern ceruse. Geoffrey's
description of the process is taken, in fact, from Dioscorides.
It would appear to have been sometimes administered inter-
nally, if, as Dr. Hill remarks, it is an ingredient in the Trochisci
albi of Rhases. We have not been able to find, however, this
trochisc in Rhases, nor in any of the ancient authorities.
Perhaps Dr. Hill confounded it with the Emplastrum album,
of which ceruse is an ingredient. (See Galen, De Comp.
Med. sec. gen. vi, and Celsus, 2.22 ad Milligan.) Galen in
fact expressly says that ceruse ought not to be administered
internally (Meth. Med. iv.) He recommends it as an anodyne
collyrium in pains of the eyes (Comment, in App. vi, 31), and
as an astringent and soothing application in general. (De
Simpl. ]Med. ix.) Dioscorides describes minutely the pre-
paration of ceruse, and the different kinds of it, but gives its
medicinal properties in brief terms like our author, (v. 103.)
Celsus recommends it in burns and ulcers (vi, 7), but inter-
nally taken he treats of it as a poison (v, 27, 15.) All
the other Greek and the Arabian authorities after Galen
give ceruse exactly the same characters as we have stated
them above. See in particular Serapion (De Simpl. 378) ;
Avicenna (ii, 2, 117) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. ii, 48) ; Ebn Baithar
(i, 63.) The last of these says of it, that it is useful in the
same class of cases as Minium ; that dissolved in vinegar, and
more especially when mixed up with rose-oil, it is a good appli-
cation in cephalalgia ; that it forms a proper ingredient in
collyria for inflammations of the eyes, — and dissolved in a
woman's milk or mixed up with the white of an egg, — that it
is dropped into the eye with advantage in such cases.

Psyllium, Fleawort ; the seed belongs to the second order of

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 421

refrigerants. With regard to heating and moistening powers
it holds an intermediate place.

Commentary. Spreugel remarks, that there can be no Comm.
difficulty about it ; it is the Plantago Psijllium L. Dioscorides ^~^'
and Pliny recommend it pounded with hog's lard as an appli-
cation to mahgnant ulcers ; Pliny also says that its seed
is a good application to the bites of serpents. (H. N. xxvi,
G6.) Dioscorides says it cures tumours, arthritic diseases, in-
testinal hernia, and other complaints, with rose-oil, vinegar or
water. It is, he says, a powerful refrigerant, (iv, 70.) Galen
and the other Greek authorities give its characters succinctly
like our author. Celsus puts it in his list of agglutinative sub-
stances (v, 2.) The Arabians recommend it for the same
purposes as the Greeks, and also for allaying the inflammation
of acute fevers. See Avicenna (ii, 2, 533) ; Serapion (De
Simpl. 230) ; Ebn Baithar (i, 132) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 567);
Mesue (De Simpl. 20.) We have treated of it as a poison in
Book V. § 40. According to Crantz its poisonous qualities have
been exaggerated by Dioscorides. (Mat. Med. iii, 117.) Ac-
cordingly we do not find it treated of by the late writers on
toxicology. Although it has long ceased to occupy a place in
our dispensatory, it has been celebrated in modern times for
its medicinal virtues. Platearius commends it highly as a
coohng and astringent medicine, in acute fevers, dysenteries,
hemorrhages, &c. (De Simpl. Med.) Prosper Alpinus mentions
that the modern Egyptians make frequent use of its mucilage
as a medicine, and hence he finds fault with Dioscorides and
Mesue for setting it down as a poison. (De Med. ^Egypt.); and
Rutty (Mat. Med. 415.) Its seeds form with boiling water a
rich mucilage, which it appears is still much used in India,
in catai-rh, gonorrhoea, and nephritic affections. Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 643.) A recent authority on pharmacy says of it that
its seeds are mucilaginous and purgative. Gray (Suppl. to
Pharmacop. 44.)

Psoricum, is formed by mixing two parts of chalcitis with
one of litharge, triturating them in vinegar, and, having put
them into a new pot, by burying them in dung for forty days.
It becomes more desiccative, more subtile, and less pungent
than chalcitis.

422 SIMPLES. [book vii.

CoMM. Commentary. Dioscorides and Pliny call it a mixture of
' * ' cadmia and chalcitis ; Galen, Aetius, and our author say of
litharge and chalcitis. Avicenna follows Dioscorides. (ii_, 2,
273.) Celsus also directs it to be made of chalcitis and cad-
mia. (vi, 6, 31.) It derives its name from its being used as
an application to parts affected with scabies (psora.) The
psoricum has been long unknown in the practice of medicine.

Qoi',
Ovum, An Egg ; the white and thin part is free from all
pungency, being moderately cooling. It is to be used for the
eyes, ulcers in the pudendum, and all ill-conditioned ulcers.
It is also mixed up with the medicines which form styptic
plasters. And the yolk of an egg being possessed of similar
powers, is mixed up with anti-inflammatory remedies. When
roasted it becomes more desiccative but less soothing. If a
whole egg be boiled ^i vinegar, and eaten, it dries up alvine
fluxes. But if, having received the addition of some sour sub-
stances, such as galls, sumach, or the flowers of the wild
pomegranate, it be fried, it becomes considerably more drastic.
A whole egg applied raw immediately reheves burns. When
taken in a supping state, it concocts and soothes aff'ections in
the chest, and proves demulcent for asperities of the trachea.
New eggs are to be preferred to old, and those of hens to the
eggs of all other animals.
CoMM. Commentary. Galen gives, in his usual copious and ele-
' • ' gant style, a somewhat lengthy dissertation on the medicinal
properties of eggs, but the narrow limits to which we are
necessarily restricted, prevent us from transferring the sub-
stance of it to our pages, although it contains much that is
highly interesting. (De Simpl. xi.) Galen recommends eggs
for various medicinal pm'poses ; and in particular he says that
wool dipped in the white of an egg proves a serviceable appli-
cation to burns. Dioscorides states their vii'tues more briefly,
and to him our author is more particularly indebted, (ii, 54, 55.)
He recommends the white of an e^^ in a tepid state for severe
pains of the bladder and ulceration of the kidneys, roughness
of the windpipe, vomiting of blood, catarrhs, and defluxions of
the chest. Pliny, Dioscorides, and Sextus Platonicus say that
eggs pounded with oil form an excellent application in cases of

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 423

erysipelas^ the leaves of beet being laid on the place. Pliny Comm.
and Dioscorides recommend them for affections of the eyes. " ' '
Avicenna recommends the white of an egg with melilot in
ulcers of the intestines. He says eggs boiled in vinegar are
useful in diarrhoea and dysentery. He recommends a supposi-
tory of the albumen of an egg in prolapsus ani, and other
affections of the fundament. Like the preceding authorities
he speaks favorably of it as an application to the eyes, (ii, 2,
520.) See also Ebn Baithar (i, 193) ; Serapion (c. 446) ;
Rhases (Ad Mansor. ; Antid. iv.)

' Qki/iov,

Ocimum, Basil, belongs to the second order of calefacieuts,
and has also some recrementitious humidity, hence it is of no
use when taken internally ; but when applied externally, it is
discutient and digestive.

Commentary. It most probably is the Ochnum Basilicum. Comm.
Dioscorides not only recommends it for many medicinal pur- '
poses externally, but also says of it that it loosens the bowels,
is carminative, diuretic, and creates milk, but is of difficult
digestion; the seed, he adds, when taken in a draught, is
beneficial in melancholy, dysuria, and flatulence, and it is also
sternutatory, (ii, 170.) Our author follows Galen very closely.
Aetius also condemns the internal administration of basil, but
praises highly a decoction of it as a fomentation to the eyes,
and particularly those of children. Oribasius as usual follows
Dioscorides, and, therefore, like him approves of the internal
use of it. It occm's in the works both of Hippocrates and
Celsus, the latter of whom says of it that it moves the bowels,
and is diuretic, (ii, 29, 31.) The Arabians treat of it still
more fully than the Greeks. Avicenna says it is a cordial
medicine, that it generally binds the bowels, but also moves
them, if there be humours in them, that it is useful in hajmo-
ptysis and in difficulty of breathing, (ii, 2, 101.) See also
Serapion (c. 107); Ebn Baithar (i, 110); Rhascs (Cont. 1. ult.
ii, 121.) The basil held a place in our English dispensatory
down to the times of Quincy and Lewis. It holds a place in
the modern Greek Pharmacopoeia, where it is stated that it
is indigenous in Persia, and only cultivated in gardens in
Greece, (p. 27.)

424 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

QKl/ilOHCig,

Ochnoides, which some call Philetserium. Its root is use-
less, but the seed is composed of subtile matter, and is desic-
cative without pungency.
CoMM. Commentary. Matthiolus held it to be a species of lychnis,
' ' but this opinion is rejected by Dodonseus. Sprengel agrees
with Lobelius and Dalecampius in referring it to the Saponaria
ocimoides. This is one of the most disputed articles of the
ancient Mat. Med. Of the conjectures which have been made
respecting it, the most probable then is that it was either a
species of Lychnis or Saponaria. See Parkinson (Theatre of
Plants, 630, 760.) We are disposed to acquiesce in opinion with
those who hold it to be the Saponaria ocimoides. Dioscorides
says of it, that its seed when drunk in wine is calculated to
benefit those who have been stung by scorpions, and is useful
for the bites of all other kinds of reptiles, and that it is given
in sciatica with myi'rh and pepper, (iv, 28.) Galen states its
character in nearly the same terms as our author. It is not
described by Aetius, by Hippocrates or Celsus, nor, as far as
we can discover, by any of the Arabians, with the exception
of Ebn Baithar, whose notice of it is entu-ely made up from
Dioscorides and Galen, (i, 93.) It has been long unknown
to om- Dispensatory, and does not occur in the Pharmacopoeia
of the modern Greeks,

APPENDIX TO THE THIRD SECTION.

On the Substances introduced into the Materia Medica by the

Arabians.

Having thus given a brief account of aU the Simple Sub-
stances described by the Greek and Roman writers on the
jNIateria Medica, we are now called upon to supply what infor-
mation we can procure regarding the additions made to their
list by the Arabians. This, we need scai'cely say, is a field of
research, which, ha\-ing been hitherto but little cultivated, is
attended with difficulties of a particularly formidable nature ;
for, although Ave have been enabled to avail ourselves of the
learned labom's of Professor Sprengel, Dr. Royle, Dr. Ainshc,

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 425

and of certain other oriental scholars who have touched cur-
sorily upon these matters^ we have been more thrown vxpon our
own resources on the present occasion than at any other stage
of our progress in executing this work. We trust, then, that
our readers will receive with peculiar indulgence our present
essay, which, however imperfect, will be found, if we mistake
not, to have opened up a mine of valuable knowledge from
which some more skilful labourer in the same line will yet draw
additional stores of information to the profession . Of course
it will be readily seen, that we do not pretend to give an ac-
count of all the articles introduced into the practice of medicine
by the Arabians ; that, even if we were possessed of the requi-
site knowledge of the oriental languages, would e^ddently be
out of the question within our narrow limits. For Ebn Baithar
alone, if his laborious work were properly explored, would furnish
a large volume of new matters added by his own individual exer-
tions to the accuraidated treasures of his predecessors ; but, of
the articles first treated of by him there are unfortunately
many which are but very doubtfully determined, and not
a few which are left Mholly undetermined by his trans-
lator Dr. Sontheimer. And here it is but right that we should
acknowledge that the translation itself would have been to us
" a sealed book" if our learned friend. Professor Blackie, of
Aberdeen, had not come to our assistance, and in so far made
up for our own very imperfect acquaintance with the German
language. But, besides the stores of Ebn Baithar, there is much
in those of Avicenna, Serapion, Rhases, and Haly Abbas, which
still remain to be unfolded by some fortunate savant who is
acquainted both with the languages of the East and the sciences
of the West.

It may be proper to mention, that the articles which are
here described are set down in the same order as the notices of
them were composed, because we could not satisfy ourselves with
regard to any methodical arrangement which would conveniently
apply to them and be in unison with the general plan of tliis
work.

Ambra grisea.

A recent writer on the Materia Medica gives the following
description of Ambergris : " The substance called Ambergris
(ambra grisea) is procured from the Cachalot or spcrmwhalc.

426 APPENDIX TO [booic vji.

In this country it is used as a perfume only ; on the continent
it is employed in medicine. It appears to be the indm'ated
faeces (perhaps somewhat altered by disease) of the animal.
Mr. Beale collected some of the semi-fluid fseces, and found
that the dried mass had all the properties of ambergris. It is
a solid^ opaque, grayish, striated substance, ha\ing a pleasant
musk-like odour, and which is derived from the squid {scepia
moschata) on which the animal feeds.^^ Pereira (Mat. Med.
1392.) No one who compares this account of ambergris with
what is said of it in the extracts we have given from Serapion
« and Avicenna under Electnim, can entertain a doubt that these
authors were well informed as to the nature of this substance.
Ebn Baithar gives a similar account of the origin of ambergris.
He says, it is furnished by sea monsters which swallow it and
vomit it up again. It swims on the surface of water, and the
blackish kind is of little value. He calls it the most excellent
of all aromatics, and praises it for strengthening the heart and
brain, and for cm'ing cramp and similar complaints. Among
other powers which it possesses, it is said to be intoxicating,
(i, 210, 405.) See also Haly Abbas (Theor. v, 33.) The
Greeks and Bomans would appear to have been unacquainted
with this species of Amber until after the Arabian period. It
is accm"ately described by Symeon Seth, as we have already
stated above in the commentary on Eledrum. He holds it to
be a good cordial and stomachic medicine.

Bezoar.

As this article is now but little known in this country, it
may be proper to prefix some account of it from recent autho-
rities. Lewis writes of it thus : " Lapis Bezoar orientalis,
oriental Bezoar stone, supposed to be produced in the pylorus
or in a cavity at the bottom of the fourth stomach of an animal
of the goat kind, which inhabits the mountains in different
parts of Persia.'' (INIat. Med. 217.) But Bontius is, perhaps
we may say, the most accurate of the modern authorities who
have described the oriental bezoars. He describes them as being
ahane concretions which form in goats or gazelles, and have
generally a little piece of chaff as a nucleus. He had also
seen them taken from the bodies of monkeys. (Med. Ind. c.
45.) See fm-ther Gray (Suppl. to Pharraacop. 179, 136.) Now,

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 427

it is certain tliat tliese Bezoars were mucli used in medicine by
the Arabians as they are in the East at the present day ; and
yet, as far as we have been able to discover, they are not de-
scribed in any of the Arabian works on the Mat. Med., with
the exception of Ebn Baithar, and his account of them is very
indistinct and unsatisfactory. We may gather from his de-
scription, however, that the term was appHed to more substances
than these alvine concretions. One of his authorities speaks of
the best kind beiug found in the heart of the stag. Like all
his countrymen, he recommends the bezoar as an amulet and
an antidote to poisons. (119.) Indeed the term Bezoar would
appear to have been used as signifying alexipharmical. See
Avicenna (ii, 2), and Serapion (c. 441.) Frequent mention of
it occurs in the works of the Arabians. See Haly Abbas
(pluries) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult., and xxxv, 6, 8, 1) ; Avicenna
(iv, 6, 1, 4.)

Camphora.

This article is so important, that we shall be excused if we
dwell upon it at some length. It is well known to be a secre-
tion procured from several trees of the genus Laurus in the
East j but more particularly from the tree which has been
named Camjjhora officinarum. Serapion is the ancient autho-
rity who gives the fullest account of Camphor. In the first
place, owing no doubt to his using some interpolated transla-
tion of Dioscorides into Syriac, he quotes him as stating that it
is procured from India and China and is produced in most
abundance during seasons when there is much thunder. One
of his Arabian authorities, Isaac Ebn Amram, gives a dis-
tinct account of the origin of camphor and a description of the
qualities of the different kinds of it, Avith a brief notice of the
mode of clarifying it by sublimation, which is the process by
which it is still produced. As to its medicinal m'tues, he holds
it to be cold and dry in the second degree, and says it is appli-
cable in cases of inflammations, vertigo, and cholera ; in fumi-
gations with myrrh, rose-oil, and sandal-wood ; that it is
anaphrodisiac, induces premature hoariness of the hair; that
in a masticatory with lettuce, it cures the hot intcmperamcnt
of the brain and induces sleep ; removes vertigo ; stops hemor-
rhages from the nose and all fluxes in general ; and, in short.

428 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

that it is a common ingredient in all fumigations and ointments.
Rhases^ as quoted by liim^ pronounces camphor to be cold and
attenuate (volatile ?) ; says it is calculated to remove hot intem-
peraraents in the head and the whole body; when too much
used that it induces insomnolency ; that it brings on coldness of
the kidneys and bladder ; coagulates the semen^ and engenders
coldness^ and principally in the colder members of the body.
Another Arabian authority, Meseab, calls it cold and dry in
the third degree, and recommends it in epistaxis as a masticatory
with raisins. Mesarugie, another authority, says, in large doses
it induces indigestion and stops the formation of semen.
Another of his Arabian authorities, Aben Mesuai (Mesue the
elder ?) says, it is astringent of the bowels, induces prema-
tru'e hoariness of the hair, and is useful in hot apostemes.
Aben Amram, as quoted by him, says. Camphor is cold in the
third degree, and is useful when applied to inflamed parts with
rose-water, and comforts the members of the body and the
senses ; and is useful in cholera along with other astringents.
He gives a quotation from the ' Medicina Antiqua^ to this
eflTect, that camphor is an astringent of the bowels, and that
its use induces hoariness of the hairs. (De Simplicibus, 344.)
Avicenna's account of it is much more succinct ; he describes
several species of it ; says it is procured from a very large tree
capable of giving shelter to a multitude of animals ; that he had
often seen the wood of it, and that it was white, brittle, light,
and contained in its pores some vestiges of camphor. He
holds that its nature is cold and dry in the second degree.
He recommends it in exactly the same cases as Serapion does,
namely, in inflammatory complaints, epistaxis, hot vertigo, and
acute ophthalmy. He also, like Serapion's authorities, holds
that it is anaphrodisiac and represses fluxes, (ii, 2, 130.)
Rhases gives a brief account of camphor upon the authority of
Misib, Mesarguil, and Bimasui; the first of whom merely re-
commends it in fluxes; the next relates of it that an acquain-
tance of his took six drachms of camphor at one dose, which
impaired his digestion and brought on impotence without in-
ducing any other complaint ; the third, like some of Serapiou^s
authorities, represents it to be cold and dry in the third degree,
and recommends it for fluxes, and further savs that it induces
premature hoariness of the hair. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 147.) In

SECT. Til.] SIMPLEvS. 429

another work he calls it cold, humid, and subtile (volatile ?),
and gives it the same characters as the other authorities.
(Ad Marisor. iii, 22.) Mesne gives a formula for troches of
camphor, which he recommends in ardent fevers, heat of the
bile and of the blood, hot intemperaments of the stomach and
of the liver, for intense thirst, jaundice, phthisis, and hectic.
(De Trochiscis. i.) Haly Abbas frequently recommends cam-
phor in the course of his works, but we have not been able
to discover any distinct account of it in the very barbarous
translation of his Materia Medica. Ebn Baithar gives a very
circumstantial account of the formation of camphor on the tree
which produces it, and describes its characters very accurately.
He says it is cold and dry in the second degree, and is useful
in hot intemperaments and bilious headaches. Like some of
the others quoted above, he says it is produced most abun-
dantly in times of thunder. In an over-dose, he says, it is an-
aphrodisiac, and induces sleeplessness, and relates a case in
which it destroyed the tone of the stomach, and occasioned
impotence. He says it is used in collyria, and as a sternu-
tatory, and to stop the hole in a carious tooth. Symeon Seth
is the only one of the Greek authorities that treats fully of
camphor, [caphura.) He says it is cold and dry in the third
degree ; that it is the gum or tear of a tree groAving in India ;
that the tree which produces it is said to be very large, so that
a hundred men could be sheltered by its shade ; that it is pro-
duced on the mountains near the sea ; and that the wood of
the tree is hght and fistulous. He recommends camphor as
being most useful in acute diseases, in headaches from heat,
and in inflammations, especially those of the liver ; says that it
induces coldness of the kidneys and spermatic vessels, and
coagulates the blood. He mentions a test of its purity. (De
Alimentis.) Myrepsus in one place mentions the herb cam-
phor, but it is doubtful whether he means the substance we
arc treating of; — most probably not. (De Unguent, iii, 46.)

Cassia Fistula.

Serapion, in the first place, gives a pretty accurate descrip-
tion of it, and states the localities from which it is procured,
namely, India, Babylonia, and Arabia. Upon the authority
of Aben Mesuai he states it to be of a sweet taste, and laxative

430 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

of tlie bowelsj and says it has virtues to extinguish the sharp-
ness of the blood, that it relieves apostemes and boils in the
mouth, and is useful in jaundice and pains of the liver. In a
dose of three to ten drachms he says it is cholagogue and lax-
ative. Abengnefit, as quoted by him, says it purifies the
nerves. Rhases, as quoted by him, says it is laxative and
efficacious in apostemes, especially those of the throat. (De
Sirapl. xii.) Avicenna's account of it is but little different
from that of Serapion. Having described it, he says it is of
an equal temperament as to heat and cold, but is of a mois-
tening nature, and that in action it is resolvent and laxative.
It is useful, he says, in hot apostemes of tlie bowels, and
especially of the throat when a gargle of it is prepared with a
decoction of nightshade. He praises it in a liniment for gout
and arthritic pains. He speaks well of it in dyspnoea. He
says it cleanses the liver, and is of use in jaundice and pain of
the liver. He says it is a gentle laxative, bringing away heated
bile and phlegm, and opens the bowels safely without griping,
(ii, 2, 192.) Badagorius, as quoted by Rhases, says of cassia
fistula, that it is alterative, an evacuant of bile, and a cleanser
of the blood. The son of Mesne, as quoted by the same, re-
commends it, like Serapion, in jaundice, pain of the liver, of
the throat, &c. Priscianus, as quoted by Rhases, says it is
a safe purgative to pregnant women, brings away bile, clears
away jaundice, and is efficacious in pain of the liver and throat.
Marsenuce (?) recommends it in the same aff'ections of the
throat as the others. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 187.) Of all the
ancient authorities. Mesne the younger gives the fullest account
of it, but it is in nearly the same terms as Serapion's. His
description of it is full and accurate. Any injurious action
which it has, he says, may be removed by the mixture of
myrobalans, rhubarb, the water of mastich, and spikenard;
and in dryness of the bowels by mixing almond oil with it.
Diuretics also are said to determine it to the urinary passages.
He says it is useful to add some laxative to it. As to its
virtues, he says it cleanses the blood, allays all sharpness in it,
assuages thirst, with the juice of endive, &c., clears the
stomach, brings away yellow bile and phlegm, and that safely,
also purges the breast and throat, and is useful in heat of the
kidneys, when taken with diuretics and the infusion of liquorice,

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 431

that it prevents the formation of stones, and is useful in ardent
fevers. (De Simpl. vi.) Ebn Baithar also gives a very elaborate
and correct account of this article, but as it is nearly the same
as that of Mesue, we need not say much about it. He calls
it a well-known tree growing in Egypt ; says in moderate doses
it is a safe purgative, even to pregnant women, but in large
doses occasions hypercatharsis. If the root is not sound, it is
apt to produce disturbance of the bowels. He says it purges
hot bile, softens the breast, and cleanses the nerves, &c.
(i, 401.) Actuarius describes it by the name of the Black
Cassia, and recommends it as a gentle purgative both alone
and with other medicines. (Meth. Med. v, 2.) It occurs
among the ingredients in the antidotes of Myrepsus. See
Antidot. (i, xi.) Of course the article we have been treating
of will be recognised as being the Cassia fistula L., the pvidding-
pipe tree, or purging cassia. The pulp of the pods is still
sometimes used in medicine as a gentle purgative. See Paris
(Pharmacol, i, 271) ; Pereira (M. M. 1172) ; Gray (Suppl. to
Phannacop. 150) ; Boyle (M. M. 355.)

Senna.

If the work of Serapion (De Simplicibus) which we possess,
be the production of the elder Serapion (and after being long
famiharly acquainted with it we are inclined to think so), he
is undoubtedly the first author who has described senna as an
article of the Materia Medica. First on his own authority he
describes very accurately the pods, stalks, and seeds of the
plant. On the authority of Isaac Ebn Amram he recommends
it for removing the inquietude accompanying melancholy, for
aches and disturbances of the nerves, for alopecia, phthiriasis,
chronic headache, scabies, pustuloe parvce, pruritus, and epilepsy.
Abix, another authority, declares it to have great power of
purging black and yellow bile, and of acting as a cordial Avhen
mixed with suitable medicines such as violets. His last autho-
rity under this head is Rhases, who says that senna and
fumitory purge adust humours, and prove useful in scabies
and pruritus. (De Simpl. 58.) Under the head of sahane
Avicenna briefly notices an article which he recommends as
being abstergent and desiccant in pruritus and scabies, in pain
of the neck, fetid breath, and watery stomach (watcrbrash ?) .

432 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

This account we are inclined to think must refer to senna,
(ii, 2, 651.) Rhases gives almost exactly the same description
of the sahane. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 596.) In his work ' Ad
Mansor.^ (viii, 54), he gives the account of Sene quoted above
from Serapion, and again at 'Divis.' (i, 144.) Haly Abbas
describes it accurately in his chapter on Purgatives. (Pract.
ii, 54.) He recommends it as a medicine which pui'ges both
yellow and black bile, and is useful in gout and rheumatism,
and in colics when mixed with raisins, oil of almonds, &c.
Mesne describes senna as the folliculus of a plant resembling
the tare. The best part of the plant, he says, is the folliculus
(legume ?), and next the leaves ; and both these parts are said
to be best when of a green colour. As senna has a tendency
to weaken the stomach by its operation, he recommends it to
be mixed with ginger, sal gem, Indian salt (sugar?), and cordials.
He quotes Galen (through some mistake, as is generally sup-
posed) as recommending it boiled in the soup of fowls. He
also speaks of giving it in whey, or in milk, or in must, that
is to say, the fresh juice of the grape. The last of these pre-
parations he praises as cleansing the brain and senses, and
creating joy. He also speaks favorably of a decoction of it
with prunes and spikenard. As to its virtues, he says it readily
purges black and adust bile, cleanses the brain, heart, hver,
spleen, the senses, and lungs, proves deobstruent and dispels
sorrow. He also speaks favorably of the leaves when applied
to the head in the bath as improving the senses of sight and
hearing, and as proving a remedy to fevers arising from black
bile, and to chronic fevers. (De Simpl. xv.) Ebn Baithar
gives an interesting description of it. He says in Arabia it is
used as a dye, and that its leaves are mixed with those of the
plant now called Laivsonia inermis. He calls it cholagogue
and melanogogue, says it penetrates the inferior extremities,
and purges them in cases of gout. He also praises it in scabies,
epilepsy, and a great many other diseases. By some mistake
he quotes Paulus. He says it is better in decoction than in
powder. The dose of the latter is from two to three drachms,
of the former from four to seven drachms, (i, 57.) Actuarius
says of sene, that it purges moderately in doses of one drachm,
(^leth. Med. v, 8.) Sene occurs as an ingredient in several
of the antidotes of Myrepsus, as c. 112, 465, 472. Under

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 433

this bead we would beg, before concluding, to refer tlie reader
to Ainslie's Mat. Ind. (i, 205). It will be there seen that in
^Ethiopia senna is still used as a dye.

Berberis.

Rhases gives extracts from Badigorius, Oribasius, Mesne,
and others on the A-irtues of this substance, which he represents
as being lithontriptic, styptic, and alexipharmic. He says it
is called calmuris in Greek. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 121.) Serapion
gives extracts from Pioscorides and Galen under this head, but
there seems no reason to suppose that they were at all ac-
quainted with this article. He recommends it as being
cooling and incisive, and a strengthener of the stomach and
liver. He also praises it in all fluxes. (De Simpl. 229.) Ebn
Baithar calls it astringent, stomachic, and hepatic,, and says it
binds the bowels and quenches thirst. He recommends it in
diarrhoea connected with weakness of the liver, and in diseases
of the stomach and uterus. See also Aviceuua {\\, 9.) The
berberiy {Berberis vulgaris) is recommended by Gerard, Par-
kinson, and all our old herbalists as an astringent medicine
in diseases of the stomach and liver. Even at the present
day it is admitted to possess these virtues. See Gray (Suppl.
to"^Pharmacop. 102) and Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 438.) The
former of these seems to acknowledge it as the Oxyacantha of
the Greeks, but we think incorrectly. Dr. Eoyle supposes the
Lycium IncUcum of Dioscorides to be the berberry. It seems to
us more probable, however, that the berberry was but the
succedaneum of the lycium. See Schroder (Chemical Dis-
pensatory, 475.)

Galanga.

Rhases calls it stomachic. (Antid. iii.) Serapion hanng
described it, upon the avithority of Isaac ebn Amram says
of it, that it is hot and diy in the third degree, is useful
to phlegmatic persons, and in humidity of the stomach (water-
brash ?) ; promotes digestion by its heat and the solution which
it occasions in the stomach, and thus relieves colic, gives
fragrance to the breath, and warms the kidnevs : it sets the
semen in commotion, and when a piece of it is held in the mouth,
it occasions erections of the membrum virile. The same virtues
in the same cases are assigned to it by Aben Mesuai, and also

HI. * 28

A

434 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

Aben Mesabah, wlio recommends it in flatulent colic and eruc-
tations. (De Simpl. 332.) A^'icennaJ having described it, de-
livers the same account of its medicinal powers as Serapion,
that is to say, he holds it to be hot and dry in the second de-
gree, of subtile parts and carminative, saj^s that it renders the
breath fragrant, is good for the stomach, promotes digestion,
is useful in colic and pains of the kidneys, and is aphrodisiacal.
(ii, 2, 314 ; v, 2, 6.) The same account of it is given by " the
Son of Mesne," in the ' Continens ' of Rliases (1. ult. i, 323.)
In the pharmaceutical work of Myrepsus there is an " antidotus
a Galanga," which is said to be beneficial in affections of the
stomach and spleen, and in indigestion ; also for singultus,
acidity of the food in the stomach, cachexia, dropsy, and cold-
ness of the whole body : it contains cloves, ginger, cinnamon,
galangal, &c. (i, 63 ; also, 222.) Ebn Baithar ascribes the
same virtues to it as Serapion ; thus he says it is a wonderful
aphrodisiac, promotes digestion, cures colic, is carminative, and
so forth. Although now little used, galangal root is not yet
wholly unknown to the writers on the Materia Medica. Dr.
Pereira says of " radix galangce officinalis ; its odour is agree-
ably aromatic, its taste peppery and aromatic. It is the
rhizome of the Aljnnia Galanga Roxb." (Mat. Med. 698.) See
also Lewis (Mat. Med. 452) ; Hill (Mat. Med. i, 447) ; Quincy
(72) ; Gray (Suppl. to the Pharmacop. 26) ; Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 166.) There are two species of galangal, which
Dr. Lindley refers to the alpinia racemosa and galanga.
He says of them, '^ the warm and pungent roots of the greater
and lesser galangals are not only used by the Indian doctors,
but are considered useful in coughs, given in infusion." (Ibid.)
On the Galangal see further Ainslie (jSIat. Ind., i, 140.)

Zeduaria and Zerumbeth.

In order to understand this subject it will be necessary
in the first place to see the descriptions of these sub-
stances given by modern authorities. Dr. Pereira says of
the former of these : " The Zeduary root {Radix Zeduaria
officinalis) of English druggists appears to me to agree
with Professor Guibourt's description of round Zeduary
(Zeduaria rotunda). It is the sliced tuber of Curcuma
Zeduaria Rox. It has a Avarra, aromatic, bitter taste, and an

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 435

aromatic odour.'' (Mat. Med. 698.) And of the Zerumbct tlie
same author says : " Cassamunar root is considered by English
druggests to he identical with Zerumbet root. (Private infor-
mation ; also. Gray, Pharmacop.) It appears to me to be
the Turmeric-coloured Zeduary of Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 490.) Is
it the product of Zinziber Cassamuniar Roxb.? The Zerum-
bet root which I received from my friend Dr. Royle is very
similar in shape to a curved and arched piece of long turmeric."
(Mat. Med. 698.) Dr. Ainslie gives an interesting disquisition
on the Zeduary of which he describes three species : 1. Zed-
uary Ksempferian [Kcempferia rotunda.) 2. Zeduary Zerumbet
{Curcuma Zerumbet.) 3. Zeduary turmeric-coloured [Curcuma
and Amomum Zeduaria.) We shall now be better able to
ascertain the meaning of the ancient descriptions of these sub-
stances. Serapion describes separately the Zerumbet Zeduaria
and Ze7'umbet, but in such terms that one is at a loss to see
any real distinction between them. (De Simpl. 172, 271.) He
calls Zeduary an odoriferous tree for which cinnamon is often
substituted. He refers to Galen and Paulus, but what pas-
sages in their works he alludes to it is not easy to discover.
He describes it as being a great tree which grows on Mount
Lebanon, and produces no fruit, but has the odour of citron,
and is hot and dry in its nature, and is astringent so as both to
open and astringe the bowels. Mesarugie, one of his authorities,
compares its virtues to those of nutmeg ; praises it as being
sternutatory, and also stomachic and hepatic. This, without
doubt, is the Zeduary, and the Zarnabum of Avicenna, who
describes it separately from the Zerumbet, but mentions that
the latter is much the same as the Zeduary. (ii, 2, 736, 738.)
llhases, in like manner, compares the Zerumbet to the Zed-
uary as being possessed of similar powers. He treats most
fully of the former, recommending it as being alexipharmic,
a good application to apostemes, &c. (Contin. 1. ult. ii, 765.)
Ebn Baithar treats fully of the Zerumbeth, which he describes
minutely, and compares it to the great Cyperus. He says it
is called camphor-root in the West. He calls it alexipharmical,
cordial, intoxicating ; an excellent medicine in inflation of the
uterus, and possessed of emmcnagoguc and diuretic powers.
He says it is good in afiections of the liver and surrounding
parts. It is said to determine downwards when applied to the

436 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

soles of the feet in complaints of the head, to prove useful in
leprosy when rubbed into the part affected, and to remove im-
potence. He also treats separately, and at considerable length,
of the Zeduaria nigra, (ii, 95.) From the above account it
will be seen that these two substances were nearly allied to one
another, and in fact there is no doubt that the one was often
taken for the other. See further INIoses Charras (Royal Phar-
macop. 68) ; Gray (Pharmacop. 26.) The Zeduary was often
used as a succedaneimi for the costus (Pemberton, Dispensatory,
310) in the composition of the Mithridate, and hence these
two substances have been sometimes erroneously taken for the
same. See also Manardus ad Mesne (De Trochiscis, 154) ; and
Quincy (English Dispensatory, 483.)

Amomum Grana Paradisi.

There seems to be no doubt that this is the article which
Ebn Baithar means to describe (i, 272). He calls it a spicy
plant which comes out of Yemen and India. He describes
two kinds, and says of them that they arc hot, fragrant, and
astringent, and hence prove stomachic and promote digestion.
He saj'S they are useful in epilepsy and faintings, and cure
headaches in a sternutatory. He describes the smaller kind
as being weaker but more attenuant than the larger. We are
not aware of the grains of paradise, or Guinea grains, as they
are sometimes called, being described by any other of the
ancient authorities. We need scarcely remark that they are
now well known, and occasionally used in the practice of medi-
cine. See Gray (Suppl. to Pharm. 27) ; Pereira (Mat. Med.
697) ; Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 167.)

Macis and Nux moschata.

We have shown in the proper place that the Macer of the
Greeks and Romans was not mace. The Arabian authorities,
it is true, in describing Mace quote what the Greeks had
written on Macer, but this does not prove their identity, for
many such instances of confused reference occur in their works.
Avicenna says, upon the authority of Mesne, that mace is the
cortex (meaning, of course, the involucre) of nux moschata.
He recommends it as a good stomachic, hepatic, and uterine
medicine, and says it proves an astringent in fluxes of the

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 437

bowels and in dysentery (ii, 2, 448.) The nutmeg, or nucleus
of the myristica officinalis, he says, is of the size of a gall, brittle,
having a fine rind (involucre) , and a sharp smell. He recom-
mends it as a styptic in complaints of the liver, spleen, and
stomach, and in difficulty of urine. In oils he says it is a
sedative of pain, and also in pessaries, and it stops vomiting,
(ii, 2, 495.) He quotes no Greek authorities under this head.
Rhases, in his 'Continens,' says briefly of the nux moschata, that
it resembles cloves, and is good for the stomach and liver.
(1. ult. 507.) In his other work (Ad Mansor. iii, 30,)
he calls it hot and dry, and recommends it as an astringent in
coldness of the stomach and liver. INIesue, in his electuary of
lignum aloes, which he recommends for affections of the heart,
stomach, and coldness of the liver, mentions nutmeg and mace
as two of its ingredients. (De Electariis, i.) The ancient writer,
however, who gives the fullest account of these articles is Sera-
pion, who under this head quotes only from Arabian authorities,
namely, Aaron, Isaac ebn Amram, Aben Mesuai, Miseaben,
Albasari, aud Rhases. They all agree in representing them to
be aromatic aud astringent, useful in flatulence and other com-
plaints of the stomach, in fetid breath, indigestion, and en-
largements of the spleen and liver. (De Simpl. 161.) Ebn
Baithar's extracts under this head are principally from Rhases
and Avicenna. He evidently disapproves of the opinion of those
that held Macer and Mace to be identical. On the nutmeg and
mace we would beg to refer to Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 202, 249.)
It will be there seen that the Hindoos still use these articles
as cardiac, hepatic, and stomachic medicines. It appears
doubtful to us whether the Greeks aud Romans were at aU
acquainted with the nutmeg. For we have always suspected
the genuineness of the last chapter but one of Aetius, which
contains a number of Indian aromatics not to be found else-
where in the works of the Greek authorities. Our suspicions,
which are of old date, have been much strengthened by the
discovery that many of the formulae contained in that chapter
as given in the Latin translation are wanting in the two MSS.
of Aetius in the Bodleian Library at Oxford. This we have
positively ascertained through the kindness of Dr. Greenhill,
who examined this part of these MSS. at our request to ascer-
tain the fact. It may be well to take this opportunity of

438 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

stating tliat with tlie original of tlie last eight books of Aetius
we have no personal acquaintance further than from a cursory
examination of these MSS. during a very brief visit to Oxford
in 1845. In the MS. named ' Canon. Gr.' (109), the nuces
Indicse are called Kapva Iv^iko.. From what we have stated
above, it must now be obvious that we have arrived at the po-
sitive conclusion that the vaGKa<pQov of the Greek Mat. Med.
was not mace. (See the Commentary on this article.)

Nux Indica.

According to Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 268) the first mention
of the Cocos niicifera, or cocoa-nut, occurs in the Itinerary of
Abuzeid and Wahab. No mention of it is made in the works
of the Greek writers on medicine. The Arabians describe it
minutely as an article of food, so that it ought to have been
noticed by us in our Commentary on the 81st sect, of Book I.
Rhases treats of it very fully as a dietetical article, and also as a
medicine, saying of it that it purges away the tapeworm, that
the oil of it is useful both internally and externally in pains
and flatulence of the back, loins, knees, and in hemorrhoids ;
and he further quotes Bemasuy in confirmation of this character
of it. All his authorities held it to be a hot and dry medicine.
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 506.) Avicenna gives, almost word for word, the
same account of it. The flesh of the cocoa-nut, he says, is in-
tensely white, and its juice sweet ; and when there is not much
juice in it, we are to understand that it is old. The inner
bark, he says, is to be taken off", as being wholly indigestible.
He recommends it in exactly the same complaints as Rhases
does, only as a vermifuge he does not say that its oil brings
away the tapeworm, but ascarides and lumbrici. (ii, 2, 498.)
Serapion gives a somewhat fuller description of the cocoa-nut,
which he knew to be the fruit of a palm-tree, but otherwise
his account of it is the same as that of the two authorities
akeady quoted. Of his Arabian authorities, one says that it
is laxative, and another that it is astringent. (De Simpl. 228.)
Haly Abbas recommends the Nux Indica as a comforter of the
nerves in hemicrania, paralysis, and epilepsy. (Pract. ii,38,248.)
Mesne notices the " oleum ex nuce Indica,^^ which, he says, is
useful in nervous pains, purges the lungs and chest, clears the
voice, fattens, and engenders semen. (De Oleis, i.) Ebn Baithar

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 439

gives an interesting account of tlie cocoa-palm both as a medi-
cine and an article of food. He says its milk is at times in-
toxicating and aphrodisiaCj and that it is useful in certain com-
plaints of the urine, in taenia and other intestinal worms. The
reader Avill find it interesting to compare the above account of
the cocoa from the ancient authorities with what Ainslie says
of it in his work, ' Materia Indica/ i, 451 ; and Dr. Lindley
in his late admirable publication on the ' Vegetable Kingdom/
(136.)

Bdellium.
It has been supposed that under this head Avicenna (ii, 2,
113), and other oriental writers, have included either that
species of Palm called Borassus flubelliformis ; or another con-
gener, Hijphcene Thebaica. See Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 272) ;
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 452) ; Royle (Antiq. of Hindoo Med. 90) ;
Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 13G.) The term, however, was applied
to other substances, as we have stated under the proper head.

Tamarindi.

There is no doubt that we are indebted to the Arabians
for our first knowledge of this important medicine. Serapion,
in describing this article, quotes only from Arabian authorities,
which implies that he held the Greeks to have been unac-
quainted with it. Its leaves are said to resemble those of the
willow. His first authority, Abohanifa, says it grows in
Csesaria ; and his next, Aben Mesuai, says its fruit, which is of
a ruddy colour, and has much pulp, is brought from India. In
temperament it is said to be cold in the third degree, and has
the power of purging yellow bile gently, and of repressing its
pungency ; of stopping vomiting, and removing pruritus. His
other authorities, Abugerig, Mesebab, and Mesarugie, give a
similar account of it. (De Simpl. 348.) Rhases writes of it in
nearly the same terms : thus, he says, it extinguishes yellow
bile, opens the bowels, removes thirst and vomiting, and
strengthens the stomach. Its action is said to be similar to
that of prunes. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 699.) On his own authority
llhases says of Tamarinds in another place, that they are of a
cold nature, loosen the bowels, repress intense bile and blood.
(Ad Mausor. iii, 49.) Avicenna calls Tamarinds cold and dry
in the second degree, says they arc laxative, and more attenuant

440 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

than prunes^ and contain less juice : tliat they stop excessive
vomiting, and thirst in fevers, and brace the stomach when it
is relaxed. They are beneficial, he adds, in syncoptic fevers,
and other disorders in which it is necessary to open the bowels
gently, (ii, 2, 691.) Mesne describes Tamarinds as being
acidulous dates, or the fruit of wild palms growing in India.
He gives a very minute description of them, which we need not
copy. As to temperament he says, they are cold and dry in
the second degree ; and in order to correct their bad effects in
cold affections of the stomach, he directs them to be mixed with
mace, spikenard, mastich, fennel, parsley, endive, &c. He
further directs their action to be increased by giving them in the
whey of goats, the infusion of fumitory or of hops. He gives
very minute directions for preparing Tamarind whey, both
simple and compound. As to its vii'tues, he says, it brings away
bile, represses the ebullition of it, and the heat of the blood, is
beneficial in inflammation of the liver and stomach, quenches
thirst, removes all heat connected with it, is useful in jaundice,
stops vomiting, and is a good medicine in acute fevers which
require to be repressed. Being of a weak nature. Tamarinds,
he says, require to be given to the amount of fi'om two to five
ounces. (De Simpl.) Ebn Baithar's description of Tamarinds
is full and accurate, but does not contain anything of importance
in addition to the information which we have extracted from the
other authorities who preceded him. (See Vol. I, 212.)

Myrobalani.

We have stated under the head of Balanus, that the Greek
authorities before the Arabian period were entirely unacquainted
with the stone fruits which now bear the name of Myrobalans.
As these substances are now scarcely known in this countrv, we
shall find it convenient again, in the present instance, to give,
in the first place, a brief account of them from modern authori-
ties. They are well described by Geoffroy, Alston, tlie Com-
mentators on Mesne, and many other writers on the ]\Iat. Med.
They held a place in the British Dispensatory as late as the
time of Quincy, and are described by Boerhaave in his Mat.
Med. They have not lately been used in the practice of medi-
cine either in Europe, or by our English physicians in the East
Indies, as far as we have been able to learn. Five species are

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 441

described by all writers on tbem, both ancient and modern,
namelv, the Citrine, Belleric, Chebulic, Emblic, and Indian.
For a particular description of them see Sprengel (R. H. 11.
i, 262) ; Ainshe (]SIat. Ind. i, 236), and Eoyle Antiq. of
Hindoo Med.) According to the last of these authors, the
Black or Indian, the Yellow or Citrine, and the Chebulic, are
the product of the Tei'ininalia Chebula ; the fourth or Beleric, of
the T. Belerica, all belonging to the natural tribe of medicines
now called Combretacese ; while the fifth or Emblic is the fruit
of the Phyllanthus Emblica, now called Emblica officinalis. See
Lindley (Yeg. Kingd. 280.) We shall now be able to appre-
hend the descriptions of the ancient authors.

Rhases quotes seAcral Arabian and Indian authorities on
Myrobalans. The Citrine or Yellow, according to Badigorias
(Pythagoras?), is cholagogue, and the Black stomachic. The
other authorities quoted by him agree in generally holding that
myrobalans are cholagogue and stomachic, and that they are
useful in hemorrhoids and palpitation of the heart. Sarac, the
Indian, recommends them as purgative and stomachic medicines
in mental diseases, hemorrhoids, headache, dropsy, and diseases
of the spleen. They all seem to be agreed in holding that
myrobalans are possessed of a purgative power compounded
with astringency. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 473.) In his other works
he recommends myrobalans for purging yellow bile, and melan-
choly or black bile, and also as astringents. (Divis. i, 144, and
Ad Mansor. viii, 54.) In the latter work he says, that in order
to pui'ge, the proper dose of citrine myrobalans is from ten to
twenty drachms. Avicenna describes four species of myro-
balans, namely, the Citrine, nnripe, the black Indian, the
Kebulic, and the Chinese, meaning by the last, we suppose, the
Emblic, or fruit of the Emblica officinalis. He describes
minutely their specific differences, and states of their general
virtues as medicines, that they are cold in the first degree and
dry in the second ; that they all extinguish yellow bile, and are
useful in bilious complaints ; that the black brightens the
colour, and all kinds are useful in leprosy. He recommends
them in diseases of the eves, and in those of the chest accom-
panied with jtalpitation and sorrow. He also states several
minute distinctions among them as to medicinal powers, which
we do not think it necessary to enter upon, (ii, 2, 449.)

442 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

Serapion writes very elaborately on myrobalanSj of wliicli he
describes four species, tlie Citrine, tbe Black or Indian, the
Kebulic, and tbe Chinese citrine (Emblic?). The authorities
quoted by him are generally agi'eed, that myrobalans possess
astringency with bitterness, purge bile and whet the stomach;
are cordial, and prove useful in melancholy, &c. Sarac, the
Indian, as quoted by him, maintains of myrobalans, that they are
hot and astringent, and at the same time eccoprotic, that they
strengthen the senses and the nerves, are useful in leprosy,
colic, old hemorrhoids, vertigo, and dropsy, and that they induce
nausea and vomiting. Honaiu gives minute directions for the
preparation of them, but these we shall not enter upon. Some
apothecaries, he says, fall into the mistake of selling Kebulic
myrobalans of a black colour for the true black kind. For the
true black myrobalans, he says, are brought from India, whereas
of the Kebulic, some are yellow and others black according to
the time of their growth at which they are gathered from the
trees. He gives very minute directions for administering them
with other substances, such as prunes, Sebesteu plums, jujubes,
and the like ; but as most of these substances are not now much
known, it would not be interesting to most readers to learn his
remarks on this subject. (De Simpl. 107.) INIesue also gives a
very elaborate and cii'cumstantial account of mja'obalans, which
our necessary limits prevent us from giving at full length. He
ranks them with the Blessed INIedicines {medicinis benedictis) ;
for, he adds, in loosening the bowels, they do not weaken but
strengthen the stomach, heart, liver, and the whole body. The
only bad effect, he says, which they ever produce, is obstruction.
Their operation, he adds, is wonderfully increased by combining
them with scammony. He says, of all the kinds, that they are
cold in the first degree and dry in the second. His directions
for correcting any bad eflFects from the use of them, and for
increasing their operation, are most circumstantial, and bespeak
an intimate acquaintance with the subject. He eulogises them
in the strongest terms, declaring that they restore youth, im-
prove the complexion, the breath, and the perspiration, impart
joy and hilarity, strengthen the stomach, heart, and liver,
are useful in palpitations, cleanse the stomach, are useful
in hemorrhoids, extinguish heat in cholera, and this more
especially the citrine. He also speaks favorably of them in a

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 443

prescribed preparation for complaints of tlie eyes, and for tertian
and bilious fevers. The Kebulic, lie says, are plilegmagogue, and
especially the prepared kinds ; they improve the sight, cleanse
and comfort the stomach, and are useful in dropsy and chronic
fevers. The Black bring away black and adust bile, are useful
in melancholy and palpitations, clear the colour, cure leprosy,
remove sadness, and are beneficial in quartans. The dose from
two to five drachms. (De Simpl. ii.) He treats separately of
the Emblic and Belleric, but we need not enter upon his account
of them. And here we would refer our readers to Costa^s
commentary on this part of Mesne, as containing all the inter-
esting information which can be gleaned from ancient authors
on the subject of mjTobalans. For the other Arabians, see Haly
Abbas (Pract. ii, 54) ; Averrhoes (Collig. v, 42) ; Ebn Baithar
(pluries) ; and Avenzoar (Antidot.) None of these supply much
that is important after what w^e have given from the other
authorities. Of the Greek writers on medicine, Actuarius is
the only one that gives any distinct account of myrobalans, and
he professes to derive his information from " the Avise barbarian
doctors,^' meaning the Arabians. He first describes the Citrine,
the Kebulic, and the Black or Indian, and represents them as
possessing purgative powers, combined with some astringency
and tonicity. Besides these three kinds he mentions, as pos-
sessing purgative powers of a like natiu'e, two medicines, which he
calls empelilez and empletze, by which he no doubt meant
Emblic and Belleric. (Meth. Med. v, 8.) The five kinds of
myrobalans, namely, the Citrine, the Kebulic, the Indian, the
Belleric, and the Emblic, occur in one of the antidotes of
Nicolas jVIyrepsus, who recommends them in various remittent
and intermittent fevers, (i, 24-.) JNIyrobalans have always been
much esteemed by the Hindoo phj'sicians. See the Susruta, and
Wise's Book on Hindoo Medicine (pluries.)

Ma?itia.
Though the Arabians would certainly appear to have been the
first to introduce the substance now used medicinally under this
name, it is impossible to believe that the Greeks and Romans
can have been wholly unacquainted with it. It, we need
scarcely inform our professional readers, is procured principally
from the Ornus Europaa or flowering ash, either by incision,

444 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

or the puncture of au insect. The ancients, however, applied
this term to a A'ariety of the thus, as we have stated in the
preceding commentary on this section, and also to the lioney-
deiv described in Vol. I, pp. 178, 179 of this work. We have
further mentioned under the head oi El/Bomeli, that it probably
was some species of manna. Altogether then the term we are
now considering is often a puzzle in reading the works of the
ancient authorities. See further Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 209) ;
Sprengel (R. H. H.) ; Pereira (M. M. 928) ; Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 547, 617, 737, 341, 342.) Even the Arabians, who appear
to have been perfectly well acquainted with its medicinal proper-
ties, confound it with the honey-dew, and seem to say that it
falls from heaven upon the trees. Serapion describes it by
the name of Tereniaben or mel roris, and says it falls from
above upon certain trees, and resembles granulated honey.
Its virtues he states, upon the authority of Isaac ebn Amram,
to consist in opening the bowels, and moistening the chest,
and he adds that it suits with persons of a hot temperament,
especially when dissolved in water of jujubes, or of prunes.
His other authorities recommend it in the same complaints,
and also in the inflammation of ardent fevers and for quenching
thirst. The dose is said to be from ten to twenty drachms.
(De Simpl. 10.) We may mention that Serapion and all the
other authorities mention that manna is found most abundantly
on thorns. Avicenna's account of this subject is so like to that
of Serapion that it would be superfluous to give any abstract
of it. (ii, 2, 694.) Hhases also gives nearly the same de-
scription of manna upon the authority of Abinerog, Mesaurice,
Mesne, and Chuz. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 711.) All these authori-
ties represent it as being a gentle purgative and expectorant,
and as being useful in acute and intermittent fevers. In
another of his works (Ad Mansor. ix, 14), treating of hoarseness
and coryza, he prescribes an expectorant decoction, one of the
ingredients of which is "marina, quara aerium appellant.^^ In
his chapter on angina (ix, 51) he prescribes a laxative medicine
containing tamarinds, cassia fistula, and " manna quam veteres
mel aerium appellant.^^ Mesue gives an elaborate account of the
origin, characters, temperament, and virtues of manna, which
is well worth consulting, although it contains nothing of any

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 445

great importance in addition to what is stated above on the
authority of Serapion, Avicenna, and Rhases. He would
appear moreover to confound the manna thuris with the
manna of the ash. Like the other authorities, he holds manna
to be a gentle cholagogue, and says it softens the throat, the
chest, the bowels, and quenches thirst. The dose from six to
fifteen drachms. (De Simpl. 8.) We liaA^e not found any-
thing further of interest in the works of Averrhoes, Haly
Abbas, and Ebn Baithar. The last of these says the Ros
Melleus is a substance which falls upon trees in Chorasan ;
that it is useful in ardent fevers, moistens the chest, proves
more detergent than sugar, cools thirst, improves the memory,
purges yellow bile, &c. He evidently alludes to the true
manna of the ash. Actuarius mentions cassia fistula and
manna as two purgative medicines which may be safely given
to children and pregnant women. (Meth. Med. v.)

Turpeih.
There can be no doubt that it is the Convolvulus Turpethum.
Khases recommends turpeth for purging crude and recremen-
titious humours from the knees and other joints. His two
authorities, Mesue the elder, and Chuz, give it the same charac-
ter. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 729.) Avicenna, after describing it, re-
presents it as being efficacious in diseases of the nerves and
joints, as being phlegmagogue, and if mixed with ginger, as
bringing away crude humours, (ii, 2, 701.) Serapion con-
founds it with the tripolium of Dioscorides and Galen, as we
have stated under that head. Upon the authority of Aben
Mesuai he assigns it the property of purging viscid phlegm,
but says that it brings on mental depression by its horrid taste,
and, therefore, it ought not to be taken alone. Other Arabian
authorities, quoted by him, give it the same character. He
describes the medicine very minutely, and the marks by which
we may determine whether it be sound or not. The dose is
from one to two drachms. (De Simpl. 337.) Haly Abbas
treats of it in his chapter on purgatives, but confines himself
principally to a description of the medicine itself. (Pract. ii, 2,
557.) The ancient author who has treated most fully of
turpeth, is Mesue the younger in his work 'De Simpl.' (11.)
He gives a circumstantial description of it, and full directions

446 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

for correcting its bad qualities by mixing it with other sub-
stances^ such as scammonyj dates, ginger, almonds, &c. He
recommends it principally as a phlegmagogue, and an evacuant
of gross humours in diseases of the joints, and as a preserva-
tive from leprosy and other diseases of the skin. It has been
much disputed whether or not the turpeth of Mesne be the
same as that of the other Arabians. (See his Commentators
1. c.) We see little reason for questioning their identity.
We have not found anything additional of much interest in
the great work of Ebn Baithar under this head. The turpeth
of Actuarius is the root of the pityusa, that is to say of the
Euphorbia pityusa. (Meth. Med. v, 9.) Dr. Ainslie, treating
of the Convolvulus turpetUum, says : " Our present article had
long a place in the Mat. Med., but of late years has fallen
into disuse. Alston (M. M. ii, 530) speaks of turpeth as
being a strong resinous cathartic, recommended in his days
in gout, dropsy, and leprosy.^^ (Mat. Ind. ii, 384.) It is still
known in the shops as a rough purgative. See Gray (Suppl.
to Pharm.) We are satisfied that it was not known to the
Greeks before the Arabian period, that it was neither the
Tripolium, as we have already stated, nor yet the Alypias, as
some have supposed. It has been long used as a purgative
medicine by the Hindoo physicians. See Wise (Hindoo
Med. 145.)

Dende.
Serapion gives a very lengthened account of the Bend
hayse, and describes two species of it. He speaks of part of
it being poisonous, and states that it purges strongly, and
induces tenesmus. A person who has taken of it is directed
to vomit, to take butter and milk in drink with astringents of
a demulcent nature, such as purslane, gum Arabic, &c. He
mentions that it is a medicinal herb much used in India and
Babylonia, along with other purgatives, but he adds that it
induces great debility in that hot and dry country, whereas in
Yemen, where the heat is attended with great rains, no class
of medicines answer so well as that which possesses astringent
and laxative powers combined, such as turpeth, myrobalans,
manna, and the like. But deMd, he says, answers only in cold
countries like Seni (China?). When it brought on hyper-
catharsis, he says, he directed his patient to sit in a cold hip-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 447

batlij and to get cold water dashed over Ms body. (De Simpl.
388.) Aviceiina^s description of dende is mostly taken from
Scrapion. He directs it to be administered only in a cold
country, and along with substances calculated to restrain its
violent operations, such as starch and saffron. He says it
purges humours and phlegm from the joints, (ii, 2, 215.) We
have not been able to discover any traces of it in the works of
Haly Abbas, Rhases, Mesne, nor Averrhoes. Ebn Baithar,
however, treats of it fully. He says, or at least his German
translator makes him say, that it is the Ricinus, and not
an Euphorbia, as some had supposed. He gives a minute
description of three kinds — the Chinese, the Indian, and the
Arboreus ; and of these the first is said to be the best and
strongest in its purgative operation. It is said to be hot,
sharp, and oily, and to pui'ge the body effectually, especially
the humours in the joints. It is not given, he says, in hot
countries, such as Irak, the sea-coast, the land of Egypt, and
Yemen, because fluxes in these countries are common, and
owing to the relaxation of the body, it cannot bear this violent
medicine. One of his authorities, Honain, wisely remarks
that in all hot countries severe medicines ought to be avoided.
INIinute directions are given for counteracting its deleterious
effects. It is said to act as a hot drastic purgative, and to
excoriate the intestines. Its bad effects are best counteracted
by an emetic, butter, gum lac, and other demulcents. We
used to think there could be little or no doubt but that
Sprengel was right in referring it to the strychnos colubrinus;
but of late, certain authorities, for whom we feel much respect,
have held it to be the Croton Tiylium. See Royle (Antiq.
Hind. Med. 3G; Mat. Med. 552) ; Pereira (739); and Sonthcimer
apud Ebn Baithar. We still think that the lignum coluhrinmn
is at least as applicable to the dende. It has been used medi-
cinally in modern times. See Hill (Mat. ]\Ied. 693) ; Gray
(Pharmacop. 58); and Pereira (922.) Pereira mentions that
he had analvsed it, and found that it contains ncarlv the same
ingredients as St. Ignatius' Bean. Dr. Lindlcy calls the tree,
which furnishes the lignum colubrinum, the Strychnos Ugustrina,
and mentions of it that it had been used in paralysis of the
extremities, and as an anthelminthic. (Veg. Kingd. G03.) Dr.
Royle mentions (M. M. 1. c.) that when in India the seeds of

448 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

the croton tiglium were given him as the climd of the
Arabians. Is it not more probable that they were merely
meant as the succedaneum of the dende ?

Fel.

Serapion treats of this substance under the same head with
two others^ bel and sel. The hel has never been well ascer-
tained^ but Sprengel and Ainslie are agreed that the sel is the
JEfjle marmelos, on which see Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 458.)
And now with regard to the Fel, Serapion describes it as a
fruit haAdng an external covering like a filbert, containing a
grain like that of the larger pine, its colour being intermediate
between yellow and white, and it, he adds, is the part which
is administered. He says it relieves the inflation of hemor-
rhoids, (c. 261.) Avicenna gives exactly the same account of
Fuel, which in the glossaiium is described as being ^' radix sen
fructus nenufaris Indi.^' He calls it a well-known Indian
medicine, useful in relaxation of the nerves, and in inflation
of hemorrhoids. He says his virtues are like those of the
apples of mandragora. (ii, 2, 251.) Rhases, in like manner,
says briefly of Fel that it is a well-known Indian medicine,
having powers like those of mandragora. (Contin. 1. ult. i,
298.) Dr. Ainslie writes of it thus : " The croton nuts were
known to the Arabian physicians by the name of fell (Serapion
261), and were formerly brought to England under the name
of Molucca grains." (Mat. Ind. 106.) Sprengel also in his R.
H. H. refers the Fel to the Croton Tiglium. Dr. Hill says of
the Molucca grains : " The grana tiglia are of the ricinus
kind ; they are the nucula cathartica quarta Moluccana purga-
toriaj" &c. See further p. 540, and Geofi'roy (iii. 5, 30.)
Certainly it appears to us that the medicinal -virtues of the Fel,
as given above by Serapion, Rhases, and Avicenna, do not
agree well with the known powers of the croton tiglium. We
cannot, however, pretend to determine what substance the
Fel was.

S ant alum ruhrum.

Avicenna describes the two kinds of sandal wood [lignum
pterocarpi santalini) still well known in practice. He says it
is a cold and dry medicine, which repels determinations to
paits, and this more especially the red. The diseases he most

SECT. ]iT.] SIMPLES. 4 49

particularly recommends it iu are, palpitation of the hearty
fevers, weakness of the stomach, and this both in liniments
and in draughts. The white, he says, is useful in hot fevers,
(ii, 2, 649.) He quotes Galen under this head, but his trans-
lator is sensible of this being a mistake. Serapion describes
the white, the yelloAV, and the red kinds of sandal-wood, and
gives a very circumstantial account of them. He says sandal-
wood is brought from Sini (China ?). The various authorities
quoted by him concur in giving the different kinds of sandal-
Avood the same characters as Avicenna, representing it as
being useful in complaints of the stomach, and in cardiac
disease ; and mixed with camphor and rose oil as an external
application in hot vertigo when rubbed into the temples. They
also agree in representing it along with other cooling plants as
being serviceable in gout. The sandal- woods, iu short, they
all hold to be cold in the third degree and dry in the second.
(De Simpl. 346.) Rhases gives a brief account of the red and
white sandal-woods, which his authorities recommend in weak-
ness of the stomach, and pain of the head ; and also for palpi-
tation of the heart in fevers, when rubbed over the stomach,
and for erysipelas when rubbed into the face. (Contin. 1. ult.
ii, 1, 609,)*

Azedarach.

Avicenna describes it as being a well-known tree, having
fruit like the Lotus Arbor [Celtis Australis?). He says it is
a very large tree, and that its flower is hot in the third degree,
and dry in the end of the first, and that it is possessed of deob-
struent powers ; and the decoction of its leaves kills lice in the
hair and strengthens it. Its fruit is bad for the stomach and
chest. It is anthelminthic, and useful in colics and in pituitous
fevers along with fumitory and mp'obalans. (ii, 2, 17.) Rhases
gives the same account of the assedarach. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 89.)
It is barely mentioned by Serapion as being a large tree, but
we have not been able to discover it in his Mat. Med. The
Arabian authorities of Ebn Baithar give an elaborate account
of it, representing it as being dangerous to persons Avho take it
in large doses, but in smaller ones useful for various pm-poses,
and more especially for promoting the growth of the hair,
(i, 30.) There can be no question that it must have been the
Melia azedarach or " bead tree.'' Dr. Ainslie says of it that "in

I"- 29

450 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

India the bark of the melia azedarach has been ascertained to
possess powerful tonic and antifebrile virtues," and that " it is
ordered for almost every purpose that the cinchona is in
Europe." (Mat. Ind. i, 70, ii, 454.) See further on the tree.
Miller (Dictionary) ; Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 464) ; and Crantz
(Mat. Med. iii, 40.) The last of these says of it, that he had
"read in the Encyclopedia (! !) that it kills lice, &c." The aze-
darach is frequently noticed in the Susruta. See also Wise's
Book of Hindu Medicine. (119.)

Anacardium.
On this see Serapion (De Simpl. 356) ; Rhases (Cont. 1. ult.
i, 47) ; and Avicenna (ii, 2, 40.) Of these authorities Avicenna
describes it most minutely. They all recommend it in mental
diseases, and especially in loss of memory, and say it is useful in
coldness of the nerves, in paralysis, and spasms. Avicenna re-
commends it as a fumigation to hemorrhoids. Without doubt
it is the Semicarpus Anacardium, or " marking nut tree" of com-
merce. It has been used in modern practice, but has now
fallen into disuse. See Hill (Mat. Med. 490.) Rhases quotes
Galen on the anacardium, referring, as we suppose, to his
^pvao^aXavoQ. (De Comp. Med. sec. gen. viii.) That the
latter was the semicarpus anacardium seems not unlikely. See
Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 209.) It is briefly noticed also by
Myrepsus and Actuarius under the name of ^avQo^aXavoq.
And further, it is deserving of remark that anacardia occurs as
an ingredient in one of our author's antidotes (c. 170, Ed. Basil.)
To say the least then, it appears doubtful whether the Greeks
were wholly ignorant of these substances as stated by Matthio-
lus. (Comment, in Dioscor. 189.)

T>iudar.
Avicenna says of it that it belongs to the genus ahhel (sabina ?)
and is called the Indian pine ; that it is pungent, and contains
a milk which is hot and occasions thirst. He adds that it is
good for relaxation of the nerves, paralysis, &c., also for cold
apostemes (chronic inflammations ?) of the brain, apoplexy, and
catalepsy. He concludes by stating of it that it is lithontrip-
tic, binds the bowels, and that its decoction removes relaxation
of the anus, (ii, 2, 213.) In the Glossarium of Avicenna (1. c.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 451

reference is here made to Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. iii, 31), but we
can find no notice of tlie Diudar there, nor in any part of the
works of Rhases. Ebn Baithar^s account of this article is
taken literally from Avicenna. Dr. Royle has ingeniously
pointed out the correspondence both of name and characters
between the Diudar of the Arabians and the Pinus Deodara.
(Antiquity of Hindoo Med. 36.) See also Lindley (Veget.
Kingd. 228.)

Sandaracha, or Gnm vernix.
It is to be remarked, on the outset, that Serapion and
Avicenna in treating of the vernix do not make any
reference to Dioscorides and Galen, as is their wont, from
which it may be inferred that they did not recognise it
as one of the articles which had been described by their
Grecian masters. Serapion^s Arabian authorities on this head
are, Albugerig, Aben Mesuai, Badegoras, INIesarugie, Abrix,
Alabari, Rhases, and Isaac Eben. They agree in recommend-
ing it in fumigations for catarrhs, for stopping immoderate
menstruation, drying fistulas ; as an anthelminthic, and remedy
for hemoptysis and hemorrhoids. One of his authorities (Isaac
Eben) describes it as being a gum of a yellow colour, like the
karabe, and says it is brought from the land of the Christians.
He adds, respecting the karabe, that Galen says it is the
gum haur romane (popuh Romanse [?]). Whether by this he
meant amber, we shall inquire presently. Avicenna says of
the sandaracha or vernix, that it is hot and dry in the second
degree, and that it has some astringency, and the power of
stopping hemorrhages. He says it is used for removing obesity,
for drying fistulse, that the smoke of it cures catarrhs, and is
the best of all remedies for toothache ; that it cures palpitation
as well as the karabe, stops fluxes of blood, cures humid
asthma, and is used by wrestlers to strengthen the breath.
It is good, he concludes by saying of it, in diseases of the
spleen, and its fumes cure old sores and hemorrhoids. (ii,2, 619.)
It may be proper to remark here, that although Avicenna ap-
plies the term sandarach both to realgar and gum vernix he docs
not fall into the mistake of confounding these substances with
one another. This will be clearly seen by comparing ii, 2, 48,
with 1. c. The Latin translation of the chapter in Rhases's

4.t2 appendix to [book vii.

^Continens/on Sandaracli, is so particularly barbarous, that some
passages of it are scarcely intelligible to us, albeit we have
spent more time than most people in poring over these most
unclassical productions. It is clear, however, that his Arabian
authorities recommend vernix in exactly the same cases as
Serapion and Avicenna do, namely, in fumigations for asthma
and coryza, as a drying application to fistulse and hemorrhoids,
as a stimulant in diseases of the eyes, and as a remedy for de-
fluxion and fluxes of blood from the womb. (Contin. 1. ult. i,
610.)

Dr. Lewis, treating of the Juniperus, says, " In the warmer
climates, particularly on the coasts of Africa, there exudes from
a larger species of juniper a resinous juice which concretes into
semi-pellucid, pale, yellowish tears, resembling mastich, but
larger ; the sandaracha and giimmi juniperi of the shops, called
by some, from the use to which it is principally applied, vernix.
It has been given internally against hemorrhages, old fluxes,
and ulcerations ; but is principally employed externally in cor-
roborant, ner\ine, and traumatic applications." (Mat. Med.
ii, 24.) Eecent authorities have decided that the gum
sandarach is not the product of the juniperus communis, as
usually supposed, but of the Callitris quadrivalris. See Pereira
(Mat. Med. 727); and Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 229.) On the
vernix see further Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 201.)

Is this the same as the Cedria of the Greeks and Romans ?
See Dioscorides (i, 105) ; Galen (De Simpl. vi.) We are in-
clined to think that it either was the same, or, at all events,
that both were procured from trees of the same genus. See
the description of the Cedria given by Pliny (H. N. xxiv, 11)
with the notes of Harduin. We have stated under Cedrus
that it generally signifies a large species of juniper. And
further, upon comparing the medicinal uses of the cedria as
given by Pliny (who foUows Dioscorides closeh^ with those of
the Sandarach as given above from the Arabians, no one can
doubt that they must apply to the same thing, or at least to
substances of a like kind. The cedria must not be confounded
with cedriuni described by Pliny. (H. N. xvi, 21.) The latter
would appear to have been a liquid procured from the wood by
distillation or boiling. There appears much probability in the
conjecture of Berzelius that the cedrium was a sort of pyrolig-

SECT, in.] SIMPLES. 453

neons acid. Pliny says it was used for embalming dead
bodies. (1. c.)

Karate, or Popu/us.
Aviceuna describes it as being the gum of a tree called
haiir romana (populus Romana?), resembling vernix, of dif-
ferent colours, and when of a ruddy colour attracting cliatf
and other small objects. He says the gum is like the flower
of the tree in virtues but colder, being astringent in the case
of all fluxes, especially bleeding from the nose, and hemoptysis.
He agrees with Rhases and Serapiou that it is a good periapt
in cases of hot apostemes. He recommends it as a good cor-
dial medicine, and one which is useful in afl'ections of the
stomach and bowels, (ii, 2, 364.) He treats of the other parts
of the poplar separately, and also gives a distinct chapter on
Ambra, and in his work ' De Med. Cord.^ he treats separately
of Ambra and Karabe. Serapion under the head of haur romi
first gives abbreviated translations of Dioscorides's and Galenas
descriptions of the black poplar (ofyf/^oc), and then a trans-
lation of an extract said to be from Paulus, but which we
cannot trace in the works of our author. In that extract
Karabe is called the gum of the haur ro7ni ; it is said to be
astringent, and to be confounded by some with the sandarach,
and that it was called the funeral gum because the Latins used it
in burials. He concludes by giving extracts from several Arabian
authorities regarding its medicinal characters, which agree in
the main with those given above from Avicenna. (De Simpl.
270.) He gives a perfectly distinct chapter on Ambra (c. 196.)
Rhases has a chapter on the " liaur seu fa(jus," which, except
that it does not contain the pretended extract from Paulus, is
made up fi'om almost the same authorities as the one of
Serapion which we have just discussed. Karabe, it is said, is
the gum of the tree. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 256.) Although there
is a good deal of confusion in the accounts of Karabe contained
in these extracts, we think it impossible to avoid drawing the
conclusion that the authorities meant to apply it to the resin
of some ba/sam poplar, j)robably some variety of the Populus
nigra, or dilatuta. It would Ije a great mistake then to identify
the Karabe with amber. Indeed, Ebu Baithar distinctly says
that amber is not the gum of the black poplar as had been
supposed, which he clearly esta])lishes by showing that the

454 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

characters of the gum poplar, as given by Dioscorides and
Galen, by no oceans accord with those of amber (succinum.)
See further under Electrum, Sandarach, and Ambra grisea.
It is proper to mention that although our opinion with regard
to the Karabe be as we have stated, most of our modern autho-
rities have set it down as being indentical with the succinum.
See Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 215); Royle (Mat. Med. 648);
Pemberton (Dispensatory, 102.) We are persuaded, however,
that whoever will carefully read the ninth chapter of the first
part of Avicenna^s work " on Cordial Medicines,^^ must agree
with us that he held the Karabe and Ambra to be totally dif
ferent substances, and a careful study of Mesne (De Electariis)
will confirm this conclusion. The gum or resin of the black
poplar is mentioned by Schroeder. (Chemical Dispensat. 442.)

Tembul and Faufel.
We treat of these substances under one head for a reason
which will become apparent before the conclusion of our article
upon them. Tembul, according to Avicenna, is cold in the
first degree and dry in the second ; it is astringent and desic-
cant; it strengthens the gums, and for this purpose is constantly
chewed by the Indians ; it also strengthens the stomach, and
for this purpose also is frequently chewed by the same people,
(ii, 2, 699.) Haly Abbas gives a very similar account of it ;
he says it is brought from India, and that seafaring men made
much use of it, because they lived much upon fish. (Pract. ii,
36, 207.) Ebn Baithar treats of it at great length. One of
his authorities, Abuthanifa^ says it improves the state of the
mouth, Elmasudi gives an interesting description of it; he
says it renders the breath fragrant, improves the mouth, and
even the mind, and he says further of it that it reddens the
teeth. Elgafaki says it cures bleeding and swelling of the
tonsils, being of an astringent and desiccant nature. Elscherif
calls it hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, and says
it produces exhilaration of spirits, and cures flatulence. He
describes minutely the Indian mode of using it. The author
himself under this head warns his readers not to confound the
plant used in his time for the tembul, with the true tembul,
which he says was seldom brought from India in his days
because it lost its virtues by being carried to a distance, (ii,
200.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 455

Faufel, or Avellana Indica, is described by Serapion's autho-
rities as being like the nutmeg, and as having a slight degree
of heat with some bitterness. Its virtues are said to be like
those of the sandal tree. It is recommended as an application
to hot apostemes. Some of his authorities call it hot and dry,
and all seem to agree in holding it to be astringent. One of
them, Mesarugie, says that it suits with toothache and scabies
of the eyebrow. ISIesue says it strengthens the teeth, re-
presses the gums when swelled, and is useful in swelling of
the eye. (De Simpl. 345.) A\dcenna describes it as being cold
with some astringency, and as being useful in hot apostemes
of a gross nature, and inflation of the eye. (i, 2, 256.) Ebn
Baithar calls it a palm, and says of it that it is a gentle pur-
gative, makes the breath fragrant, is a cordial, and strengthens
the gums and teeth, (i, 267.)

Now there can be no doubt that the former of these is the
jnper betel, and the latter the areca catechu. The nuts of the
latter, which modern authorities describe as resembling the
nutmeg, are cut into slices, and along with the leaves of the
betel constitute the famous masticatory of the East called betel.
For an account of these two substances, consult in particular
Ainslie (Mat. Ind. i, 268, 465) ; Royle (Antiq. of Hindoo
Med. 85) ; Pereira (M. M. 616) ; Lindley (Yeg. Kingd. 137) ;
Meyeu (Geograpli. of Botany, as edited by the Eay Society.)

Chubabe, or CubebcB.
Avicenna under this head refers to the carpesium of Galen,
but it evidently was a different substance. Some, he says,
had called it refrigerant with some heat, but he holds it to be
truly hot and dry in the second degree. He calls it aperient
and attenuant, and recommends it in putrid ulcers of the
members and gums, as a medicine which clears the voice when
held in the mouth, and as a deobstruent of the liver in en-
gorgement thereof; as a cleanser of the urinary passages, as a
diuretic medicine which promotes the discharge of gravel and
stones of the kidneys, and of the bladder, and he adds, " Spu-
tum masticantis earn delectat cam cum qua habetur coitus."
(ii, 2, 134.) Rhases also, through some mistake, quotes Galen
luider this head, and gives exactly the same account of its

456 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

medicinal powers as Avicenna. (Contin. 1. ult. i, 242.) Serapion
under this head gives Dioscorides^s description of the wild
myrtle with further references to Galen and Paulus^ but con-
cludes by saying that he was sensible Dioscorides had not
treated of cubebs. (De Simpl. 288.) Ebn Baithar mentions
that certain of the authorities had taken it for the carpesium.
He says it renders the breath fragrant and cures affections of
the bladder. He further quotes Ebn Sina (Avicenna?) as
stating that it enhances the delight of coitus, (i, 344.) By
the way, Dr. Pereira mentions that the Indians still take
them to excite the sexual feelings. We would beg to refer
for further information on this subject to his excellent account
of the Piper Cubeba. (754.) See also Liudley (Veg. Kingd.
204), and Royle (M. M. 562.)

Usne7i.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 713) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 257) ;
Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 753.) This term is used rather
vaguely by the Arabian authors, but there can be no doubt
that it comprehended the salsola fruticosa. They call it ab-
stergent, cleansing, and aperient, and recommend it as an
emmenagogue, and in difficulty of urine and dropsy. Rhases
says it is of a hot and dry nature, and is purgative, deobstruent,
and corrosive. (Ad Mansor. iii, 22.) The confectio de usnen of
Serapion containing fourteen other ingredients mostly of an
aromatic nature, is recommended by him for debility of the
stomach. (De Antidot. 71.)

Fagara, or Fagre.
See Serapion (De Simpl. c. c); Aricenna (ii, 2, 260); Rhases
(Cont. 1. ult. i, 312.) Serapion's authorities compare it to the
vetch, and say of it that it is hot and dry in the second degree,
and is stomachic. Isaac ebn Amran describes it as having a
small, black, round grain within, and a red one without, as
forming a good gargle in fsetor of the mouth, and entering as
an ingredient into powders and ointments. Avicenna's de-
scription of it is to the same effect ; he says, however, that it is
hot and dry in the third degree. He recommends it as an
astringent, stomachic, and hepatic medicine. Rhases^s account

SECT, m.] SIMPLES. 457

of it is verj'^ short, but not far different from tlie others. Dr.
Lindley describing the XanthoxyJon hastile, says of it, " that
its capsules and seeds are employed in Northern India for
intoxicating fish; they are also given as the faghuret of
Avicenna. The X. piperitum and Avicennse are used in China
and Japan as antidotes against all poisons ; they would un-
doubtedly in many cases be of considerable use as a stimulant
remedy .'' (^ eg. Kingd. 473.) See further Sprengel (R. H.
H. i, 270), and Royle (M. M. 326.)

Artamita.
Avicenna gives such a description of it as fully justifies
Sprengel in deciding it to be the Cyclamen Persicum. He
recommends it in diseases of the joints, as a sternutatory, and
for the cure of hiccup, and says of it that it is alexipharmic
and produces abortion, (ii, 2, 61.) It is in use with the
Hindoo physicians. See Wise (System of Hindoo Med.)

Vertz.
From Serapion^s account of it there seems no doubt that it
is the Memecylon tinctorhim. He gives a very minute de-
scription of three species which grow in Arabia and India, and
mentions that some held the root of one of the species to be
the curcuma. They are all remarkable for containing colouring
matter. He recommends them for the cure of leprosy, pru-
ritus, and pustula. (De Simpl. 170.) Rhases briefly describes
it by the name of vars. He sa^-s two kinds, the yellow and
the red, are brought from Yemen, and that they are collected
upon trees like pounded saffron. (Coutin. 1. ult. iii, 110.)
Avicenna describes it by the name oi yures. (ii, 2, 291.) His
description is very similar to that given by Rhases, and he re-
commends it in the very same cases as Serapion. Ebn Baithar
gives a very full and interesting description of it both as a dye
and as a medicine, but we need not enter into an exposition
of his views, since they scarcely diff'er at all from the account
of it given above from Serapion. AVe may just mention that
he says clothes dyed with it are aphrodisiac. See Vol. I, 585.
The mcmccyls constitute a genus of plants still well known
in India as dyes and articles of food and medicine. See the
works of Roylc and Lindley.

458 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

Mahaleb.
See Serapion (De Simpl. 44); Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 442);
Avicenna (ii, 2, 471.) It appears to be undoubtedly the
Primus Mahaleb, that is to say, the Cerasus Mahaleb of ISIiller,
Angl., " rock/^ or " perfumed " cherry. Serapion applies to it
what Dioscorides and Galen had written on the j'j7«//yrea ; after
which he gives the opinions of several Arabian authorities who
recommend it as a medicine to expel the superfluities of the
system and intestinal worms, and as being useful in gout, and
as a lithoutriptic. One of them, Isaac ebn Amram, describes
the varieties of it very circumstantially. Avicenna and Rhases
give a similar account of it.

Jesemin and Zambach.

See Serapion (De Simpl. 176); Rhases (Contin. xxii, 838;
1. ult. i, 309); Avicenna (ii, 2, 611); and Ebn Baithar (591.)

Serapion describes them under the same head, the one as
having a white flower, and the other a yellow^ of which the
latter is the weaker in its powers. It is got, he says, from
Babylonia, where there is another species which has a sky-
blue coloiu". His authorities recommend it principally in
phlegmatic complaints, and more particularly in those of old
persons, and as an application in impetigo and other cutaneous
diseases of a like natui'e. He says it induces headache when
administered to persons of a hot temperament. Avicenna gives
a very similar account of these two plants, and neither Rhases
nor Ebn Baithar supplies any additional information regarding
them ; the latter^ however, gives a very interesting account
of them. He says of the yellow species that it was used for
dyeing the hair. Like the others, he speaks favorably of it,
and especially of its oil in complaints of a cold nature. The
latter species, in all probability, was the jusminum sambac,
still well known in the East as a perfume. See Lindley (Veg.
Kingd. 651) ; Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 59) ; and Sprengel
(R. H. H. i, 242.) Whether the other be the humile or
officinale, we are unable to determine.

Secacul.
See Serapion (De Simpl. 89) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 663.)
From the description which they give of it, there can be no

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 459

doubt, we tliink, that it is the pastinaca secacul, Russel ; that
is to sav, the Tordilium orientale, secacul dictum of Miller.
(Gard. Dictionary.) They agree in saying that it is decidedly
aphrodisiac, more especially when preserved with honey.
A^dcenna concludes his notice of it with stating that buzeiden
is used instead of it. In another part of his work he gives
very sensible directions for preparing secacul conditum, that is
to say, " preseiTcd secacul.^' (v, 1, 8.) Although, as we have
stated above, we think there is little or no doubt that the
secacul was a species of tordylium, it is proper to acknowledge
that the learned commentators on INIesue are much divided in
opinion respecting it. (De Electariis, i, 95.)

Buzeiden.

See Serapion (De Simpl. 260) ; A\'icenna (ii, 2, 95) ; and Ebn
Baithar (ii, 183.) Avicenna describes it as being an Indian
medicine possessing virtues resembling those of beer. He says
it is hot in the second degree, and dry in the first ; is at-
tenuaut, proves serviceable in pains of the joints and in gout ; is
aphrodisiacal and alexipharmic. (ii, 295.) Serapion calls it a
species of satyrion (orchis?). He calls it an Indian medicine,
little used in his country. He says it resembles hermodactyls
in the cure of arthritic diseases or of gout, and that it
engenders semen, but hiu'ts the testicles. Its bad effects
are best corrected bv mustard : its dose two drachms. Ebn
Baithar, in this instance, supplies no additional information.
After what we have stated of it, we need have no hesitation in
agreeing with Sprengel that it is the orchis morio, or at all
events some species of that genus. As Serapion does not
quote any Greek authorities under this head, it may be in-
ferred that he held it to be distinct from the orchis of Dios-
corides and his followers. Several species of this genus are
still used in India as medicines. The famous salep is pro-
cured principally from the O. mascula. See Royle, Lindley,
and Pereira.

Mial, or Storax humida.

The liquid Storax is described distinctly by Avicenna, who
states that one species of it exudes from the tree and the
other is got by boiling ; that the former is of a lighter colour
and is highly valuable, whereas the other is darker and is less

460 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

esteemed. Some, he says, held it to be beneficial in cerebral
diseases, but this opinion he rejects, as it induces vertigo. See
under Storax. He quotes only from Arabian authorities,
(ii, 2, 423, 615.) Both kinds of storax are treated of largely
by Serapion. (De Simpl. 46), and are noticed by Rhases.
(Contin. 1. ult. i, 687.)

It is still disputed what tree it is which produces the Liquid
Storas. According to Sprengel and most modern authorities,
until of late, it was held to be the Altingia excelsa. Dr.
Pereira, however, shows that this is a doubtful point, and men-
tions that Dr. Lindley holds that the liquid storax of the shops
is produced by the liquid ambar orientaJe. But in his recent
publication on the ' Vegetable Kingdom,^ Dr. Lindley says,
" Liquid storax is thought to be yielded by the Dammar pine."
(p. 229.) Landerer has recently shoAvn that it is obtained from
Storax officinale. (Pereira, Mat. ]\Ied. 1325, 2d ed.)

Kadi.
It is described by Serapion as being a plant which grows in
Arabia, frora which the aromatic oil of Kadi is formed. He
gives a curious description of it, but does not mention any medi-
cinal purposes to which it was applied. (De Simpl. 40.) It
would appear that it is also described by Ebn Baithar (i, 337.)
He describes it as being a species of palm, which it resembles in
all respects, and says that a fragrant oil is prepared from it.
Its country is Arabia. He quotes on it Rhases, in his 'Continens'
and ' Treatise on Smallpox,' but we have been unable to dis-
cover the passages which he refers to. His authorities de-
scribe, in glowing colours, the virtues of this substance, and
more especially of its wine, in smallpox. What species of palm
it was we are unable to sav decidedlv.

Meizaragi.
Serapion gives a full account of it upon the authority of
Abugerit and Abii", who agree in recommending it in arthritic
diseases. They give minute directions for using it in electuai'ies,
pills, and decoctions. Its dose with sugar is one drachm.
They mention that, when put into rivers, it intoxicates fish.
(De Simpl. 365.) AAicenna describes the Mehezehereyi, as
being a tree like esula [spurge ?) ; and says it is hot and dry in

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 4G1

tlic third degree, and intoxicates fish when thrown into a river.
He adds, that it is carminative and phlegmagogue, and is useful
in gout, sciatica, and arthritis, (ii, 2, 480.)

We need have no hesitation in agreeing with the best
authorities, that it is cocculus indicus, or the seed of Menis-
permum cocculus L., i. q., Anamirta cocculus of Lindley. (See
Veg. Kingd. 309.) He saj's of it, that it contains a most
venomous principle, the picrotoxine, and that in its pericarp
is found the not less formidable alcaloid menispermine. See
also Gray (Pharmacop. 119), and Ainslie (Mat. Ind. ii, 132.)
Both these authors mention of it, that it is used to intoxicate
fish. See, farther, an excellent account of the cocculus indicus
in Pereira (M. M. 1326.) It was used by the Hindoo physi-
cians for the cure of nervous diseases. See Wise (System of
Hindoo Med. 557.) Dr. Royle is somewhat doubtful whether
the cocculus was known to the Arabian physicians, but upon
the whole inclines to this opinion. (Mat. Med. 249.)

Nux Vomica.
We have briefly treated of the Nux Vomica as a poison in
another place (Vol. 11,241.) We have now to say of it, that
it was also used medicinally as an emetic. For example, Haly
Abbas treats of it in his chapter on INIedicines which procure
Vomiting. (Pract. ii, 65 ; see also Pract. x, 12.) Serapion, in
like manner, treats of it in his chapter on Emetic Medicines,
(vii, 36.) Thus he gives the following formula for an
emetic: "B- Concamed (cardamomi ?), nucis vomicse, seminis
raphaui, omnium an 5J. Tcrautur et dentur in potu cum
aqua mellis et decoctione ancthi.^' Serapion treats of it also
in his work ' On Simples,' where he states, that '•' eas}' vomit-
ing" may be induced by administering it agreeably to the
formula which we have just quoted from his other work. He
adds, that perhaps it will also loosen the bowels. Abrara,
another of his authorities, likewise says, that given to the amount
of two drachms, with two drachms of dill or of fennel seed, and
drunk with warm water, it will produce vomiting and loosen
the bowels. (De. Simpl. 163.) Ebn ]5aitliar^s authorities give
an interesting account of the Nux Vomica, from whicli it is
clear that it was frequently used as an emetic, along with fen-
nel, natron, mustard, &c. in hydromcl.

462 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

Dr. Pereira, upon the authority of Dale (Pharmacol.), decides
that the Strychnos Ignatia was the nux vomica of Serapion.
But, notwithstanding our great respect for his opinions, we
cannot agree with him in the present instance. For, considering
how common the nux vomica is in Persia (Ainslie, Mat. Ind.),
there is a strong presumption that the Arabians cannot have
been unacquainted with it, and it is not pretended that the nux
vomica is treated of by them by any other name unless it were
the methel, Avhich we will presently show it not to be, nor is it
attempted to be shown Avhen and how the misapplication of the
terra originated. See, however, in support of Dr. PereiiVs
views, Parkinson (Theatre of Plants, 1601.) It is also proper
to mention, that the learned Geoffrov calls the Faba sancti
Ignatii the nux vomica Jegitima. But as it is admitted by
the best authorities on toxicology, that St. Ignatius bean is
much more energetic in its action than nux vomica (see
Christison, 644, and Orfila, ii, 276), there is still less probabi-
lity of its having been used medicinally than the other. See
further in support of the v^ews we are advocating, Sprengel
(R. H. H. i, 250.) AVe may mention also iu conclusion, that
the nux vomica was used as an emetic by the Hindoo physi-
cians, more especially in the case of poisoning. See Wise
(Hindoo Med. 402.) '

Nu-x Methel.
We have briefly alluded to this substance {Datura Methel) as
a poison elsewhere. (Vol. II, 241.) Serapion, quoting from
Arabian authorities, compares its nut to the nux vomica, and
its seed to that of mandragora : its bark, he adds, is rough, its
taste pleasant and unctuous, and its virtues cold in the fourth
degree ; if given in a small dose [kirat or siliqua ?) it intoxicates
strongly, and if two drachms are given it proves fatal at once.
Bhases, as quoted by him, says it is a narcotic, a sedative, and
perhaps emetic medicine, and that it proves fatal in large doses,
and in small intoxicates. He directs its pernicious effects to
be counteracted by taking warm butter, and thus producing
vomiting, and otheinvise treating the case in the same manner
as in poisoning by mandi'agora. (De Simpl. 375.) Bhases, in
his work entitled ' Ad Mansor.,' says of the nut methel, that it
is a dangerous medicine^ which induces stupor, nausea, vomiting,

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 463

and inebriety, (iii, 30.) His account of it in his ' Continens'
is very brief. Avicenna describes it in his 'Mat. Med.' as
being a nut similar to the nux vomica, and having seed Hke the
citron (?). Like the others, he says it inebriates, induces
stupor, and is inimical to the brain and heart. In the dose of a
drachm he says it proves fatal, (ii, 2, 501.) Ebn Baithar's
authorities give a full account of it, but differing little from
the others already given. One of them says, that a drachm
^vill kill on the spot, and in small doses it induces stupor,
vomiting, and loss of sense. They direct these bad effects to
be counteracted by the administration of an emetic of natron
(soda), by giving wine and pepper, and keeping up the heat of
the body. The Hindoo physicians held that it is alexiterial.
See Susruta and Wise (Hindoo Med.)

An excellent modern authority says of the Datura MeteL
that " its seeds are narcotic, more powerful than the Datura
Stramommm, and produce temporary idiotcy." Gray (Suppl. to
Pharm. 52.) Dr. Lindley, after describing the Datura Stra-
monium as a violent narcotic, says of the Metel, that it has a
similar action. (Veg. Kingd. 619.) Comparing, then, the
effects of the Nux Methel, as described by the ancient authori-
ties with those of the Datura Methel, as given by those recent
authorities, we cannot hesitate in recognising their identity.

Rachaba, or Nux Mechil.

One of Serapion's authorities states that an Arab had told
him that it is a great tree, like the nut-tree, having leaves
like a great fig, and fruit like small pomegranates, and speaks
very indistinctly about its being Pharoah's nut ; but it is
difficult, from his language, to make out what he says on that
point. He says it is sweet, has a pleasant smell, and is eaten
by shepherds and others. He mentions that some had con-
founded it with the nux vomica ; but he concludes by saying
that whoever will compare the descriptions of the rachaba and
nux vomica must see the difference. (De Simpl. 161.) From
this description it is quite clear that this cannot be the nux
vomica, but rather one of the eatable figs, probably the Jicus
benjamina.

Nux Henden, or Banden.

See Serapion (De Simpl. 79) and Avicenna (ii, 2, 496.)

464 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

According to the latter it is a grainy mass^ like the vetch,
white, incKning to yellow, which is brought from Barea
and Chorasan, and of which a wine is made with honey. He
quotes Paulus (by some mistake we suppose) as saying of it
that it is refrigerant, extinguishes inflammation, and is slightly
desiccant. It suppresses fluxes of blood, fattens, cures im-
petigo, and is aphrodisiac. Serapion's authorities give a more
lengthy description of it_, but do not supply many more par-
ticulars. Rhases, one of them, calls it the fat of the earth,
and the rock of the earth, and another calls it pigeon^s root.
They all agree that it makes an excellent wine, which forms
semen, fattens the body, and is aphrodisiac. They also state
that it stops fluxes, and causes vomiting. Ebn Baithai-'s
account of it is nearly the same as Serapion^s. He says it is
called honey earth in Andalusia, (i, 274.) Sprengel suggests — •
how correctly we leave it to our readers who are better
acquainted with the productions of the East than we can
pretend to be, to determine — tliat it is the Garcinia Mangostena,
or Mangosteen, a fruit which has the reputation of being the
finest in the Avorld. The description of it, given by Serapion,
as far as we can judge of it from the barbarous Latin trans-
lation, would certainly seem to agree in some striking points
with that of the mangosteen. Compare it with ' Loudon,
Encycl. of Gardening,^ 1531.

Meisce, or Mes.
See Serapion (De Simpl. c. 116); AWcenna (ii_, 2, 481);
Ebn Baithar (ii, 465.) It is described at some length, and in
nearly the same terms bv all these authors. Thev call it a small
grain like a vetch, of a green colour, and say that some used
it for fasils, and that it was wholesome but not very nutritious.
Thev sav of it that it is cold, and rather desiccant, useful in
catarrhs and coughs, and as a plaster to bruised and torn parts.
In our edition of Serapion it is marked as mango in a very
old looking hand-writing, and it is recognised as the Phaseolus
mango by Sprengel (R. H H. i, 266), and by the German
translator of Ebn Baithar.

Horon, or Bombax.
See Serapion (De Simpl. 66) and Ebn Baithar (i, 305.)

SECT. 111.] SIMPLES. 465

Abuhanifa, one of Serapion^s authorities, says that some
medical men had informed him that cotton grows on trees like
quinces. So at least we understand the passage ; but as it is
very curious, and also very obscure, it may be well to give the
Latin translation : '^Dixerunt mihi quidam medici de kelbe
quod colon nascitur inter eos in arboribus quae sunt sicut
arbores antipsicorum.^' Compare Pliny (H. N. xii, 10.) The
next of Serapion^s authorities, Aben Mesuai, recommends the
juice of it in the diarrhoea of children. Mescha says its seed
is beneficial in coughs and good for the breast. Albasari says
of it that it is good for clothes, and that its juice is an ex-
cellent application in cutaneous diseases of the face. Rhases
also, as quoted by him, recommends it in the same cases, and
fiu'ther says of it that it is aphrodisiac. Ebn Baithar's authori-
ties also give an interesting account of it, recommending it in
much the same cases as those of Serapion, namely in infantile
diarrhoea, and as an application to cutaneous diseases ; and he
further states that it was used to burn warts, no doubt like
the raw flax, often mentioned in the works of Hippocrates.
The leaves are said to have been useful in uterine complaints,
and in gout mixed with rose-oil. Clothes prepared from it
are much praised by the author. There can be no doubt from
what we have stated, that it must have been the Gossypium
arboreum or hei'hacemn, most probably the latter. See Meyen
(Geogr. Botany.) From Ainslie's Mat. Ind. it will be seen
that oil prepared from the former is still used for cleaning the
skin of spots, and that the leaves arc given for the cure of
diarrhaa. (ii, 284.)

Musa.

See Serapion (De Simpl. 84) ; Avicenna (ii, 2, 484) ; Ebn
Baithar (ii, 535.) According to Serapion's first authority,
Aben Mesuai, it is hot in the middle of the first degree, and
moistening in the end of it, little nutritious, and has the
property of being useful in heat of the breast, lungs, and
bladder, and softens the bowels; if much used, it creates
a load on the stomach, and obstruction in the liver, and if
taken by a person of a cold temperament in great quantity, he
ought to take hydromel, oxymel, or prepared ginger with it.
Another of his authorities, Sindaxar, says it promotes the

HI. 30

466 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

growtli of the foetus in utero. A third, named Alchalebemen,
says it is a good medicine for the chest and the kidneys, and
is diuretic. The book on ancient medicine, as quoted by him,
says of it that it is aphrodisiac, and heavy on the stomach ;
and Avicenna's account of it is so similar that it woukl not be
worth T^hile to give an exposition of it. Ebu Baithar describes
it minutely as being a species of Palm. Its medicinal charac-
ters, as stated by him, are nearly the same as those given
above from Serapion, There can be no doubt that it is the
Musa 2)a)'adisiaca, or common plantain tree. On it the reader
may find it interesting to consult Ainslie (Mat. Ind. 316), and
Loudon (Encycl. of Garden. 1530.) The plantain tree is
briefly noticed by Theophrastus (H. P. iv, 5), but does not occur
in the works of the Greek and Latin physicians,

Granum Kelkel, or Alkelkel.
See A\acenna (ii, 2, 30,2) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 275) ; Uhases
(Contin. 1. ult. i, 378); Ebn Baithar (ii, 315.) Serapion's
authorities say of it that it is hot and moistening, increases
the secretion of semen, especially when taken with the oil of
sesame ; that when taken in too large a dose, it induces
cholera, and after other food occasions vertigo. The account
of it given by Rhases and Avicenna is little difiPerent. The
latter says of it that it is fattening, and comforts relaxed
bodies. Ebn Baithar gives a very minute description of it ;
he says he planted it in his own country, and that it produced
fruit. He ascribes the same good and bad effects to it as
Serapion. When roasted, he says, it does not engender bad
chyme. Its seeds are said to be aphrodisiac. We suppose
there is little or no doubt that it is the Cassia tora. On the
modern use of it by the Hindoos, see Ainslie (]Mat. Ind. ii, 405.)

Lehibach, or Lahiba.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 425) ; Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. i, 389.)
Rhases quotes Galen as saying of it that it has powers like
horehound. We are at a loss to say what substance he alludes
to among the Simples of Galen. Another authority'' quoted
by him seems to say that a portion of it flung into a lake
containing fish, will make them swim on the surface, and
Avicenna confirms this statement. Avicenna further says it

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 467

is emetic and liydragogue. We would refer it with Sprengel
(R. H. H. i, 249) to the Mussaenda frondosa.

Gilbenee.
Avicenna compares its seed to turbith^ and its operation to
hellebore. He says when given to the amount of half a
drachm it operates as an emetic, and that one drachm may
prove fatal. He mentions the case of a paralytic person who
took it, and having vomited was thereby cured. He adds of
it that it also acts as a purgative (ii, 2, 282.) It is evidently
the gilbeuce of Rhases, who in like manner describes it as a
powerful emetic, the operation of which resembles hellebore,
and is useful to paralytics. j\Iore than a drachm of it, he
says, given in a dose, may occasion death. (Ad Mansor. iii, 30.)
It appears decidedly to be the Cerbera manghas L., i. e. Arbor
lactaria, Rumphius. See Sprengel (R. H. H. i, 252) ; Ainslie
(Mat. Ind. ii, 261.) Dr. Lindley says of it : " The kernels of
Cerbera manghas are emetic and poisonous; the milky sap is
purgative ; the leaves and bark are used in Java as a substitute
for senna." (Veg. Kingd. 600.)

Kustberkush.
Avicenna giv^es a description of it which appears to us very
unsatisfactory, but which determines Sprengel to refer it to
the Tamarix orientaJis. He calls it hot and drv in the second
degree, and attenuant. (ii, 2, 371.)

Nefrin, or Nerfin.
See Avicenna (ii, 2, 506); Serapion (De Simpl. 187.)
Avicenna compares it to the narcissus, and says it resembles
the jasmine in virtue, but is weaker than it. He recommends
it in coldness of the nerves, and as a cure in noises and pains
of the ears, and in toothache. He also recommends it ex-
ternally in headache, inflammations of the throat and tonsils,
and for stopping vomiting and hiccup. Serapion compares it
to the rose and jasmine, and recommends it in pleurisy and
pains of the womb. Rhases, as quoted by him, says that in
Chorasan he had seen it given to the extent of two drachms
as a purgative. It seems highly probable that it is the Nar-
cissus orientalis.

468 APPENDIX TO [book vit.

Muhichia.

Avicenna (ii, 2, 194) ; Serapion (De Simpl. 149) ; Ebn
Baithar (ii, 537.) Avicenna's description of this article, which
he also calls " Olus Judaiciim," would seem to decide that it is
the Corchonis oUtorius or Jews^ mallow. The other two
authorities quoted above are not so precise in their description
of it. It is more properly an article of food than of medicine.
See Lindley (Veg. Kingd. 372), and Ainslie (Mat. Ind.
ii, 387.)

Moschus.

Musk, the inspissated secretion of the follicle in the pre-
puce of the Moschus moscMferus L,, would appear to be first
mentioned in the works of Aetius (xvi, 122), who gives for-
mulas for various fumigations (suffumigia) containing a great
many aromatics, and among them musk. But as we have
already had occasion to state, we entertain strong suspicions
that the concluding chapters of this author may be spurious.
Indeed, as this important article is not noticed by authors sub-
sequent to Aetius, such as Oribasius, it would appear to us
that this circumstance is the strongest possible presumption,
that the passage in Aetius had been added after the Arabian
period of medicine. There is one notice of it also by our
author, but it also has a suspicious appeai-ance. (p. 292, ed. Basil.
See also 296.) Serapion gives a long account of it, first upon
the authority of Abuhanifa, who calls the animal the musk
gazelle, and says its habitat is in the countries of Tumbasci
and Sini, by which he probably means Thibet and China. Of
these the better kind, he says, is that procured from Thibet,
as the animal in that country lives on fragrant herbs, and the
inhabitants are better acquainted with the process of extracting
it from its follicles. And, moreover, he says, the Sinenses
(Chinese ?) are apt to adulterate their musk. The animal
which produces musk, he adds, does not differ in figure, colour,
nor horns from other gazelles, and the best musk is procured
after it is full grown. He then gives an anatomical description
of its canine teeth, and of the modes of catching it by snares,
gins, and by shooting it with arrows ; and also the manner of
extracting the musk from the anim,al after its death. But
the best musk, he says, is procured from the animal when it
is in a state of orgasm, and rubs its follicles against a rock

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 469

until the musk drops out of them. The inhabitants of Thibet
(homines cle Thebeth) know the places where the animal
feeds, and eollect the musk thus procured from them. This,
he remarks, is the finest musk of all, and is reserved for royal
personages and held in high esteem. This authority concludes
by saying that in the region of Thebeth there are many cities,
but that the one, from which musk is procured, is that
city which is properly called Thebeth. His next authority is
Alcholabaraa, who calls musk hot in the second degree, and
diy in the third. The following one, Aben Mesuai, says of
it, tliat it comforts the heart and internal viscera, both when
drunk and when applied externally in plasters. His next
authority is Hoiiain, who recommends musk in diseases of the
eyes. The others supply little additional information on it,
but in general recommend it in diseases of the brain. He
says the Persian doctors applied the oil to the member as an
aphrodisiac. (De Simpl. 185.) Rhases recommends musk in
headache, and all cold affections of the head, and also as a
stomachic. (Ad jNIansor. iii, 22.) In his 'Continens^ he quotes
from several Arabian authorities, all of whom give it the
characters already stated, and recommend it most especially in
diseases of the brain and eyes. (1. ult. i, 483.) Avicenna gives
an accurate description of it, as far as we can judge from the
wretched translation of his works. He recommends it in
errhiues with saffron, and with a little camphor for vertigo,
and other affections of the brain. He also thinks favorably of
it as a cordial in affections of the heart, and in melancholv.
He concludes by saying of it that it is alexipharmic, especially
in cases of poisoning with uapellus. (ii, 2, 452.) See also his
treatise (de Med. cordial,, ii.) There does not appear any
distinct mention of it in the works of Mesne the younger.
It occurs frequently as an ingredient in the antidotes of
Myrepsus. Ebn Baithar gives a very full description of it
and its medicinal \drtues, but it agrees so well with the
description of it by Serapion, that we need not enter much
into particulars. He recommends it particularly in diseases of
the eyes, and says that the oil of it is a useful application to
piles, and when rubbed into the genital member, is strongly
aphrodisiac. It is, moreover, said to be an excellent cordial.
Of the Greek authorities Symeon Scth is the only one that

470 APPENDIX TO [book vit.

e;ives anything like a distinct account of musk. He describes
three kinds, of which the best is procured from a city east of
Chorasan called Trepet (Thibet?). The next in quahty is the
Indian, and the worst is that which is procured from the
Sines (Chinese?). All the kinds, he says, ai-e formed in the
umbihcus of an animal with one horn, resembling the gazelle.
Like Serapion he states that it is got from the animal while
in a state of sexual orgasm. :Musk, he says, is hot and dry
in the third degree, and of a volatile natui'e. As to its medi-
cinal powers, it strengthens weak parts, and is beneficial in
cold intemperaments of the head, but injurious in hot. It is
adapted for the recovery of persons in a fainting fit, in loss of
strength, and in afiPections of the heart. (De Alimentis.) An
antidote of musk occurs in Actuarius. (Meth. Med. v, 6.)

Vohibilis.
This name is loosely applied by the Arabian authorities to
several genera of the cUmbing plants. For example under
this head Serapion describes the lebleb or cussus, the acfin,
the atthin, and lebleb maju. Of these the first is unquestion-
ably the KKTaog or ivy, and is described in extracts from
Dioscorides and Galen. Of the acfn he says that it is laxative,
and quotes Dioscorides as saying that it loosens the bowels.
He says the atthin is styptic, and quotes Dioscorides and Galen
as recommending it in rheums of the eyes, and fluxes of the
bowels. The last or lebleb he describes upon the authority of
Aben Mesuai, who says it is hot in the middle of the first
degree, dry in the beginning of the same, of a cutting nature
with some saline properties, and purges adust bile. Afterwards
he describes its medicinal powers in the same terms as
Dioscorides and Galen describe the cissus, that is to say, he
represents it as being rather a medicine than an article of
food ; says it purges bile in doses of from one third to two
thirds of a pound, Avhen clai'ified without Ijoiling, by means of
ten drachms of sugar or penidia. His next authority, Isaac ebn
Aim-am, savs it is deobstruent. Alkauzi says it is cold and
dry, is pm-gative and useful in indurations. His last authority,
Abix, says the lebleb is cold and moistening, cholagogue, and
along with cassia fistula and oil of almonds it proves useful in
clearing out the bowels, and relieves coughs. (De Simpl. 42.)

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 471

Avicenua under the head of Volubilis, i. e. hedera {n, 2, 724),
and under Cussus (ib. 169), describes the Ktcrcroc of Dioscorides,
but the former of these rather confusedly so as to create
suspicions that he used the term in rather a lax manner.
]\Iesue is the ancient author who treats most elaborately of the
volubilis, applying the term to five distinct species, or rather
genera, of which the first is probably the Hedera, the second
the Helxine, and the third the Clematis of the Greeks ; the
fourth, which he calls lupulus, is acknowledged to be the
Humulus liqmlus, and the fifth the Convolvulus scammonium.
See his learned commentator Costa (c. 24.) As all the others
have been already treated of, we shall confine our attention at
present to the account which he gives of the medicinal powers
of the hops. He says the lupulus brings away some yellow
bile, clears the blood, allays its inflammation, and that its
infusion or whey is of great use for this purpose, and its syrup,
he adds, cures jaundice. He says it was little used by the
physicians of his time. He recommends it as a deobstruent
of the liver, and of other internal viscera, as a remedy in
asthma, and protracted fevers ; and as a plaster to the head with
rose oil or oil of chamomile, &c. (i, 24.) He treats of scam-
mony separately in the next chapter. The character thus
drawn of the lupulus does not seem at first sight to agree well
with the acknowdcdged virtues of the Humulus Lupulus. But,
as Rutty remarks, he probably alludes to the stem and not to
the flowers of the plant, as being a medicine which purges
yellow bile. (M. M. 296.) The Humulus Lupulus is not noticed
by any Greek writer, nor by any Roman, with the exception
of Pliny. (H. N. xxi, 50.)

The lebleb, noticed above, there is every reason to suppose,
was the dolichos lebleb. It is also treated of by Avicenua as
well as Serapion. They represent it as containing saltish
juices which purge adust bile. It is a well-known article in
Hindoo Medicine. See Wise (Book of Hindoo Medicine, 10 1.)

Abrong, or Abrugi.

Serapion describes it as a round grain, spotted with black

and white, which is brought from Seni (China?), having a

bitter taste, hot and dry in the second degree, a laxative of

the bowels, and vermifuge. (De Simpl. 153.) According to

4/2 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

Dodonseus aud Parkinson, it is the pea which the latter de-
scribes and represents under the name of pisum cordatum
vesicarium. See Theatre of Plants (1378.)

Ribes.
This has been supposed the ribes or raspberry, but it is now
■well ascertained that it is a species of Rheum, namely the Rheum
Ribes. See Sprengel (R, H. H. i, 257.) Serapion gives a
full account of it ; he represents it to be a cold, astringent
plant, and recommends it in various complaints, such as cholera,
smallpox, measles, and in hemorrhoids. (De Simpl. 241.)
Avicenna briefly recommends it in nearly the same complaints,
(ii, 2, 581.) See also Rhases (Cont. 1. ult. i, 582.) Ebn
Baithar gives a full and very interesting description of it. He
says it groAvs in alpine localities in Sp'ia, and in the northern
countries, but not in Spain; that it has large, broad, round
leaves, and tender reddish spots. He calls it bitter and
astringent, and recommends it in palpitation of the heart,
vomiting, and marasmus. He also praises it in hemorrhoids,
and the red flux (menorrhagia) of women ; and further com-
mends it in measles, smallpox, and plague. Dr. Royle says
(M. M. 521) that the Rheum Ribes is "the Riivas of Serapion,
who mentions it as making a good sherbet." Does he allude
to the chapter on the Ribes quoted above ?

Aurantium.
When we stated in another place (Vol. 1, 134) that no ancient
author had noticed the orange, we were unacquainted with
the works of Ebn Baithar, and of D^Hanvantare, the author
of the Susruta. In the latter work the orange is enumerated
Avith acid fruits, of a somewhat indigestible nature. (140 et
alibi.) Ebn Baithar says of the orange that it produces an
oil which is useful in flatulence and pains of the joints. The
rind of the fruit, he says, is carminative and anthelminthic, an
antidote to poisons, and removes spots from clothes. The
Hindoos have been long familiar with the Citrus aurantium.
See the Susruta and Wise's Hindoo Medicine (p. 191.)

Limon.
We are now inclined to think that we were mistaken in

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 473

stating (Vol. I. 137) that the lemon was mentioned by Avicenna
(ii^ 2, 433.) His description is probably to be referred to the
Statice limonium. However, beyond all doubt, the Citrus
meclica Limon is fully described by Ebn Baithar. He says
the rind is bitter, acid, astringent, and aromatic, excites the
appetite, improves digestion, renders the breath fragrant, is
cordial, and an antidote to poisons. He recommends it par-
ticularly in fevers^ exanthemata, palpitation of the heart,
vomiting, &c. It appears also to be noticed several times in
the Susruta. (See p. 14-2 ct alibi.) Lemons are likewise
noticed by the Persian writers on the Materia Medica by the
names of Leemoo and Neemboo. See Royle (Mat. Med.
297.) They have been long known to the Hindoos. See
Wise (Hindoo Med.)

Margarita.
Though the Greeks and Romans were well acquainted with
pearl-mussels, as is obvious from several passages in the classical
authors, it does not appear that they ever used these articles in
the practice of medicine. They were used by the Arabians as
an ingredient in their celebrated Electuarium de Gemmis,
(jNIesuc de Elect.) and were reckoned among their cordial medi-
cines. Avicenna says of pearls, that they resemble karabe in
medicinal powers, but are more powerful in their operation.
(De Med. Cordial.) Serapion gives a fuller account of them
upon the authority of several Arabian writers, who describe
pearls as being cold, desiccant, and attenuant, and recommend
them in diseases of the eyes, and in hemorrhages, as dentifrices
in diseases of the teeth, but more especially as cordials in pal-
pitations and other aflcctions of the heart. (Dc Simpl. 397.)
We could have wished to have given in this place, since we have
had no convenient opportunity to do so elsewhere, an exposi-
tion of the views of the Arabians respectiug the operation of
cordial medicines ; but as this subject could not be understood
without a fuller explanation of certain parts of the higher phi-
losophy of the ancients than is consistent Avith our limits, wc
are reluctantly obliged to dismiss it with a very brief notice.
Wc would beg leave to refer our readers to Aviccnna's elaborate
treatise ' de Medicinis Cordialibus.' He there gives an ingenious
disquisition on medicines whicli operate upon the animal spirits

474 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

and dispel vapours, and first advocates views which have formed
the basis of many a modern hypothesis on this subject. Among
the cordial medicines described by him we would remark
amber, gold, silver, citron, coral, cinnamon, camphor, myro-
balans, hyacinth (the gem), lapis lazuli, myrtle, musk, mace,
frankincense, silk, sandal-wood, tamarinds, zerumbet, zeduary,
&c. One important class of cordials consists of medicines
which evacuate black bile, namely, melanogogues, which we
will have to treat of in a subsequent section of this work.

In imitation of the Arabians, Paracelsus and the modern
alchemists have attributed great virtues to the precious metals
and stones as cordial medicines. See Schroder (Chemical Dis-
pensatory, pluries.) He says of pearls, that '' they are an ex-
cellent cordial, that strengthens the balsam of life, resists
poison, pestilence, and putrefaction, and clear the spirits."
(167.) Pearls and other precious stones have always been
highly esteemed by the Hindoo physicians. See the Susruta
and Wise's Hindoo Medicine (124.)

Sericum.
We have mentioned above, that silk is one of the cordial
medicines treated of by Avicenna. Silk, and especially raw
silk, he says, is attenuant and desiccative, acts as a cordial,
improves the memory, proves useful in affections of the ej^es, in
obstructions of the liver and other complaints. (De Med. Cord,
ii, 3.) The silkworm [bombyx mori) and the uses of silk in
medicine, are described with considerable accuracy by Serapion.
Like Avicenna he ranks it with the cordial medicines, and
recommends it in this capacity along with pearls, karabe,
corals, and musk. (De Simpl. c. 28.) Silk forms one of the
ingredients in the electuary of Mesne, to which he gives the
following imposing title, " Electuarium ex granis tinctoriis ad
cordis palpitationem, syncopem, mentis alienationem, seu
desipentiam, moerorem sine causa manifesta, facultates enim
nostrum corpus dispensantes mirifice roborat." See f. 89, and
the interesting Commentary of Costa. It is also an ingredient
in several of the Antidotaria of Avenzoar. Ebn Baithar says,
that various Arabian authors had written on the medicinal pro-
perties of silk. One of them quoted by him describes the use
of it in medicine by burning it, and using its ashes for collyria

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. A7o

and other purposes. He remarks, that Ebu Sina (Aviceima)
says, that silk as an article of clothing prevents the formation of
lice. Raw silk has been used as a medicine in modern times.
Moses Charras, in his ' Royal Pharmacopoeia/ writes thus of it :
" Many writers have attributed great virtue to raw silk. But
although the use thereof had been at all times unknown in
physic, my judgment is that it is too fragrant, that it has too
much beauty, that it affords too many conveniences to human
life, that there are too many wonders in the first original, pro-
gress, labour, and metamorphosis of the worm which produces it,
to be despised.^^ He adds, " that is called raw silk Avhich w^as
never boiled, but is still as it were in the grain, out of which the
worm has been but newly taken." He says further of the com-
position, whereof raw silk is an ingredient, namely, Confectio
alkermes regia, " This confection is, without question, one of
the best cordials that ever Galenic physic invented. For it
repairs and recreates the vital and animal spirits, it ceases
palpitations of the heart and swooning-fits ; it fortifies the
brain, &c." (R. P. 149.) A still more recent authority on
pharmacy, says of raw silk, <Seric?«», that it is "cordial, restora-
tive, one drachm in powder." Gray (Suppl. to Pharmacop. 215.)

Hyacintlius.
This is one of the precious stones which often occurs as an
ingredient in the Araljian formulae for antidotes. Ebn Baithar
remarks, that it is not described by Dioscorides nor Galen.
He mentions three kinds, a yellow, a red, and a black, of which
the red is the noblest. Its powers, he says, are increased by
fire. It was used as an amulet, and was held to be cordial and
alexipharmic ; and, in fact, Ebn Baithar says it is possessed of
many virtues. From his mentioning of it, that, when rubbed,
it attracts straw , there seems every reason to suppose that it was
toru'maline. Some have taken the hyacinth of the Greeks
and Romans for the same, but Heeren rather supposes it to be
the ruby. It is briefly noticed as a cordial by A\dccnna, Mesne,
and Serapion. The last of these gives nearly the same accoinit
of it as Ebn Baithar ; that is to say, both had copied from the
same authorities. He particularly mentions it as being an
excellent phylactery to guard the body during thunder-storms.
(De Simpl. 398.) The Confectio de Hyacintho has been very

476 ArPENDIX TO [book vii.

celebrated in modern times. See Moses Cliarras (Roy. Phar-
macop. 147.)

Hager Albuzedi.
It is thus described by Serapion : " Hager albuzedi is a red
stone, but less so than the hyacinth, the redness of which is
more agreeable to the eye, as there is no obscurity in it. The
mines where this stone is found are in the East. When taken
from the mine it is opake ; but when divested of its outer coat
by a lapidary, its goodness is discovered and it becomes trans-
parent. When this stone has been strongly rubbed against the
hair of the head, it attracts chaff, as the magnet does iron."
He speaks of its being useful to the eyes Avhen they are rubbed
with it, and says that as a seal it dispels frightsome dreams,
(de Mineral. 399.) According to Beckmann this is most pro-
bably not the tourmaline, although it bears some resemblance
to it iu properties, but belongs rather to the hyacinths. (His-
tory of Inventions.) In fact, it Avould appear to us highly
probable, that this article like the preceding was a variety of
the ruby.

Hager Salachil, or Lapis Corneolus.
Several species of it are described by Serapion, of which the
best he says is the red. They are brought, he adds, from the
mines of the Romaus, and were used principally as an amulet
and dentifrice. It must have been the same as the Sardion of
Theophrastus (De Lapidibus), and of Plato (Timasus.) The
term would appear to have been used in a general sense for
several of the finer kinds of agates. (De Simpl. 400.) A
modern authority thus describes it : " The Sarda or Cornelian.
It is a gem half transparent, like the water wherein flesh is
washed, or like bloody flesh : hence it is called Carneolus or
Cornelian. The best cornelians are found in Sardinia."
Schroder (Chemical Dispensatory, p. IGO.)

Tincar, or Borax.
We have treated of this article already under the head of
ChrysocoUa, with which it has been often confounded. It was
introduced into medical practice by the Arabians, and there
appears to us no doubt that it was the same as our borate of
soda. It was very much used for the cure of toothache. See

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 477

the authorities quoted under Chj'ysocoIIa. It was used medi-
cinally by the Hindoo physicians. Sec the Susnita (pluries).
Wise (Hindoo System of Medicine, 117) ; Ainslie (Mat. Ind.
57G) J Royle (Mat. Med. 97.)

Hager Alcazaha.
It is difficult to determine precisely what this precious
stone was, although it is pretty minutely described by Serapion.
He says it is brought from Yemen, and is of divers colours,
from white to black, and that it occasions disturbed dreams
when worn as an amulet : he recommends it, however, to be
thus used by infants, and says a vessel prepared from it, if
used for holding any article of food or drink, prevents sleep.
(De Simpl. 401.

Lapis Lazuli.
We have in so far treated of this substance under Cyanus in
the preceding Commentai'y, It was used, like the other pre-
cious stones, as an amulet, but was more particularly celebrated
as a melanogogue medicine. It was further said to be useful
in asthma, and as an emracnagogue. See Serapion (De Simpl.
369) ; Avicenna (ii, 256). A modern authority describes it
thus : " It is a stone like a sapphire, or the flowers of cyanus
adorned with golden stones or flowers, harder than the Armenian
stone. It is in virtue like the Armenian stone, but weaker;
it purgeth chiefly melancholy. It is worn about the neck for
an amulet to drive away frights from children,^^ &c. Schroder,
(Chymic. Dispensat.)

Berengemish, or Ozimum Gariofilatum.
Serapion, after quoting a description of it from Isaac el)u
Araram, says of it, that it is hot and dry in the end of the
second degree, is useful in coldness of the stomach, promotes
digestion, is a hepatic and cordial medicine, dispels melan-
choly, renders the eructations fragrant, &c. His other au-
thorities recommend it in similar cases. (De Simpl. 156.)
Avicenna gives a similar account of it in all respects, (ii, 2, 254.)
We suppose there is no doubt that it is the clove basil, or
Ocimum gariofilatum of Miller; or, according to Sprcngel, the
O. monachorwn.

478 APPENDIX TO [book vii.

Behen.
Serapion briefly describes two varieties of it consisting of
fibrous roots, being brought from Armenia, aud ha^-ing a good
smell with some viscidity. Both kinds, he says, are hot and
humid, and increase the secretion of semen. (De Simpl. 223.)
See also A^-icenna (ii, 2, 82), and Rhases (Contin. 1. ult. iii, 29.)
Avicenna holds that it is also cordial in addition to its power
of forming semen. It is the Centaurea Behen L.

S>pinach\a.
We have already treated of the spinach [Spinachia oleracea)
as a dietetical article introduced by the Arabians. (Vol. 1, 113.)
According to Avicenna it is laxative of the bowels, useful in
orthopnoea, and other diseases of the chest. It is noticed in like
terms by Serapion (De Simpl. 140) ; by Rhases (Contin. 1. ult.
i, 671.) Ebn Baithar says of spinach that it is an excellent
potherb, and useful in diseases of the neck and chest, being much
used for this purpose by the inhabitants of Nineveh, who are
veiy su])ject to such complaints.

Rhabarbarum.
We have stated under Rheum in the preceding Commentary
(317), that it was the rheum rhaponticum, which is the only
species of the rheum described in the regular treatises on the Mat.
Med. of the Greeks and Romans. Our author, however, would
seem to allude to the Rheum barbarum or purgative rhubarl), at
Book I, 43, and VII, 11. Although it is stated by some learned
authorities that the rheum of Tralhan ("sdii, 3) was a species
of the Rhabarbarum, we are satisfied from a careful examina-
tion of the passage, that it was the rhaponticum. There
can be no doubt that the general use of the purgative rhubarb
was introduced by the Arabians, of whom Ebn Baithar is by
far the most copious and instructive under this head. He
states decidedly that there are four species of rhubarb, three
of which are perfectly distinct. On the first species, by which
he CAidently means the R. Rhaponticum, he gives extracts from
Dioscorides, Galen, Oribasius, and Paulus. He says the older
physicians knew nothing of the virtues of the purgative kinds
of rhubarb until they were discovered near to his time. He
says the purgative rhubarb acts as a deobstruent and strength-

SECT. III.] SIMPLES. 479

ener of all the internal viscera, is useful in mental diseases,
dropsy, jaundice, marasmus connected with obstructions, espe-
cially when combined with gum lac. He says it is most useful in
chronic diarrhoea when taken in an aromatic wine and with
Indian spikenard, and also in uterine fluxes, dyspepsia, and other
complaints of a similar nature. He praises it most especially
as a stomachic. He states, that of all the kinds of rhubarb,
the Turkish possesses the purgative quality in the highest de-
gree. Of the other Arabian authorities, Averrhoes is one who
gives a very distinct account of the true purgative rhubarb.
(CoUig. V, 42.) ]Mesue describes three species of the Rhabar-
barum, or Rhaued, namely, Indianum, Barbarum, and Turci-
cum, to all of which he ascribes purgative powers, and recom-
mends them as being possessed of hepatic, stomachic, and de-
obstruent properties, which render them particularly serviceable
in dropsy, obstructions of the spleen, and jaundice. The dose
of the infusion, he says, is from one to ten drs. ; and of the
pounded, from one to three. He appears not to have been
acquainted with the Rhapouticum (De Sirapl. v), whereas
Avicenna and Serapion would seem not to have known the other.
It may be proper to mention, in conclusion, that the Rheum
rhaponticum is the common culinary or tart rhubarb of this
countiy. According to Loudon, it was introduced in 1573,
but it is most probable that we owe the introduction of it to
the Romans.

But it is time that we should draw this Appendix to a close.
And now we trust it will not be thought out of place to con-
clude with Professor Beckmann^s eloquent eulogy on the Litera-
ture of the Arabians in his celebrated work on the ' History
of Inventions and Discoveries.^

" What a noble people were the Arabs ! We are indebted to
them for much knowledge and for many inventions of great
utility ; and we should have still more to thank them for were
we fully aware of the benefits we have derived from them.
What a pity that their works should be suffered to moulder
into dust, without being made available ! What a shame that
those acquainted with this rich language should meet with so
little encouragement ! The few old translations which exist
have been made by persons who were not sufficiently acquainted

480 SIMPLE PURGATIVES. [book vii.

either with languages or the sciences. On that account they
are for the most part unintelligible, uncertain, in many places
corrupted, and besides, exceedingly scarce. Even when ob-
tained, the possessors are pretty much in the same state as
those who make their way with great troul)le to a treasure, Avhich,
after all, they are only permitted to see at a distance through
a narrow gate. Had I still twenty years to live, and could hope
for an abundant supply of Arabic works, I would learn Arabic.
But o piog p^ayrvg, i) 0£ revvr] jita/cp?j."

SECT. IV. ON SIMPLE PURGATIVE MEDICINES.

Give of aloes one drachm, with honeyed water, in the morning.
But they who administer it in the evening or after food occa-
sion mischief, for it makes the food spoil. It evacuates yellow
bile, less if given to the extent of three oboli, for in that case
it proves solely and entirely eccoprotic. But purgative medi-
cines being generally bad for the stomach, aloes alone is
stomachic. Those who cannot endure the bitterness of it may
take it formed into pills. It is manifest that purgative medi-
cines do not evacuate by any one simple temperament such as
heat (for then all hot things would be evacuants, svich as pep-
per), but by some specific property of their whole substance in
like manner as the magnet attracts iron. Of purgative medi-
cines those which are simply laxative have been treated of in
the First Book. We are to use drastic purgatives either in
order to transfer some matter, or to dislodge and remove an
indurated diathesis, or as an alterative to the system, and in
order to change the temperament of it, or to displace any
offending humour. There are certain mixed modes compli-
cated of the afore-mentioned. Purgative medicines are to be
given to those whose powers are firm and their understanding
strong ; to such as have passed the first stage of life, and have
not yet come to the last ; to those who have a strong stomach,
and have collections of superfluous matters in the body, and are
not very sanguineous. The best seasons for purging, if there
be no urgent necessity, are the spring and the autumn.

SECT. IV.] SIMPLE PURGATIVES. 481

On those things which evacuate bile. We may give eliola-
gogiie medicines at any season except winter, to persons in
the vigour of life and in the dechne ; to persons of diy
and muscular habits, and who are of a dark or ruddy com-
plexion ; to men rather than to women ; to those whose food
is apt to spoil on their stomachs, and whose bellies are con-
stipated ; to such as abound in bitter bile, are irascible, pass
little urine, and use hot and dry food : in icteric, hepatic,
and pleuritic affections ; in phrenitis, cynanche, mania, cepha-
laea, ophthalmy, erysipelas, leprosy, fevers, and to such as are
troubled with collections of bile. Aloes is given to such as are
troubled with heaviness of the head, with ophthalmy, with thirst,
with disturbed dreams without fever ; to such as have a sensa-
tion of departing rigor ; to those who pass acrid flatus, and have
gnawing pains of the intestines ; to those who are seized with
burning heat about the stomach, or nausea producing eversion
of it ; and to those who being troubled with a collection of ex-
crementitious matters cannot bear evacuations by clysters.
For it evacuates the whole body, and does not occasion disorder
of it unless given in very great quantitj^, and brings along with
it any bile lying in the intestines, stomach, and gullet. — Helle-
bore agrees both with those in acute diseases and those in
chronic requiring a cholagogue medicine, such as maniacs, those
troubled with hemicrania, and such as have defluxions of the
eyes and complaints in the chest. But it suits most with such
viscera as the uterus and bladder Avhen they require a chola-
gogue remedy. It is also proper for chronic affections of the
trachea, for jaundice, exanthemata, lichen, herpes, erysipelas,
and leprosy. Black hellebore evacuates bile, especially yellow,
from the whole body and without trouble. Hence it is given
to those not affected with heavy fever, and more especially to
such as are free from fever, in the quantity of one drachm of
the roots triturated in honeyed water or plain water, while fast-
ing, or with honey made into pills. Some mix with it penny-
royal, savoury, or some of the volatile stomachics. — Scamraony
purges like hellebore, and more especially yellow bile, but of
all purgative medicines it is the most prejudicial to the stomach.
It is, therefore, to be given to those who are free from fever,
and such as have strong stomachs, to the amount of four oboli,
with salts, pepper, ginger, or some one of the volatile sto-

iii. 31

482 SIMPLE PURGATIVES. [book vii.

machicSj or along with honey. It is also formed into pills
with gum. — The medullary part of the fruit of the Colocynth
evacuates especially bile and mucous matters, not from the
blood like hellebore and scammonv, but from the nerves and
nervous parts, when given to the amount of one drachm in
two cyathi of honeyed water which has rue boiled in it. But it
is to be triturated for a long time, because otherwise its rough
particles sticking in the internal parts produce ulcerations and
nervous affections by sympathy. It is to be given to those
who have affections of the head, namely, when the meninx or
the pericranium is affected, such as those labouring under
vertigo or hemicrania, or those troubled with cephalsea ; also
in epilepsy, ajioplexy, cynic spasms, chronic deflusions on the
eyes, orthopnoea, asthma, and chronic coughs ; likewise in
arthritic cases to those who have affections about the kidneys
or bladder. — Elaterium evacuates like scammony. Such as is
green like leeks, light, and not older than a year, is to be
chosen ; and it is to be given to the amount of three oboli, tri-
turated with one hemina of milk. — Tithymallus, spurge, eva-
cuates bile like elaterium and scammony. Four or five drops
of the juice are given, mixed with polenta and quickly
swallowed. For if retained long in the mouth they ulcerate
the tongue and surrounding parts. — Lathyrides (a species of
spurge) purge bile like hellebore and scammony. They are to be
given to the amount of seven, eight, or as many as fifteen
grains to such as are robust and require much purging, who
are to be directed to chew them. But those who are weaker
and have bad stomachs, must swallow them whole. — The dried
tops of the Peplium are to be given to the amount of eight
oboli in honeyed water. They evacuate bile like hellebore,
and occasion the breaking of wind. — Agaric has similar powers
to the colocynth, but acts slowly and is not prejudicial to tha
stomach. It is given to the amount of two drachms with
honeyed water. It should be very white, brittle, and not very
woody nor carious. — lUyrian Iris purges in like manner when
given to the amount of eight oboli in honeyed water. It ought
not to be old nor carious. — The small Centaury by purging bile
and mucus is particularly adapted for cases of ischiatic disease.
The decoction is to be drunk of a drachm and a half of
centaury, boiled in a hemina of water until it be reduced to

SECT. IV.] SIMPLE PURGATIVES. 483

the half. — Tlie flower with the fruit of Tragoriganura is given
to the amount of two drachms, in honeyed water, to the same
class of persons as the black hellebore. It is more stomachic
than the hellebore, but less purgative. — Four drachms of
Chamelcca (mezereon ?) boiled in two heminse of honeyed water,
until reduced to a fourth part, purge like hellebore. Some ad-
minister chamelsea by making it into pills with a double
quantity of wormwood. — Aristolochia, birthwort, purges like
colocynth, one drachm of the species called clematis being
given in honeyed water. — The dried root of Polypody when
pounded and sprinkled on honeyed water, or triturated along
with it, has the same eifects as colocynth.

Medicines which evacuate black bile. Medicines which eva-
cuate black bile are to be given in an especial manner to
melanchoKc persons, to such as are easily moved to paroxysms,
to passionate persons, to misanthropists, to persons of soli-
tary habits, or to such as during convalescence require purg-
ing, during the heat of autumn, in dry habits, and to such as
are not muscular. — Epithymum, dodder of thyme, is the best of
those medicines which evacuate black bile. It is to be given to
the amount of five drachms triturated with a liemina of milk.

Epith}Tnbrum, or the substance which grows upon savory,
evacuates in like manner with the epithymum, but is weaker.
Pennyroyal, when taken to the amount of an acetabulum, in
honeved water, evacuates black bile. — The Heracleatic Traerori-
ganum in the same dose evacuates like pennyroyal. But both
must be dried. Alypum, the seeds of it have been said to purge
black bile when given in the same quantity as the epithymum
with salts and vinegar ; but, as Dioscorides says, it occasions
slight ulceration of the intestines. It is, I think, that substance
which is now called alypias. It is to be given in honeyed water.
— Parthenium (matricaria ?), feverfew, when dried and drunk
in like manner, evacuates the same humours. Alypon, madwort,
drunk with salts, purges in like manner.

Medicines which evacuate phlegm. We arc to administer
phlegraagogues in cold habits ; to aged persons, in winter ; in
paralytic and apoplectic cases ; for loose oedematous swellings ;
to such persons as have great collections of phlegm in the

484 SIMPLE PURGATIVES. [book vii.

belly, chest, or stomach j and in cases of the female flux.
They agree also with those who have a copious running from
the nose and thick expectoration, with cases of anorexia and
ischiatic disease when the joint becomes mucous or pituitous ;
but they are particularly adapted for those cases of dropsy
which are called anasarca. — One di-achm of white Storax,
drunk with an equal quantity of turpentine rosin, evacuates
phlegm. — The bark of the root of Olive to the amount of one
drachm, with wine or water ; nine oboli of Pellitory, with
Avater ; tAvo drachms of the seed of Lychnis [camjnon) ; one
di'achm of the root of Sow-bread, with hydromel -, two drachms
of Garlic, with honey ; ground Pine, triturated and given in the
form of pills ; half a drachm of the flakes of copper, with an
equal quantity of rosin, in pills, purges bile strongly. — A drachm
and half of the green leaves of Bay ; two oboli of the bark of
the root of the wild Cucumber; forty seeds of that specie's of
ricinus called Crotones stripped of their bark and eaten, do the
same. A half of that part of Parsley connected with the root
(which some call chamseraphanus), when eaten; two drachms
of Bdellium, with hydromel ; but Gum is particularly adapted
for defluxions on the eves.

Medicines ivMch evacuate water. We are to give hydra-
gogues in that variety of dropsical disease called ascites ; to
women troubled with the whites ; and to those who have
ulcers accompanied with a copious discharge. — One drachm
of the flakes of Copper, when drunk with honeyed water evacu-
ates water; but a little vinegar must also be swallowed lest
it be vomited. — The Granum Cnidium when strijjped of its
bark, triturated, and drunk with boiled honey, that it may
not touch the orifice of the stomach, CAacuates water. Twenty,
twenty-five, or thirty grains are to be given, and to those who are
stronger, as many as forty. — One drachm of Euphorbium,
drunk with boiled honey, evacuates phlegm, but more especially
water. — Eight oboli of the seed of rough Spleenwort, with
honeyed water, evacuate water. — Cneorum, in like manner,
purges water Avhen drunk with polenta. — Five drachms of the
seed of Cnicus, when triturated together in ptisan^ are swallowed
with a small quantity of salts. — One drachm of Ammoniac
perfume, drunk in honeyed water, evacuates water. Some give

SECT. IV.] SIMPLE PURGATIVES. 485

it in affections of the spleen with oxycrate. — The juice of the
bark of the root of the Elder-tree, when drunk to the amount
of two ounces with wine, evacuates water.

Commentary. The philosopher Aristotle thus explains his Comm.
ideas respecting the action of purgatives : " When purgatives " "
are conveyed to the stomach, and are there dissolved, they are
carried by the same passages as the food, and when they can-
not be digested, but their prevailing power remains unsubdued,
they return, and carry with them whatever opposes them, and
this is called purging." (Problem. 43.) See also Alexander
Aphrodisiensis (Probl. ii, 58.)

Hippocrates administered purgative medicines freely and
boldly, but at the same time he cautions against the unseason-
able and rash administration of them in several parts of his
works. We do not find any theory, however, of the modus
operandi of purgatives, nor any general remarks on the cases
in which they are applicable, in any of the Hippocratic treatises
which are now acknowledged to be genuine. Some ingenious
remarks, however, may be found on this subject in the work
'De Nat. humana.'

Celsus has a chapter on purgative medicines which contains
much curious and valuable matter. He says the more ancient
physicians gave various purgative medicines very freeh^, such
as black hellebore, polypody, squama seris, the milky juice of
lactuca marina [eupliorhia paraVias ?), the milk of asses, with
a little salt ; but he holds that purgatives hurt the stomach,
and are not to be given when any fever is present. The rules,
which he lays down for the administration of them, are highly
judicious, and deserving of consideration. He approves of
them when the head feels heavy, when the eves are misty,
when there is obstruction of the bowels, and when there is
pain there or in the hip-joint, when the stomach is oppressed
with bile or phlegm, and when there is dyspnoea, when vene-
section is indicated, but the powers of the system will not admit
of it, and in several other cases, (v, 12.) He mentions that
Asclepiadcs totally rejected the use of purgative medicines. (i,3.)

Galen has devoted a complete treatise to the discussion of
the question regarding the modus operandi of purgatives. He
decidedly inclines to the theoiy that every purgative by some

486 SIMPLE PURGATIVES. [book mi.

CoMM. specific property attracts,, and as it were, sucks to it the
' ' ' humour to "svhich it has a uatui'al alliance, in like manner as
the magnet attracts iron. He divides Pui'gatives into Chola-
gogueSj Melanogogues, Hydragogues, and Phlegmagogues.
He rejects the hypothesis of Erasistratus, who maintained that
each medicine converts the juices presented to it, into its
own specific natiu'e : thus that cholagogues convert them into
yellow bile, melanogogues into black bile, and so forth.
Although Galen flatters himself that he eflectuallv demolishes
this hypothesis, we have long looked upon it as a very plausible
one, and believe that at the present time the prevailing opinion
in the profession iuchnes much in that direction. For example,
the green and dark discharges which are brought off" by mer-
curial purgatives, are now generally supposed to be occasioned
by the fluids in the secretions entering into combination with
the medicine administered. It is to be regretted that no
ancient author has given us a clear exposition of the hypo-
thesis of Erasistratus. Galen gives a long list of cases, in
which piu'gatives prove beneficial, such as eiysipelas, epilepsy,
apoplexy, gout, rheumatism, melancholy, and many chronic
complaints. He insists strongly on the benefit derived from
cholagogues for the cure of jaundice. (De purg. Med. xi.)

Antyllus, in an extract preserved by Aetius, espouses the
theory which maintains the specific operation of purgatives,
and that thev act bv attracting the humours to which thev
are allied. He recommends them for various complaints, as
malignant cutaneous diseases, spontaneous ulceration, and
rheumatic afi'ections. (iii, 23.)

The account of this subject, given by Oribasius, is taken
from the works of Galen and Ruff us. It is too lengthy for
our limits. Ruff'us directs the surgeon to consider weU the
patient's constitution, and regulate the dose of the medicine
accordingly, as there is a great difi'erence in the susceptibility
of persons to be acted upon by purgatives. The following is
a list of the purgatives described by Ruffus in this fragment :
Polypody, iris, colocynth, phacoides (a species of spurge olive ?),
peplos, pephum, aloe, hippophaes, hippophaestum, clematis,
pycnocomon, vines, thyme, epithyme, marjoram, Greek savory,
poppies, cucumber, the smaller heliotrope, the lesser sesa-
moides, the tithymalli or spurges, the chamelaea, lathyris.

SECT. IV.] SIMPLE PURGATIVES. 487

agaric, and euphorbium. His description of the operation of Comm.
each medicine bespeaks a good acquaintance with the subject. ' ^ '
(Med. Collect, vii, 26.) See also Actuarius (Meth. Med. iii, 7.)

Haly Abbas makes some acute remarks on the action of Ca-
thartics. Every purgative, he says, attracts the humour, to which
it is allied. Different opinions, he adds, have been entertained
regarding the modus operandi in this case. Some maintain that,
when such a medicine is swallowed, it goes to the members where
its cognate humour is lodged, from which both are expelled by
the expulsive faculty of the part, and return to the bowels
together. This theory, however, he rejects. He mentions
further that others maintain that the medicine attracts its
peculiar fluid, as a magnet does iron ; and of this theory he
adopts a modification. He states it as his opinion that, when
such a medicine has been swallowed, it attracts its cognate fluid
from the suiTOunding parts, to which all the similar fluids in the
body are afterwards determined, being conveyed thither by
the veins. He gives a full account of all the purgatives known
in his time. (Pract. iii, 53, 54.) JNIuch the same theory is ad-
vocated, and fully explained by Serapion. (De Autidot. vii, 10.)

Avicenna and Rhases object to the doctrine of Galen
that he appears to have maintained that there is a peculiar
alliance between a purgative medicine of a certain class and
the fluid or humour which it attracts, whereas they argue
that, as there is no alliance between the magnet and the iron
which it attracts, so is it in like manner with purgatives and
the peculiar fluids which they evacuate. This, however, is
only a more precise exposition of the theory advanced by
Galen. Rhases (Cont. xii, 1) ; Avicenna (i, 4, 4.) The ancient
theory is very acutely stated by Averrhoes (Collig. v, 21.)
See also ]\Iesue (Canones universales.) There appears to be
some originality in the theory of INIesue. He says that a pur-
gative medicine operates by occasioning a preternatural increase
of the vital, or, as it is now called, animal heat of the part to
which it is applied, whereby its attractive powers are increased.
He maintains very ingeniously that purgation is an act of
Nature, that is to say, an operation of the vis medicatrios
naturts, and that the medicine is merely the instrument of
Nature in this case, for, lie adds (as Hippocrates says), it is
Nature, and not the physician, that cures diseases. A pur-

488 SIMPLE PURGATIVES. [book vii.

CoMM. gative medicine^, then, lie argues, acts by rousing the expulsive
" * ' power of Nature. He joins the preceding authorities, how-
ever, in illustrating the attractive power of purgatives, by com-
paring it to the property which the magnet has of attracting
iron, and amber of attracting straws. Purgative medicines,
he says, have the faculty of clearing away the humours from
the different parts of the body; from the stomach and intestines
they do so readily ; from the meseraic veins less easily ; still
more difficultly from the liver, and with the greatest possible
difficulty from the joints, especially when the humours are
• impacted there. He forbids purgatives to be given in the
extremes, either of hot or cold ; in this practice observing the
rule of Hippocrates. In hot weather, he says, emetics, and not
purgatives, are indicated. The directions which he gives for
correcting the noxious qualities of purgative medicines are highly
important, but they are too lengthy for our limits. Aromatics
added to purgatives, he says, dispel flatus ; bitters do the same,
and strengthen the stomach; saltish things increase their pur-
gative powers; unctuous, by lubricating the intestines, accelerate
their operation, and render it easier; and sweet substances
render them less nauseous, and diminish their acrimony.

On the ancient arrangement of purgative medicines Dr.
Paris makes the following pertinent remark : " It is impos-
sible to concede to the opinion of Dr. Hamilton, that the
different species of purgative medicines do not possess dis-
tinct powers over the difi'erent species of matter to be
evacuated ; on the contrary, there is reason for reviving the
ancient theory, too inconsiderately abandoned, and which ac-
knowledged these different distinctions in the operations of
cathartic medicines under the appropriate names of hydragogues,
cholagogues, &c." (Pharmacop.) Dr. Alston likewise writes
thus : " We have a very learned essay in confirmation of the
ancient doctrine of the specific operation of purgatives by Dr.
G. Martyn (Lond. 1740, in 8vo.) I shall not enter into the
controversy, but only observe that there is nothing impossible,
yea, nor improbable in the theory." (Lectures.) See a learned
dissertation on the action of purgatives in Mangeti ' Bibliotheca
Anatomica,^ i, 159. We may mention further that Dr. Murray
in his Materia Medica inclines to the Galenic theorv of the
specific operation of purgatives, (c. viii.)

SECT. IV.]

SIMPLE PURGATIVES.

On Cholagogues. Most of these medicines are sufficiently Comm.
well kuoM-n, and therefore do not require to be treated of at ' *
greater length. See also Aetius (iii) and Oribasius (M. Col.
vii.)

The Arabian author Mesne gives the foUoAving table of
Cholagogues :

Cliolagoga f

Clementer.

Aloe . .

Absintliiiim

Rosa

Rhabarbarum

Wyrobalaui

Pruna.

Tamar Indi

Cassia . .

i\Ianiia.

Viola nigra

Psyllium

Adiantum etiam phi.

Trahendo et
astringendo,
flavie: nam aliae
aliud vacuant.

V Astringendo.
t Liibricando.

Radices /

Valenter.

Agaricus.

Asarum.

Aristolochia.

Bryonia.

Cyclaminus.

Cucumer agrestis.
\ Dracunculus et arum.

Elleborus.

Esula.

Hermodactylus.

Iris.

SciUa.
LTurbith.

It will be perceived that this list contains several articles
with which the Greeks were unacquainted, nameh^, myrobalani,
tamariudi, manna, and turbith. Of all these substances we
have ab'eady given some account in the Appendix to the Third
Section. INIesue calls the tamarinds, the fruit of an Indian
palm-tree, the word tamur signifying a date. He says, that
they are excellent medicines for repressing the acrimony of the
humours, purging bile, cooling the heat of the blood ; that they
prove useful in hot fevers, jaundice, inflammation of the stomach
and liver, and that they stop vomiting. He calls them refrige-
rants and desiccants of the second order. To prevent them
from hurting the stomach by their coldness, he recommends to
give them with spikenard, mace, mastich, wormwood, fennel, or
any such calefacients. Avicenna states their medicinal charac-
ters in the same terms. Serapion says, that they are desiccants
and refrigerants in the third degree. Averrhoes ranks them
among the refi'igerants of the third, and desiccants of the
second order. We have ah'cady mentioned, that the earlier
commentators are decidedly of opinion, that the tripolium of
the Greeks was turbith, but this is now generally acknowledged
to have been a mistake. Mesne calls it the root of a milky
herb, having leaves like a ferula, but smaller. Proba])ly, liow-
ever, as his commentator Manardus remarks, there is some

490 SIMPLE PURGATIVES. [book vii.

CoMM. mistake in the comparison of it to the ferula^ as there is no
' • ' resemblance between them. An accurate modern author,
Moses Charras, calls it the bark of a milky root, which is
chosen by its weight, dark-coloured without, white within, and
clear from its pith, which is hard and fibrous. Mesue repre-
sents it to be a hot, nauseous purgative. It is given in powder,
he savs, to the amount of from one to two drachms.

Serapion recommends Cholagogues particularly in jaundice,
inflammatory aff'ections of the brain, mania, epilepsy, erysipelas,
herpes, and tertian fever. He describes the following medi-
cines as cholagogues : aloes, southernwood, black hellebore,
scammony, colocynth, agaric, elaterium, two species of mezereon,
lathyris, the root of the lily, centaury, polypody, birthwort,
myrobalans (the yellow, the black, and the chebulic), pome-
granate, cassia fistula, -violet, ivy, and two Arabian substances
anabac and alterariabin. We are unable to determine what the
last two were.

A modern writer, Chi'istianus INIargravius, in his ' Materia
Medica Contracta,' thus enumerates the cholagogues of his
time.

Cholagoga,
Cassia, manna, tamarindi, succusque rosarum,
Scammonium, mjTobalani, rhabarbarum, aloe.

Professor Alpinus gives an accurate account of the ancient
cholagogues. (Meth. Med. iii, 9.) The following medicines are
said to be used as purgatives by the Hindoos; we give the
scientific names as given by Dr. Wise : 1. Convolvulus tur-
pethum. 2. Panicum frumentaceum. 3. Croton polyandrum.
4. Anthericum tuberosum. 5. Abrus precatorius. 6. Cessam-
pelos hexandra. 7. Asclepias geminata. 8. Clotoria ternata.
9. A kind of convolvulus. 10. Shabraba. 11. Cassia fistula.
12. Plumbago zeylanica. 13. Acheranthes aspera. 14. Poa
cvnosurides. 15, Saccharum spontaneum. 16. Jelaka?. 17. A
variety of the convohnilus turpethum. 18. Ramaku. 19. Bignonia
suaveolens. 20. Terminalia chebula. 21. Indigofera tiuctoria.
22. Uicinus communis. 23. Costus speciosus. 24. Eiiphorbia.
25. Suj)tachetta. 26. Calotropis gigantea. 27, Hahcacabum
cardiospermum. Of these the turbet, myrobalans, and castor
oil, are particularly commended. (On Hindoo Medicine.)

SECT. IV.]

SIMPLE PURGATIVES.

On Melanogogiies. The other Greek authorities treat ofcoMM.
nearly the same number of jSIelanogogues. They are treated " '
of methodically by Galen, Oribasius, and Aetius. The Alypias
is supposed by Bernard (Nota in Nonni Epit.), and Prosper
Alpinus, to have been the tui-bith ; but, as is now maintained,
erroneously. See SprengeFs Notes on Dioscorides (iv, 177)
and the preceding Appendix.

The following is Mesue's list of Melanogogues:

Melanogoga \

Clementer,
Staechas.
Aqua lactis.
Fumaria.
Epithymus.

Thymus leviter, magis phleg.
Polypodium.

Jus gallorum phleg. cum phleg.
, melanogogum cum melanogog.

Fructus et
Flores

Valenter.

Balanus Myrepsica.
Centaurium.
Colocynthis.
Coccum Gnidium.
' Genista.
Ricinus.
Senna.

Terrea <

Armenus lapis.
Cyanus lapis.
Mtrum.
Salis genera.

Of these medicines, the only one which we owe to the Arabians
is Senna. Mesne, it is true, quotes Galen as an authority on
it, but this is most probal)ly a mistake, as no mention of it is
noAV to be traced in any part of his works. Averrhoes, ac-
cordingly, ranks it among the newly-discovered medicines. He
says, that it is both phlegmagogue and cholagogue. Serapion
and Rhases give nearly the same account of it. They state the
minimum dose of the powdered leaves at one di'achm, and of
the decoction at five drachms. Mesne directs us to prepare a
vinous tincture by infusing the leaves in musk. He recom-
mends us to correct its nauseousness and unpleasant effects by
the addition of ginger, and other cordials. He says that it
cleanses the liver and spleen. Actuarius briefly notices it. He
says it evacuates bile and phlegm. (Meth. Med. v, 8.) See
Appendix. The Arabian authors represent the lapis lazuli to
be the same as the lapis armenus of the Greeks. We have
stated what we believe to be the truth of the matter in the
preceding commentary. ^largravius, in his enumeration of
mehmogogucs, makes a distinction between them :

Melanogoga —
Sunt ludiae balani, lazuli lapis, armenusque,
Senna, polypodium quernuni, hclleborusque, cpitbymuni.

492 SIMPLE PURGATIVES. [book vii.

CoMM. Averrlioes states that the lapis lazuli is the most potent
' • ' medicine of this class. (CoUig. v, 43.)

On Fhlegmagogues. Mesue's list is as follows :

Clementer. Valenter.

rCnicus. fEuphorbiuni.

I Lupulus. Opoponax.

Phlegmagoga<^ Hyssopus. Lachryraa ( Scammonium.

I^Eupatorium etiam cholag. 1 Sagapenum.

l^Sarcocolla.

Serapion directs us to administer these medicines to persons
of a cold habit, in cold seasons of the year, to those affected
with anasarca and apoplexy, in sciatica and hemorrhages. His
list is little different from our author's. Margravius enu-
merates the phlegmagogues as follows :

Phlegmagoga —
Carthamus, agaricus, tuvpeth, mechoaca, jalappa,
Eniblica, bellirica;, chebula;, colocynthis, amara,
Hermodactylus, euphorbium, opoponax, sagapenum.

On Hydragogues. The hydragogue properties of the elder-
tree are commended by Boerhaave and Sydenham. See the
section on Dropsy in the Third Book.

There is some difficulty in determining what the cneoros was.
We are inclined to think that it was the cassia fistula, the
medicinal characters of which, as stated by Mesne among the
Arabian, and Prosper Alpinus among the modern, authorities,
correspond with the account of cneoros given by our author.

Gum ammoniac is an ingredient of the purgative salt, a
receipt for which is given by Apicius. It also enters into the
sales purgatorii of Myrepsus. (ii, 9 and 10.) See the com-
mentary on the next Section.

Prosper Alpinus says of the coccum gnidium, or fruit of the
thymelfea, that in doses of fifteen grains it is a strong purga-
tive, and evacuates principally serous humours in dropsy. He
reckons the squama peris among the drastic purgatives.

Serapion's account of the hydragogues is nearly the same as
our author's. The following is INIargravius's list of them :

Esula, gratiola, atque ireos succus, mechoaca,
Post ebuli semen, et succus, cortexque elaterium,
Soldauella virens, et gummi gutta, jalappa.

SECT, v.] COMPOUND PURGATIVES. 493

SECT. V. ON COMPOUND PURGATIVES.

Pills from aloes. Of the medullary part of colocynth^ p. j;
of the juice of wormwood, p. j ; of aloes, p. j ; of sciimmony,
p. ij ; make with water pills of the size of a chick-pea. The
dose xj grains.

The oxymel of Julian. Of rue^ oz. iij ; of marjoram, oz. iij;
of the hair (capillary-leaves?) of thyme, oz. iv; of dill, oz. iss; of
iris, oz. j; of the root of mandrake, oz. iss; of agaric, oz. ij; of
fatty dead pines, oz. xij; of the granum Cnidium, oz. iv; of
lathyrides, oz. iij ; of alypias, oz. iij ; of polypody, oz. ij; of the
cassia-leaf (malabathrum), oz. j ; of costus, oz. j; of spikenard,
oz. j ; of rha Ponticum, oz. iss ; of squills, oz. iij; of the tops
of the elder-tree, oz. iij ; of canopus, which is the bark of
elder, oz, iij; of asarabacca, oz. j; of pennyroyal, oz. iij ; of
dodder of thyme, oz. ij; of hellebore, oz. ij ; ofsweetflag, oz. ij;
of water-parsnip, oz. j ; of amomum, oz. j ; of St. John^s wort,
oz. j ; of cumin, oz. j ; of anise, oz. ij; of vinegar, ten sextarii; of
honey, five sextarii : macerate the herbs in the vinegar for
three days ; then, having boiled it until more than one half be
consumed, add the honey, and having strained, add the
lathyrides, the costus, the granum Cnidium, and the spikenard
triturated, and, if you please, after it is fully boiled, the oxymel.
The full dose is oz. j ; or according to the patient^s strength.
It is useful in gouty affections and epilepsies ; and when we re-
quire at the same time to evacuate or dislodge thick humours.

The ■purgative hydragogue from cloves. Of aloes, of dodder
of thyme, of cloves, of granum Cnidium, of stone-parsley, of
rha Ponticum, of each, oz. ss; of euphorbium, scr. iv; of honey,
q. s. The dose is one spoonful.

Tfie purgative medicine from rhodomel, of Alexander. Of
the juice of roses, two sextarii; of honey, one sextarius; of
scammony, oz. iv, A full dose is five spoonfuls, a small, two,
a medium dose three spoonfuls. ^ — Otherwise: of honey, lb. j;
of the juice of roses, lb. j; of pepper, dr. ij; of scammony, dr. viij;
of mastich, dr. iv; and of ginger, dr. ij. — Otheriinse, one which
I use : of spikenard, of asarabacca, of dodder of thyme, of each,
oz. ss; macerate in a hemina of water for three days; and
having boiled it to a moderate degree, mix with the water

494 COMPOUND PURGATIVES. [book vii.

of the juice of roses, half asextavius; of honey, half a sextariusj
and having boiled it until it acquire consistence, add scammony
to the amount of oz. iss.

A purgative medicine from quinces. Of roasted quinces, oz. iv;
of pepper, oz. ss; of scammony, dr. j; of honey, oz. v. Having
triturated it, give one spoonful, according to the strength.

The stomachic purgative from citrons. Boil of the bark of
a citron, and of the flesh of the same, lb. j, in a sextarius and
a half of viater, until a third be left; add half a sextarius of
honey, and having boiled until it acquire the consistence of
honey, sprinkle of the powder of long pepper, oz. j; of scam-
mony roasted in leaven, oz. j.

The purgative called Buccellatus. Of baked scammony,
oz. j; of pepper and of parsley-seed, of each, scr. j; of fennel,
of anise, of each, oz. j; of honey, lb. j ; having roasted it mo-
derately, give in hippocras to the amount of one ounce.

Purgative olives. Of scammony, oz. j; of pepper, oz. j; of
dodder of thyme, of toasted cumin, of stone-parsley, of rue,
of the green leaves of mint, of each, dr. iv ; of laserwort, dr. j ;
of dates, oz. v; of honey, oz. v; of vinegar, two heminse; of
pickled olives (namely of schistous), one sextar. Some add a
moderate quantity of fish-sauce. The dose is v, vij, or ix.

A purgative trochisk. Of scammony, dr. iv; of euphorbium,
dr. iv; of the cassia-leaf (malabathrum), dr. ij; of pepper, dr. ij;
of honey, lb. j. The dose is oz. j.

A purgative and stomachic posca. Of cumin, of fennel, of
each, oz. j; of pennyi'oyal, of parsley, of anise, of each, oz. ss;
of dodder of thyme, of scammony, of each, oz. j; of salts, oz. ij.
The full dose is two scruples in the oxy crate. Some add also
of euphorbium, scr. iv.

A purgative wine for dropsical cases. Of squills, oz. iij; of
parsley-seed, oz. vi; of pepper, dr. j; of the root of capers,
dr. iv; of the granum Cnidium stripped of its bark, dr.j; of the
leaf malabathrum, two balls; of wine, twelve heminse; of honey,
oz. iij. Having pounded the squills, macerate in wine, and
mix the other things when triturated.

Purgative salts. Of common salts toasted, dr. \'j ; of parsley-
seed, of ginger, of dried bread, of each, scr. vj ; of anise, of
pepper, of each, oz. ss; of scammony, of dodder of thyme, of
each, oz. j. The dose is one spoonful.

SECT, v.] COMPOUND PURGATIVES. 495

The podagric purgative from hermodactyhis. Of hermo-
dactylus, oz. iij; of anise, of Ethiopian cumin, of bishop^s weed,
of the clusters of thyme, of white pepper, of ginger, of each,
scr. iij; of dodder of thyme, oz. ss ; the dose is scr. iv; some
give scr. vj. It is administered in the morning with hippocras,
honeyed water, or strong wine heated.

The same purgative otherivise. Of hermodactylus, oz. j; of
Ethiopian cumin, of anise, of agaric, of ginger, of each, scr. vj ;
of mastich, scr. ij; of spikenard, scr. ij; of musk, one siHqua; of
cnicus, scr. ij. The dose is scr. iv with hydromel. We reject
scammonv, because it is bad for the stomach. But if more
evacuation be required, mix with the dose three siliquse of
scammony ; give after the bath.

Pills from the lapis Armenicus, given principally in arthritic
cases. Of aloes, oz. iv; of scammony, oz. vj; of agaric, oz. j; of
dodder of thyme, oz. j; of lapis armenicus, scr. xij; of cassia,
oz. j; of spikenard, oz. j; of baked squills, oz. ij; of saffron,
scr. xij; add to rhodomel. The dose is scr. ij.

The pvrgatii'e from coronopodium, applicable in the same
cases as that from hermodactyhis, a stomachic. Of ginger,
scr. ij ; of pepper, scr. j ; of agaric, scr. j ; of the internal part of
cnicus, scr. iv; of the root of buckthorn plantain (corono-
podium), scr. vj ; the dose is scr. iij, but to those persons whose
belly is difficult to move, twenty-three siliquse, which make
altogether seven oboli, or nearly eight. After evacuation,
having bathed, let them take eggs and bread for food.

TJiat from Cyrenaic juice, for quartans. Of Cyrenaic juice,
of pepper, of ginger, of the leaves of rue, of each, dr. j . The
dose is the size of a filbert.

A j)urgative pap, useful in cases of cedema and aggravated
elephantiasis, and when one ivishes to dislodge a thick and viscid
humour. Having cut up two colocynths, evacuate the seed,
and allowing the medullary part to remain, fill them with
sweet oil, and covering them up with their proper covers allow
them to remain a night and a day. On the following day,
having evacuated the oil, boil the colocynths in water until
they are reduced to a soft consistence ; then throw them away,
and the oil being mixed with water, add to it three oboli of
black hellebore, and of scammony, dr. j ; but boiling along with
them a pap of similago, or dried bread pounded, and then give

496 COMPOUND PURGATIVES. [book vii.

of it to the patient, who has been formerly restricted to a
simple diet, to the size of eight, ten, or at most fourteen
filberts; and let him drink hot "srater.

CoMM. Commentary. It may be proper in this place to apprize the
"■— ^^ — ' reader of the reason why he will not find the remainder of the
work so copiously illustrated by notes as the preceding parts of it.
The combination of simple medicines in pharmaceutical prepara-
tions is so arbitrary, and so little regulated by any fixed principle,
that it is seldom we can find any two authors exactly agreeing as
to the ingredients which enter into any one preparation. Now
to follow all the ancieut writers on pharmacy through all their
complex formulae, and point out every little difference which
prevails among them, would be a very wearisome task, and one
which would scarcely recompense us or our readers for the time
and attention which such an undertaking would necessarily
demand ; and neither is it much required, since, as will be seen,
oui" author^s system of pharmacy is sufficiently copious and ac-
curate for all practical pui'poses. We shall therefore be content
with gi\'ing a general explanation of each class of these medi-
cinal preparations, and only offer some occasional remarks on a
few of the more important articles.

Under this head we shall give some account of the Halatia
Cathartica, or Purgative Salts of the ancients. The aX^q koh'cu
TTtfppvyjiiivai are the same as the sal commune frictum of
Apicius. Humelbergius thus explains it: "fricti, id est cremati
et torrefacti." The following is Apicius's receipt for the
" Sales conditi ad multa :" Of common salt roasted, lb. j ; of sal
ammoniac roasted, lb. ij ; of white pepper, oz. iij; of ginger, oz. ij;
of bishop^s weed, oz. iss ; of thyme, oz. iss ; of parsley-seed,
oz. iss. The pui'gative salts of Aetius contain sal ammoniac
mixed up with many purgative and cordial medicines, such as
scammony, laserwort, parsley-seed, ginger, pennyroyal, spike-
nard, and pepper, (iii, 109.) These are the ingredients of a
sal purgatorius recommended by Actuarius. (Meth. Med. v, 10.)
Myrepsus gives prescriptions for various purgative and sto-
machic salts. Thev all consist of sal ammoniac, or common
salt mixed with scammony and aromatics in different propor-
tions. (Sect, ii.) See also Haly Abbas. (Pract. x, 10.)

SECT, vr.] PURGATIVES. 497

SECT. VI. ON THE MANAGEMENT OF THOSE WHO TAKE PURGATIVE

medicines; and what is to be done to those WHO ARE
NOT PURGED BY A PROPER DOSE OF PURGATIVES.

In general when any of the drastic purgatives is to be
taken^ the medicine is to be given to the patient with an
empty stomach, and after digestion has been performed ; and
he is to be prevented from sleeping until it has been wholly
purged off, and if possible he should make moderate motion,
and abstain during the time from all food and drink, until the
purging is over.

From the works of PhUagrius. But if he cannot endure
abstinence from food, either because the mouth of the stomach
is troubled with bile from long fasting, which has preceded,
or any such cause, we must give him bread out of diluted
wine, or the juice of ptisan, or of chondrus, not after the
evacuation has begun, lest it spoil in the stomach, but straight-
way after the medicine has been taken ; for in this way by its
weight it contributes to the speedy evacuation of the medicine.
But if, after taking any of the laxative medicines, one does not
purge nor evacuate, provided the case be not at all serious,
we need not be very solicitous about it ; but if the greatness of
the disease be urgent, or the patient experiences acute tearing
pains with distension of the belly, we must necessarily ad-
minister a clyster. But if even thus the belly is not evacuated,
and there is a pungent pain and disorder of the body, he is to
be bathed and rubbed freely with oil ; or if he feels full and
heavy, a vein must be opened, more especially if he is of a
sanguineous habit of body, and if his eyes be red and promi-
nent, not naturally but incidentally, owing to his having drunk
the medicine. "When none of these symptoms trouble him,
but he experiences a gnawing and lancinating pain, he may
take food immediately after the bath, and drink wine freely,
and in the meantime he is to receive a clvster, if he does not
settle ; and again he is to be bathed. The oil used in the
clyster, should be that of rue or prepared from some other of
the carminative medicines.

HI. 32

498 PURGATIVES. [book vir.

CoMM. Commentary. Hippocrates^ as Galen mentions, reeommenfls
" " ' a draught of ptisan to be s'n'allowecl immediately after taking a
pm'gative medicine, in order to facilitate the operation of the
medicine and wash away any particles of it which may lodge in
the intestines. Both forbid it to be given after the operation
has commenced, as it tends only to blunt the powers of the
medicine. Galen remarks, that sometimes a purgative does not
operate, either from idiosyncrasy of the patient, or from the
smallness of the dose, or from the intestines being blocked up
bv indurated faeces, which must be removed bv means of a
clyster before the medicine can operate. At other times, he
adds, the medicine is determined to the kidneys, or is digested
and converted into food. As all purgatives are bad for the
stomach, he recommends us to weaken the impression of them
by the mixture of aromatic seeds, which possess attenuating and
cutting powers — Quosnam oportet purgare, &c.

Oribasius treats fully of this subject in two extracts from the
works of Galen and Ruffus. Ruffus directs us, when the
bowels are difl&cult to move, to give beforehand a soup of shell-
fish, with mallows, beet, and the like, or to administer a clyster.
He forbids us to give purgatives to persons who are apt to vomit.
(Med. Collect, vii, 26.)

iSIesue has treated more fully of all the circumstances con-
nected with the administration of purgatives than any other
ancient author. When the operation of the medicine is retarded
by flatus, or the bad state of the humours, he recommends us
either to administer a clyster or give an emetic. When this
arises from debility of the expulsive faculty of the intestines, he
directs us to give, first, a moderate draught of cold water, and
then some astringent potion, such as one fi'om quinces, or pears.
When the passage is obstructed, he directs a clyster to be admi-
nistered ; and in this case he forbids cold water to be given, as
it will increase the contraction of the intestine. When violent
pains are excited in the stomach by the medicine, he recommends
an emetic, and if in the bowels, a clyster. (Canon. Univers. iii.)
See also Avicenna (i, iv, 8), and Rhases (Contin. xii.)

SECT. VII.] HYPERCATHARSIS. 499

SECT. VII. ON THE TREATMENT OF HYPERCATHARSIS.

In cases of hypercatharsis the body is to be rubbed aiid
bathed in hot water^ and before the bath a thin, pale-coloured
and yellow wine is to be given (for such is the most speedily
distributed), and bread soaked in it, and pomegranates. But
if the evacuation contiuue, the limbs are to be bound with
ligatui'es, extending from above downwards, and tightened so
as to intercept the blood and spirits. A moderate quantity
of the theriac from the flesh of vipers is also to be given. For
it soon passes to the skin, and quickly gives a counter-deter-
mination to the defluxion of fluids upon the bell}', and blunts
the poisonous and deleterious property as it were of the
cathartics. When in Avant of it we may use the theriac
trochisks, and also that from seeds, and the antidote called
Philonius. Cupping-instruments are also to be applied over
the stomach, and cataplasms from polenta, and wine and
honey; after which we must use the astringent epithemes.
But they will derive the most sensible advantage from frictions
of the whole body, and draughts of the aforesaid medicines.
They must abstain from very cold and very hot air ; for the
one occasions a determination from without inwards, and
increases the discharge, and the other dissipates and reduces
the strength. But if the evacuation is increased bv irritation
in the bowels, we must apply cataplasms of the afore -mentioned
things, and injections of emollients, such as the fat of geese,
sweet wine, nard, and the like.

Commentary. Oribasius remarks, that when an oA'erdose Comnc.
of a purgative medicine has been taken, it purges first yellow ' — * —
bile, then black bile, and at last blood. He recommends us,
in cases of hjq^ercatharsis, to give a hot draught, to apply tight
ligatures and violent friction to the extremities, and cupping,
instruments to the hypochondrium and back. When the
patient can readily be made to vomit, he directs us to produce
this operation by the administration of a copious draught of
tepid water, and by putting a feather or the fingers down the
throat. This is in accordance with Celsus's rule of practice :
" Longas dejectiones supprimit vomitus," (ii, 8.)

500 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

CoMM. Hippocrates and Aetius, in cases of excessive purging from
the administration of medicine, recommend the bath and a light-
coloured wine before and after it.

A^acenna lays down the rules of treatment with great pre-
cision, but they are mostly the same as our author's. After fric-
tion, cupping, tight ligatures, and restorative draughts have
been tried, should the excessive purging continue he recom-
mends us to administer narcotics, (i, 4, 7.) See, in like man-
ner, Rhases (Contin. xiii, 1, 2), and Serapion (de Antid.)
But Mesne is the author who has treated of all the symptoms
connected with h}-percatharsis at the greatest length. He
recommends us to reserve narcotics as an uJtimum remedium, as
from the unseasonable administration of them much harm might
result. He directs us to add cordials and aromatics to the
narcotics. When the tenesmus is severe he directs us to stop it
by suitable enemata and suppositories. For the debility and
lassitude occasioned by too great pui'gation he recommends a
tepid bath of sweet water, and friction with warm oils.
(Canones Universales.)

SECT. VIII. — ON THE ANTIDOTES CALLED HIER^.

The hiera of Antiochus. Of germander, of agaric, of the
medullary part of colocynth, of cassidony, of each dr. x ; of opo-
ponax, of sagapen, of stone-parsley, of the species of birthwort
called clematis, of white pepper, of each dr. v ; of cinnamon,
of spikenard, of troglodytic myrrh, of the leaves of saffron, of
each dr. iv; of honey, q. s. — Another hiera. Of the medullary
part of colocynth, dr. xx ; of baked squills, of agaric, of am-
moniac perfume, of the bark of black hellebore, of scammony,
of St. John's wort, of each dr. iij ; of dodder of thyme, of diied
polypody, of bdellium, of aloes, of germander, of horehound,
of cassia, of each dr. \iij ; of troglodytic myrrh, of opoponax, of
sagapen, of stone-parsley, of the common long, and white
pepper, of cinnamon, of saffron, of castor, of the long bu*th-
Mort, of each dr. iv ; of honey, q. s.

The hiera of Justus. Of dodder of thyme, di\ xij ; of hore-
hound, of cassidony, of germander, of black hellebore, of
scammony, of agaric, of long pepper, of baked squills, of each

SECT, viir.] ANTIDOTES. 501

dr. xv] ; of euphorbium, of the medullar^ part of colocynth, of
aloes, of saffron, of gentian, of stone-parsley, of ammoniac
perfume, of sagapen, of each dr. viij ; of opoponax, of poley, of
cinnamon, of myrrh, of spikenard, of the flower of the rush, of
pennja'oyal, of each dr. iv; of long and of round birthwort,
of each dr. ij ; of honey, q. s. The dose is two, three, or four
scr., with honeyed water and salts.

Tlie hiet^a of Galen. Of germander, of long pepper, of
white pepper, of cassidony, of black hellebore, of scammony,
of spikenard, of baked squills (and some of dodder of thyme),
of each dr. xvj ; of myrrh, of saffron, of ammoniac perfume, of
euphorbium, of each dr. viij. Mix with honey.

The Idera of Ruffus. Of sicyonia, or the medullary part of
colocynth, dr. viij; of germander, dr. Xj of sagapen, dr. viij; of
stone-parsley, dr. v; of round birthwort, dr. v; of white pepper,
dr. V ; of cinnamon, dr. iv ; or of cassia, dr. viij ; of base hore-
hound, of saffron, of poley, of mp'rh, of each dr. iv; of
honey, q. s.

The hiera of Archigenes. Of horehound, of agaric, of
germander, of the medullary part of colocynth, of cassidony,
of each dr. x; of opoponax, of sagapen, of stone-parsley, of
round birthwort, of white pepper, of each dr. v ; of cinnamon,
of spikenard, of myrrh, of the cassia leaf (malabathrum), of
saffron, of each dr. iv ; pouiid the dry things together, and
strain. The opoponax, sagapen, and myrrh, being bruised,
are to be put into a mortar to macerate with honeyed water for
one night ; then triturate and add the dry things ; then
mixing them with the finest honey lay them up in a glass or
leaden vessel. This is the common method Avith all the hierae.
The full dose of them is dr. iv. Add to it also of salts, dr. j ;
of honey, two cyathi ; of water, q. s. If we wish to make those
compositions of this class which have not scammony more
purgative, we must add to each of them an obolus of it.

Commentary. The hierae, for the most part, consist ofcoMM.
drastic purgatives, combined with aromatics. There is a great ' '
variety of these compositions described in the works of the
ancient writers on pharmacy. Galen makes mention of an
aloetic liicra, which was much used by the celebrated Archi-
genes. The following is his prescription for it : " li. Aloes, dr. c;

502 LINLMENTS. [book vii.

CoMM. cinnamomi, nardi, xylobalsami, mastichse chise, asari, croci,
' ' a a dr. yj." Galen remarks, however, that the proportion of
aloes is too great, and recommends us to substitute xc or
Ixxx dr. instead of the quantity directed. (De comp, Med.
ace. loc.) Mesue describes the composition of 6 hierse, Haly
Abbas of 5, aud Serapion of a much greater number. But
for variety, Myrepsus surpasses all the other authorities. He
describes the composition of 30 hierse. The following is his
receipt for the Hiera Picra Galeni : " R. Aloes flavse, dr.
xivss. ; cinnamomi, croci, costi, floris junci odorati, xylobalsami,
cassise fistulse purse, mastiches, asari, rosarum, amomi, absinthii,
a a dr. j ; Tere subigeudo cum mellis Attici q. s." Moses
Charras's receipt for it is very little different. (Royal Pharm.
i, 20.)

SECT. IX. ON LINIMENTS TO BE APPLIED TO THE ANUS, AND

PURGATIVE APPLICATIONS TO THE NAVEL.

A liniment to the anus fo?' the discharge of flatulence. Rue
is triturated with honey so as to from one juice, and the
inner pavts of the fundament rubbed with it. It becomes
more efficacious if a small quantity of cumin and natron, or
the juice of sowbread be added. It is daubed upon flocks of
wool and introduced ; or a suppository is formed with the
addition of honey. For the flatus escapes freely, aft'ordiug
relief.

A liniment to the anus, evacuating the belly ; called Cheza-
nanche. Alum being triturated with honey is to be boiled until
it become yellowish, and the anus is to be rubbed with it. It
forces a free evacuation of many things, but not without
trouble.

An application to the navel as a laxative of the bowels. Of
sowbread, dr. iv ; of natron, dr. iij ; of black and white helle-
bore, of each, dr. ij ; of colocynth, dr. iij ; of scammony, dr. ij ;
of the juice of elaterium, dr. iv ; of granum Cnidium, dr. iv ; of
fatty dried figs, oz. ij ; of the gall of bulls, oz. j. Another very
excellent one : of elaterium, of lathyi'ides, of galbanum, of sow-
bread, of black hellebore, of each. di". iv ; of the medullary
parts of colocynth, dr. viij ; of fresh wild cucumber, of

SECT. X.] EMETICS. 503

scammony, of graimm Cnidiura, of each, dr. ij ; of spurge, dr.
ij ; of turpeutine, dr. iij ; mix these with the gall of bulls, and
use as a liniment. Some, by mixing with them of wax, oz.
vij, and of Sicyonian oil, q. s., make it of the form of a
plaster.

Commentary. It is clear that the liniments applied to Comm.
the anus were a sort of suppositories. The Chezananche is ^ *
described in much the same terms as our author's by Myrepsus.
The rest of his compositions of this class are also very similar
to our author's, (xxvi, 2.) Actuarius gives a full account of
them. (Meth. Med. v, 9.)

Purgative applications to the navel were much trusted to
by the ancient physicians as laxatives, but they are now seldom
used. The late Dr. Kerr, of Aberdeen, however, sometimes
had recourse to them, and spoke highly of their efficacy.

SECT. X, ON EMETICS, AND THE MODE OF ADMINISTERING

HELLEBORE.

Persons in health have recourse to emetics when the system
is loaded with too much food or humours, and those in acute
diseases, when troubled with phlegm or the like. But neither
persons in health nor those in acute diseases should be per-
mitted to use emetics, but only in chronic affections, more
especially in cases of indurations, and for such matters as re-
quLre to be dislodged by forcible means, as in gout, epilepsy from
the stomach, elephantiasis, dropsy, melancholy, and the like.
They are improper in spittings of blood, weakness of the
stomach, and suffocative complaints. The readiest of the
emetics is the oil of privet (oleum Cyprinum), the fingers or
some feathers being dipped in it and pushed down the throat.
And dr. vij of Celtic nard taken in honeyed water evacuate up-
wards powerfully. In like manner v or vj dr. of betony drunk
in honeyed water, and three green leaves of the daplmoides
pounded and eaten. And an obolus of elaterium taken in a
draught of water, purges phlegm and bile upAvards ; and fifteen
grains of stavcsacrc with thick honeyed water. Of plants with
bulbous roots, those usually eaten if taken raw, and the boiled

504 EMETICS. [book vii.

roots of narcissus pui'ge upwards. And the upper part of the
root of parsley, namely, that which is exposed to the air,
Avhen eaten, purges upwards. Some call it chamseraphauum.
The under part of the root purges downwards. "When the
whole is eaten it purges both upwards and downwards. Ra-
dishes pui'ge less than the aforementioned, but more usefully.
They are to be tahen when very acrid and fresh, and cut into
small parts ; and having allowed them to soak in oxymel for
two or three hours, as many of the pieces as possible are to be
swallowed, so that one may vomit three or four times after
supper, and once if fasting. But after, l^rge draughts of
oxymel are to be swallowed ; and after v.alking about for
two hours, and drinking tepid water, one may compel one's
self to vomit by inserting the fingers or some feathers into the
throat.

Modes of administering hellebore. Hellebore is to be given
in protracted and severe complaints, and when all hope from
other remedies is precluded, because the disease has proved
stronger than them all. It is to be given in continued diseases,
as dropsy, elephantiasis, cachexia, paralysis, and the like ; and
in certain complaints wliich attack at intervals, as epilepsy and
gout. There being many modes of administering hellebore,
the simplest, and rather the preparative for a course of helle-
bore, is this method : having perforated radishes with a reed,
pieces of the di'ied roots of the finest white hellebore are to be
inserted into the perforations, and having been allowed to re-
main for one night they are to be removed. Having cut the
radishes in pieces they are to be given with oxymel, in the
manner described, to the patient who has been accustomed be-
fore to emetics, and after an interval of the number of hours
mentioned, he is to be forced to vomit. The estabhshed mode
of administering hellebore is as follows : having allowed two
ounces of the best hellebore to macerate in a hemina of water
for five days, boil until only a third pai't of the water remain,
and having expressed the hellebore, mix with the water an
equal quantity of honey, and boil it until it thicken ; and after
the patient has been exercised with vomits in the manner
described, give it to him when fasting, and after digestion has
been performed, and the contents of the bowels evacuated.

SECT. X.] EMETICS. 505

either spontaneously or by one or two injections^ according to
his strength. But the most efficacious mode is this : having
cut the roots of the hellebore into pieces resembling the seeds
of Indian corn (for when reduced to a downy powder it occa-
sions suffocation by its powerful action)^ give to those who are
of a weaker constitution dr. ij, at most, or, at least, dr. j of the
hellebore, in the juice of ptisan, of.halica, or the like ; but to
those who are stronger, it is to be given in hot water or honeyed
water. The purging begins after three or four hoiu's ; but
when it is longer of commencing, it operates more effectually.
AYhen the vomiting is slow of beginning, give honeyed water
to drink, and let the patient be compelled to vomit by insert-
ing feathers dipped in oil into the throat. If even thus he
will not vomit, let him be put into the bath. When vomiting
commences, if it go on properly, we need not interfere ; but if
lancinating pains or convulsions supervene, we must give a
mixture of water and oil to drink. For thus is an evacuation
downwards occasioned (which otherwise sometimes takes place
when hellebore has been administered), and they bear the con-
centration of the medicine better. ^Yhen the patient falls into
deliquium animi he is to be resuscitated by strong-smelling
things and the like. Any other symptoms which may happen
to occur are to be treated in a suitable manner. AYhen the
purging is excessive, they are to be allowed to take food and
sleep, and do otherwise as mentioned in describing the treat-
ment of hypercatharsis. But if it continue, cupping-instru-
ments are to be applied over the stomach, and ligatures tied
round the limbs. \Yhen the evacuation proceeds properly we
must give to drink a moderate quantity of honeyed water, in
order to wash away the superfluous particles of the medicine.
After a little while, give some food of easy digestion. When
apprehensions are entertained of the administration of helle-
bore by the mouth, and the medicine is by all means required,
Antyllus uses the following injection : having allowed two
drachms of white hellel^ore to macerate in a sextarius of water
for a day and a night, on the day following we are to boil the
hellebore in the water until but a half remain. Then we are
to inject it by the anus so as to produce vomiting. It purges
upwards somewhat more feebly than when the medicine is
drank. After sufficient purging, an acrid suppository is to be

506 EMETICS. [book vii.

introduced so as to occasion the discharge of the injection and
stop the vomiting. After the discharge of it, an injection of
honeyed water is to be given once or twice in order to wash
out the gut. The same person says : A suppository is made of
white hellebore, pounded and strained, and mixed with boiled
honey, which purges Like the injection of hellebore. But the
following is a better method ; for we have it in our power to
regulate the purging : The quantity is to be dr. ij of hellebore,
and the suppository is to be Avrapped round, or bound with
some flocks of wool firmly. The head of this ball of wool is to
be allowed to hang out of the anus, in order that after suffi-
cient purging it may be in our power to remove the supposi-
tory. This method purges effectually, and neither occasions
convTilsive suffocation nor any other dangerous symptom.

CoMM. Commentary. The gentle emetics used by the ancients
' " ' on ordinary occasions have been treated of in Book I. We
have now to give some account of the more drastic emetics.

Galen and Oribasius recommend, as effectual emetics, the
bulb of the narcissus, the seed of the anagyrus, and the fleshy
part of nut ben. The Unguentum irinum and the U. cypri-
num are stated by Aetius and most of the other authorities to
be safe and effectual emetics. Aetius also commends the
decoctions of hyssop and of thyme, the seed of bastard saffron
pounded with oily grain, the oils of sesame, radishes, and
narcissus, and the leaves of the daphnoides. Nitre or an im-
pure carbonate of soda was also a medicine in general use as
an emetic. The Lemnian earth was often given as an emetic,
being a sort of red ochi'e. Avicenna and Ehases make mention
of a species of black turbith, called yilbenec, which they de-
scribe as an effectual emetic, but somewhat unsafe. See the
Appendix. Avicenna says that tickling the throat with a
feather, smeared in the oil of sesame, readily excites vomiting.
He remarks that vomiting is promoted by motion and stopped
by rest. The bulbus emeticus was in general use to produce
vomiting. Serapion directs us to give it boiled along with
honey He also commends the nux vomica as an emetic when
given along with a small quantity of salt. We need scarcely
say that it is now seldom or never given for this purpose,
although it still holds a place in some of the continental

SECT. X.] EMETICS. 507

systeras of Materia Medica. The earlier modern writers on Comm.
medicine recommend it freely as an emetic. See Guido de ' ' '
Cauliaco. (\ii, 1.)

But of all the medicines of this class the white hellebore
was undoubtedly the most powerful, and in important cases
was the most generally used. We must, therefore, take this
opportunity of describing the forms in which it was adminis-
tered. Hippocrates appears to have been familiarly acquainted
with it as a medicine, and to have administered it very freely.
Ai-etseus concludes his work with a spirited eulogium on
hellebore ; " But in all inveterate chronic diseases, -when other
remedies have failed to produce the effect, this alone is to be
depended upon for the cure. For, in power, white hellebore
resembles fire, and with still greater powers hellebore, by per-
vading the inward parts, produces freedom of respiration from
obstruction, a healthy colour from paleness, and plumpness of
body, in place of emaciation." But on the modes of adminis-
tering hellebore, the fullest and most accurate of the ancient
authorities is Oribasius, whose interesting account of it we
shall now attempt to give in an abridged form. His description
is mostly taken from Archigenes, Herodotus, and Antyllus.
He sets out, then, with giving dii'ections about preparing the
patient for entering upon a course of hellebore. This consists
principally in putting him upon a regulated diet, and adminis-
tering occasionally some of the gentler emetics, especially the
one from radishes. He, then, describes at considerable length
the marks by which good hellebore may be recognised. When
broken, he says, it ought to be white in the inside ; and when
taken into the mouth it ought to be felt hot and acrid, but at
first of a sweetish taste ; thereafter gradually becoming more
stimulant, and provoking a great flow of saliva, and that fre-
quently attended with vomiting. He recommends the follow-
ing preparation of hellebore as being efficacious and perfectly
safe : A pound of hellebore is to be macerated for three days
in six herainee of water, which we are to boil at a gentle fire
until a third part of the water is consumed, when the hellebore
is to be expressed ; then two heminaj of honey are to be
added to the decoction, which is to be again boiled until it
no longer stain the finger. Of this prcpai'ation, the dose, to
those who do not require strong purging, is two cochlearia.

508 EMETICS. [book vii.

CoMM. but to robust persons, tbe quantity called a mystrum. Another
of liis authorities, Antyllus, directs us to allow five drachms of
the shavings of hellebore to macerate for three days in half a
hemina of rain-water, after which it is to be strained and
heated in a double vessel. Oribasius also mentions that the
medicine may be given in a coarse powder. He afterwards
lays down the rules of treatment when the action of the medi-
cine superinduces dangerous symptoms. We need not go over
this part minutely. Suffice it to say that, according to cir-
cumstances, he directs us to provoke vomiting by tickling the
throat with feathers dipped in one of the emetic oils j to open
the bowels with oily clysters ; and to rouse the patient when
in a state of stupor, by stimulants, restoratives, shaking him,
pinching him, or tossing him in a garment. He recommends
hellebore in cases of mania, melancholy, inveterate pains of
the hip and other joints, epilepsy, catalepsy, vertigo, chronic
headache, lethargy, leprosy, and other cutaneous diseases.
He also praises it as a remedy in hydrophobia. (INIed. Col-
lect, viii.)

Aetius states that hellebore is given in infusion, in decoc-
tion, and in substance, either cut into pieces or pounded and
sifted. When administered in pieces it soon begins to act as
a purgative, generally within two hours, bringing away bile
and phlegm without much trouble, and after four or five hours
the medicine itself is generally vomited up, and the purging
stops. When given in a fine powder it acts violently but
slowly, so that four or five hours have generally elapsed before
its operation commences. He adds that in all its forms it
evacuates bile and phlegm, but that it is attended with danger
of bringing on convidsions or hypercatharsis. On the infusion
he remarks, that it suits with old persons and children, to
those who have a feeble constitution, and for the cure of ele-
phantiasis. Five drachms of cut hellebore are to be allowed
to macerate for three days in half a hemina of rain-water,
after which it is to be strained and heated, when the whole of
the infusion is to be taken. The decoction he recommends to
be given to persons of a firmer habit of body, and in cases of
mania and melancholy. It is to be thus prepared : A pound
of hellebore, cut into pieces, is to be allowed to macerate for
three davs in two sext. of rain-water ; after which it is to be

SECT. X.] EMETICS. 509

boiled gently upon the coals until only a third remain ; then, Comm.
having strained it, we add to the decoction two pounds of ' " '
scummed honey, and boil to the consistence of honey. It may
be given as a linctus to the amount of a large spoonful, or
mixed Avitli hot water in a draught, when it will not superin-
duce spasms, contractions, or hypercatharsis. To those who
stand in need of more violent concussion, who are of a strong
habit of body and possess fortitude, and vonait readily, it is
given cut into pieces ; and to persons of still greater determi-
nation, or who have been accustomed to it, in the form of a
sifted powder. It is to be cut into pieces of the size of malt
or bran, and taken in ptisan or barley-water, a draught of mead
or plain water being swallowed after to wash it away. The
maximum dose of it is dr. iiss. Hellebore may also be
pounded and sifted in a fine sieve, when the larger particles
may be given in halica (barley-water ?) or pottage ; but the
smaller particles may be formed into pills with boiled honey,
(iii, 131.) Macer Floridus concludes that scr. ij. is a sufficient
dose of the white hellebore. (De Herb, vir.)

The Arabians give this medicine in the same forms and
under the same circumstances as the Greeks. They estimate
the dose of it at from dr. j to dr. ij. Mesue forbids it to be
given in the form of a powder. He and Haly Abbas, how-
ever, recommend it in pills with hiera, colocynth, agaric, and
various aromatics for the cure of elephantiasis and melancholy.
Serapion states that there is great danger of its inducing con-
vulsions if improperly administered. Avicenna^s account of
the modes of giving it is very interesting.

Upon this subject we shall give the observations of the
celebrated Prosper Alpinus : " Elleborus albus inter medica-
menta vomitoria perpetuo apud omnes gentes prsecipuum
locum obtinct, fuitque in usu elleborismus, id est, purgatio per
ellcljorum album, admodum familiaris apud antiquos, ad morbos
sanatu difficillimos tollendos, cujus quidem usu complures ab
affcctibus fere prorsus insanabilibus sanabantur, atque ita cito,
et probe, ut ex sanationes miracula vidcreutur; unde olim
antiquorum illorum mcdicorum laus insignitcr augebatur.
Nunc vero non sine segrotantium damno, atque magno artis
mcdicce dedecore, ipsius usus apud omnes fere medicos obso-
levit, qui nunc neque audent, ncque sciunt, quomodo veratrura

510 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

CoMM. album exhibendum est." (Med. Meth. iii, TO.) He gives the
' • ' following prescription for making a preparation of hellebore :
" Nonnulli ex recentioribus parant elleborum accipientes, 5iss ;
vini dulcis aromatici^ lb. y, turis^ 3iss; hypericin 5j; saccharic :;ij ;
buUiant ad consumptionem mediatatis. Cujus decocti dant
uncias tres." He likewise approves of giving hellebore by
boiling it in oil. (Ibid.)

The followdng is a very simple receipt for the preparation of
the mel helleboratum or honey of hellebore : " Take of the
roots of white hellebore, dried and sliced, one pound ; of clari-
fied honey, three pounds ; of water four pints. After steeping
the roots three days in the water, boil them a little while,
then boil the liquor, well pressed out and strained, with the
honey to a due consistence." Dr. Pemberton (London
Dispensatory, a. d. 1746.) By due consistence is meant the
consistence of honey.

SECT. XI. ON THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF ANTIDOTES.

The Preface of Galen's work on Antidotes. Those composi-
tions which cure affections not when thev are applied externally,
but when taken internally, are named antidotes by the ancients.
There are three diflFerent kinds of them. The first are those
which are administered for deleterious substances ; the second,
for those animals called venomous ; and the third are the
remedies for afi'ections occasioned by bad articles of food.
Some antidotes profess to fulfil all these three purposes, such
as the one called theriac.

The preparation of the hedychroum, which forms an in-
gredient of the theriac. Of the bark of the root of aspalathus,
of calamus aromaticus, of costus, of asarabacca, of xylobalsam,
of valerian, of amaracus, of mastich, of each, dr. vj ; of carpo-
balsam, dr. ij ; of marum, dr. xvj ; of the flower of the rush,
dr. ij ; of cinnamon, dr. xxiv ; of amomum, of cassia, of rheum,
of each, dr. viij ; of Indian nard, of the cassia leaf (mala-
bathrum), dr. xij ; of myrrh, dr. xxiv ; of safiron, dr. xij ; mix
with fine wine, and form into trochisks, having smeared the
finger with opobalsam.

The preparation of trochisks of squills. Having covered over

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. 511

tlie squills with clay or dough, roast it moderately, and taking
of the inner parts of it, p. ij ; and of the flour of tares, p. j ;
and having triturated in like manner, form trochisks.

The preparation of the theriac trochisks. Having chosen
four or five vipers of a tawny colour, and recently taken, cut
off their heads, and four fingers^ breadth of the part next the
tail, and having removed the skins and entrails, boil the rest iu
a new pot, with dill and a moderate quantity of salts, until the
spines be separated from the flesh. Then removing and clean-
ing away properly the flesh from the spines, and having mixed
with them an equal quantity of clean bread, and triturated
them in like manner, form into small balls, having your fingers
smeared with opobalsam, and cool in the shade.

The preparation of the theriac antidote. Of the trochisks
of squills, dr. Ixviij ; of the theriac trochisks, dr. xxiv ; of
hedychroum, dr. xxiv ; of cinnamon, dr. xxiv ; of common pep-
per, dr. xxiv ; of the juice of poppies, dr. xxiv ; of dried roses,
dr. XV; of water- germander, of rape-seed, of IlljTian iris, of
agaric, of liquorice, of opobalsam, of each, dr. xij ; of myrrh,
of saflron, of ginger, of rhaponticum, of the root of cinquefoil,
of calamint, of horehound, of stone-parsley, of cassidony, of
costus, of white and long pepper, of dittany, of the flower of
sweet rush, of male frankincense, of turpentine, of mastich, of
black cassia, of spikenard, of each, dr. vj ; of the flower of
poley, of storax, of parsley-seed, of seseli, of shepherd's pouch,
of bishop's weed, of germander, of ground pine, of the juice of
hypocistis, of Indian leaf (malabathrum), of Celtic nard, of
spignel, of gentian, of anise, of fennel-seed, of Lemnian earth,
of roasted chalcitis, of amomum, of sweet-flag, of balsamum, of
Pontic valerian, of St. John's wort, of acacia, of gum, of carda-
mom, of each, dr. iv ; of carrot-seed, of galbanum, of sagapen,
of bitumen, of opoponax, of castor, of centaury, of the species
of birthwort called clematis, of each, dr. ij ; of Attic honey,
lb. X ; of Falernian wine, oz. ij. Put into a mortar the opium,
hypocistis, myrrh, sagapen, liquorice, storax, acacia, and opopo-
nax, and having poured in some honey pound and dissolve :
then pouring in wine so as to cover them, macerate for three
days ; then having pounded the others, unite them, and scum
the honey. It is to be laid up in vessels of silver or glass, not
quite full, and the covers taken off" every day. In case of need

512 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

it may be used for persons bitten by venomous animals, and
those who have taken anything poisonous, after seven years, a
quantity of it, to the size of a filbert, being drunk twice a day,
in three cyathi of wine. In like manner, to those who are in
a dangerous state from some obscure cause, when the disorder
in the body imitates the quality of a mortal poison, as is the
case particularly in pestilential diseases_, it is to be given once
a day. But in all other affections, it is to be used from the
tenth to the twentieth year. For coughs, pains of the chest or
side, it is to be given at night, if free from fever, with wine and
honey ; but if feverish, with hydromel, to the extent of an
Egyptian bean. In all cases of haemoptysis, it is to be given
morning and evening, to the size of an Egyptian bean ; if
recent, in oxycrate ; or, if chronic, in the decoction of comfrey.
In cases of flatulence, tormina, or cseliac affections, it is to be
taken in the morning, to the size of an Egyptian bean, in hot
water. It excites an intense appetite, and removes rigors,
coldness, and vomiting of bile when drank before the attack.
It promotes menstruation, and expels the foetus when dead, if
drunk to the size of an Egyptian nut with honeyed water, or
sweet wine, in which rue or dittany has been boiled. In the
case of loss of voice, it is drunk alone, and with double the
quantity of tragacanth in wine and honey, or sweet wine, being
retained under the tongue and allowed to melt. For diseases
of the spleen or liver, it is given with oxycrate ; but if they are
in a scirrhous state, with a cyathus and a half of oxymel, or
vinegar of squills. For nephritic complaints, it is given with
oxymel to the size of an Egyptian bean. In dysenteric cases it
is given to the same amount, with the decoction of sumach,
morning and evening. For dimness of vision it answers excel-
lently thus : Mix oz. ij of the antidote, and of opobalsam, with
one cyathus of honey, and after a little anoint with it. It is
also used as a dentifrice. Many, for the sake of prophylaxis,
take it at new moon to the size of a Grecian bean, after
digestion, with a cochleare of honey and two cyathi of water.
In like manner they use it when upon a journey they suspect
that the air or water is bad.

Theriac salts. Take four female vipers recently caught ;
and then putting into a mortar one Italian modius of ammoniac
or common salt, pound into thick pieces, along with it, of gen-

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. .513

tian^ lb. iss ; of roimcl birth wort, lb. iss ; of the hair of the
small centaury, lb. ij ; of cardamom, of horehouiid, of each, oz.
vj ; of water germander, of parsley, of Cretan germander, of
each, lb. j ; of the seed of garden rue, sext. ij : unite these with a
sufficient quantity of Attic honey, and throwing the half of
them into a new pot, and then the four vipers alive, add to
them fresh tender squills, cut into small pieces, and then join
to them the remaining half of the mixture formerly mentioned.
Then having covered up the pot carefully, make three or four
perforations in its lid to allow the vapour to escape, that it
may indicate to you the progress of the operation of roasting.
At first much smoke will be seen issuing, fuliginous and very
turbid, indicating that the fire is acting upon the animals. You
must then take care lest you inhale any of this smoke, which is
infected with the exhalation from the vipers. When this
vapour has ceased, you may see a fine flame issuing through
the holes, by which you may know that they are properly
roasted. Then having removed the pot from the fire, and
allowed it to cool for a whole day and night, take out the ashes,
pound them carefully, and sift them along with these mixtures :
of the seed of wild rue, of Cretan hyssop, of each, oz. ix ; of the
seed of fennel, of Celtic nard, of Scythian base horehound, of
each, oz. vj ; of jSIacedonian stone-parsley, of Indian leaf, of
each, oz. iv ; of amomum, of grapes, of the seed of horminum
toasted, of each, oz. iij ; of the shoots of marjoram, of the shoots
of thyme, of each, oz. ij ; of juniper berries, of white and of
long pepper, of each, lb. j ; of the root of laserwort, oz. x ; of
coriander seed, of ginger not perforated, of the seed or root of
satyrium, of pennyroyal, of the seseli of jNIarseilles, of mint, of
each, oz. vj ; of cassia fistula, oz. ij ; of cinnamon, oz. j. I, ho^v-
ever, have made the preparation, so that I did not burn the
animals, but mixed the trochisks from them, as related under
the theriac, with those things wdiicli are burnt along with the
vipers, that the bitterness which they have in them may be laid
aside during the burning. I added just such a proportion of
the trochisks as I conjectured to agree with the contents of
the four vipers. And truly in this way they turned out
excellent.

The Mithridatic antidote from scinks. Of troglodytic
myrrh, of ginger, of cinnamon, of each, dr. x ; of spikenard, of

III. 33

nl4 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

frankincense, of shepherd's pouch, of opobalsam, of schoenanth,
of costus, of cassidony, of seseli, of galbanura, of turpentine, of
long pepper, of castor, of hypocistis juice, of storas, of the
leaves of malabathrum, of each, dr. iv ; of black cassia, of poley,
of white pepper, of water germander, of carrot-seed, of carpo-
balsam, of cvphi, of bdellium, of Celtic nard, of gum, of stone-
parsley, of opium, of cardamom, of the seeds of fennel, of
gentian, of rose-leaves, of each, dr. viij ; of dittany, of anise, of
sweet flag, of valerian, of each, dr. iij ; of Athamantic spignel,
of acacia, of the belly of a scink, of the seed of St. John's wort,
of each, dr. iss ; of wine and honey, q. s. Prepare it in like
manner as the theriac. Galen says, that it applies to the
same cases as the theriac, with the exception of those who
have been bitten by the viper, for there the theriac is more
efficacious.

Tlie antidote from different kinds of blood being a remedy
against all venomous animals and deadly poisons. Of white
and long pepper, of costus, of sAveet flag, of valerian, of
anise, of Cretan dittany, of each, dr. ij ; of amomum, of
opobalsam, of the seed of wild rue, of the seed of fennel, of
Ethiopian cumin, of dill, of the dried blood of a male duck, of
the blood of a kid, of the blood of a goose, of the blood of a
female duck, of the seed of the wild rape, of each, dr. iij ; of
gentian root, of trefoil, of the schoenanth, of frankincense, of
di'ied roses, of each, dr. iv; of cinnamon, dr. ij ; of water ger-
mander, dr. viij ; of stone-parsley, of poley, of myrrh, of nard,
of each, dr. vj ; of cassia, dr. iij ; of Cyrenaic juice, dr. iij ; of
cassidony, dr. v ; of asarabacca, dr. ij ; of ammoniac perfume,
dr. iij ; of Athamantic spignel, dr. ij ; of agaric, dr. ij ; of car-
pobalsam, gr. xx ; of boiled honey, q. s.

Simple oxymel. Of the most acrid white vinegar, sextar. j;
of water, sextar. ij ; of honey, sextar. j ; boil to the consistence
of the most liquid honey, despumating the honey.

The vinegar of squills. Of white squills cut into pieces,
dried in the shade for forty days, and again cleaned, one
mina ; of good ^-inegar, sextar. xij. Put them into a vessel,
cover it up, and allow to remain in the sun for sixty days ;
after which the squill is to be expressed and thrown away, and
the strained vinegar laid up in a vessel. Some add one mina
of squills to sextar. vj ; others add the same quantity of green

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. 515

squills to the vinegar, and allow them to remain in the vessel
six months ; and it becomes more penetrative. It is applicable
for defluxions of the mouth, as a gargle, and when di'unk, for
many internal affections, excepting when there is ulceration,
and for many other piu'poses.

The oxymel of squills. Of the internal tender parts of
squills, lb. ij ; of strong white vinegar, sext. xv ; of pepper, of
Macedonian stone-parsley, of each, dr. ij ; of Cretan carrot, of
bishop's weed, of anise, of Celtic nard, of lovage, of asarabacca,
of cardamom, of spikenard, of amomum, of rha Ponticum, of
each, oz. ss ; of the seed of fennel, of cumin, of laserwort, of
ginger, of pellitory, of Cretan hyssop, of costus, of pennyroyal,
of each, oz. j ; of green mint, one fasciculus ; of green rue,
five branches ; of Attic honey, one sextarius ; of rob, sext. ij ;
of green parsley, one fasciculus. Put the white inner parts of
the squills bruised into the vinegar, and allow it to macerate
seven days during the heat of the dog-days : then taking out
the squills, which, if dried, are to be pounded, but if green,
not pounded, add to the vinegar, and again, after seven days,
having strained all, add the honey and rob to the vinegar, and
having boiled to a proper consistence, lay them up in a glass
vessel. This remedy is to be taken as a potion before food,
or along with food for a sauce. It is much used.

Galen's medicine from squills, answering particularly with
epileptics. Having broken down squills with yovir hands into
small pieces, put into a vessel used for containing honey, and
having covered it up properly, put it in a place exposed to the
midday during the heat of the dog-star ; forty days after the
rising of the dog-star loose it, and you will find that the body
of the squill is melted down. Taking, then, its juice, sweeten
it with some very fine honey, and give every day a spoon-
ful of it, if to children, a small one, but if to adults, a large
one. But triturate the body of the squill itself with honey
and give a spoonful of it. It is inferior in power to the juice.

The antidote of Philo. Of white pepper, dr. xx ; of liyos-
cyamus, dr. xx ; of the juice of poppies, dr. x ; of saflron,
dr. V ; of pellitory, of euphorbium, of spikenard, of each dr. j ; of
Attic or any other fine, well-boiled honey, q. s. Give to
adults the size of a filbert, to smaller persons, that of a bean,

516 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

and to children, the size of a chick-pea. It is an excellent
anodyne and soporific medicine.

The Athanasian anodyne and pleuritic antidote, from Ori-
basius. Of cassia, dr. A'iij ; of spikenard, of araomum, of
saffron, of opium, of storax, of myrrh, of costus, of each, dr. iv ;
of despumated honev, q. s. The dose the same as that of the
antidote of Philo.

The antidote from tiro peppers of similar poirers. Of
cardamom, of castor, of opium, of each, dr. iij ; of myrrh, of
costus, of white and of long pepper, of galbanum, of each,
dr. iij ; of saffron, dr. iij. Mix with well-boiled honey, and
give to the size of a bean.

The antidote from poppy-heads and rob. Having mace-
rated, in a sextarius of rob, eight or ten green, but not
watery heads of poppy the day after they are gathered, and an
ounce of liquonce for one day, boil until they are dissolved ;
and after they have acquired a moderate consistence, take
from the fire, and put into a vessel, and use in the case of
watchfulness, accompanied with fever, and when there is a
thin defluxion from the head upon the chest.

The antidote from poppy-heads and honey. Boil the poppy-
heads, as mentioned above, and the ounce of liquorice inoz. j of
rain-water or spring-water until dissolved ; and ha\nng squeezed
it out, add to the decoction half a sextarius of honey and boil
until it acquire consistence. Give it in those cases which,
along with a mitigation of pain and the production of sleep,
require purgative and detergent medicines, for the parts
within the thorax, or about the lungs and kidneys.

The compound antidote from poppy-heads. Take of the
water in which poppy-heads have been boiled, according to
the above-mentioned proportion, sext= j ; of sweet wine, two
heminse ; of honey, lb. j ; of saffron, of the juice of hypocistis,
of each, dr. iv ; boil to a proper consistence. That which is
prepared from honey, poppy-heads, and quinces is more grate-
ful to the stomach. It becomes more efficacious if along with
the poppy-heads some melilot and Kquorice be also boiled in
the water.

A simple linctus or lohock from horehonnd, principally for
consumptions. Boil a pound of the hair of horehound in six
heminae of water until but a third remain : then throw away

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. 517

the herb, and adcliug to the water an equal quantity of honey,
boil to the consistence of honey, and give one cochleare
(spoonful),

A compound lohock from horehound. Of the hairy parts of
horehound, of TUyrian iris, of hyssop, of pennyroyal, of liquo-
rice, of parsley, of each, oz. ij ; of fatty dried figs, oz iij ; of
the kernels of the pine containing rosin, oz. iij ; bruise the
dry things into large pieces, and macerate with the figs in
sextar. iij of water, and boil to a third part. Then having
strained the Avater, add of honey, lb. ij, and boil to the con-
sistence of honey.

The lohock from tares. Of bitter almonds, oz. ij ; of the
flour of tares, oz. iv ; of hyssop, oz. iv ; of iris, oz. ss ; of
toasted pine-nuts, oz. ij ; of honey, sextar. j, or q. s.

The lohock called Dodecatheon. Of Illyrian iris, oz. iv: of
tares, oz. iv ; of hyssop, oz. ij ; of nettle-seed, oz. ij ; of liquo-
rice, oz. ij ; of fenugreek, oz. ij ; of the bulbi, oz. iv; of
toasted linseed, oz. iv ; of gith, scr. xviij ; of pennyroyal,
scr. viij ; of toasted pine-nuts, oz. ij ; of pepper, scr. vj ; of
honey, q. s.

The antidote Sotira. Of spikenard, scr. xxxix ; of myrrh,
scr. xxvij ; of saffron, scr. xxxvij ; of castor, scr. xxxix ; of
opium, scr. xxxvj ; of stone-parsley, scr. xlv ; of anise, scr. ix ; of
parsley, scr. vij ; of the schoenanth, scr. xxx^-j ; of cassia, scr. xij ;
of long pepper, scr. xij ; of the seed of sinon, scr. vj ; of storax,
scr. xviij ; of araomum, scr. xij ; of seseli, scr. xij ; of hedy-
chroum, scr. xviij ; of costns, scr. xviij ; of asarabacca, scr.
xviij ; of honey, q. s.

Tlie cough medicine from storax. Of amomum, of cassia,
of each, oz. ij ; of storax, of spikenard, of each, oz. iss ; of
saffron, of white pepper, of each oz. j ; of honey, sext. j ; give
a spoonful.

The medicine of Philoxenus for empyema and chronic de-
fluxions. Of turpentine, dr. xxviij ; of nard, dr. xvj ; of the
oil of myrrh, dr. vj ; of cardamom, of the bulbi, dr. vj ; of
saffron, dr. xij ; of galbanum, dr. xvj ; bitter almonds, Ixxx ;
of honey, a hcmina. It is given in water to drink to the size
of an Egyptian bean.

The much-used antidote of Esdra ; it is very desiccative. Of
amomum, scr. vj ; of saffron, scr. xviij ; of the seed of carrot,

518 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

scr. iss ; of tlie seed of fennel, scr. iij ; of cassia, scr. iss ; of
schoenanthj scr. iiiss ; of cinnamon, scr. iij ; of the juice of
hiiq)ocistis, scr. ivss ; of snlpliur, scr. v ; of poppy-seeds, scr. v ;
of pellitory, scr. iij ; of stone-parsley, scr. iss ; of Illyrian iris,
scr. "\djss ; of the seeds of henbane, gr. xiijss ; of spikenard,
scr. vijss ; of the seeds of rue, scr. iss ; of dill, scr. iij ; of car-
damom, scr. iij ; of dried roses, scr. ivss ; of the floAver of
nerium (it is, as it were, the flower-cup from which the rose of
the rose-bay emerges), and of the rose of it, of each, scr. iij ;
of Pontic rhubarb, scr. vj ; of gentian, scr. vj ; of hedychroum,
scr. iss j of tragacanth, scr. xv ; of buckthorn, scr. vj ; of the
leaves of citron, scr. vj ; of the seed of basil, scr. iss ; of anise,
scr. iij ; of euphorbium, scr. iij ; of Indian leaf, scr. ij ; of
Celtic nard, scr. vj ; of spignel, scr. iij ; of costus, of myrrh, of
each, scr. \] ; of bdellium, scr. xvj ; of the juice of southern-
wood, scr. xiij ; of Syriac sumach, scr. xxvss ; of asarabacca,
of the belly of a cormorant, of the jasper-stone, of each, scr. iij;
of pepper, scr. xv ; of castor, scr. iss ; of Cimolian earth, scr. vj ;
of sison (bishop's weed ?), scr. ix ; of storax, scr. ix ; of opo-
balsam, scr. xij ; of the herb seseli, scr. iss ; of honey, oz.
xxviij ; of wine, q. s.

The medicine from the flesh of quinces. Three pounds of
clean quinces are boiled in three sextarii of old wine, then
pounded, and there is added to them, of pepper, of anise, of
lovage, of each, when triturated, oz. j. Some also add, of
ginger, oz. ss; and others, instead of the wine, use vinegar.

The medicine from the juice of quinces of approved efficacy
for anorexia and dyspepsia. Of the juice of ripe quinces, sext. ij ;
of fine honey, sext. ij ; of vinegar, sext. j ; of ginger, oz. iij ;
of white pepper, oz. ij : boil to a proper consistence. Galen
prepares it for those affected with cold. But, he says, when
bile prevails, prepare it without the pepper and ginger.

The preparation of a tablet from quinces. Six pounds of
clean quinces are boiled in wine until they become soft. Then
being strained and triturated, some add, of honey, lb. viij, and
boil at a slow fire, stirring with a piece of reed until the
whole Avill not stain the hand ; and then they add the fol-
lowing things bruised : of pepper, oz. iij ; of anise, oz. iij ;
of stone-parsley, oz. j. Some also add of ginger, oz. j,
and of mastich, oz. j. "When mixed, they are formed into

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. 519

cukes of half au ounce each, and are composed along Avith
bay-leaves.

Aiiother medicine from quinces, having the jneces bruised,
but entire. Of clean quinces cut into pieces, lb. viij are
boiled in sext. viij of wine moderately, so that they may not
be dissolved. Then there are mixed with them of despumated
honey, lb. viij ; of pepper, oz. viij ; of stone parsley, of anise,
of each, oz. iij ; of ginger, oz. v ; of spikenard, oz. iss ; of
cloves, oz. j. W hen all these things are pounded and mode-
rately boiled to the consistence of broth, take them off, and
having cooled it, add the pieces of quinces to the broth.

TJie antidote from three yeijpers. Of common, of white, and
of long pepper, of each, dr. -vij ; of ginger, of anise, of thyme-
tops, dr. ij ; of honey, q. s.

Another, of Oribasius. Of white pepper, oz. ij ; of black
and of long pepper, of spikenard, of cinnamon, of bishop's
weed, of walnut, of hyssop, of seseli, of carrot, of stone-parsley,
of each, oz. j ; of ginger, dr. iv ; of honey, lb. iij.

Another. Of common pepper, oz. iij ; of white pepper,
oz. j ; of long, oz. j ; of stone- parsley, of cinnamon (or double
the quantity of cassia), of ginger, of each, oz. j ; of honey,
oz. xxj, or q. s. ; and have also mixed of the corymbi of
thyme, oz. j.

The diosjjolites. Of cumin, which has been macerated in
water and toasted, oz. j ; of pepper, of ginger, of each, oz. ij ;
of green rue, oz. iss ; of natron, dr. iiss. Mix with honey.

The medicine from calamint. Of stone-parsley, of penm'-
royal, of seseli, of calamint, of each, oz. iij ; of parsley-seed,
oz. j ; of the corymbi of thyme, oz. j j of lovage, oz. iv ; of
pepper, dr. xij ; of honey, q. s.

The medicine from citron, for those of slow digestion. Of
vinegar, heminse iij ; of the flesh of citron, lb. j ; of hyssop,
of rue, of origany, of each, a fasciculus ; having been allowed to
macerate for a night and a day in the vinegar, they are to be
boiled to a third, and being expressed, are to be thrown away.
But with the vinegar is mixed of honey, sext. j ; and then it is to
be boiled to the consistence of honey. ^Yhen it acquires consis-
tence, there is to be added to it, of asarabacca, of spignel, of
wliite pepper, of each, oz. ij. The dose is a spoonful in the
morning and at bedtime.

520 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

The pier a of Galen. Of aloes, dr. c ; of xylobalsam, of
mastich, of saffron, of spikenard, of asarabacca, of cinnamon,
of each, dr. vj : some add also, of schcEnantli and of cassia^ of
each, dr. vj. Give dr. j in hvdromel.

The picra from oxymel for stomach complaints, colics, affec-
tions of the uterus, and dropsy. Of aloes, oz. iv ; of Indian
leaf, oz. ij ; of costus, of cassia, of amomum, of iris, of each,
dr. j ; of the bark of the root of fennel, lb. j ; of mastich, of
Celtic nard, of ginger, of each, dr. j ; of pepper, dr. j ; of
spignel, di*. j ; of vinegar, sext. iss ; of honey, sext. iss. The
fennel being first boiled in the vinegar is thrown away, then
the honey is added, and after boiling to the consistence of
honey, the other things are sprinkled in powder.

An excellent composition from the liver of a wolf. Of gentian,
of ground-pine, of stone-parsley, of horehound, of the gall of a
bear, of mustard, of ceterach, of the root of panax, of rubrica,
of madder, of cabbage-seed, of long birthwort, of white pepper,
of spikenard, of costus, of the seed of rocket, of the seed of
eryngo, of poley, of vipei-^s bugloss, of hemp-agrimony, of
juniper-berries, of the liver of a w^olf, of elecampane, equal
parts. Mis Avith well-boiled honey. The dose is the size of
a filbert, with boiled wine and honey.

The antidote Theodoretus ivith anacardia. Of anacardia,
oz. issj of saffron, of cassia, of Indian leaf, of spikenard, of
cloves, of spignel, of agaric, of schoenanth, of Pontic rhubarb, of
dodder of thyme, of each, dr. iv ; of sweet-flag, of pepper, of
each, oz. iss ; of aloes, oz. iij ; of saxifrage, of mastich, of Illy-
rian iris, of each, oz. iss ; of nutben, oz. j ; of honey, lb. vj,
or q. s.

The Theodoretus without anacardia. Of aloes, di\ Ix ; of
agaric, dr. xxiv ; of saffi'on, of cassia, of Pontic rhubarb, of
sweet-flag, of cinnamon, of mastich, of each, dr. x ; of costus, of
the seed of rue, of white pepper, of each, dr. viij ; of spikenai-d,
dr. iij ; of xylobalsam, of asarabacca, of germander, of spiguel,
of each, dr. iv ; of honey, q. s. Some here add two anacardia.
The dose is dr. ij, with honeyed water.

The cyphoides for hepatic affections and complaints in the
chest. Of the flesh of dried grape, dr. xxv ; of safi'ron, dr. j ;
of calamus, dr. ij ; of bdellium, dr. iiss ; of cassia, dr. iss ; of
cinnamon, three oboli : of nard, three oboli ; of sweet rush,

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. 521

dr. ij ; of myrrh, dr. iv ; of turpentine, dr. iv ; of the scrapings
of aspalathus, twelve oboH ; of honey, dr. xvj ; of wine, q. s.

Another cyphoides, of Alexander. Of saffron, of cinnamoDi,
of bdelHum, of each, dr. iv ; of myrrh, of calamus, of each, dr. ij ;
of bitumen, of schoenanth, of each, dr. iij ; of cassia, of nard,
of each, dr. j ; of turpentine, dr. x\'j ; of the flesh of dried
grapes, dr. clx ; of honey, hemin. iss ; of Chian Avine, q. s.

An hepatic medicine from cacanus. Of cacanus, oz. j ; of
costus, oz. j ; of Indian leaf, scr. viij ; of white pepper, scr. vj ; of
spikenard, scr. vj ; of honey, q. s. Give a spoonful with hippocras.

The Zopyriiis. Of myrrh, dr. v; of saffron, of cassia, of
each, dr. iv ; of cinnamon, dr. iij ; of spikenard, dr. ij ; of
schoenanth, dr. ij ; of white pepper, dr. iss j of frankincense,
dr. j ; of costus, dr. j ; of honey, q. s.

The Paonian antidote. Of the styrax calamite, dr. \g ; of
frankincense, of amomum, of saffron, of each, oz. iss; of
spikenard, di*. vj ; of Indian leaf, dr. ij ; of white pepper,
dr. vj ; and of common, dr. "saij ; of myrrh, oz. j ; of costus,
oz. j ; of honey, q. s.

T/ie hepatic pills, of Dositheus. Of aloes, oz. j ; of spikenard,
of Indian leaf, of costus, scr. ij ; of agaric, scr. "viij ; of mastich,
scr. xiij ; of dodder of thyme, dr. iv ; of Pontic rhubarb, scr. j.

TJie splenic oxymel. Of the bark of the root of capers, of
scolopendrium, of spikenard, of asarabacca, of iris, of schoenanth,
of the flower of cyperus, of anise, of cumin, of fennel, of sweet-
flag, of the fruit of heath, of each, oz. j ; of the leaves of
tamarisk, of the leaves of willow, of the root of parsley, of
the frankincense tree, of squiUs, of each, oz. ij ; of \dnegar,
sextar. iij ; of honey, sext. iij ; of ammoniac perfume, oz. iij.
Prepare like that from squiUs. Give two spoonfuls.

An oxymel for calculous coynplaints. Of saxifrage, of bet-
tony, of couch-grass, of maiden-hair, of spikenard, of carpesium,
of asarabacca, of eryngo, of each, oz. j; of Macedonian stone-
parsley, of the seed of rue, of each, oz. ss ; of green fennel, of
iris, of baked squills, of knee-holly (chamEedaphne), of each,
oz. ij ; of the bark of the root of capers, oz. iij ; of water-
parsnip, oz. ij; of water, of \dnegar, of honey, of each, sext. ij.

The lithontriptic posca. Of pennyroyal, of mastich, of
parsley-seed, of dried mint, of each, oz. j ; of common salt
toasted, lb. j ; of coriander-sccd, of spikenard, of anise, of

522 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

bishop^s weed, of each; scr. vj ; of Indian leaf, scr. iv ; of white
pepper, oz. ss, (or of common oz. j); of the seed of gromwell,
Qz. ^j ; of bettony, oz. -sg ; of fine vinegar, sext. v. When all are
pounded, sifted, and triturated very fine, let them be mixed
with vinegar for thi-ee days, and exposed in the sun for forty
days. At the time of using, ha^^ng made a decoction of black
chick-peas, and of the root of asparagus, and of maiden-hair,
and of parsley, add, for the sake of temperament, of vinegar
hemin. ij, and let the patient drink it in the hot bath. Some
give scr. xij of the afore-mentioned things, in powder with
oxycrate mixed with the decoction of the afore-mentioned herbs;
and the medicine is no less efficacious.

A UthontrijAic hijypocras. Of white pepper, of saxifrage, of
spikenard, of gromwell, of bettony, of each, oz. j ; of stone-
parsley, of Indian leaf, of each, oz. iss; of the seed of wild rue,
oz. ss ; of honey, sext. j ; of Ascolonitic wine, sext. xvj.

The medicine from the blood of the biick-goat. When the
grape begins to ripen, take the blood of a full-gi-own buck-
goat, and having dried it in the sun, give to persons aflected
with calculi two spoonfuls of it with Cretan must. Some also
mix, of amomum, of Indian leaf, of each, oz. iij ; and others of
mvrrh, scr. iv.

The nephritic composition from cicada. Of gromwell, of the
garfish burned, of seseli, of each, oz. j; of bishop^s weed, of the
seed of the garden cucumber, of common saxifrage, of grapes
without then- stones, of the seed of marsh-mallows, of the white
fasil, of lyn curium, of each, oz. ss; of spikenard, of valerian, of
spiguel, of the stones from sponges, of each, dr. j ; of maiden-
hair, of the seed within the Christ^s thorn, of water-parsnip, of
the root of brambles, of couch-grass, of polypody, of each,
dr. iij ; of goat's blood dried, as described, scr. vj ; of dried
cicadse, without the head, wings, and feet, oz. iv; of white
pepper, dr. vj ; of boiled honey, q. s. The dose is the size of
a filbert in hippocras, or the decoction of caltrops, or of saxi-
frage, or of sinon, or of the root of asparagus, or of couch-
grass, or of cinquefoil, or of the root of fullers-herb.

The antidote from gromwell. Of gromwell, of betony, of
saxifrage, of stone-parsley, of white pepper, equal parts.
Mix with honey.

The antidote from the seed of leeks. Of white and of black

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. 523

pepper, of Cretan carrot, of tlie seed of the garden cucumber, of
the seed of fennel, of the seed of leeks, of Macedonian stone-
parsley, of pellitory, of ginger, of the Indian leaf, of each, oz. j;
of honey, q. s.

The antidote from tecolithos, or hqns Judaicus. Of spike -
nard, of hyssop, of lapis Judaicus, of each, scr. viij ; of pepper,
scr. xij ; of ginger, of stone-parsley, of costus, of saxifrage, of
each, scr. vj ; of cassia, of parsley-seed, of each, scr. iij ; of
c^'perus, scr. vj ; of the scrapings of ivory, scr. iv ; of the
wood of cardamom, scr. vj; of gromwell, scr. ivj of honey, q. s.

The antidote from the seed of the wild malloiv. Of the seed of
the garden cucumber, dr. xij ; of the seed of henbane, dr. vj ;
of the seed of hemlock, dr. iij (but some use \'j) ; of opium, of
fennel, of the seed of the wild mallow, of saffron, of each,
dr. iij ; of parsley-seed, dr. vj ; of cassia, dr. iv ; almonds, x ;
walnuts, X ; filberts, x ; of asarabacca, dr. iv ; mix with Cretan
must, and give three oboli, if the patient be free from fever,
with rob. But some mix it with honey.

A nephritic medicine from dessert-fruits, for ulceration of the
bladder and kidneys. Of the white grape, deprived of its
stones, of fresh pine-nuts, of each, oz. ij ; of the seed of cu-
cumber, stripped of its bark ; of myrtles deprived of their
bones ; of bitter almonds, of fatty dates, of parslej-seed, of
poppy-seed, of saffron, of each, dr. j ; of myrrh, oz. ij. Give a
drachm of it in must to the patient, fasting.

The sati/riac antidote. Of ginger, of the superior satyrion
(herb dogs-tooth ?), of each, dr. viij, of the tail of a scink, of
spignel, of asarabacca, of stone-parsley, of cardamom, of seseli,
of each, dr. iv ; of the seed of rocket, of cinnamon, of each, dr.
iij ; of all-good (horminum), of white pepper, of the seed of
bastard saffron, of each, dr. ij ; of the schoenanth, of spikenard,
of each, dr. j, of goat's blood, a mystrum (spoonful). A drachm
is given with wine, but to those who are weaker, with milk.

Pills from xylomucer for dysenteries. Of xylomacer, of
opium, of Pontic rhubarb, of each, scr. vj ; of gall, of myrrh, of
each, oz. j ; mix with palm wine.

Remedies for the gout. The antidote from coralliiun. O
rheum barbarura, of pseony, of troglodytic myrrh, of spikenard,
of each, oz. ij ; of Indian leaf, oz. j ; of cloves, gr. xv, of the
pimpernel having the purple flower which they call coralliura,

524 ANTIDOTES. [book yii.

oz. ss ; of long birthworthj oz. iv^ aud of round, oz. vj. One
scruple is to be given as a dose every day to the patient, when
digestion is accomplished. We must begin at the autumnal
equinox, which is about the 24th of the month of September ;
and it is to be taken regularly for fifty days, and then inter-
rupted for fifteen days ; and this is to be done until the whole
365 days be completed. It is to be given up during the whole
of the dog-days, that is, from the 24th of June to the end of
August. The patient must abstain from venery, from flesh, par-
ticularly that of swine, and from pickle, sauce, beet, carrot, mint,
and from boiled lettuces and pompions ; from fishes, as the
mullet, gomplii (gobii?), mollusca, and the testacea ; from all
the legumes, and in short from all things whicli furnish a thick
chyme, and from black wine, and from much wine of any kind.
He is to bathe every day, and take exercise either on foot or
on horseback, or in a vehicle. Those Avho are of a drier habit
have not been injured by a less restricted diet.

The podagric antidote of Agapetiis. Of Indian leaf, of rheum
barbarum, of saffron, of spikenard, of troglodytic myrrh, of
costus, of germander, of each, oz. ij ; of hepatic aloes, oz. v; of
St. John's wort, of pffiony, of each, oz. iij ; of long birthwort,
of valerian, of spignel, of vervain mallow, of pimpernel, of each,
oz. iv. The mode of using it is the same as that of corallium.

The podagric remedy, called atactos. Of Indian leaf, of
spignel, of vervain mallow, of the pimpernel ha^aug the blue
flower, of madder, of mastich, of saffron, of cassia, of hepatic
aloes, of gentian, of germander, of each, oz. j ; of cloves, of
white and of black pepper, of each, oz. ss ; of spikenard, of mp-rh,
of rheum barbarum, of the root of pseony, of the long birthwort,
and of the round, of each, oz. ij. To be used in like manner.

The p)odagric antidote of Proclus, ansivering also v)ith
ischiatic disease. Of germander, oz. ix ; of centauiy, oz. viij ;
of birthwort, oz. vij ; of gentian, oz. vj ; of St. John's wort,
oz. V ; of Macedonian stone-parsley, oz. iv; of spignel, oz. iij ; of
agaric, oz. ij ; of valerian, oz. j ; of Attic honey, two heminse.

The composition from seven ingredients for the same jnirjjoses.
Of St. John's wort, of long birthwort, of each, oz. j ; of centaury,
of ground pine, of agaric, of each, oz. iij ; of germander, oz. vj ;
of gentian, oz. v. Some add likewise, of stone-parsley, oz. j ;
of honey, dr. v. The dose is dr. j.

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. 525

Commentary. Celsus thus defines tlie nature of antidotes : Comm.
"Antidota raro, sed prsecipue iuterdura necessaria sunt, quia ' ' '
gravisismis casibus opitulantui'. Ea recte quidem dautur collisis
corporibus vel per ictus, vel ubi ex alto deciderunt, vel in vis-
cerum, laterura, faucium, interiorumque partium doloribus ;
maxima autem desideranda sunt adversus venena, vel per mor-
sus, A'el per cibos, aut potiones nostris corporibus inserta." He
gives prescriptions for three antidotes. They consist principally
of stimulant and aromatic medicines, mixed with honey and
wine, (v, 23.)

Most of the antidotes treated of in this chapter are copied from
Galenas work ' De Antidotis,' but our author, in many instances,
has used the liberty to introduce various alterations, either with
the view of simplifying or improving upon the formulce of
Galen. Mesne also treats fullv of antidotes in his work, ^ De
Electariis,' wherein he substitutes a considerable number of
Arabic articles for those used by the Greeks. Serapion describes
these compositions with extreme prolixity. (Tract, vii.) But
what shall we say of Myi'epsus, who gives prescriptions for 511
antidotes ? Of these, and such like multifarious compositions,
it would be idle to attempt any general analysis, and therefore
Ave shall pass by all the articles treated of in this chapter un-
noticed, with the exception of the Theriac, which was so cele-
brated in the records of ancient medicine, that we think our-
selves called upon to give some further account of it. Galen
devotes two distinct treatises to the consideration of the cele-
brated theriac from vipers, besides giving a general description
of it in his work on antidotes. Our author's account of it is
merely an abridgment of his. Galen mentions that Mith-
ridates, king of Pontus, had, by repeated experiments upon
condemned malefactors, acquired a most thorough knowledge of
the proper antidotes for almost every venomous reptile and
poisonous substance, and hence he constructed the composition
bearing his name, which Avas long esteemed as a general anti-
dote to deleterious substances. From it Andromachus, the chief
physician to the emperor Nero, formed his famous theriac, having
added the flesh of vipers, and otherwise altered some of the ingre-
dients in the theriac of ]Mitliridates. The prescription for it Avas
translated into verse by Damocrates, and the poem, consisting of
171 lines, is preserved in Galen's Avork, "^De Antidotis.' As stated

526 ANTIDOTES. [book vii.

CoMM. by Galen, itwas composed of inspissated juices, liquirl juices, barks,
' ' ' roots, flowers, seeds, and fleshes. Of the vegetable substances
which entered into the composition of it, it is difficult to re-
mark any one general character, although one can have no
difficulty in perceiving that by far the greater number of them
are hot, volatile stimulants, which, agreeably to the ancient
views of practice, as explained by us in the Fifth Book, were
supposed to counteract the frigidity of poisons. It was, no
doubt, with the same intention that Andromachus added the
flesh of vipers, from which, as a modern author, Moses Charras,
remarks, a volatile salt and oil are procured. In preparing the
vipers, Galen directs us to cut oflF the head and tail to the ex-
tent of four fingers^ breadth, and then to take out their entrails
and fat, and boil them until the backbone be separated from
the flesh, when the latter is to be taken out and formed into
trochisks, with crumb of bread. We need not occupy time
with detailing all the other steps in the formation of this mul-
tifarious composition, as our author^s account is sufficiently
ample and accurate. Galen expresses great confidence in it,
especially as an antidote to poisons, and a remedy for invete-
rate diseases of the skin, such as leprosy and elephantiasis.
It derives its name, he says, either from its being used as a
remedy for the stings of venomous animals (Qripia), or because
the flesh of such a reptile, namely, the viper, entered into the
composition of it.

The Greek authorities subsequent to Galen repeat his
directions for forming this celebrated medicine, and any altera-
tions which they make in it are not very important. The
Rheum barbarum instead of the Rha Ponticum appears in the
prescription given by Myrepsus. Like his predecessors, he
praises the theriac not only as an antidote to poisons, but as a
preservative from pestilential diseases. Actuarius, who describes
it very accurately, pronounces it to be the best of all the antidotes.

Averrhoes's treatise on the theriac is interesting and
worth consulting, although his views are upon the whole much
in accordance with those of Galen. He seems to have referred
its action as a medicine to its power in rousing the vital heat
of the system ; and hence he very properly forbids it to be
administered in all cases of an inflammatory and bilious
nature. He therefore condemns the use of it in pleurisy un-

SECT. XI.] ANTIDOTES. 527

less when the pain is dull and chronic. He says, it ought not Comm.
to be given in cases of difficult parturition, unless when it is ' ' '
wished to rouse the expulsive faculty, or when the foetus is
dead. According to his account, the composition has not
arrived at perfection, when it is four years old, and it retains its
powers until after forty years.

Haly Abbas sums up the medicinal properties of the theriac
Avith stating that it dries the natural humidity, strengthens the
viscera, cleanses the organs of food and respiration, and ex-
pels superfluities from the brain. Hence he pronounces it to
be a remedy for all the diseases which attack the human body.
(Pract. X 4.)

Serapion describes the following methods of trying whether
the theriac be good : 1st. Give of it to the amount of a drachm
to a person who has taken a powerful emetic or cathartic, such
as white hellebore or scammony, and if it counteract the effect
of the medicine that has been taken, we know that it is
genuine. 2d. As Galen directs, having got a wild cock, allow
it to be stung by a venomous reptile, and then give it a proper
dose of the theriac. If the fowl escape unhurt we are sure
that the medicine is good ; but if he die we know that it is not
to be depended upon. 3d. Give a poisonous substance, such
as opium, to a cock or a dog, and then administer the theriac,
the powers of which may be judged of from the result.

Moses Charras, who published ' The Royal Pharmacopoeia '
about the end of the seventeenth century, thus enumerates the
medicinal uses of the theriac of Andromachus : " Treacle beiuff
composed of a great quantity of hot medicaments, ought to be
very much esteemed for the cure of cold diseases, and of all those
where the natural heat is feeble and languishing, especially, among
the rest, of palsies, epilepsies, convulsions, and all cold diseases of
the head. It is proper against all weaknesses and want of re-
tention in the stomach and intestines; against the diarrhoea, dy-
sentery, lientery, morbus cholera, and all sort of colics ; against
agues, and particularly the quartan ; against the worms; against
all sorts of poison, the pestilence, smallpox, the measles, and all
epidemic diseases ; against the biting of mad dogs and all sorts
of venomous animals ; against want of sleep, and griping pains
in children ; against liysteric passions, the jaundice, and an in-
finite sort of other diseases. (P. i, c. 20.)

528 TROCHISKS. [book vii.

CoMM. This famous medicine was expelled from tlie 'British Phar-
' ' macopoeia ' about the middle of the last century. When its
rejection was proposed by Dr. Heberdeu, the College di^dded
upon the question, and there were found to be 13 votes for
retaining, and 14 for rejecting it. Its medicinal -virtues had
been preAiously questioned by Capivaccius, Triucavallius, and
Julius Alexandrinus. It is still retained, however, in the 'Codex
Medicamentarius' of Paris ; and, we understand, is much used
by the Greek physicians in Constantinople. A formula for a
theriac is contained in the Greek Pharmacopoeia of the present
day. Although it still retains the name of " Theriaca Andro-
machi," it consists of but a very small number of ingredients
in comparison with the original preparation. Dr. Mead says
of it, " The physicians in Italy and France very commonly
prescribe the broth and jelly of viper's flesh to iuAigorate and
purify the mass of blood exhausted with diseases or tainted with
some vicious and obstinate ferment." (On Poisons.) Upon the
virtues of viper's flesh, Duemerbroeck expresses himself in the
following terms : " Carnes viperinas ac serpentinas adversus
multa venena eximiam antidotalem vim obtinere adeo notum
est ut absolute negari non possit, idque non tantum liquet ex
Galeni testimoniis verum etiam ex quotidiana experientia. Sic
Hartmanuus scribit se propriis oculis vidisse, a quodam experto
medico tribus diebus continuis intra corpus gravissima qusedara
venena assumpta eademque paulo post sine ulla noxa, ab exhi-
bito pulvere cum astantium admiratioue iterum expulsa fuisse."
(De Peste, iii, 5.)

SECT. XII. ON TROCHISKS, OR TROCHES.

Trocliisks are so named from their form. There are three
kinds of them. For some of them are to be swallowed, some
injected, and some rubbed in. Of those which are swallowed,
some are for restraining the belly, or a flow of blood, or any
other discharge, by their cooling, astringent, obstruent, or desic-
cative qualities, such as that from Egyptian thorn, that from
seeds, and the like. Some are anodyne, eitlier by deadening
the sensibilit}', such as the saff'ron, or by dispelling, like those
from aromatic substances. Some act as deobstruents on the

SECT. XII.] TROCIIISKS. 529

spleen, kidneys, and liver, sucli as that from bitter almonds.
Of those which are injected, some are for blunting acrimony,
as in dysenteiy, such as those from pompholyx, starch, and
Samian earth, injected with the juice of ptisan, or the like.
Some act as astringents upon the ahane discharges, or a flow
of blood, as those from alum, acacia, and omphacium, such as
that of Philip ; or that consisting of Egyptian thorn, injected
with the juice of roses or of plantain. Those that are caustic
agree with spreading dysenteries, being composed of sandarach,
arsenic, quicklime, and burnt pepper ; but they are to be in-
jected with the juice of lentils or of rice, the intestine being
first washed out with salt water, and the patients having eaten
and drunk beforehand, so that none of the powers of the medi-
cine may be carried up to the stomach. Those trochisks which
are injected prove serviceable principally in affections below
the navel, for their power does not reach higher up. Those
which are rubbed in are possessed of similar powers to those
which are injected. But the astringent ones are applicable in
herpes, exanthemata, intertrigo, hemorrhage, and ulcers at-
tended with discharges, such as that of Aiidron and that of
Polyides. Those possessed of blunting powers agree with car-
buncle, and ill-conditioned ulcers, such as the white trochisks,
and that from lotaria. Those which bm'n as those mentioned
above, like the Faustian, are applicable in spreading ulcers in
the pudenda and anus, and for pterygia and sarcomata.

The trochisk aster. Of saflron, of castor, of spikenard, of
cassia, of myrrh, of Lemnian earth, of the bark of mandragora,
of each, oz. iv ; of carrot, of parsley, of anise, of seseli, of the
seed of henbane, of storax, of each, dr. viij. Triturate with
wine.

The trochisk trigonus. Of the seed of parsley, of the seed
of henbane, of each, dr. ij ; of anise, dr. viij ; of opium, dr. iij.
Triturate with water.

The trochisk from seeds. Of anise, of bishop's weed, of the
seed of fennel, of each, dr. iv ; of the seed of parsley, of opium,
of the seed of henbane, of each, di'. ij. Triturate Avith
water.

The trochisk croceus, or saffron trochisk. Of anise, of the
seed of Cretan carrot, of each, dr. iv ; of myrrh, of castoi', of
each, dr. ij ; of saffron, of opium, of each, dr. iij ; of the seed

III. 34

530 TROCHISKS. [book vii.

of parsley^ of storax^ of eacli^ dr. iv ; of the seed of henbane,
dr. vj. Triturate with water.

TJie trocldsk from roses. Of acacia, of gum, of the flower of
roses, of pomegranate flowers, of the juice of hypocistis, of
galls, of each, dr. iij j of the juice of green roses, of the seed
of j)lantain, of each, dr. j ; of Indian buckthorn, dr. j.

The trochisk from corallium. Of the seed of henbane, of
frankincense, of each, dr. viij ; of Samian earth, of corallium,
of Sinopic vermilion, of opium, of each, dr. iv ; of starch, of the
flowers of the wild pomegranate, of each, dr. ij. Mix with the
juice of knotgrass.

The trochisk from amber. Of fleawort, oz. v; of mastich,
oz. iv ; of the scrapings of amber, of iris, of safiron, of each,
oz. iv j of opium, oz. ij.

The trochisk from Egyptian thorn. Of Egyptian thorn, of
sumach, of frankincense, of acacia, of stone-alum, of the juice
of hypocistis, of galls, of Lemnian earth, of corallium, of com-
frey, of Samian aster, of aloes, of Cretan cistus, equal parts.
Mix with wine.

The trochisk which Galen entitles the aphrocVisiasticum
clidion. Of the flowers of the cultivated pomegranate, of
Egyptian thorn, of the flowers of the wild pomegranate, of the
juice of hypocistis, of acacia, of each, dr. vj ; of buckthorn,
of Pontic rhubarb, of opium, of each, dr. iv ; of myrrh, dr. ij .
Mix with myrtle wine, or the decoction of roses or of myrtles.

The clidion of Oribasius, for dysentery and caeliac affection.
Of the immature gall, dr. viij ; of opium, dr. iv. Form into
pills with water, and give three or four.

The trochisk from hartshorn for dysentery and hemoptysis.
Of snails, dr. xij ; of burnt hartshorn, of roasted galls, of
roasted acacia, of each, dr. v ; obol. xij ; of black myrtles,
dr. XV ; of dried opium, of the juice of hypocistis, of each, dr. v ;
of the oenanthe, dr. v ; of the juice of the root of mandragora,
of terra aster, of each, dr. xij ; of the sumach used for condi-
ments, dr. xiv ; of roasted pomegranate rind, dr. vij ; of
frankincense, dr. viij ; of the roasted bark of pine, dr. xiv ; of
the seed of henbane roasted, dr. x ; of the rhus coriaria, sext. ii ;
of dark-coloured wine, what will be sufficient to boil the sumach
until the wine become thick. When it is strained, add the
other things, and form the trochisks.

SECT. XII.] TROCHISKS. 531

TJie trochisk of the Amazons. Of the seed of parsley, of anise,
of each, dr. vj ; of the hair of wormwood, dr. iv ; of myrrh, of
pepper, of opium, of castor^ of each, dr. ij ; of cinnamon, dr. vj.
Mix with water.

The trochisk from bitter almonds. Of anise, of the seed of
parsley, of asarabacca, of bitter almonds, of the hair of worm-
wood, equal parts; form, with water, trochisks of dr. j each.
Give to those who are free from fever in wine and honey, and
to those who have fever in water and honey.

The splenic trochisk from heath. Of the fruit of heath,
dr. iv ; of white pepper, of Syriac nard, of ammoniac perfume,
of each, dr. ij. The ammoniac is dissolved in water, and
added to the powders, and trochisks are formed containing a
drachm each. The dose is one trochisk, with one cyathus of
oxymel.

The trochisk from alkakengi. Of the seed of the cultivated
cucumber, stripped of its bark, oz. iv ; of the seed of henbane,
of hemlock, of each, oz. ij ; of fennel, of the seed of dock, of
saffron, of pine nuts, of bitter almonds, of opium, of each, oz. j ;
of alkakengi, sext. iij ; of wine, q. s.

The trochisk of Philip, for dijsentery. Of the flowers of the
wild pomegranate, of acacia, of the juice of hjqoocistis, of
opium, of sumach, of frankincense, of myrrh, of saffron, of
gall, of aloes, of Pontic rhubarb, of the rind of pomegranate,
of myrtles, of each, dr. iv. Mix with austere wine, and form
into trochisks of three oboli each. Give to those who are free
from fever with wine, and to those in fever with hydromel.

The trochisk of Miisa. Of alum, of aloes, of myrrh, of
copperas (blue \itriol ?) of each, oz. iss ; of pomegranate rind,
of saffron, of crocomagma, of each, dr. vj, in wine.

The preparation of the crocomagma. Of saffron, oz. ij ; of
roses, of starch, of mjTrh, of aloes, of frankincense, of gum, of
each, oz. j ; of costus, of spikenard, of each, dr. j, in wine. In
the prescription for oil of saffron another mode of preparing
crocomagma is described.

The trochisk Nere, from the loorks of Hei'a. Of myrrh, of
aloes, of saffron, of each, dr. viij ; of fissile alum, dr. c. Mix
with water.

The sigiUum of Polyides. Of fissile alum, dr. iij ; of frankin-
cense, dr. iv; of myrrh, dr. viij; of copperas (chalcanthum?).

532 TROCHISKS. [book vit.

dr. ij ; of the flowers of the cultivated pomegranate, dr. xij ;
of the gall of bulls, dr. vj (others use dr. xvj) ; of aloes, oz. j.
Mix with austere wine.

The trochisk of Pasion. Of squama seris, dr. xij ; of burnt
copper, of sal ammoniac, of round alum, of scraped verdigris,
of frankincense, of each, dr. viij ; of wine, q. s.

The trochisk Andronius. Of the flowers of the cultivated
pomegranate, dr. x ; of myrrh, dr. iv ; of galls, dr. viij ; of
round birthwort, dr. iv ; of copperas, of saffron, of fissile alum,
of crocomagma, of misy, of frankincense, of each, dr. ij.
Triturate with astringent wine or vinegar.

The trochisk of Faiislinus. Of arsenic, dr. xij ; of sandarach,
dr. vj ; of quicklime, dr. viij ; of burnt paper, dr. j. Mix with
the juice or decoction of myrtles ; make into trochisks, and
inject along with the decoction of myrtles, of lentils, and of the
roots of bramble.

The trochisk from paper. Of burnt paper, lb. ij ; of quick-
lime, of arsenic, of sandarach, of each, oz. j. Mix with the
juice of plantain.

Tlie trochisk called Thronus Marcellius. Of burnt paper, dr. x ;
of sandarach, of arsenic, of squama aris, of fissile alum, of each,
dr. iv ; of the flowers of the wild pomegranate, dr. iij ; of opium,
dr. ij ; of quicklime, dr. iij ; of omphacium, dr. j ; of the juice of
hypocistis, dr. iij. Mix with myrtle wine, and form troches of
four drachms each. When yon have boiled the pomegranate
rind, myrtles, and roses to a third part, give one trochisk, or
simply dr. iv to six cyathi of wine.

The trochisk from cork. Of burnt galls, of burnt paper, of
burnt cork, of burnt bread, of each, dr. xv. In another pre-
scription there is added of burnt hartshorn, dr. xv ; of arsenic,
dr. i j ; of sandarach, of quicklime, of each, dr. xv; of acacia,
of ceruse, of each, dr. v; of litharge, dr. iij. Triturate in wine.

The trochisk Bithynus. Of pomegranate rind, dr. x ; of cala-
mine, oz. iij ; of birthwort, of galls, of the root of all-heal, of
iris, of copperas, of fissile alum, of chalcitis, of misy, of squama
seris, of manna (and some also of costus), of each, oz. iss.
Mix with vinegar.

The trochisk from castor, for ulcers, spreading sores, and de-
fluxions. Of saff^ron, of aloes, of frankincense, of each, oz. j ;
of the flowers of the cultivated pomegranate, of fissile alum, of

SECT. XII.] TROCHISKS. bS'^

castor, of manuaj of scraped verdigris, of each, oz. j ; of sinopic
vermilion, lb. j. Mix with old wine.

The trochisk from castor, for colics. Of myrrh, of castor^ of
each, scr, vj ; of saffron, of opium, of each, scr. ix ; of anise, of
parsley seed, of carrot seed, of each, oz. ss ; of the seed of hen-
bane, scr. xviij.

The trochisk from ivine and oil, for the fundament and puden-
dum. Of ceruse, oz. x ; of litharge, oz. v ; of frankincense,
of the di'oss of lead, of fissile alum, of each, oz. ij. Triturate
with wine that does not contain salt water. At the time of
using it, mix with wine and rose oil, or wine and myrtle oil.

The trochisk from Phrygian stone, for the pudenda. Take
three Phrygian stones burnt and extinguished, and mix the
first with butter or rose oil ; the second with wine ; and the
third with honey, to the extent of oz. ij ; add, of the flower of
roses, oz. iv; of pomegranate rind, oz. j.

The trochisk from lotaria to the fandament and pudendum. Of
ceruse, of starch, of glaucium, of saffron, of alum, equal parts.
Triturate with the juice of lotaria or wine.

The white trochisk. Of terra aster, oz. iv ; of pompholyx,
of ceruse, of starch, of each, oz. ij ; of opium, scr. iv. Mix
with water.

T/ie trochisk from halicacahus, or ivinter cherry. Of litharge,
dr. xxiv ; of ceruse, dr. xij or xxj ; of winter cherry, dr. viij ;
of copperas (chalcanthum), dr. iv ; of fissile alum, dr. iv ; of
vermilion enough to give it colour. Mix with water.

The trochisk from the two hellebores, and also from the two
acacias. Of the black and of the yellow acacia, of artificer's
glue (in another prescription of fish-glue), of each, oz. iv; of
ammoniac perfume, of glaucium, of aloes, of each, oz. ij ; of
male frankincense, of black and of white hellebore, of each,^
oz. j. Mix with \dnegar of squills, and at the time of using it
dissolve either in the same or in common vinegar, and anoint
before and after the bath.

The trochisk Criorjen.es. Of myrrh, of burnt copper, of
round birthwort, of scraped verdigris, of the squama stomomatis,
of the straight vervain, of round alum, of each, oz. j ; of vine-
gar, q. s. The vervain is to be gathered when the sun is in
Aries. It may be made into a plaster thus : take of the
trochisk, of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of oil, equal parts ; of

534 TROCHISKS. [book vii,

vinegar what will be sufficient for the tritui'ation of the tro-
chisk.

The trochisk melanchlorus, or black-coloured. Of mjTrh, of
aloes, of burnt squama seris, of arsenic, of fissile alum, and of
round alum, of iris, of chalcitis, of misy, of fossil salt, of cop-
peras, of ceruse, of natron, of litharge, of the root of all-heal, of
calamine, of pomegranate rind, of galls, of round birthwort, of the
squama stomomatis,of scraped verdigris, ofeach,oz.j; of A'inegar,
q. s. It is formed into a plaster thus : of the trochisk, oz, ij ;
of Colophonian rosin, of wax, of oil, of each, oz. ^j ; of vinegar,
what will be sufficient for the trituration of the trochisk.

Tlie trochisk pantolmius, for chironian and malignant ulcers,
and for discharges. Of cassia, of burnt copper, of ceruse, of
litharge, of scraped verdigris, of fissile alum, and of round, and
of liquid, and of the plinthitic alum, of the root of all-heal, of
the long and of the round birthwort, of pomegranate rind, of
copperas, of purslain, of the iris called astragalitis, of chalcitis,
of misy, of ammoniac perfume, of sal ammoniac, of verdigris,
of iron, of squama seris, of aloes, of diphryges, of frankincense,
of galls, of sarcocolla, of burnt lead, of olive leaves, of sori, of
myrrh, of liquid melanteria, of the flowers of the wild pome-
granate, of the Egyptian thorn, of sulphur which has not been
touched with the fire, of natron, of red sumach, of Syriac
sumach, of chrysocolla, of elm-leaved sumach (rus coriaria), of
acacia, of the spuma salis, of omphacium, of arsenic, equal
parts. Triturate during the heat of the dog-days with vinegar
for thirty days.

The trochisk of Nymphodotus. Of aphronitrum, oz. j ; of
Alexandrian natron, of Gallic soap, of each, oz. j ; of Cappa-
docian salt, of mastich, of galls, of each, dr. iv ; of rose leaves,
of amomum, of starch, of each, oz. j ; of Indian leaf, dr. j ;
of fissile alum, of costus, of each, dr. ij ; of myrtle wine, q. s.

The trochisk from thapsia, for hemicrania. Of the juice of
thapsia (deadly carrot), dr. xvj ; of myrrh, dr. viij ; of opopo-
nax, of euphorbium, of each, dr. x] ; of natron, of the Parthic
juice, of each, dr. iv ; of pepper, of sagapen, of each, dr. ij ; of
\-inegar, q. s. In using it, rub it in with Aanegar, and after six
hours wash it ofi". If you wish to use in a reduced state, mix
with equal parts of cerate, and spread it, allowing it to remain
for a day and a night.

SECT. XII.] TROCHISKS. 535

The trochisk called subdititious, for dysentery and pains of
the anus. Of terra aster, of starcli, of each, oz. iij ; of saffron,
oz. ij j of acacia, of tragacanth, of each. oz. j ; of castor, of frank-
incense, of buckthorn, of each, oz. ss ; and in hotter tempera-
ments, also, of opium, oz. ss ; mix with the juice of fleawort,
and form into oblong trochisks.

Commentary. Celsus informs us that they are the same Comm.
as the pastilli of the Latins. He thus describes their general ' ' '
properties : " Pastilli hsec ratio est : arida medicamenta con-
trita humore non pingui, ut vino vel aceto, coguntur, et rursus
coacta inarescunt, atque, ubi utendum est, ejusdem generis
humore diluuntur." He gives prescriptions for six trochisks.
(v. 20.)

Galen remarks that trochisks derive their name from their
spherical shape. He treats of them at great length in the
fifth book of his work ' De Comp. Med. sec. gen.^ Many of
our author's receipts are copied from him.

For an account of the Arabian trochisks, see in particular
Serapion (vii, 18) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. x, 14) ; and Mesue
(i, 8.) The following is Mesue's formula for the trochisks of
camphor : " The trochisks of camphor, for ardent fevers, heat
of the blood and bile, warm intemperament of the liver, in-
satiable thirst, jaundice, consumption, and hectics. — R. Of
rose leaves dr. iv ; of spodium, of liquorice aa, dr. ij ; of yellow
Saunders, dr. iiss ; of the seeds of citrons, melons, cucumbers,
and gourds, of saffron, of tragacanth, of gum, of spikenard, aa
dr. j ; of lignum aloes, of cardomum, of starch, of camplior, aa
dr. j ; of white sugar, of manna, aa dr. iij. Mix with the mucilage
of fleawort and water of roses." Myrepsus's formula for the
same is little different. He describes the composition of 13()
pastils.

Moses Charras gives the following account of trochisks :
" They are also called pastils, rolls, cakes, and lozenges.
Trochisks were invented as well to preserve a long time the
virtue of certain medicaments as to unite together the virtue of
several. To which purpose having finely powdered the ingre-
dients, which are to be powdered, they are to be incorporated
with some juice, syrup, or otlier viscous liquor, to make there-
with a solid paste, out of which are formed little trochisks, flat.

536 SMEGMATA. [book yii.

CoMM. round, triangular, square, long, or otherwise, Avliich being
spread upon paper, and dried out of the sun, and at a distance
from the fire, to the end they may be dried in all parts alike,
may be put up in boxes or pots for use." (Royal Phar. ii, 21.)
Troches are pharmaceutical preparations still frequently used.
According to the directions in the ^ Edinburgh Dispensatory,^
" they are composed of powders made up with glutinous sub-
stances into small cakes, and afterwards dried.'' There is this
difference, however, between the troches of the moderns and
the trochisci of the ancients, that all the former are given
internally, whereas many of the ancient trochisci were used as
external applications. Of this description are five out of the six
pastilli described by Celsus. Le Clerc says of them : " lis
differoient des emplatres, et des collyres, en ce qu'il n'entroit
aucune matiere huileuse dans les trochisques et qu'ils servoient
pour le dedans aussi bien que pour le dehors." (Hist, de
la Med.)

SECT. XIII. DRV APPLICATIONS AND ABSTERGENTS

(sMEGMATA.)

Of dry applications or powders, some sviit with ulcers, and
some are applied to the skin. Of those which suit with ulcers,
some act as incarnants of hollow ulcers, and some restrain
fungous flesh, and some are cicatrizing, some caustic and septic,
and some styptic. The incarnative applications act either by
cleansing foul ulcers, such as those from tares, birthwort, iris,
all-heal, myrrh, frankincense, and aloes; or by drying the
superabundant discharge, as those from copper, diphryges,
squama jeris, burnt paper, the bark of pine and thorn. But
these promote cicatrization, either by blunting acrimony and
pungency, such as those from pompholyx, starch, ceruse,
sphecla (impure potass), the lapis specularis, burnt oysters,
terra Samia, and the like, and the compositions from them pos-
sess similar powers. Of repressing medicines, some are mild,
such as those from squama seris, those from misy and chalcitis,
when burnt, and galls ; but those from copperas, verdigris,
misy, and chalcitis, not burnt, are stronger. The caustics and
septics are prepared from quicklime, arsenic, sandarach, and

SECT, xiii.] SMEGMATA. . 537

spliecla, which is the burnt lees of wine. All these things
when reduced to a fine powder and sprinkled upon ulcers, are
less pungent. The coarser the powder to which they are re-
duced, the more pungent are they. St}^tics restrain bleeding,
either by astringing or cooling, or proving desiccative or
obstruent by burning and forming an eschar ; and the materials
of them have been mentioned in the section on Trochisks. Of
those which are applied to the skin, some cleanse and absterge,
such as those from Cimolian earth, pumice, bean-meal, barley-
leaven, the flesh of pompions, and the flower of salt ; some are
attenuant and discutient, such as those from hellebore, alcy-
onium, sulphur, stavesacre, mustard, pellitory, the seed of the
rosemary, lemnitis, or adarce, and the shell of the cuttle-fish.
But those having quicklime and arsenic added to them, with
some liquid, become depilatory and abstergent. Some arc ap-
plied to the head in order to dry up the discharge from it,
such as those from natron, salts, galls, the rind of pome-
granate, and the like. All the smegmata or abstergents should
be applied to the skin when it is not anointed.

The dry cephalic application. Of tares, oz. v ; of iris, oz. iss;
of manna, oz. iss ; of birthwort, of squama seris, of each, oz. iss.

Another. Of the bark of pine, dr, vj ; of frankincense, dr. iv ;
of pumice-stone, dr. iv ; of iris, dr. ij ; of diy rosin, dr. a'J ; of
birthwort, dr. ij.

From aloes. Of aloes, dr. vj ; of tares, dr. viij ; of manna,
dr. iv ; of galls, di\ iij ; of fissile alum, dr. ij.

The dry application of Manetho from the burnt lees of wine.
Of calamine, burnt and washed, oz. j ; of terra aster, oz. j ; of
burnt lees of wine, oz. iv ; of lapis specularis, oz. iv ; of frankin-
cense, oz. iv ; some add, also, of starch, oz. iv.

The melitera of Oribasius. Of chalcitis, of squama a^ris, of
galls, of the flowers of the wild pomegranate, of long birthwort,
of each, oz. j; of pomegranate rind, of fissile alum, of each, oz. ss.

From oysters. Of calamine, of frankincense, of each, oz. j;
of oysters burnt, oz. iij.

The powder from frankincense. Of litharge, of frankincense,
of calamine, of ceruse, equal parts.

The powder called uphroditarium. Of frankincense, of squama
8eris, of rhoedarium (a preparation from sumach), of starch, of
ceruse, equal parts.

538 SMEGMATA. [book vii.

The Rhodian styptic for spreading ulcers and fungous flesh.
Of unripe galls, dr. vj ; of galls burnt, and extinguislied in wine
and dried, dr. xij ; of the black squama seris, or, if not, of the
red, dr. \4ij ; of copperas, dr. xxiv ; of fissile alum, dr. xxvij ;
triturate for a suf36cient number of days.

The powder called flavus. Of burnt chalcitis, dr. xl ; of
burnt copperas, dr. viij ; of burnt misy, dr. x ; of burnt cop-
per, dr. V.

The jwwder called psarus. Of misj^, oz. v ; of galls, oz. iv ;
of chalcitis, oz. ij ; of squama seris, oz. ij ; of copperas, oz.j;
of scraped verdigris, oz. ij.

The caustic powder called heliocaes. Of arsenic, lb. j ; of
calx viva, lb. ij. Triturate with water during the dog-days, then
dry and use.

The florid poivder. Of cyperus, dr. viij ; of myrrh, dr. xij ;
of sandai-ach, dr. iij ; of the flowers of roses, dr. ij ; of saffron,
dr. ij ; of crocomagma, of fissile alum, of Illyrian iris, of each,

dr. ij.

The powder from paper, principally for spreading ulcers of the

mouth and those of the pudendum. Of squama aris, of burnt
paper, of each, dr. viij ; of arsenic, of sulphur vivum, of each,
dr. xij ; of burnt lead, dr. vj. For the more humid morti-
fications use it drv, but for such as are dry mix it with rose-oil,
and sometimes Avith honey along with rose-oil.

The poivder fi'om butcher's broom {oxymijrsine) , for the same
jmrposes. Of elm-leaved sumach, oz. ij ; of the leaves of
butcher's broom, of sandarach, of each, dr. viij ; of the dried
leaves of willow, of pomegranate rind, of each, dr. vj ; of fissile
alum, of chrysocolla, of aloes, of crude chalcitis, of squama seris,
of arsenic, of common salts, of each, dr. iv.

The powder ofMassaliotes. Of roasted natron, of chrysocolla,
of Asian stone, of sandarach, of misy, of chalcitis, of fissile alum,
of diphryges, equal parts. Use dry.

The dry abstergent application (smegma) called the ^scu-
lapian. Of bay berries, of Alexandrian natron, of roasted salt,
of Cappadocian salt, of ammoniac perfume, of aphronitrum, of
pumice-stone, of each, lb. j j of black hellebore, of fuller's herb,
of pellitory, of the burnt lees of wine, of stavesacre, of mustard,
of cyperus, of fissile alum, of the schoenanth, of iris, of galls,
of each, oz. vj ; of sampsuchum (a species of marjoram), lb. j ;

SECT, xiii.] SMEGMATA. 539

of the seed of the chaste tree, of pennyroyal, of the flour of
beans and of lupines, of each, oz. vj ; of the black chamseleon,
of sulphur, of gum, of frankincense, of pepper, of the root of the
wild cucumber, of horehound, of Cimolian earth, of pseony, of
the shell of the cuttle-fish, of the leaf of fenugreek, of costus,
of cumin, of euphorbium, of spikenard, of each, oz. iij. But
Alexander adds the following things : of bitter salts, of salts
from nitrous fountains, of Tragessean salt (" see Plin. xxxi, 01"),
of each, lb. j ; of adarce, oz. j ; of liquid alum, of Celtic, of
cnicus, of granum Cnidium, of dried grass, of dried bryony, of
each, oz. iij.

The abstergent application from pompions [smegma peponaton) .
Of frankincense, of mastich, of ammoniac perfume, of each,
oz. j ; of tragacanth, oz. iss ; of the juice of wild grape, oz. ix ;
of the fresh seed of pompion, oz. iij ; of similago, sext. v ;
the whites of xxi eggs, of iris, oz. iv. Some also use of black
hellebore, oz. ij.

Otherivise, that of Crito. Of bean meal, one modius ; of
similago, sext. iv ; of trefoil, of nutben, of Illyrian iris, of each,
lb. iv ; of ammoniac perfume, lb. j ; of costus, lb. j ; the whites
of seven eggs, of the flesh of pompions, sext. ij ; of the juice of
unripe grape, sext. ij. Mix, and having formed trochisks, dry,
then having pounded and strained, use.

Otherivise. Of tragacanth, of frankincense, of mastich, of
ammoniac perfume, of each, dr. x ; of the juice of unripe grape,
dr. V ; of similago, sext. v ; of the white of an e^^, oz. j ; of the
flesh of pompions, oz. j. Prepare as above described.

A desiccative smegma for defluxions of the head. Of the
tawny-coloured Alexandrian natron, oz. v ; of common salts,
roasted, oz. iss ; of Cappadocian salts, oz. j. Having mixed
these with the strongest vinegar, put into a linen bag, and
burn in a furnace until it be reduced to cinders. Then
having cooled it, rub with it triturated, adding a little wine in
the bath.

The soap of Constantine. Of dried roses, of aloes, of galls,
of pomegranate rind, of Indian leaf, of sarcocolla, of each, oz. iij ;
of the flowers of the wild pomegranate, of myrrh, of sandarach,
of spikenard, of each, oz. ij ; of costus, oz. j ; of Gallic soap,
lb. j. Mix with the decoction of lupines.

The depilatory poivder for the gout. Of mastich, of male

540 SMEGMATA. [book vii.

frankincense, of stavesacre, of Avliite liellebore, of litharge, of
each, oz. iij ; of Indian leaf, of starch, of black hellebore, of the
flower of Asian stone, of each, oz. j ; of alcyonium, of roasted
pumice-stone, of Cimolian earth, of sampsuch (marjoram), of
each, oz. iij ; of spikenard, oz. j ; some also add of aloes, oz. j.
Having pounded them, keep the powder in a vessel ; and when
going to use it, put the juice of rice and of ptisan in a pot, and
after it boils add of the powder, oz. iss ; of Gallic soap, oz. iss ;
of arsenic, of fissile alum, of each, oz. iss; of sandarach, oz. iss;
of recent quickhme, lb. j. Use this unguent thrice a month,
on the 9th day of the moon, the 19th, and the 29th, for a
whole year, and afterwards once a month on the 29th day of
the moon.

Commentary. The terms are thus explained by Blancard :
Diapasma. Phnio, medicamentum aridum ex siccis pulveribus
conflatum inspersile, quod aut vestibus ad gratiam odoris, aut
ulceri vulnerique varia ratione, aut potui etiam ad luxum
inspergitur, cuiTraa^ia, KaraTraafxa, KarcnraoTOV (jya^ixaKov.
Oribasius non male discrimen inter has voces ex Antyllo ponere
mihi videtur ut If^nraafiaTa sint, quse sudoribus cohibendis, et
commovendo pruritui adhibentur : quae Sympasmata et asper-
gines Aurelianus nominat : KaTairaajxaTa sunt quae ulceribus
superpouuntur, ^r/'oto etiam dicta : §m77 0(7;itora vero conciliandse
in vento fragrautiae." (Lexicon Medicum.) The different forms
of medicines are thus characterized by Dr. Blomfield : " Quatuor
sunt ^a^naKwv genera, quorum principue mentio fit apud
auctores Grsecos : (^aoj^iciKa ^piara, -iraaTa, ifkaaTa, et wiaTa vel
TTort^ta, quibus interdum additur quintum genus, Tci (i^wai/na,
et sextum i-rrw^ai, proat eis ad unguendum, inspergendum, em-
plastro obtegendum, bibendiim, edendum, vel incantandum ute-
bantur/' (Glossarium ad J^schyli Prometh. 1. 488.) Theocritus
uses the word tTriiraaTov in its medical sense. (Idyll, xi, 2.)
He says, no medicine, either in the form of ointment or powder,
is a remedy for love. Le Clerc thus explains the medicines
of which we are treating : " Les jjoudres s'appelloient en Grec
Srjpitt 6v ^r)oa c'est a dire, medicamens sees. On les appelloit
Diapasmata, Catapasmata, Catapasta, Sympasmata" He says
of the Smegma : " On s'en servoit particulierement pour net-
toyer le peau, pour oter le demangeaison, &c.'^ He adds :

SECT. XIV.] LINIMENTS. 541

" Lorsqiie il s'agissoit de faire tomber le poll on prenoit des Comm.
matieres encore plus fortes et plus acres que celles qu'on a in- """"
diquees, comme de Forpiment, de la sandaraque, de la cliaux
vivCj et Ton les detrempoit avec les sues. En ces cas on donnoit
a cette composition le nom particuliere de psilothrum on depi-
latoire." (Hist, de la Med.) On the meaning of the terms see,
further^ Eustathius (ap. Iliad, iv) ; Scholiast. Aristoph. (Plaat) ;
and Gataker's Antoninus (v, 9.)

Celsus gives the following general description of these medi-
cines : " Quajdam autem mixturse medicamentorum sunt quibus
aridis neque coactis utimur, sic ut inspergamus, aut cum aliquo
liquido mixta illiuamus." The powder of gollas, if prepared
according to his directions, would consist of potass, sulphur,
quicklime, and orpiment. His ninth preparation of this class
is a sternutatory, and the tenth is one for making a gargle.
(V, 22.)

Most of our author's formulse are borrowed, with a few altera-
tions, from Galen. (De Med. sec. gen. v.)

For a description of the Arabian Pulveres, see, in particular,
Haly Abbas (Pract. x, 16j and Mesne, (i, ix.) Many of Mesue's
compositions are internal medicines, consisting principally of
aromatics. Thus, his first preparation, which is intended to
dry humidity of the stomach, dispel flatulence, and assist
digestion, consists of lignum aloes, oz. ss ; of galls, dr. iss ; and
of white sugar, oz. iss.

Nicolaus Myrepsus, in his copious ^ Dispensatory,' describes
the composition of 50 smegmata and 143 pulveres. The far
greater number of the former are intended as applications to
the skin in diseases thereof, such as impetigo, leprosy, itch, and
the like. The pulveres consist of applications to the skin,
sternutatories, gargles, and injections. None of them, we
l)elieve, are to be taken inwardly.

SECT. XIV. ON LINIMENTS TO TUE MOUTH AND TIIllOAT.

As much as the coat whicli lines the mouth is finer and softer
than the skin, such a diff'erence must there be with regard to
the applications made to the mouth. At the commencement,
therefore, of inflammation, medicines for repelling the defluxion

542 LINIMENTS. [book vii.

are required, sucli as the dry applications, namely, omptacium,
the gall omphacitis, the juice of sumach and of hypocistis, and
alum, the bark of pine and of the frankincense-tree, and the
flowers of the wild pomegranate tree ; and, in a word, all the
astringents, with the exception of those which are unsavoury
and deleterious ; and the liquid applications, such as the juice
of the blackberries, both of the brambles and those called mul-
berries: also the juice of the bark of green walnuts and of
pomegranates, more especially such as are acid, and of quinces
and Aminean must. Honey is mixed at the commencement
solely for the preservation of the medicines. But when the
humour lodges in the part, digestive and moderately-repellent
articles are to be mixed, such as saffron, myrrh, and the juice
of liquorice. And during the whole time that intervenes be-
tween the acme and decline, a compound of both kinds is to be
used, I mean, the repellent and discutient ; and at first the
repellent are to be the prevailing ingredients, but afterwards
the discutient. In the decline we must use discutients, which
have no astringenc}^, such as natron, aphronitrum, origany,
hyssop, thyme, calamint, iris, besasa and the like. The liquid
application then should be rob, that from boiled must, that
from dried figs and palm-nuts, and the sweet must itself
with honey. When but a little of the inflammation remains,
we are to mix also some sulphur vivum. We must first boil the
juice with honey, to the consistence of the more liquid honey,
and then sprinkle the powders finely le\dgated, and afterwards
boil moderately until the whole are properly united, and then
it is to be laid up in vessels of glass.

The simple liniment to the mouth from mulberries. Of the
juice of mulberries, sext. iij ; boil until a third part be con-
sumed, add of honey, sext. j, and boil to the consistence of
honey.

The compound one from mulberries. Of the juice of mul-
berries, hemin. vj ; boil to the consistence of the sordes in
baths, then mix, well triturated, of saffron, dr. j ; of myrrh,
dr. ij ; of the juice of unripe grape, dr. j ; of fissile alum, three
oboli; of honey, one hemina; and boil to a proper thickness.

Of the bramble-berries. The composition from bramble-
berries is prepared in like manner, being more astringent.

The simple one from walnuts. Of the juice of the pounded

SECT. XIV.] LINIMENTS. 543

bark of green walnuts, hemin. v; of honey, licmin. y, it is boiled
like that from mulberries.

The compound one from ivalnuts. In the commencement,
and at the acme of inflammations in the mouth, mix of saffron
and of alum, of each, oz. j ; of myrrh, dr. ij; and in the de-
cline add, as a discutient, of natron, dr. j ; of sulphur, dr. j, to
the aforementioned proportions of the juice and of honey.

The preparation from the juice of pomegranates. Of the
juice of sweet pomegranates, without their kernels, sext. iv ; of
the juice of acid pomegranates, sext. ij ; of honey, sext. j ; of
the Minnsean myrrh, dr. viij ; of crocomagma, of galls, of each,
dr. viij ; of fissile alum, dr. iv ; of Illyrian iris and of om-
phacium, of each, dr. viij. Prepare like that from mulberries.

The same otherwise. Of the juice of sweet pomegranate
bruised with their kernels, sext. vj ; of fine honey, sext. j ; of
fissile alum, oz. j ; of myrrh, oz. ss.

The preparation from must. Of must, sext. vj ; of galls, of
fissile alum, of each dr. ij ; of saffron, of myrrh, of each, dr. j.
If you mean it for a demulcent, let the must be sweet, but if
as a repellent, austere. The middle state has intermediate
properties.

The Egyptian stomachic. Of honey, lb. j ; of oil, oz. viij ;
of turpentine, oz. ij ; of saffron, dr. iv. They are melted in a
double vessel.

The stomachic medicine, from besasa. Of anise seed, of parsley
seed, of the schoenanth, of the seed of bishop^s weed, of fissile
alum, of Illyrian iris, of besasa (which some call harmala, it is
the wild rue), of cinnamon, of troglodytic myrrh, of saffron, of
gall, of each, oz. j ; of long birthwort, of cassia, of croco-
magma, of dried roses, of each, oz. j ; of costus, of the fresh
ashes of pigeons, oz. iij ; of Indian nard, of amoraum, of each,
oz. ss ; of honey, q. s.

Commentary, Celsus thus sums up the general properties Comm.
of these preparations : " Gargarizationes autem aut laevandi — ' — '
causa fiunt, aut reprimendi, aut evocandi. Lsevant, lac, cremor
vel ptisanaj, vel furfurum : reprimit aqua, in qua vel lenticula,
vel rosa, vel nibus, vel cotoneum malum, vel palmulaj decoctse
sunt : evocant, sinapi, piper." (v, 22.)

Galen treats of these compositions very systematically, and

544 POTIONS. [book vii.

CoMM. at great length, in the sixth book of his work, ' De Comp. Med.

' — ' — ' sec. loc.' The far greater number of our author's jirescrip-
tions are copied from it. Myrepsus likewise gives a long list
of such like compositions (§ ix.) See also Aetius (viii.)

SECT. XV. ON DELICIOUS AND OFFICINAL POTIONS.

Of delicious officinal potions, some are composed of wine,
having certain articles added to it, such as pepper, wormwood,
sowbread, and many other things, from which they sometimes
receive their appellation, sometimes having honey mixed with
them and sometimes not ; and some are composed from water
in which have been boiled apples or roses, with certain juices,
such as those of unripe grapes, pomegranates, and myrtles.

On this account the finest scummed honey is mixed with
them for the sake of preservation, sweetness, and sometimes
of utility. The austere and vinous hydromel brought from
Cebyra in small vessels is an exception ; for I have known it
formed without honey, as the apomel is made from honey alone
and water, without any other substance. But those things
which are prepared from wine, which are called propotions
(or " whets "?) receive sext. j of scummed honey to four of
wine and are made without being boiled. Those which are
prepared from water and juices, if boiled, receive one part of
honey to three of the liquor, about two parts of which are
consumed in the boiling ; but if they are not boiled they
receive one part of honey to two of the liquor. Those things
which are not boiled are to be isolated for a sufficient time,
and particularly the omphacomel. Those from water require
to be boiled, because from their weakness they are readily
changed. They are all to be laid up in small pitched earthen
vessels, which are to be carefully covered up and deposited in
situations above ground until they are concocted. They are to
be used as attenuants, and well mixed with water. But the
omphacomel after being boiled like must, and settling, is to
be covered up. Those composed from wine we use principally
in cases which are free from fever, or for the relish only (with
the exception of those which are prepared from scammony, the
granum Cnidium, or the like purgatives) ; or in such affections

SECT. XV.] POTIONS. 545

as when we would use the medicines Avhich are tlie ingredients of
them by the mouth. Those prepared from water, or the juices we
use in febrile cases, or as sweeteners, when the disease does not
admit the use of wines, and sometimes as agreeing with the
affections, as apomel for a sialogogue, diuretic, laxative of the
bowels, or atteuuant of hvimours ; and hj^dromelon and hydro-
rosaton in cases of thirst, ardent fevers, resolutions, and
derangements of the stomach ; and oraphacomel, myrteton, rho-
dostacton, and rhoita, in cseliac and dysenteric cases, and for
vomitings and other defluxions. They are frequently used as
washes in affections of the mouth.

The hydromelum from the juice of apples. Of the juice of
clean quinces bruised, sext. ij ; of honey, sext. iij ; of water,
sext. vj. Boil, scumming it until it be reduced to a third
part. Another. — Of clean quinces cut into pieces, lb. v. Boil
in sext. i of well-water until thev become soft. Then re-
moving them from the fire, after they become cold, strain,
and having filtrated the apples throw them away. Having
measured the water, mix with it half the quantity of honey,
and boil again, scumming it until the eighth part be consumed.
Some compose the hydromelum in like manner from sweet
apples.

The comiiosition of the hydrorosatum. Of roses deprived of
their nails (the white parts of the leaves), lb. iv ; of water,
sext. v; of honey, sext. ij.

The preparation of the Rhodomelum. Of the juice of quinces,
sext. j ; of roses, lb. iij ; of honey, sext. iij ; of water, sext, v.
But since the apples are not found at the same season with
the roses, these are to be added to honey at the proper season,
and when the apples appear, the composition is to be com-
pleted.

The preparation of the omphacomel. Of the juice of unripe
grapes, sext. iij ; of honey, sext. j. Having mixed, expose it to
the sun for forty days, or boil.

The preparation of Myrteta. Of the juice of myrtles,
sext. iij ; of honey, sext. j. Boil till the third is consumed.

Apomel from the ivorks of Phalaffriifs. Of white houev-
combs tilled with honey, lb. j ; of spring water, lb. iiiss ;
having broken down the comb and united them, boil the
water Avith the honey until the scum of it and the waxy part

III. 35

546 POTIONS. [book vii.

swim on the top and is separated^ then cool and cover it up
carefully.

The composition of rhodostactum. Of the juice of roses
without their nails, sext. ij ; of honey, sext.j. Boil, scumming
it, until the fourth part be consumed.

The preparation of rha-tes. Of the juice of pomegranate,
sext. iij ; of honey, sext. j. Boil to a third part.

CoMM. Commentary. We shall in the first place give some account
of the Propoma. It was a draught generally containing wine,
which was taken at the commencement of the supper, or prin-
cipal meal of the ancients. Horace alludes to it in the follow-
ing lines :

" Anfidius forti miscebat mella Falerno,
Meudose : quoniam vaciiis committere venis
Nil nisi lene decet : leni praecordia mulso
Prolueris melius." (Lib. ii, Sat. 4.)

Catius here condemns the practice of using strong wine for
the composition of the Propoma. Old Falernian wine was
thought the best. Thus Macrobius says of it : " Mulsum quo
probe temperes, miscendum esse novo Hymetto et Falerno
vetulo." (Satvirn. vii, 12.) " To the Propoma," says Athenseus,
" were added pepper, Indian leaf, myrrh, cyperus, and Egyptian
ointment." (Deip. ii, 25.) A long list of receipts for Propomata
is given by Myrepsus (§ 38.) Most of them contain wine,
honey, and aromatics. See a learned Dissertation on the
Propoma by Casaubon (in Athen. Deipnos. ii, 17) ; also
Lister (in Apicii Op. i, 1.)

It will be proper here to give some account of the medi-
cated wines, or, as we would now call them, the Vinous Tinctures,
of the ancients. Dioscorides details the composition of them
very fully in the fifth book of his ' Materia Medica.^ The fol-
lowing is his prescription for the wine of squills : Take a mina
of squills, and having pounded it, sift, and bind it in a thin
piece of linen ; then put it into 20 sextarii of good fresh must,
and allow it to macerate for three months ; afterwards strain
the wine into another vessel, and cover it up carefully. The
wine of quinces is to be prepared by putting 12 minse of
quinces, deprived of their seeds, into a cadus of must, and

SECT. XV.]

POTIONS.

54;

allowing it

to remain for thirtj' days. Wines from other Comm.
kinds of apples, such as medlars, services, and pears, may be " " '
prepared in like manner. He afterAvards gives similar directions
for preparing the following medicated wines :

Wine of wild nne.

Wine of marjoram.

pomegranate.

calamint.

roses.

fleabane.

myrtles.

aromatics.

lentisk.

myrrh, pepper, and iris.

turpentine.

elicampane.

palms.

spikenard.

figs.

asarabacca.

sycamores.

wild nard or valerian.

resiu.

carrot.

cone of the pine.

sage.

cedar or juniper.

panacea.

cedar-rosin.

sweet-flag.

pitch.

parsley.

wormwood.

fennel and dill.

hjssop.

hellebore, wild cucumber, or

germander.

scammony, for procuring

cassidony.

abortions.

betony.

spurge-flax.

tragoriganum.

mezerior.

huuium.

ground-pine.

dittany.

mandrake.

horehound.

hellebore.

thyme.

scammony.

savoury.

The preparation of these factitious wines is also described by
Pliny. (H. N. xiv, 19.) To this class we may refer the Vina
condita of Apicius. (Cap. i.) See also in particular Aetius
(iii) ; Myrepsus (§ 27) ; Haly Abbas (Pract. x, 21) ; Serapion
(A'ii, 3.")) ; Actuarius (Meth. Med. v, 7.) Actuarius gives the
following prescription for preparing a vinous tincture of poppies,
which he recommends for coughs, cholera, and such like com-
plaints : Of poppy-heads, c 3 of liquoricc-root, lb. j ; of sodden
must, lb. c.

548 COLLY RI A. [book vii.

SECT. XVI. 'OX COLLYRIA AND AGGLUTINATIVE APPLICATIONS.

The materials from which ophthalmic medicines are composed
are various. For inspissated and liquid, seeds, fruits, the parts
of herbs, and metals are ingredients in them. Of these, some
sooth acrimonies, and are, as it were, obstruents, such as pom-
pholyx, spodium, starch, lead, Samian aster, calamine, all
washed substances, and the white of an egg. These are to be
used after evacuation of the head, for if there should be
plethora of it, there will be danger of the coats of the eyes
being ruptured by distension. The opposite class of collp'ia
being of an acrid nature, are deobstruents and evacuants of the
humours permanently lodged there ; such as the Cyrenaic and
Median juices, sagapen, euphorbium, and the like. Some are de-
tergents of foul ulcers, such as the squama seris, copper, chalcitis,
misy, sori, the flowers of copper, and antimony burnt. Allied to
these are those called abstergents, such as arsenic, sandarach,
the flower of Asian stone. Some are astringent, and of these
such as are moderately astringent are of extensive use for
ophthalmies, ulcers, and defluxious, as the leaves, fruit, and
flowers of roses, spikenard, Indian leaf, saSron, glaucium, and
hypocistis. Those possessed of a stronger astringency are
mixed with those remedies which are used for sharpening the
sight, such as omphacium, acacia, the flowers of the wild and
of the cultivated pomegranate, and galls. Some are concoctive
and discutient, such as myiTh, saffron, castor, rosemary, and the
juice of fenugreek. Of compound ophthalmic medicines, some
are simply called plasta, some xerocollyria, and some hygro-
coUyria. The first class admit of all the materials formerly
mentioned, and agree with all states. They are to be prepared
most commonly in spring, for in summer their strength is apt
to evaporate, and in winter the ai'ticles being constricted do
not mix properly. They are to be rubbed with the addition of
a fluid, but not in great quantity that the metallic parts may
not subside, nor the aromatic float on the surface, but in small
quantities, so that it may be rubbed until it is like the sordes
of baths. Rain-water should be used, because it is finer and
moderately astringent. But if not, those things are to be
levigated and triturated with wine or some juice ; the metallic

SECT. XVI.] COLLYRIA. 549

substances for a longer time, and the juicy substances for a
sliorter. At last, after sufficient trituration, we must add the
gum, and having formed them, lay them up in copper vessels
especially, or in glass. Those prepared from juices are to be
used immediately, but the metallic improve by keeping. Of
the xerocollyria, some melt down, and absterge callus, sycosis,
pterygium, and scabious aflFections, being composed of chalcitis,
verdigris, and misy. Some occasion a discharge of tears,
agreeing with obstructions and dimness of sight, and are com-
posed of these things, pepper and spikenard. Some are prophy-
lactics for preventing influxes, such as those from Phrygian stone,
sarcocolla, glaucium, aloes, calamine, antimony, and saffron.
All these medicines are to be applied to the eyes in a state of
the finest powder. But the hygrocollyria are prepared from
Attic honey, opobalsam, oil of the most subtile kind from age,
the juice of fennel, the galls of different animals, the Cyrenaic
juice, and many other things. Those things which are at-
tenuant, calefacient, and purgative are useful for dimness of
sight, and incipient suffusions. These and all acrid things are
to be used when the head is free from plethora, and when the
atmosphere is serene and pure, and the wind is northerly, and
not very hot nor very cold. Those preparations called agglu-
tinants are made from such things as are obstruent, aggluti-
native, constringent, refrigerant, styptic, or desiccative, such
as pollen, manna, Samian earth, myrrh, shells, acacia, opium,
with the white of an egg. They are glued to the forehead when
the humour is not vmder the scalp, but external to it.

TJie collyrium monenieron for incipient and old ophthahnies. Of
acacia, dr. xxxvj ; of gum, dr. xxxij ; of calamine, dr. xxiv ; of
burnt and waslied copper, dr. viij ; of opium, dr. j. Triturate
in austere wine. It is discutient and desiccative.

Tlie collyrium chiucum Of sinopic vermilion, of the im-
mature gall, of saffron, of the flower of fresh roses deprived of
their nails (which we call the pouch), of gum, of each, oz. iv;
of opium, oz. j. Triturate with Amina^an, Falernian, or Chian
austere wine. But the wine must not contain salt water.

The collyrian cygnarium. Of calamine, burnt and washed,
oz. vj ; of washed ceruse, oz. iv ; of pompholyx, oz. iv ; of
starch, oz. ij ; of tragacanth, of roasted opium, of gum, of each,
oz. ij. Triturate with rain-water.

550 COLLYRIA. [bookvii.

The pale-coloured cygnus. Of calamine, burnt and washed,
oz. ij ; of terra aster, oz. ij ; of ceruse, oz. iv ; of pompholyx,
oz. viij ; of starch, oz. ij ; of opium, oz. ij ; of acacia, of traga-
canth, of each, oz. j ; of gum, oz. iv. Triturate with rain-
water.

The white cygnus. Of calamine, oz. xv ; of ceruse, oz. xvij ;
of opium, dr. viij ; of frankincense, dr. vij ; of starch, oz. vij ;
of gum, oz. xiij. Triturate with rain-water.

The collyrium pelarion for ulcers. Of calamine, of ceruse, of
each, dr. xxiv ; of acacia, of opium, of each, dr. xviij ; of gum,
of tragacanth, of starch, of each, dr. ix ; of myrrh, dr. iij ; of
copper, of saffron, of each, dr. iss. Triturate with water.

The brown collyrium, for hypopium and great affections.
Of tender calamine, dr. xxiv ; of ceruse, dr. xvj ; of scraped
verdigris, dr. xij ; of antimony, dr. viij ; of fissile alum, dr. iij ;
of burnt chalcitis, dr. iij ; of Indian nard, dr. iv ; of the oil of
unripe olives, dr. ij ; of copper, dr. ij ; of squama seris, dr. viij ;
of the fruit of heath, dr. xiij ; of the juice of poppy, dr. xxiv ;
of saffron, dr. iv ; of castor, dr. iij ; of myrrh, dr. vj ; of
Indian buckthorn, of acacia, of gum, of each, dr. iv ; of fresh
roses, dr. iiss. Triturate with Falernian, Surentine, Aminsean,
or Chian austere wine. It is rubbed in three times a day, in
a watery state, being diluted with the juice of fenugreek, then
the white of an egg or milk, and at last, with water, thicker.

The collyrium severianum. Of calamine, oz. vj ; of ceruse,
oz. xij ; of tragacanth, oz. iij. Triturate with the juice of
fenugreek. Ha^dng burnt the calamine, dissolve it in milk
and then wash.

The collyrium from decoctions. Of calamine, oz. xvj ; of
ceruse, oz. viij ; of starch, of opium, of tragacanth, of acacia,
of each, oz. ij ; of gum, oz. vj. Triturate with the decoction
of dried roses, of melilots, of poppy, of poppy -heads, of liquo-
rice, in equal parts.

The repellent collyrium, from hydria or water vessels. Of
the sand found in copper vessels used for heating water, lb. iij ;
of calamine burnt and washed, lb. j ; of washed ceruse, of
washed pompholyx, of washed terra aster, of each, oz. vj ; of
frankincense, oz. j ; of myrrh, oz. j ; of the juice of linseed, of
' fleawort, of ptisan, of fenugreek, of each, lb. j ; of tragacanth,
oz. vj j of gum, lb. j.

SECT. XVI.] COLLYRIA. 551

The collyrium of Nilamon. Of calamine, oz. viij ; of pora-
pholyxj oz. iv : of ceruse, lb. j ; of tragacanth, of gum^ of
opium, of each, oz. iv. Rain-water.

The collyrium spodiacon, for inflammations, defluxions, and
chemoses. Of frankincense, of antimony, of each, dr. c ; of
calamine, of ceruse, of each, dr. xxiv ; of Samian earth, of the
juice of poppy, of each, dr. iij ; of gum, dr. xv. Triturate with
the juice of fresh olive leaves. Prepare the juice thus : having
pounded in a mortar the more tender leaves of olive, washed,
add a moderate quantity of water, and filtrate through a piece
of linen rag.

The tender collyrium from olive leaves. Of frankincense,
dr. iv ; of antimony, dr. xv ; of calamine, dr. xxviij ; of ceruse,
dr. xlix ; of Samian earth, dr. xviij ; of opium, dr. vj ; of gum,
dr. j ; of lead, burnt and washed, dr. viij. Mix with the juice
of green olive leaves.

The yellow collyrium from green olive leaves. Of burnt cop-
per, dr. xij ; of sandy x, oz. xxiv ; of olive leaves, oz. ij ; of
opium, oz. ij ; of gum, oz. x. Mix with palm wine, or
Aminsean.

The Claudiac collyrium from myrrh. Of glaucium, of sarco-
colla, of each, dr, xlviij ; of saffron, dr. xxiv ; of opium, of
myrrh, of bloodstone, of each, dr. vi ; of tragacanth, dr. xMij ;
of gum, dr. xvj. Mix with Italian wine. To be used with an

egg-

Another collyrium from myrrh, for fistula lachrymalis. Of
calamine washed, of bloodstone washed, of each, dr. xxviij ; of
myrrh, of Cyprian spodium, of each, dr. xxiv; of opium, dr. viij ;
of saffron, dr. iv (but some use dr. viij) ; of white pepper, grs.
XXX ; of gum, dr. xvj. Mix with Italian wine. To be used
with an egg, and in recent cases diluted with water.

The stacticon of Prosechius. Of calamine, of gum, of each,
dr. XX ; of antimony, of copperas, of each, dr. viij ; of opium,
dr. xiv ; of scraped verdigris, dr. x ; of white pepper, dr. vj ;
of saffron, dr. viij ; of raw misy, dr. viij ; of opobalsam, dr. iv.
Water.

The hygidium of Ammonius. Of calamine, of copper, of
each, dr. xvj ; of ceruse, of castor, of aloes, of saffron, of each,
dr. iv ; of squama (seris ?), dr. v; of the flower of roses, of
burnt lead, of each, dr. viij ; of l)uckthorn, dr. iij ; of the stone

552 COLLYRIA. [book vii.

scliistos, dr. iv ; of opium^ dr. x ; of acacia^ dr. xj ; of guin^ dr.
xlviij. Water.

TJie collyrium Olympus, or Olympiacum. Of acacia, of spike-
nard, of fraukinceuce, of each, dr. viij ; of copper, burnt and
washed, of antimony, burnt and washed, of ceruse, burnt and
■washed, of calamine, of each, dr. xij ; of myrrh, of roasted
opium, of each, dr. iv ; of saffron, dr. v ; of scraped, verdigris,
dr. iij ; of the stone schistos, of the red squama, of Indian
buckthorn, of the oil of unripe grapes, of each, dr. j ; of castor,
of the flower of roses, of each, dr. ij ; of pahn-nuts, dr. iv ; in
like manner the bones of burnt palms, to the number of v ; of
gum, oz. V. Rain-water. Let there be soaked in water for three
nights and days, of the aromatic reed, of the seed of henbane,
of dried roses, of each, dr. iv ; of Indian leaf, dr. j.

The collyrium of nard. Of calamine, of saffron, of gum, of
each, dr. xxxvj ; of burnt copper, dr. xviij ; of antimony, of
acacia, of each, dr. xxx ; of Syriac nard, dr. xij ; of opium, of
myrrh, of each, dr. xvj. "With water.

Hie small Theudotian collyrium. Of antimony, of acacia, of
each, dr. xx ; of burnt copper, dr. viij ; of ceruse, dr. iv ; of
myrrh, dr. iv ; of verdigris, dr. ij ; of aloes, of meconium, of
buckthorn, of each, dr. j. Rain-water.

The collyrium rhinarion. Of bloodstone, of the stone schistos,
of each, dr. xvj ; of burnt copper, of calamine, of \ erdigris,
of each, dr. viij ; of opium, dr. v ; of chalcitis, dr. ij ; of
gum, dr. viij. In wine.

Tlte collyrium xyster. Of burnt pumice-stone, of burnt
misy, of burnt shells, of each, oz. vj ; of calamine, of opium, of
burnt chalcitis, of saffron, of hepatic aloes, of castor, of Indian
leaf, of each, dr. ij ; of antimony, of acacia, of each, oz. j ; of
burnt copper, oz. iv ; of troglodytic myrrh, dr, iv ; of spikenard,
dr. j ; of ceruse, dr. viij ; of gvim, dr. iv. Rain-water. Some also
mix wine.

The hecatomb collyrium for thick cicatrices. Of calamine,
burnt and wa;hed, of copper, burnt and washed, of each, dr.
viij ; of antimony bm'ut, of the yellow acacia, of gum, of each,
dr. XV ; of aloes, of galls, of aerugo vermiculata, of castor, of
Imckthorn, of spikenard, of saffron, of opium, of myrrh, of
ceruse, of the shavings of ebony, of chalcitis, of each, dr. j ; of
roses, dr. Ix. Rain-water.

SECT, xvl.] COLLYRIA. oo3

The colhjriuin from horn, of Galen. Of burnt lead, of burnt
hartshorn, of each, oz. ij ; of ceruse, of squama seris, of starch,
of frankincense, of cuttle-fish, of burnt shell, of verdigris, of
myrrh, of gum, of each, oz. j. Rain-water.

The coUyrium from frankincense. Of frankincense, oz. \j ;
of calamine, of pompholyx, of terra aster, of starch, of gum, of
each, oz. iij ; of ceruse, oz. vj ; of squama seris, oz. iv ; of traga-
canth, oz. iij ; of opium, oz. vj. Rain-water.

The Libanian coUyrium. Of washed calamine, of starch, of
each, dr. xij ; of ceruse, dr. xij ; of spodium, of pompholyx, of
terra aster, of lead, burnt and washed, of tragacanth, of each,
dr. viij ; of opium, dr. xij ; of gum, dr. iv. Rain-water and the
whites of twenty eggs. Some add also of myrrh, dr. iv.

The coUyrium called the aster of Magnus. Of pompholyx, of
calamine, of ceruse, of each, dr. xvj ; of lead, dr. viij ; of starch,
dr. xviij ; of frankincense, dr. x ; of terra aster, dr. xij ; of
mj'rrh, dr. ij ; of tragacanth, of gum, of each, dr. viij. Water.

TJie coUyrium Uranium. Of terra aster, washed, oz. iij ; of
spodium, washed, oz. j ; of gum, oz. iv; of antimony, burnt and
washed, oz. ij ; of squama teris, washed, oz. j ; of opium, dr. vj ;
of calamine, bm'nt and washed, dr. ij. Rain-water. It is an
incarnant and repellent.

The coUyrium from the juice of fenugreek. Of calamine, of
tragacanth, of each, oz. viij ; of ceruse, oz. xxx ; of starch, oz.
XXX ; of opium, oz. j. Triturate with the juice of fenugreek.

Tlie coUyrium of Cleon. Of pompholyx, of lead, of each,
oz. Vj of saflron, oz. iss; of the squama stomomatis, oz. j ; of gum,
oz. ij. Rain-water. Inject diluted.

The coUyrium containing Ixxii ounces of roses. Of green
ruses, oz. Ixxii, of calamine, burnt and washed, dr. xxiv; of
scraped verdigris, dr. ij; of spikenard, dr. j; of squama aeris,
A\ ashed, dr. ij ; of antimony, bm'nt and washed, of opium, of
myrrh, of each, dr. iij ; of saffron, dr. viij ; of starch, dr. ij ; of
gum, dr. xxiv. Rain-water.

The ivhite coUyrium from roses. Of calamine, burnt and
washed, of ceruse, washed, of each, lb. j ; of starch, of opium,
of tragacanth, of each, oz. iij ; of aloes, oz. iss ; of gum,
oz. iij ; of saffron, oz. iss; of roses without their nails, oz. vj.
Water.

The coUyrium from aloes. Of calamine, of ceruse, of aloes.

554 COLLYRIA. [book vii.

of each, oz. x ; of green roses, oz. yj ; of starch, oz. iij ; of
opium, oz. j ; of tragacanth, oz. ij ; of gum, oz. iij. Rain-water.

T7ie saffron collyrium from roses. Of spikenard, of dried
roses, of aloes, of each, dr. ij ; of the white henbane, dr. iss ; of
saffron, dr. ivss ; of glauciura, oz. "vj ; of sarcocollaj oz. vj ; of
opium, dr. ij ; of tragacanth, oz. j. Rain-water.

The coUyrium from roses, of Nilus. Of tender roses, dr. iv;
of saffron, dr. ij ; of poppy, obol. j ; of gum, dr. iv. Rain-
water.

The collyrium lynceusfor sharpening the sight. Of calamine,
of burnt copper, of ammoniac perfume, of each, dr. xij ; of
myrrh, of bloodstone, of Thebaic opium, of each, dr. AJ ; of
hepatic aloes, of the gall of bulls, of galbanum, of sagapen, of
each, dr. iv ; of scraped verdigris, of opoponax, of sal ammoniac,
of each, dr. j ; of gum, dr. vj. Rain-water.

The collyrium Proteus, for the same purposes, and it also atte-
nuates cicatrices. Of calamine, of ceruse, of crude chalcitis, of
each, dr. xl ; of pepper, dr. iss ; of Cyrenaic juice, dr. viij ; of
saffron, dr. xij ; of Thebaic opium, dr. x ; of sagapen, dr. xij ;
of Ethiopian olive, dr. xij ; of arsenic, of fissile alum, of each,
dr. viij ; of myrrh, dr. xij ; of ammoniac perfume, dr. xx ; of
opoponax, dr. xvj ; of opobalsam, dr. x ; of gum, dr. xx.
In rain-water.

The collyrium from the juice of fennel. Of calamine,
dr. xvij ; of Indian ink, dr. xvj ; of long pepper, dr. xiij, and of
white, dr. xij ; of Cyrenaic juice, dr. viij ; of opobalsam, dr. vj ;
of sj)ikenard, dr. vj ; of sagapen, of opoponax, of each, dr. v ; of
opium, dr. iv ; of euphorbium, dr. j ; of gum, dr. j . Triturate
with the juice of fennel.

The collyrium from opobalsam. Of calamine, of ceruse, of
each, dr. viij ; of the oil of unripe olives, dr. iv ; of white pepper,
dr. xvj ; of opium, dr. iv; of opobalsam, of gum, of each, dr. xvj.
Rain-water.

The collyrium called thalasseros. Of calamine, oz. viij ; of
verdigris, oz. ij ; of Indian ink, oz. viij ; of white pepper, oz. iv ;
of Median juice (assafoetida ?) oz. j ; of opobalsam, oz. ij ; of
gum, oz. vj. Water.

The collyrium harmation. Of ammoniac perfume, of burnt
copper, of the bark of frankincense, of each. dr. iv ; of verdigris,
dr. j ; of gum, dr. iv. Rain-water.

SECT. XVI.] COLLYRIA. 555

The coUyrium malabathrinum, called also isotheon. Of cala-
mine, dr. xvj ; of copper, burnt and washed, dr. xiv ; of opium,
of Indian buckthorn, of Indian leaf, of Indian nard, of saffron,
of aloes, of each, dr. ij ; of ceruse, dr. viij ; of castor, dr. ij ; of
myrrh, dr. iv; of acacia, of antimony, of each, dr. xl. With water.
To be used with an e^^.

The thicker collyrivm from ivine. Of calamine, of the lapis
haematitis, and schistos, of each, dr. xl ; of burnt copper, dr. xxx ;
of chalcitis, dr. xxxij ; of the seed of poppy, dr. xiij. Having
boiled the poppies in water, and strained the juice, add and tri-
turate with palm wine or Aminsean.

Another from ivine. Of burnt copper, of the calamine called
placitis, of each oz. ix; of bloodstone, washed, oz. vj ; of saf-
fron, of myrrh, of aloes, of ammoniac perfume, of each, oz. iij ;
of Indian buckthorn, of spikenard, of each, oz. j ; of white
pepper, gr. cl ; of the yellow acacia, oz. ix ; of gum, oz. iij.
Triturate with Falernian or Aminsean wine.

The coUyrium from two stones for asperities. Of lapis
hsematitis and schistos, of cassia, of each, di'. xviij ; of copper,
of calamine, of opium, of scraped verdigris, of each, dr. ix ; of
gum, dr. ix; of bm'nt chalcitis, dr. vj. Water.

Xerocollyria. The prophylactic of Galen. Of Asian stone
cut into small pieces and biu'ut in a pot, until it become red-
hot and extinguished in butter not old, and then again burnt
and extinguished in Falernian wine ; and a third time burnt
and extinguished in honey, and dried, lb. j ; of bmnit copper,
of white pepper, of Indian leaf, of each, oz. j; of antimony, oz.iss:
and when all the things are levigated, and you Avish to lay up the
medicine, add of the juice of balsam, not thick (for this prevents
the preparation from getting dry) but of the most transparent,
oz. j. Apply it to the eyelids only, not allowing the pencil
to touch the coats, but so that it may only reach the eyelids
when opened. They are to be anointed, not once, but often
before food and after it, and more especially if a sense of
oplithalmy be present. It preserves in a wonderful manner,
before every other medicine.

Tlie dry coUyrium from saffron. Of sarcocolla, dr. viij ; of
saflfron, dr. iv ; of glaucium, dr. iv. Anoint often in the day.
Some also add aloes.

Another dry coUyrium for xerophlhulnnj, sycosis, mortiji-

556 COLLYRIA. [book vii.

cati07is, and hypersarcoma. Of calamine^ dr. x ; of clialcitis,
dr. XX ; of pepper, gr. xv ; of Celtic nard, dr. j ; triturate the
calamine and clialcitis with wine, and when dried add the
other things and reduce to a fine powder.

T7ie liquid coUyrium from iviJd carrot. Of the juice of wild
carrot, of germander, of cresses, and sometimes of othonna,
equal parts. The othonna is the great celandine.

Another, for sycosis, encanthis, and sarcoma. Of roasted
misy, dr. \^ ; of copperas, dr. iv ; of Attic honey, sext. j.

The liquid collyrium panchrestus of Erasistratus, having
wonderful efficacy, in complaints of the eyes, tonsils, pudenda,
and suppurated ears. Of copper, dr. vj ; of roasted misy, of
myrrh, of each, dr. iij ; of saffron, dr. iss ; of pepper, di\ j ; of
Chian wine, and of Cretan must, of each, hemin. iss. Having
triturated all the things in the wine until dry, pour in the
must and boil to the consistence of honev.

Agylutinants for defluxions of the eyes. Of Samian earth, of
manna, of frankincense, of myrrh, equal parts. Adding to it
the white of an egg, apply to the forehead spread upon linen.

Another. — Of the seed of henbane, dr. j ; of opium, dr. j ;
of myrrh, dr. ij ; of saffron, dr. j ; of pollen, dr. iv ; the yelks of
two roasted eggs. Mix with the white of an egg.

CoMM. Commentary. Gorrseus derives the word collyrium from
" — ' — ' /coAojSj/ ovpo, i. e. Cauda trunca, being expressive of their
conical shape. (Defin. ]\Ied.) Blancard prefers the derivation
from KioXvh) and povq. (Lexicon Medicum.)

Oribasius states that collyria Avere applied — to the eye,
to the uterus, and to fistulous ulcers. (Med. Coll. x, 23.)
It is ob^dous, therefore, that the ancients used the word in a
more general signification than the moderns do. Le Clerc
gives the following description of the ancient collyria : " Les
uns, qiu etoient composes de matieres seches, eurent le nom de
t,r)ooKo\\ovoia, collyres sees. Les autres, oia il n'entroit que
des matieres liquides, s'appellerent vypoKoXXou'pu, collyres
humides ou liquides. Les ingrediens des premieres, qui etoient
les niemes que ceux des collyres entieres, etoient des poudres
metalliques, de ceruse, de pompholyx, d'antimoine hrule, de vert-
de-gris, de chalcitis, de cadmia, et autres semblables. II y
entroit aussi des poudres tirees des plantes, quelques sues

SECT. XVI.] COLLYRIA. 557

d'herbes, et quelques gomaies, coramc du sajfra/i, des roses, Comi
du sue dc chelidoine, et dc feiiouil, do V aloes, de la myrrh, de " ^
I'opiam. On tneloit tous ces ingrediens et oa en formoit des
masses que Ton faisait secher, et dont on faisait de la poudre
lorsqu'on vouloit s'en servir. Les collyres liquides etoieat
seulemcnt composes de matieres liquides. Ou preaoit, par
exeraple, du miel d'Attique, qui etoit estime le meilleur, de
V opohalsamnni, avec du fiel de vipre, de perdrix, ou de quelque
autre auimal, et du sue de fenouil. Ou faisait de cela un
melange, dont on laissoit tomber quelques gouttes dans les
yeux de ceux qui avoient la vue foible, ou quelque suffusion
coramen9ant." (Hist, de la Med. iii, ii, 1.)

The Ophthalmic Collyria are treated of with extraordinarj'^
accuracy and minuteness of detail in books iv and v of
Galen's work 'De comp. med. sec. locos.' Notwithstanding
the success with which the surgery of the eye has been culti-
vated of late, we are confident that the oculists of the present
day might derive still further improvement from an attentive
study of these books. It is to be remarked that several of his
collyria, as well as those of Celsus, contain opium, so that the
use of the vinum opii in modern practice is not an original
invention. IMany of them contain very powerful escharotics,
such as copper and arsenic, which indicates a gi-eat degree of
boldness in ancient practice. Why is arsenic never used now
for the cure of complaints of the eye ? Our author's account
of them, which is mostly taken from Galen, is very accurate
and deserving of consideration.

All the collyria of Celsus are ocular remedies. As he states,
they consist principally of soothing and refreshing medicines
variously mixed.

Scribonius Largus describes fully the composition of collyria,
which he divides into the soothing and the acrid. The former
consist of saffron, gum, tragacanth, calamine, antimon}'-, opium
and the like. The latter contain such ingredients as these,
burnt copper, verdigris, chalcitis, misy, alum, ammoniac, and
galls.

]\Iyrepsus gives prescriptions for 87 ocular collyria, of every
possible variety of chaiacter.

For the Arabian collyria, see particularly Serapion. (De
Antidot. vii, 34.) Camphor is an ingredient in many of them.

558 PLASTERS. [book vii.

SECT. XVII. ON PLASTERS, AND THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE

ADDED TO THE BOILING OF THEM, FROM THE WORKS OF
ANTYLUS, AND,

On the proportion of wax to oil. Of those medicines which
are the ingredients of plasters, some are terrene, as the metals,
and some are kinds of stones and earth, as lees, ashes, and
shells ; some are oily, some tears, some soluble, some inspissated
juices, some liquid juices ; also a few admit seeds, herbs, and
roots. Of plasters themselves, some are vulnerary, and are
called bloody, agglutinative, and plasters for fractures, which
must be composed of desiccants, not in the extreme, but in the
second order complete, and the commencement of the third.
Such are willow, oak, cypress, the barks of pine and pitch-tree,
myrrh, rosemary , bitumen, aloes, birthwort, the ashes of the wood
of ^dne, ceruse, litharge, and the most of the metals. They are
boiled until they do not stain. The cicatrizing plasters are also
composed of desiccants, but more so than the agglutinants.
Such are, burnt copper, the squama seris and ferri, verdigris,
chalcitis, the flower of burnt copper, alum, gall, molybdsena,
calamine, pumice-stone, and the shells. The discutient are
formed from the calefacient and moderately desiccative, such
as birthwort, thapsia, old oil, and the oil of radishes, honey,
opobalsam, pitch, turpentine, galbanum, burnt salts, and the
flower of salt. The emollient are formed from litharge, fats,
marrow, old oil, bee-glue, ammoniac, storax, galbanum, bdel-
hum, mastich, turpentine, the root of marsh -mallows, and of
the wild cucumber. The desiccative are made of sulphur,
natron, salts, ashes, bitumen. The epispastic are formed from
salts, natron, bee-glue, verdigris, leaven, dung, sulphur, turpen-
tine. The digestive are composed of wax, ladanum, dried
grape, amomum, safiron, frankincense, pitch, Egyptian mastich,
storax, myrrh, galbanum, butter, cesypum, fats, verdigris. The
suppurative are formed from water and oil, pollen, wheaten
bread, chondrus, butter, the fat of swine and of calves, frank-
incense, pitch, rosin. The paregoric are made of litharge,
ceruse, oil, dill, camomile, starch, white wax. The bloody-
plasters (as they are called) are to be applied when the wounds

SECT. XVII.] PLASTERS. 559

and fractures are recent, and to co-operate with them, sponges
soaked in oxycrate are to be bound on, above the pledgets, and
are to be loosened on the third day, and the same pledgets
and not others, again applied. The emollient, epispastic, dis-
cutient, and suppiu'ative are applied after the use of cataplasms
and cerates. But the suppurative agree best at the com-
mencement and in cases of extreme pain. Of the boiling of
them we will speak afterwards.

The plaster tetrapharmacon, basilicon. Of wax, of Colo-
phonian rosin, of pitch, of bull's suet, equal parts.

TTie plaster from the juice of linseed for discussing and break-
ing. Of old oil, lb. ij ; of wax, oz. xx ; of Colophonian rosin, of
axunge, of each, lb. iss ; of litharge, lb. j ; of ceruse, oz. vj ;
of the juice of linseed, oz. vj ; of pollen, oz. j ; of frankin-
cense, oz. iv.

The plaster from honey. Of litharge, of wax, of oil, of each,
lb. iv ; of tiu-pentine, lb. ij ; of honey, of axunge, of each, lb. j.
Another. Of litharge, lb. vj ; of oil, lb. vss; of Colophonian
rosin, lb. viiss; of wax, lb. iiiss ; of honey, lb. iij.

The diachylon, or plaster from juices. Of litharge, lb. vj ;
of oil, in summer, lb. vij, but in winter, lb. ix; of fenugreek,
sext. ss; of linseed, sext. ss ; of marsh-mallows, lb. iij. Boil
the marsh-mallows and seeds in sext. xx of water, until but
a Httle be left, and of it, mix lb. iv to the oil, and boil until
the bubbles cease ; then sprinkle with the litharge finely levi-
gated, and boil at a gentle fire until it no longer stain.

The plaster from pollen. Of fine flour, of ammoniac per-
fume, of eacli, lb. j ; of pine-rosin, of wax, of axunge, of each,
lb. iij ; of the juice of linseed, q. s.

The botanicon, or plaster from herbs. Of dock, of sordid oil,
of the anchusa called the Chserospelethos (it is the Onoclcan),
of the plantain which has seven fibres (Plantago major?),
of each, oz. iij ; of oil, lb. vj ; of axunge, lb. vj. The herbs,
being boiled in the oil, are thrown away, but the other things
are melted in the oil.

The plaster from kiny's-spears. Of the juice of the root of
asphodel, lb. j ; of oil of roses, of oil of camomile, of the fat
of geese, of each, oz. ij ; of axunge, oz. iij ; of wax, oz. iv.

The leaven-plaster for breaking abscesses. Of leaven, of
axunge, of each, oz. vj ; of salts, oz. iv; of pine- rosin, oz. iij ;

560 PLASTERS. [book vir.

of wax, oz. iv ; of aplironitrum, oz. j ; of ammoniac perfume,
oz. ij ; of honey, oz. vj ; of soap, oz. ij.

The dothiene, or plaster for furunculus. Of ammoniac per-
fume, lb. j ; of Alexandrian natron, oz. vj ; of aphronitrum,
oz. vj ; of swine's seam, lb. ij ; of wax, lb. ij ; of turpentine,
lb. j ; of old oil, oz. j ; of \dnegar, q. s.

The plaster from soapwort for discussing strumous sweUings..
Of litbarge, of soapwort, of birthwort, of eacli, oz. iv ; of gal-
banum, of squama seris, of aloes, of each, oz. j ; of manna,
oz. ij ; of ammoniac perfume, oz. vj ; of pine-rosin, oz. xvj ;
of vinegar of squills, sext. iv ; for the trituration of the
powders.

The plaster smilium for abscesses. Of old oil, lb. iss ; of
litharge, of red natron, of sal ammoniac, of the lye of figs
called protostacton, of rosin, of each, lb. j ; of galbanum, of
ammoniac perfume, of each, oz. iij ; of copperas, oz. iv ; of
wax, oz. vj ; of verdigris, of opoponax, of each, oz. j ; of
vinegar, q. s. Boil the litharge and the verdigris in the oil
until it cease to stain, and then add the other things.

T/ie plaster from garlic for breaking abscesses. Of wax, oz.
vj ; of Colophouian rosin, oz. iv; of pine-rosin, oz. iij; of
bulFs suet, oz. iv ; of yellow natron, oz. iss ; the heads of
garlic cleansed, xx ; of oil, sext. ss. Having boiled the garlic
in the oil, throw it away, and mix the other things.

The discutient plaster from apyranon. Of the fat of geese
and of pheasants, of each, oz. iij ; of old oil, oz. xxvj ; of flea-
wort, oz. iij ; of nettle-seed, of the green root of apyranum,
of each, lb. j ; of white wax, oz. x ; of diachylon plaster, oz. ij ;
of turpentine, oz. j. Having divided the root into small pieces,
macerate in the oil with the fleawort and nettle-seed a night
and a day ; and then having boiled, throw them away, and
mixing the soluble substances with the oil, dissolve.

The wheat-plaster for hardness and scirrhous swellings. Of
marsh-mallows, of palm-nuts, or of Nicolan dates, of each,
lb. ij ; of fenugreek, of linseed, of each, sext ss ; of camomile,
of melilot, of the bark of palms, of each, oz. vj ; of Amiusean
wine, sext. vj ; of litharge, lb. j ; of ceruse, of Colophonian
rosin, of each, lb. ij ; of wax, of turpentine, of each, lb. j ; of
old oil, lb. V ; of water, lb. ij ; of dried bread broken down
and sifted, lb. v. The juice of the herbs is extracted by

SECT. XVII.] PLASTERS. 561

boiling in wine, and the bread is soaked in it ; on the day
following, the litharge and ceruse are triturated in the water,
and afterwards the oil is added and boiled until it ceases to
stain ; and then the other things are added. Being removed
from the fire, the bread is added and stirred strongly. To
these are then added, of scraped verdigris, of the flower of
salt, of each, oz. \'j ; of iris, of birthwort, of each, oz. vj ; of
turpentine, lb. j.

The plaster Pelarion, from the dross of silver, for excoria-
tions and the like. Of wax, of the fat of bulls, of each, oz. v;
of the dross of silver, oz. vj ; of Colophonian rosin, oz. iv ; of
pitch, of oil, of each, oz. ij ; the dry dross is triturated in
wine or the juice of fenugreek. When the dross is not at
hand we may use molybdEena.

The plaster from marshmalloivs, in gouty cases and other
indurations. Of the juices of fenugreek, linseed, and marsh-
mallows, of each, lb. iij ; of oil, lb. ij ; having boiled it until the
juice be consumed, add of Colophonian rosin, lb. j ; of turpen-
tine, lb. j ; of the tear of ivy, oz. iij. When dissolved, having
taken it from the fire, add of wax, lb. j, of galbanum, oz. iv,
both pounded together, and having dissolved, stir with a spatula.

The plaster kissinon, or ivy plaster, for wounded nerves and
pmictures, especially chronic. Of red squama, oz. ivss ; of
frankincense, oz. j ; of misy, oz. iss ; of chalcitis, dr. iv ; of
vinegar, vj. Triturate in the summer sun until consumed,
when having dissolved, of wax, oz. viij; of oil, oz. xviij ('^deest
aliquid'') ; mix. But if a nerve be divided and laid bare,
instead of the galbanum, add of turpentine, oz. ij.

The melanchlorus, for the same purposes, and for bleeding
wounds. Of pomegranate rind, of burnt copper, of galls, of
round birthAvort, of sal ammoniac, of squama seris, of fissile and
liquid alum (but some instead of the liquid use the round), of
iris, of misy, of copperas, of chalcitis, of scraped verdigris, of
calamine, of aloes, of myrrh, of frankincense, of the root of
all-heal, of litharge, of ceruse, equal parts. All of Avhich are
triturated in the sun during the season of summei", with vine-
gar for a sufficient number of days, and formed into trochisks.
It is made into a plaster thus : of the medicine, oz. ij ; of wax,
oz. vj ; of oil, oz. viij ; when for wounded nerves the oil is to
be old, but otherwise the common.

III. 36

o62 PLASTERS. [book vii.

The plaster from groundsel. Of the juice of groundsel,
lb. ij ; of old oil, lb. iss ; of oil of privet, oz. iv ; of old
axunge, lb. j ; of turpentine, oz. j ; of galbanum, oz. ss ; of
pine rosin, oz, \] ; of verdigris, of frankincense, of the medicine
oesypura, of each, oz. j ; of squama seris, scr. viij ; of wax, oz. x ;
of the old pitch of ships, oz. xiv. Boil the oil with the juice to
the consistence of the sordes of the oil in baths, with swine's
seam, and triturate the powders with oil of privet ; beat tlie
galbanum with the wax, and put it into a pot. And if the
pitch of the ships be dry, having triturated and strained it, weigh
and sprinkle it. If it cannot be triturated let it be strained,
with part of the oil dissolved, and then let all the things be mixed.

The discutient j)laster of Mnasceus. Of was, of axunge, of
each, lb. j ; of Colophonian rosin, oz. x] ; of litharge, lb. ij ;
of fine wax, lb. iv.

TJie Ariobarzanian plaster, for the same affections. Of
litharge, oz. iss ; of ceruse, lb. j, oz. v ; of sea-water, oz. xxv ;
of old oil, lb. iss ; of buccina burnt, oz. viiss ; of yellow wax,
oz. ix; of turpentine, oz. vj ; of frankincense, oz. iij,
scr. iiiss.

The plaster from dracunculus, or dragon-herb . Of wax, of
Colophonian rosin, of dried pitch, of axunge, of rosin, of each,
lb. iv ; of ammoniac perfume, lb. ij ; of the root of dracun-
culus, lb. V. The root being dried and triturated is sprinkled,
Avith the other things dissolved.

T7te plaster called Psittacion. Of wax, of Colophonian rosin,
of swine's seam, of the tender leaves of henbane, or the juice
of them, equal parts. But in Alexandria, of wax, lb. iiss ; of
henbane, lb. ij ; of axunge, lb. iiss ; of Colophonian rosin,
lb. X. This is more discutieut.

The myrtle plaster, or emplastnim myrsinatum. Of litharge,
of ceruse, of sandy x, of lead, burnt and washed, of each, oz. j ;
of wax, oz, \] ; of myrtle oil, lb. j ; of wine, q. s.

The plaster from ceruse, or from eggs. Of white wax, oz. ^j ;
of rose oil, lb. iss ; of htharge, oz. ij ; of ceruse, oz. ij ; of starch,
oz. iij ; the Avhites of v eggs.

The plaster Parygron, of Oribasius. Of litharge, oz. iss ;
of ceruse, oz. iss ; of wax, oz. iv ; of swine's seam, oz. \\} ; of
Colophonian rosin, oz. ix ; of the juice of linseed, of oil, of
each, oz. x. It answers admirably for fissures of tlie heels.

SECT. XVII.] PLASTERS. .563

But, says lie^ it must be kept from ulcers, for it becomes
fetid.

The epulotic plaster from calamine. Of burnt chalcitis,
oz. i j ; of calamine, of manna, of each, oz. j ; of wax, of colo-
phony, of myrtle oil, of each, lb. j ; of wine, q. s.

The palm plaster, or emplastrum palmulatum. Of old axunge,
lb. ij ; of old oil, lb. iij ; of litharge, lb. iij ; of crude chalcitis,
oz. vj. First the chalcitis is to be le\dgated in a proper vessel,
or in the sun. After it has become of the consistence of the
lees of the oil in baths, add the litharge, previously triturated,
and afterwards the suet. After they are properly triturated, boil
with a gentle fire until it cease to stain, stirring with palm branches.

The jjlaster from alkanet, for burns. Of white wax, oz. ix ;
of rose oil, oz. xviij ; let these be melted, and sprinkle upon
them of the dried root of the purple alkanet, finely levigated,
oz. iv. Another. Of the green root of alkanet, of the hair of
horehound, of each, oz. iij. Boil in oz. ix of oil, and throw
away. Add to the oil v oz. of white wax and dissolve.

The plaster called pompholij(jeron. Of pompholyx, oz. ij ; of
litharge, oz. iij ; to be triturated with the juice of linseed, and
then to be added when dissolved and cooled ; of wax, oz. vj ;
of the grease of geese or domestic fowls, oz. ij; of chamomile, oz.vj.

The anodyne plaster phijcotijche^ for the fundament. Of
frankincense, oz. xvij ; of myrrh, oz. vij ; of opium, di*. iv ; of
fissile alum, dr. ij ; of butter, dr. iv; the yelks of iv eggs
roasted ; of calamine, burnt and washed, dr. iv ; of pompholyx,
dr. vj ; of Tuscan wax, oz. viij ; of the grease of geese, dr. xvj;
of stag's marrow, dr. xj ; of lead, burnt and washed, dr. viij ;
of bloodstone, dr. j ; of liquid oesypum, dr. iv. Triturate the
powders with Italian wine, and mix the soluble substances.

The plaster of Amythaon, for distorted and torn joints. It is
also epispastic. Of ammoniac, of wax, of bdellium, of each,
dr. viij ; of tvirpentine, of Illyrian iris, of galbanum,of each,dr.xx.
The Aristophanian emollient plaster. Of pitch, lb. iv ; of the
pitch of ships, lb. ij ; of wax, lb. j ; of opoponax, oz. j ; of
vinegar, hcmin. j.

The plaster from molybdana, for hot affections. Of
raolybdana, oz. iv ; of litharge, oz. ij ; of ceruse, oz. ij ; of
wax, oz. viij ; of myrtle oil, lb. ij. Triturate the dry things
with wine.

564 PLASTERS. [book vit.

The plaster coracon from oxymel, for the pudendum and
spreading sores. Of galls, oz. ij ; of squama seris, oz. iss ; of
chalcitis, of frankincense, of each, oz. j. Triturate with Ainegar
for a sufficient number of days ; then mix of honey, oz. v. But
having made separately a cerate from oz. ij of myrtle or rose oil,
and of the seam of bulls, oz. viij ; of wax, oz. iv ; of turpentine,
oz. j ; having mixed, triturate together, and use like that from
paper, both by means of an instrument for extracting pus and
by a pledget.

The plaster from vinegar and oil. Of litharge, p. j ; of oil,
of vinegar, of each, p. ij, some make it iij.

The plaster from agate, being discutient and emollient. Of
agate stone, half burnt, oz. iss ; of wax, oz. v ; of roasted rosin,
oz. iij ; of oil, oz. j.

The plaster Isis, for bloody laounds, being agglutinative, incar-
native, and cathartic. Of squama seris, of burnt copper, of
round birthwort, of each, dr. viij ; of fissile alum, dr. vj ; of
ammoniac salts, dr. viij ; of frankincense, dr. viij ; of ammo-
niac perfume, dr. viij ; of myrrh, dr. xij ; of aloes, dr. xij ; of
galbanum, dr. xij ; of the juice of the root of dracunculus,
dr. viij ; of wax, lb. j ; of Colophonian rosin, lb. ij ; of old oil,
oz. iij ; of vinegar, q. s.

The plaster Athena, for foul ulcers, infarctions, and wounded
nerves. Of pomegranate rind, of burnt copper, of galls, of
round and long birthwort, of sal ammoniac, of ammoniac per-
fume ; of squama peris, of fissile alum and of round, of iris, of
misy, of copperas, of chalcitis, of scraped verdigris, of calamine,
of aloes, of myrrh, of frankincense, of bee glue, of galbanum,
of each, oz. j ; of wax, dr. cc ; of pitch, dr. cc ; of Colophonian
rosin, dr. c ; of oil, oz. vj ; of vinegar, q. s.

TTie agglutinative plaster from dittany, for the bites of dogs
and all sorts of ulcers. Of litharge, lb. ij ; of squama seris, oz.
iss ; of old oil, sext. ij ; of diphryges, oz. iij ; of gentian, oz. iss;
of birthwort, of scraped verdigris, of each, oz. iss ; of dittany, of
burnt copper, oz. iss ; of Colophonian rosin, lb. j ; of manna, of
galbanum, of aloes, oz. iij ; of ammoniac perfume, oz. vj ; of bee
glue, oz. ij ; of common wax, oz, viss. The oil must first be
boiled with the litharge, until it cease to stain. Then taking it
oflf the fire, we are to add the verdigris and squama, and again
boil until it cease to stain ; and again taking it off the fire, add

SECT. XVII.] PLASTERS. 565

the rosiiij the ammoniac sifted, and stir until it cease boiling ;
and place it at the fire, and when it boils but a little add the
copper and diphryges and boil again until it thicken ; then add
the common wax, and boiling until it cease to stain, put in the
bee glue, and after a little the aloes, manna, dittany, birthwort,
and gentian, are to be sprinkled finely levigated when but a
little cooled.

The Barbaric plaster, for bloody sores, and for promoting the

formation of callus in fractures. Of Judsean asphaltos, of

dried pitch, of wax, of rosin, of each, lb. j ; of turpentine, oz. ij;

of litharge, oz. j ; of ceruse, oz. iss ; of manna, oz. ij ; of opo-

ponax, oz. ij ; of myrrh, oz. ij ; of oil, oz. iij ; of vinegar, q. s.

The ayglutinative plaster from iviUoivs, for hemoptysis and
empyema when applied to the chest. Of misy, of chalcitis, of
verdigris, of ceruse, of galls, of fissile alum and of round, of
melanteria, of each, oz. vj ; of wax, lb. ij ; of pine-rosin, lb. ij;
of pitch, lb. ij ; of pomegranate rind, oz. vj ; of asphaltos,
lb. ij ; of willow-leaves, lb. ij ; of the oil of roses, oz. iv ;
of copperas, oz. "vj ; of vinegar^ q. s. Some add also of turpen-
tine, oz. ix.

The pilaster of Nicolaus,for bloody wounds and an agglutinant
of sinuses. Of squama aeris, oz. iv ; of scraped verdigris,
oz. iss j of litharge, oz. iss ; of long and of round birthwort,
of each, oz. j ; of fissile and of round alum, of copperas, of
each, oz. j ; of sulphur vivum, oz. j ; of the gall omphacitis,
oz. iv ; of ammoniac salts, oz. j ; of misy, oz. j ; of marjoram,
oz. j ; of chamseleon, oz. j ; of the calamine called racemosa,
oz. j ; of white hellebore, oz. j ; of hog^s-fennel, oz. iij ; of
parsley-seed, oz. i j ; of the root of comfrey, oz. iss ; of ceruse,
oz. iss ; of the juice of mandragora, oz. ss ; of chalcitis, oz. iss ;
of Samian aster, oz. j ; of male frankincense, oz. j ; of aloes,
oz. j ; of bdellium, oz. ij ; of Thebaic opium, oz. ij ; of tro-
glodytic myrrh, oz. ss ; of ammoniac perfume, oz. j ; of fenu-
greek, oz. vj ; of the juice of perdicias, oz. vj ; of yellow wax,
lb. iij ; of Colophonian rosin, lb. ij ; of pine-rosin, lb. j ; of
bitumen, lb. j ; of mastich, oz. vj ; of black pitch, lb. ij ; of
old oil, lb. j ; of storax, oz. j ; of opoponax, oz. iss ; of vine-
gar, q. s.

The Icesian plaster, for strunKS, abscesses, the spleen, joints,
and ischiatic disease. Of litharge, dr. cxx ; of old oil, sext. ij ;

566 PLASTERS. [book vii.

of \dnegar, sext. j ; of verdigris, dr. iss ; of the bark of the
pine, dr. \'iij ; of chamseleon, with the root, dr. xvj ; of euphor-
bium, dr. xvj ; of the juice of hypocistis, dr. x\'j ; of bee-glue,
dr. xA-j ; of myrrh, dr. xvj ; of ehcampane, dr. xvj ; of pelHtory,
dr. xvj ; of wax, lb. iij.

The plaster of Nero, for blows and all jjains of fleshy parts.
Of old oil, lb. iss : of litharge, lb. j ; of ammoniac perfume,
oz. j ; of ceruse, oz. iv ; of galbanum, of manna, of myrrh, of
frankincense, of each, oz. j.

TTie much-used emplastrum oxyrum. Of dried pitch, dr. ij ;
of wax, lb. j ; of ammoniac perfume, oz. j ; of turpentine, lb. ssj
of galbanum, oz. ij ; of manna, oz. ij ; of vinegar, sext. iss.

The agglutinative plaster without wax, or emplastrum acera-
tum of Galen. It is digestive and promotes the suppuration of
ulcers, with oleum ricini and old oil, Avhen spread npon a pledget.
Of litharge, lb. iij ; of oil of ricinus, or old oil, lb. iv, of the
most acrid vinegar, lb. ij ; of the black squama seris, of chal-
citis, of verdigris, of each, oz. ij. Boil the litharge with the
oil to the consistence of the lees in baths ; then add the me-
tallic substances, triturated for many days with vinegar.

The plaster from metals. Of chalcitis, oz. j ; of misy, oz. ij ;
of squama seris, oz. iij ; of frankincense, oz. iij ; of Colophonian
rosin, oz. ij ; of galbanum, oz. iss ; of wax, lb. j ; of oil, oz. xv ;
of vinegar, q. s.

The plaster harmonia, for fractures. Of chalcitis, oz. iv ;
of squama seris, oz. iiss ; of burnt copper, oz. j ; of frankin-
cense, oz. ij ; of oil, lb. j ; of vinegar, lb. j. Boil the metals
in the oil until it cease to stain, then add the frankincense.

The emplastrum melinum of Serapion. Of litharge, lb. j ; of
wax, oz. vij ; of ammoniac perfume, oz. iiiss ; of galbanum, of
verdigris, of each, dr. ix ; of Colophonian rosin, oz. vij ; of
myrrh, dr. j : of oil, hemin. iss. Boil the litharge with the oil
until it cease to stain, then add the other things.

The emplastrum anicetum, being agglutinative, discutient, re-
moving scales, and answering ivith distortions. Of bay-berries,
of dried ii'is, of frankincense, of each, dr. Ix ; of burnt copper,
dr. XX ; of natron, of sal ammoniac, dr. xx ; of pellitory, of
stavesacre, of the seed of rosemary, of the granum Cnidium, of
mustard, of pigeon's dung, of birthwort, of cumin, of verdigris,
of cyperus, of the seed of rocket, of each, dr. viij ; of vinegar,

SECT. XVII.] PLASTERS. 567

liemin. xii. Triturate during the heat of the dog-days until
the vinegar is consumed, then add, of tlie thickest decoction
of dried figs, oz, ix ; and having mixed, form trochisks and
dry. In using it, triturate of the trochisks, oz. ij, with vinegar,
and mix, of rosin, oz. iij ; of Tuscan wax, oz. ij ; of oil, oz. ij.

The plaster from darnel. Of pitch, lb. ij ; of pine-rosin,
oz. ix ; of Tuscan wax, oz. v ; of oil, oz. iij ; of strained bitu-
men, oz. ij ; of the flour of darnel, sext. j ; of vinegar, q. s.

The plaster from the juice of mulberry -tree. Of litharge, of
dried pitch, of bull's-seam, of each, oz. viij ; of turpentine,
oz. iij ; of wax, oz. v ; of scraped verdigris, of opoponax, of
galbanum, of each, oz. j ; of tlie oleum ricininum, oleum
susinum, or very old oil, hemin. j ; of liquid pitch, hemin. j ;
of the juice of the mulberry, the fruit of which is called syco-
mora, hemin. j.

The double-coloured plaster, or dichromos. Of burnt coppcj*,
of fissile alum, of ammoniac perfume, of each, oz. j ; of wax,
lb. j ; of Colophonian rosin, lb. j ; of swine's scam, lb. j ; of
vinegar, q. s.

The Indian agglutinative plaster, for spreading ulcers and
hmnoptysis. Of wax, of roasted rosin, of dried pitch, of the
liquid Zacynthian bitumen, of each, lb. j ; of ceruse, of chalcitis,
of misy, of melanteria, of fissile and of round alum, of the gall
omphacitis, of the rind of the pomegranate, of each, oz. vj ; of
vinegar, q. s.

The 2^1 aster from the ashes of asps, for discussing strumce and
gout. Of turpentine, of Asian stone, of Judsean bitumen, of
each, dj". ccclx ; of wax, of bay-berries, of ammoniac perfume,
of aphronitrum, of the fat of calves, of each, dr. cccxl ; of the
lapis pyrites, of quicklime, of each, dr. cxl; of the ashes of
asps, dr. cxl ; of old oil, hemin. ij. Sprinkle the ashes upon
the medicine when cooled. It is prepared also without the
ashes, because some have an aversion to them, and it is no less
efficacious.

The desiccative and discutient plaster, called lemta or lioness.
Of ammoniac perfume, of plumbago, of each, dr. c ; of mustard,
dr. viij ; of the root of chamaeleon, dr. xvj ; of Colophonian
rosin, dr. c ; of squama ajris, of the root of soapwort, of euphor-
biura, of verdigris, of each, dr. viij ; of birthwort, dr. xvj ; of
pellitory, dr. viij ; of old oil, hemin. j ; and of the oil of

568 PLASTERS. [book vii.

radishes, q. s. — Another. The lesena for altering and evacuating
humours. Of copperas, oz. ij; of arsenic, oz. j; of black helle-
bore, of cantharides^ breasts, of each, dr. iss; of sandarach, oz. iij;
of wax, lb. iss ; of roasted rosin, lb, j ; of oil, hemin. ij.

The Macedonian plaster. Of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of
pitch, of the suet of bulls, of rosemary, equal parts. Having
melted and removed them from the fire, sprinkle the frank-
incense.

The plaster sph(erion, for febrile complaints. Of ceruse, of
litharge, of quicklime, of each, oz. iij ; of wax, oz. iss ; of
Berenicarian natron, of rose oil, of each, oz. j. Pour the
melted things upon the dry and form small balls. In using,
melt, of oil, oz. vj, with oz. ij of wax, and add, of the medicine,
oz. j, and stir with a spatula. When cooled, bruize with oz, ix
of water ; add also of rose-oil, oz. iij.

The anti-inflammatory jjlaster from ochre, both for those
cases of inflammation tvhich occur spontaneously, and those occa-
sioned by judicial torture. Of Attic ochre, lb. ij ; of chalk,
lb. j ; of litharge, oz. viij. Triturate with wine, of wax, of
Colophonian rosin, of pitch, of pine rosin, of each, lb. j ; of
turpentine, oz. viij; of oil, lb. ij. It is dissolved thus: of wax,
lb. j ; of old oil, lb. iij ; of the medicine, lb. j. Bruise with wine.

The plaster from cedria, being agglutinative, disc^itient, and
detergent. Of wax, of dried pitch, of each, lb. j ; of Colopho-
nian rosin, oz. viij; of cedar rosin (gum juniper?), oz. vj.
Having melted them together, boil until they cease to stain.

Another emollient plaster. Of wax, of pitch, of each, oz. viij ;
of Colophonian rosin, dr. xxv ; of bee-glue, dr. xvij ; of cedar
rosin, dr. xx.

The cicatrizing plaster from pumice-stone. Of myrtle oil,
lb. ij ; of wax, lb. j ; of pumice burnt and extinguished in
wine, dr. vj ; of the squama stomomatis, dr. vj ; of burnt
copper, of Cimolian earth, of each, dr. v. It is put upon a
pledget, and a sponge out of water is applied above.

The plaster called Paiila or Rest, for struma and buboes. Of
wax, of Colophonian rosin, of natron, of each, lb. j.

The plaster from natron, for carbuncles. Of roasted natron,
oz. iij ; of wax, of oil, of Colophonian rosin, of each, dr. iss ;
of Cyrenaic or Median juice, dr. x. It is applied, diluted, upon
a pledget.

SECT, XVII.] PLASTERS. 569

The plaster from anemone. Of anemone stripped of its nails
(" the white parts of its flowers"), oz. ij ; of wax, oz. v ; of oil,
oz. iv; of rosin, oz. vss; of Coloplionian rosin, lb. iiss.

The green plaster of Machcerion for ischiatic diseases, infarC'
tions of the joints, and abscesses. Of opoponax, of galbanura,
of verdigris, of myrrli, of iris, of ammoniac perfume, of birth-
Mort, of each, oz. j ; of turpentine, of wax, of the oil of unripe
olives, of each, oz. vij.

Another simple green plaster. Of rosin, lb. iij ; of wax,
lb. j ; of scraped verdigris, lb. ss ; of frankincense, dr. xxv; of
vinegar, q. s.

Another green plaster for humid and fungous ulcers. Of
Coloplionian rosin, oz. vj ; of scraped verdigris, oz. iss ; of wax,
oz. ij ; of Cappadocian salts, oz. j ; of rose oil, oz. ij ; of vine-
gar, q. s.

Tlie plaster from rue, for pleuritic cases. Of green rue,
lb. j ; of butter, lb. iss ; of turpentine, oz. xv ; of the medicine
cesypum, oz. xv ; of opoponax, oz. iij ; of galbanum, oz. iij ; of
oil of dill, lb. j.

The jAaster from lye, for ischiatic, arthritic, and (edematous
complaints. Of wax, of old oil, of protostacton (" a mixture of
lime with some other sort of lixivial ashes ''), of each, lb. j ; of
roasted rosin, of Alexandrian natron, of white natron, of
turpentine, of each, oz. vj. Triturate the natron with the
ashes.

The plaster from natron, for abscesses and scirrhous swellings.

Of old oil, of wax, of aphronitrum, of soap, of ashes, of each,
lb. j ; of turpentine, oz. vj ; of galbanum, of bee-glue, of am-
moniac perfume, of each, oz. j. Prepare like the former.

The plaster from salts. Of wax, oz. iv ; of oil, lb. j ; of
common salts, oz. iv ; of aphronitrum, oz. iv ; of ceruse, oz. viij ;
of vinegar, oz. ij, for the trituration. — Otherwise. Of common
salts, of natron, of each, oz. iv ; of wax, of old oil, of each,
oz. vj ; of sea- water, q. s.

The plaster from bacon, for dissolving tophi. Of the fat of
old swine's bacon, of ammoniac perfume, of the old cheese of
cow^s or goat^s milk, of bulFs fat, of the pitch of ships, of each,
lb. j ; of the marrow of stags, oz. ^'iij ; of the cerate of ocsypum,
oz. iij ; of the oil of privet, oz. vj : of Egyptian wine, q. s.
The plaster from dragon's blood [cinnabaris), for tophi and all

.570 TMSTERS. [book vii.

other scirrhous swellings. It is called jjmnpathes. Of litharge,
lb. j ; of old oil, sext. j ; of squama seris, oz. j ; of burnt
copper, oz. j ; of sauguis draconis, scr. xviij ; of a living
magnet, oz. j ; of Phrygian stone, dr. vj ; of the stone
pyrites, of calamine, of scraped verdigris, of frankincense, of
each, oz. j ; of diphryges, oz. ij ; of aloes, oz. iss ; of galbanum,
oz. iss ; of the Scythian stone onites, scr. xviij ; of the blood-
stone, oz. j ; of bee-glue, lb. j, scr. xxviij ; of wax, oz. xvij ;
of the stone perdicites (another edition has perdiciaton), oz.j;
of betony, oz. j, scr. viij ; of gentian, oz. j ; of long and of
round birth worth, dr. iv ; of the black chamceleon, oz. j ;
of dittany, scr. xij ; of dried rosin, lb. j ; of the fat of the
ostrich, lb. j. Triturate the stones with the litharge, adding of
the flower of salt, lb. ij, gradually until the whole be con-
sumed.

The plaster from filberts, of tried efficacy, for tophi of the
joints. Of protostacton (" a mixture of lime with some lixi-
A'ial ashes "), oz. vj ; of the inner part of filberts, oz. ij ; of
aphronitrum, oz. vj ; of old oil, lb. j ; of gallic soap, oz. iv ; of
honey, oz. viij ; the Avhites of six eggs ; of wax. oz. x ; of
turpentine, oz. ij. Triturate with the protostacton.

An admirable anodyne cerate from the torpedo, for gout.
On the fifth day of the month of March, put into a pot under
ground of common oil, sext. ij, boil with the wood of vine, and
when it boils, add of the sea-fish torpedo, lb. j ; and of the
blood of the mole, which some call madaniuda, oz. iv, and boil
until the flesh of the fish be dissolved or toasted ; then, having
strained, add of oil and of wax what will be sufficient to give it
consistence, so that the cerate may be very tender, which,
having spread upon a linen rag, apply.

TJie plaster from the urine of a mule, for gout. Of the urine
of a male mule, sext. iv ; of litharge, lb. ij ; of old oil, one mina.
Having triturated all the things for a long time until they be-
come of the consistence of the lees of baths, boil till it cease
to stain.

The pA aster from the flower of Asian stone, of Philagrius, for
scirrhus. Of the root of hog's fennel, of the flower of Asian
stone, or, if it is not at hand, of salts, of ammoniac perfume,
of uuscoured wool biu'nt, of each, oz. j ; of round bii'thwort, of
pumice-stone, of dog's dung, of scraped verdigris, of squama

SECT. XVII.] PLASTERS. 571

seris, of misy, of eacli, scr. xviij ; of castor, scr. xviij ; of myrrh,
oz. iij j of the most acrid vinegar, oz. iij ; of wax, oz. xiiss ; of
pine rosin, of Brutian pitch, oz. xviiiss, scr. vj ; of old oil, and
of the most acrid vinegar, q. s.

The same, of Galen. Of wax, of turpentine, of each, lb. j ;
of Asian stone, of manna, of each, oz. iij ; of oil of privet, oz. ij;
of the bonnet-maker's water, q. s.

The ai'tliritic plaster from the flotver of salt, in the decline of
the complaint. Of turpentine, of roasted rosin, of pine rosin,
of wax, of each, lb. j ; of dried pitch, of fissile alum, of the
flower of salt, of each, lb. ss. Boil in a double vessel.

An incarnative plaster for ulcers. Of rose-oil, of turpentine,
of honey, of each, oz. ij ; of ceruse, of butter, of each, oz. j.
Some add also of frankincense, oz. j.

TJie Italian plaster for cleansing and incarnating foul ulcers.
Ha\ing boiled the tender bark of the wild fig in oil, throw it
away, and having melted in the oil a sufficient quantity of dark
yellow wax, use on a pledget.

Tlie erective p)laster. Of satyrion, of the testicle of a stag,
of the tail of a skiuk, of each, dr. ij ; of the seed of rocket, of
pellitory, of the seed of rosemary, of wax, of each, dr. iv ; of tur-
pentine, oz.j; three eggs of troglodytic sparrows, ("wrens?") three
swifts, of oil of bay, or of iris, q. s. The swifts are soaked
alive in vinegar for forty days, the vessel being buried in dung.

The golden plaster for hloodij wounds. Of frankincense, of
fissile alum, of each, oz. ij ; of Colophonian rosin, of common
rosin, of each, lb. j ; of oil, oz. iij ; of arsenic, oz. ij. Triturate
the arsenic in the vinegar.

The p)l aster for fractures, of Oribasius. Of Brutian pitch,
lb. j, oz. iv ; of litharge, lb. j, oz. iv ; of frankincense, oz. viij ;
of turpentine, oz. v ; of bull's suet, lb. j, oz. iv ; of galbanum,
of opoponax, of each, oz. j ; of w^ax, oz. iv; of old oil, lb. j ; of
vinegar, oz. v.

A plaster for fractures with a wound and without a ivound.
From Heraclitus. Of dried pitch, mina j ; of litharge, mina j ;
of manna, mina ss ; of calves' suet, mina j ; of Tuscan wax, oz.
xxvj ; of opoponax, dr. viij ; of scraped verdigris, of Cyprian
copper, of each, the fifth and tenth part of a mina; ol' turpentine,
min. iss ; of copper, oz. j ; of oleum riciui (castor oil), or old oil,
hem. j ; of vinegar, hemin. ss.

572 PLASTERS. [book vji.

The preparation of the medicine called the liquid cesypum.
Of melilot^ oz. iv ; of cardamom, oz. ij ; of uuscoured wool,
oz. vj : having macerated in sext. ij of wiue for three days, boil
until little is left ; and having filtrated mix with the wine, oz. iij
of oil, and boil until Httle of the wine remain, and then add of
Colophonian rosin, oz. x ; of turpentine, oz. x. Some add like-
wise of wax, oz. X, and of the herb hyssop, oz. j, and boil with
the others. Others clean the wool in wine, and having dried
the wine with the sordes, which they call pinon, at the time of
using, add of it, oz. iij, and the other things as mentioned.

On the mixture of wax to oil. If you wish to prepare oint-
ments like those called Acopa, add four parts of the oil to the
wax ; but if, as in fractures, you wish to make a soft cerate,
make it double. AYhen we wish to give the medicine the form
of a plaster, then we mix equal parts of oil with wax, if the
atmosphere be of a moderate temperature. But if the wax be
old or dry, and the atmosphere cold, then there must be a little
more of the oil than of the wax; when the wax is soft and the
atmosphere warm, the wax should be a little less than the oil.
This little should be the twelfth part on each side of the middle,
for in this case you will mix xj or xiij oz. of oil to the pound
of wax.

From the ivorks of Antyllus, on the boiling of those medicines
which are the ingredients of plasters. — Litharge. In the boil-
ing of the medicines, the litharge will be boiled with the oil ;
but the litharge having been previously triturated, is to be
triturated again with the oil, so as to become -viscid, and then
it is to be boiled at a gentle fire, stirring incessantly. At
first, then, it swells and bubbles ; but when nearly boiled suffi-
ciently, it becomes of a more feculent colour. It has attained
its measure of boiling when the swelling subsides, and it no
longer stains. The molybdsena is to be boiled in a similar
manner to litharge ; but the measure of the boiling of it is not
only when it ceases to stain, but when it changes from a fiery
colour to a yellow and strongly florid. Burnt copper in boihng
is not to be put in at the commencement, but when the plaster
is half boiled : the measure of the boiling, unless a small quan-
tity only is put in, is Avhen its colour predominates and renders
the plaster yellow ; sori and diphiyges are put in during the
boiling. The measiu'e of the boiling of the diphryges, like the

SECT. XVII.] PLASTERS. 573

squama, is to be when its colour predominates. With regard
to the sori, there is no particular measure, except the common
one, to make the plaster of such a consistence that it does not
stain. The chalcitis is boiled like copper, and the measure of
it is the degree to which it renders the plaster of a deeper
yellow and more ruddy colour. The flower of copper is like
copper, and is regulated by the common measure of boiling.
Copperas (blue vitriol ?) is added in the middle of the boiling,
and when boiled it gives a stronger shade to the colour of the
plaster ; and if not prevented by other circumstances, it renders
the plaster black ; misy is added in the end, but there is no
particular measure with regard to it ; arsenic and sandarach are
added at the end of the boiling ; burnt lead is put in at the
middle of the boiling ; ceruse is put into white plasters at the
end, for thus it preserves their colour and whitens them still
more, but it is added to the black at the commencement, for by
being more boiled it becomes blacker ; verdigris is added to the
green plasters after the boiling ; and, in some cases, it is not
put into the pot at all, but being triturated with vinegar, and
remaining in the mortar, the other things are mixed with it :
to those of an apple colour (pale red ?) it is added when the pre-
paration is half boiled ; for when it undergoes moderate boiling,
it puts on the apple colour ; but in those which are to have a
double appearance, and douJile colour, we must boil the verdi-
gris immediately after the commencement ; when the boiling is
persevered in, it first puts on the apple colour, then the double
appearance, and at last its colour becomes yellow ; alum is added
for the most part after the boiling, but there is no measure of its
boiling; vermilion is added at the end; calamine and pompholjrx
are added at the commencement; salts and natron are added at
the middle of the boiling; sulphur at the end, the boiling of it
blackens the plasters. All earths and stones are added at the
end for the most part : pumice-stone, too, at the end. Burnt
shells are added at the end. Oil, if added at the commence-
ment to rosin and liquid pitch, prevents the plaster from
acquiring consistence. The oil, therefore, is to be added after
it has acquired consistence. Other fatty substances which do
not contain salt, are to be added at the middle of the boiling.
Of ointments, the Irinum bears boiling, the Cyprinum and
Rosaceura less ; tlie others, none at all. The ingredients are.

574 PLASTERS. [book vir.

therefore, to be aclcled at the end of tlie boiling. Wax is not
boiled alone by itself, for it burns, neither with liquid rosin
nor liquid pitch, for it remains disunited. But it is added to
pure oil or oily matters boiled with the metals, or to rosin and
pitch, previously boiled and thickened with other things which
are to be added. Dried rosin is added with wax. The liquid,
before all other things, is boiled by itself, unless a very small
quantity is used. Pitch is added before all other things. The
measure of the boiling of the liquid is its acquiring consistence;
but of the dry especially, if boiled with vinegar, when it ceases
to bubble and swell. The pitch of ships, when triturated and
separated by a sieve from its recrements, is sprinkled upon a
plaster when boiled; but if soft, it is dissolved with the oil.
The former method is the more correct, because in the second
the weight is not preserved. Bitumen (asphaltos) is boiled by
Ijeing added at the commencement. But it is not to be levi-
gated, because it contains asperities like grains of figs. It is,
therefore, to be broken into large pieces and boiled in vinegar,
not stirring it lest it bubble. I, says Timocrates, have suc-
ceeded by boiling it in oil. Bee-glue (propolis) is to be softened
and boiled. For, by the boiling, it is not entirely incorporated.
But if the plaster receives, as an ingredient, common wax, the
bee- glue, like the galbanum, is to be pounded with the wax
and added. Ammoniac is added about the middle of the
boiling. But if it can be levigated, it should be sprinkled
in the state of a powder, but if not, it may be triturated with
some liquid ; but if it be a plaster for fresh wounds, it is to be
triturated with vinegar or wine ; but if for fistulee or strumse,
by all means with vinegar. If it be a soft plaster (such as
those for the fundament), it is to be triturated with water ;
then, being levigated, it is to be added to the other things
when cooled that they may not boil. Opoponax is added much
later than ammoniac : it requires but very little boiling ; but it
must be frequently triturated with wine or vinegar. Galbanum
does not bear boiling. But when the plaster has attained such a
consistence that it does not stain, it is to be taken off the fire,
and it is to be softened and added. Sagapenum is pounded
in a mortar, and when it becomes tender it is softened with
the plaster after being removed from the fire. Aloe is
sprinkled after the boiling. Poppy-juice is macerated for one

SECT, xvii.] PLASTERS. 57.")

day in a little water, and is then levigated in a mortar, and in
tliis state the plaster is ponred npon it. Thapsia is sprinkled
last, or triturated with some fluid. Bdellium being levigated,
is sprinkled after the plaster is taken from the fire ; but if it
is of a fatty nature, and cannot be le\dgated, it is to be
pounded like sagapen, and made into the form of a plaster,
and softened with the plaster after the boiling. Frankincense
and manna are sprinkled at the end of the boiling, becoming
glutinous, with a little honey, vinegar, water, or wine, if
the plaster admit a liquid. ]Myrrh is added when the boiling
is over. None of the seeds, roots, and herbs can endure boil-
ing ; but when levigated, and while they remain in the
mortar, the other things are poured upon them in a state of
solution.

Commentary. The following are the general directions Comm,
given by Celsus for the formation of plasters : " Emplastrum ' "
hoe modo fit : arida medicamenta per se teruntur ; deindc
mixtis his iustillatur ant acetum, aut si quis alius non pinguis
humor accessurus est, et ea rursus ex eo teruntur ; ea vero
quffi liquari possunt, ad ignem simul liquantur, et si quid olei
misceri debet, tum infunditur : interdum etiam aridum ali
quod ex oleo prius coquitur." He describes the composition
of 28 plasters, (v, 19.)

The composition of plasters is treated of by Galen at so
great length that it is quite out of the question to attempt
even an abstract of his account of them. His accuracy of
detail and attention to minuti^ are almost inconceivable. See
the first four books of his work (De Med. see. genera.) Our
author, as usual, is much indebted to him.

For further information regarding the emplastra of the
ancients, see also Haly Abbas (Pract. x, 18) ; INIesue (Do
Unguentis) ; and Myrepsus (§ x.) Myrepsus, as usual, is
most copious : he gives formuhc for 199 plastei's.

The diachylon 2)laster is described by Galen and Mesne, but
as the ingredients of theirs are nearly the same as in that of
our autlior, we need not give their formulae.

The ^Ei/yptiacum, which is still celebrated as a remedy in
certain cases is thus described by Mesne : " Take of verdigris,
dr. v; of honey, dr. xiv ; of very acrid vinegar, dr. vij : boil

576 PLASTERS. [book vii.

CoMM. to a proper consistence. Some also add dr. iiss of triturated
" • ' frankincense.'^

The following is an itch ointment by Mesne : " Take of
cenise, of litharge, of aloes, of saflPron, of calamine, of mercury
extinguished, equal parts ; make into an ointment, Avith oil of
oleander and ^-inegai', q. s."

An itch ointment of Myrepsus consists of the fresh leaves of
the bay-tree boiled •with oil, and having wax and sulphur
added to it. We can say, from ample experience, that such
an ointment is a most effectual remedy for scabies.

The preparation of the basilicon, as directed by Avicenna,
is a nearer approach to the modern ointment of that name
than our author's : " Of rosin, of pitch, and of wax, equal
parts, prepare with olive oil.''

SECT, XVIII. ON EMOLLIENT PLASTERS AND EPITHEMES.

Of those applications called emollient plasters, or malag-
mata, some are applied to the middle parts of the body when
in a state of chronic inflammation, or indurated, or in a hot or
cold state, or affected with defluxions ; and some to the ex-
tremities when infarcted, or to the nerves when affected with
cold ; or they are ser\iceable to the other parts when scirrhous.
These have been treated of in the section on Plasters, and will
be treated of in that on Acopa. Of those which agree with the
middle parts of the body (which are properly called epithemes),
those applied for the stomach and liver, of whatever kind they are,
must require a strengthening power from astringents ; for with-
out these there will be danger to the life, the functional opera-
tions of these parts being extensive ; and, therefore, they are
principally composed of aromatics. When the stomach then is
affected with dyspepsia, atony, or inflation, those from seeds, and
from melilots, aloes, and wormwood, from sampsuchum (marjo-
ram), nard, and mastich are to be applied. To the liver, those
from nutben, ammoniac, fats, and chamomile ointment ; and to
the spleen, those from quicklime, arsenic, capers, willows, carda-
mom, verdigris, ammoniac, and vinegar are to be applied. For
defluxions about tlie belly, those from wild vine, alum, apple
ointment, and other astringents are to be used. And these by

SECT. XVIII.] EMOLLIENT PLASTERS. 577

a misuomer are called by the general name of malagmata or
emollient plasters^ although their power be the reverse of
softening. When the viscera are in a hot state, as in ardent
fevers, those from saffron, oil of roses, the juice of linseed,
endive, knot-grass, hog^s lard, or litharge are to be applied ;
but when in a cold state those from opobalsam, Indian leaf,
sowbread (cassamum), and pepper. In expectorations of blood,
astringent and desiccative applications, composed from alum,
willow, and bitumen, are to be applied to the breast ; and in
consumptions, those from bay berries, horehound, cardamom,
and lye.

The malugma from melilots. Of saffron, of Celtic nard, of
cyperas, of cardamom, of iris, of myrrh, of each, oz. ij ; of
melilots, lb. j ; of ammoniac perfume, lb. j ; of wax, lb. iij ; of
turpentine, lb, j ; of oil of privet, lb. iij ; of glaucinum, lb. ij ;
of bdellium, oz. vj. Some add also of cyphi, oz. ij ; of
wine, q. s.

The malagma Polyarchium, from Galen's ivork, ' according to
the parts.' Of wax, of tm'peutine, of bdellium, of ammoniac
•perfume, of cardamom, of cyperus, of each, one mina; of meli-
lot, of amomum, of Indian nard, of saffron, of myrrh, of frank-
incense, of the wood of cinnamon, of each, dr. xxv ; of oil of
privet, hemina j ; of Italian wine, q. s. Prepare and use
sometimes unmixed and sometimes diluted with the cerate of
privet.

The PoJyarchhan, otherwise. Of xylobalsam, of costus, of
iris, of cyperus, of myrrh, of the schoenanth, of cardamom, of
frankincense, of spikenard, of mastich, of storax, of bdellium,
of amomum, of Indian leaf, of saffron, of cassia, of pellitory,
of long birthwort, of each, oz. j ; of ammoniac perfume, oz. iss ;
of roasted rosin, oz. iij ; of turpentine, lb. j ; of stag's marrow,
oz. ij ; of wax, lb. ij ; of opobalsam, oz. vj ; of wine, oz. viij.

The malagma Philagrianum. Of saffron, oz. iss ; of aloes, of
ammoniac perfume, of bdelHum, of storax, of each, oz. j ; of
the fat of geese, oz. ij ; of the medicine oesypum, oz. iv ; of
palm-nuts, oz. ij ; of wax, lb. j ; of nard, oz. vj ; of the oint-
ment of apples, oz. ^'j ; of wine, what will be sufficient for tri-
turating the dry things.

The fragrant malagma. Of saffron, of aloes, of mastich, of
wormwood, of storax, of wild vine, of sowbread, of cloves, of

III. 37

578 EMOLLIENT PLASTERS. [book tii.

each, oz. iij ; of nard, lb. j ; of wax, lb. j ; of oil of apples,
oz. yy, palm-nuts, xij ; of wine, q. s.

T7ie malagma Baton. Of cardamom, of cassia, of Celtic wild
Aine,of tlie flowers of tlie wild pomegranate, of virgin wax, of each,
scr. viij ; of savin, of sowbread, of amomum, of each, scr. vj ;
of the schoenanth, scr. xviij ; of iiis, scr. iv ; of cloves, scr. iss ;
of the lily perfume, oz. ij ; of frankincense, of myrrh, of each,
oz. j ; of ladanum, oz. vj ; of bdellium, of mastich, of aloes,
of nard, of the oil of lentisk, of each, oz. ss ; of maple rosin,
of pine rosin, of turpentine, of each, oz. iij ; of opobalsam, oz. j ;
of ammoniac perfume, scr. vj ; of wax, oz. vj. The bruised
juicy and dried things are to be pounded with oil of wild
vine. In another prescription, some add, of pepper, scr. xviij,
and of musk, scr. j.

The Galenian malagma. Of saffron, oz. ss ; of aloes, oz. j ;
of mastich, oz. iij ; of the fruit of wormwood, scr. viij ; of wild
vine, scr. viij ; three large dates ; of wax, oz, iij j of oil of
apples, oz. vj.

TTie malagma Brythrion. Of storax, oz. v ; of quinces, oz. xx ;
of masucha or masuaphium, of saffron, of each, dr. x; of
crumbs of bread, of cyphi, of each, dr. v ; of wild vine, oz. iiss ;
of sowbread, of wormwood, of each, dr. x ; of cloves, scr. xv ;
of ammoniac perfume, scr. x ; of opobalsam, scr. viss ; of nard,
oz. V ; of Colophonian rosin, of gleucinum, of oil of apples, of
each, oz. x ; of oil of roses, dr. x ; of bee-glue, oz. v ; of turpen-
tine, oz. X ; of honey, coch. x; of Indian leaf, dr. x; of spikenard,
dr. X ; of wax, oz. viiss. Triturate with Falernian and Aminsean

wine.

The splenic malagma ofNilus,for all othen' cases of induration.
Of wax, lb. j ; of ammoniac perfume, lb. j ; of oil of privet, lb. j ;
of saffron, oz. ss (some make it, oz. j) ; of ^dnegar, q. s.

The malagma citrinum. Of wax, of Colophonian rosin, of
each, lb. j ; of ammoniac perfume, of arsenic, of lime, of alum,
of %dnegar, of each, cyath. viij. Triturate the dry things with
the vinegar.

The harher's malagma. Of dried pitch, lb. j ; of wax, of
pine rosin, of ammoniac perfume, of natron, of dry bay-berries,
of the fat of bulls, of each, lb. ij -, of the flour of fenugreek,
sext. j ; of pollen, sext. j ; of the dried root of the black
chamseleon, lb. j.

SECT. XVIII.] EMOLLIENT PLASTERS. 579

The malagma, from goat's dung, of Oribasius, for splenic
affections, dropsies, and scirrhous liver. Of oil of privet or
very old oil, lb. iij ; of wax, lb. iiss ; of the dung of goats, of
bay -berries stripped of their bark, of Illyrian ii'is, of each,
sext. j ; of turpentine, lb. j ; of mustard, of natron, of cyperus,
of the seed of radish, of the bark of the root of capers, oz. iij;
of the medullary part of colocynth, oz. ij ; of fenugreek, oz. j.
Sometimes the dry things are added to the soluble and some-
times they are mixed with \anegar. But if there is a flux of
the bowels, the colocvnth must not be added.

The malagma spongiola, from goafs dung, for dropsies. Of
Brutian pitch, lb. iiss ; of natron, lb. j ; of the medullaiy part
of colocynth, of pellitory, of opoponax, of granum cnidium, of
each, oz. iij ; of bark of the root of capers, of frankincense,
of iris, of the fat of bulls, of elaterium, of squama seris, of
parsley-seed, of the seeds of spurge (lathyrides), of each, oz. \^;
of bay-berries, sext. ss ; of the flour of fenugreek, oz. ss ; of
bulFs gall, oz. ij ; of oil of privet, sext. ss ; of wax, lb. j ; of
roasted rosin, lb. iij ; of mountain goat^s dung, of the seed of
rosemary, of cj'perus, of cardamom, of each, oz. vj.

The malagma from hay-berries. Of wax, of rosin, of pitch,
of bay-ben'ies, of bull's fat, of each, lb. j ; of natron, of ammo-
niac perfume, of each, oz. vj ; of vinegar, q. s.

The malagma from seeds. Of cardamom, of cyperus, of
savin, of natron, of bay-berries, of cassia, of melilot, of fenu-
greek, of Celtic nard, of parsley-seed, of sampsuchum, of anise,
of the root of panacea, of frankincense, of ammoniac perfume,
of turpentine, of each, oz. iij ; of honey, of wax, of nard, of
each, lb. j ; of the fat of bulls, lb. j.

The fetid malagma for pleurisy. Of pine rosin, lb. j ; of wax,
of green rue, of oil of privet, of each, oz. vj ; of sulphur vivum,
of opoponax, of sagapen, of each, dr. iv. Some add also of
galbanum, dr. iv.

The malagma from sampsuchum. Of wax, lb. j ; of turpen-
tine, lb. ij ; of sampsuchum (marjoram ?), of bay-berries, of
fenugreek, of each, sext. j ; of nard, q. s.

The malagma of Apollophanes for hepatic diseases. Of wax,
dr. Ixxx ; of turpentine, of manna, of each, dr. xl. Pound with
the lees of iris-oil and anoint the mortar.

The malagma copton, for hardness of the stomach and liver.

580 EMOLLIENT PLASTERS. [book vit.

Of bee-glue, oz. vj ; of storax, oz. i j ; of mastich, oz. j ; of tur-
pentine, oz. ss ; of the lees of nard, q. s.

The malagma from iviJcl vine. Of "wild ^ine, of aloes, of
saflFron, of acacia, of fissile alum, of dried roses, of the juice of
wormwood, of galls, of the oil of unripe olives, of Syrian
sumach, of manna, of each, dr. j ; of myrtle-oil, of wax, of
each, lb. j ; five large palm-nuts ; of Amiucean wine, q. s.

The AntyUian malcujma. Of fissile alum, oz. ss ; of aloes,
oz. j ; of mastich, scr. yj ; of wild wine, scr. viij ; of the oil of
unripe olives, scr. viij ; of dried roses, scr. viij ; of Syriac
sumach, scr. x ; of the Egyptian thorn, scr. x ; of the flowers
of the wild pomegranate, scr. xx ; of galls, scr. xv ; of wax,
oz. V ; of oil of apples, q. s.

The malai/ma from grape stones. Of saffron, of sandyx, of
wild vine, of each, oz. j ; of dried alum, oz. iv; of the flowers
of the wild pomegranate, of oil of unripe olives, of the flower
of roses, of dried myrtles, of each, oz. ij ; of white wax, lb. j ;
of oil of apples, lb. ij ; of quinces, oz. iv ; ten Nicolan palm
nuts; of AmiuEean wine, q. s. ; of dried grape stones, oz. viij.
In using, take of the medicine, oz. iij : of wax, oz. j.

The malagma from dill. Of green dill, oz. vj : of melilot,
oz. ij; of chamomile, oz. ij; ten green heads of poppy. Having
boiled, mix of the decoction, lb. iij ; and as much of oil ; and
when the decoction is consumed, add of fresh hog's lard, lb. ij ;
and separately triturate of the inner part of baked squill, oz. ij;
and of stag's marrow, oz. ij. Mix all together.

Tlie malagma ambrosia, for stopping fevers. Of litharge,
lb. j; of fresh hog's lard, oz. -s-j ; of the juice of linseed, oz. \j ;
of white wax, oz. ix; of oil of roses, lb. j ; of honey, oz. iij ;
of safi'ron, oz. j. Some add also the raw yelks of ten eggs.

CoMM. Commentary. Le Clerc thus describes these preparations :
Ce qu'on appelloit malagma ne difteroit fort de Templatre.
Galien declare (Pharmac. gen. vii, 5) qu'il est indiff'erent qu'on
se serve du terme de malagme, on de celui d'emplatre.'^ He
adds, '^ Ce qu'on appelloit epitheme etoit aussi a peu pres le
meme chose." (Hist, de la Med.) According to Galen, the
malagmata derived their name from being used as emollient
applications to parts in an indurated state, and were all mode-
rately calefacient, being in general neither desiccative nor

SECT. XIX.] ACOPA, ETC. 581

humectative. He describes the composition of these prepara- Comm.
tions with his usual accuracy and minuteness. ' * '

Celsus gives a full account of the malagmata. He says
plasters, malagmata, and pastils differ, inasmuch as malagmata
consist principally of aromatics, whereas, the other two are
rather formed from metallic substances. In general, he says,
they are rather calefacient than refrigerant ; some, however,
are refrigerant, and are used as applications to the joints in
gout. A few are not only calefacient but also epispastic.
He gives prescriptions for 35 malagmata. He makes no men-
tion of epithemes. (v, 17, 2.) Scribonius Largus, likewise,
treats fully of the malagmata (§ cclv-cclxvii).

Oribasius states that there are three varieties of malagmata :
the first consisting of dry things, namely, roots and herbs ;
the second kind, of metalhc substances, or a certain proportion
thereof; and the third, of juices, suet, and tears. (Med. Collect.
X, 28.)

A full account of them is given by Actuarius (Metli. 'Med.
vi, 9) and Myrepsus (§ xi, xxxiv.) The following epitheme is said
to be powerfully purgative : " Of scammony, of elaterium, of
spurge, of each, dr. viij ; of white and of black hellebore, of bulFs
gall, of each, dr. iij ; of the root of the wild cucumber, of the
leaves of wormwood, of each dr. x ; of Tuscan wax, dr. viij ; of
turpentine rosin, dr. iv; of Attic honey, oz. viij; of red nitre,
oz. j.^' (Myrepsus, 1. c^)

The following is a malagma for luxated joints and contu-
sions : '' Of galbanum, oz. j ; of saffron, dr. ij ; of ammoniac
perfume, of pure wax, of each, oz. iss ; of dried pitch, lb. iss;
of very acrid vinegar, coch. iss." (Ibid.)

SECT. XIX. ON RESTORATIVE OINTMENTS (aCOPA), LINIMENTS,

CALEFACIENT PLASTERS (dROPACES), AND SINAPISMS.

The acopa are so named for having been first invented for
the feeling of lassitude, as a tensive, ulcerative, and osseous
lassitude ; but they agree with many other complaints. Some,
then, are calefacient, some emollient, and some stimulant.
The calefacient are prepared from pepper, pellitory, the seed
of rosemary, and the like. They agree with aSections of the

582 ACOPA, ETC. [book vit.

nerves, and strong frigidity which cannot be readily restored
to heat. The emoUient agree with induration, scirrhus, and
infarction of the joints ; and the materials of which they are
formed have been pointed out by us when treating of plasters.
The stimulant being composed of lemnestis, the seed of rose-
mary, euphorbium, the granum cnidium, and the like, are to
be used in chronic affections, and such as are difficult to
dislodge, namely, in such cases as sinapisms are applicable.
The consistence of all the acopa is to be intermediate between
the cerates and plasters. The liniments resemble the acopa,
but have a more liquid consistence. The dropax has a two-
fold composition, the one being like a plaster, and the other
like a malagma. Some rub them into the part warm. Their
materials are like those of the acopa and plasters. It serves
the purpose of a cataplasm, agreeing with the same chronic
affections in which sinapisms are applicable. A dropax (''cale-
facient plaster") is applied before a sinapism, in order to prepare
the body for the mustard ; and after the sinapism, in order to
remove the residue of the complaint. The sinapism is not
composed of many ingredients, but is a most powerful appli-
cation, agreeing particularly with chronic affections after all
other remedies have been tried in vain. It is more especially
applicable in cephaltea, hemicrauia, epilepsy, vertigo, and mania,
when applied to the head; and in asthma, orthopncEa, and
chronic cough when applied to the chest ; and in chronic
catarrh, a sinapism may be appKed both to the head and chest ;
and to the stomach and belly in chronic affections of them.
It is a suitable remedy in all ischiatic and podagric cases, to
any part which has lost its tone, or is in a cold state, and
cannot easily be warmed. The limits of the action of the
medicine are, when violent pain has been produced, and the
flesh becomes more ]i\dd and swelled up, and so that after the
bath it may become bhstered in a mild manner. But if the
sensibility has been lost, care must be taken lest the burning
proceed too far without being perceived, and therefore the
part is to be often uncovered and examined. Of acute diseases,
lethargy, cataphora, and catochus admit of sinapisms, which,
if at the commencement, are to be applied to the legs, but if
the matter has fixed in the part, to the head. Those which
are in a cold state and cannot be warmed but with difficulty.

SECT. XIX.] ACOPA, ETC. bK?

must have siuapisms applied to the legs aud arms. Sinapisms
are to be entirely proscribed when there is continued fever or
an ulcer ; also in affections of cartilaginous parts, and such as
have no flesh. For the parts which are devoid of flesh are
sometimes biu-nt black when sinapisms are applied to them.

The acopon called Bromion. Of wax, of Colophonian rosin,
of common rosin, of each, lb. j ; of hog's lard, oz. iv; of butter,
oz. vj ; of marshmallows, of fenugreek, of linseed, of each,
lb. ij ; of oil, lb. j ; of galbanum, oz. iiss. Having boiled the
juice with the oil until the most of the juice be consumed, add
the other things with wax and galbanum.

The complex acopon. Of the juice of marshmallows, of
fenugreek, of linseed, of rue, and of cumin, of each, lb. ij ; of
stag's marrow, lb. j ; of old oil, lb. j ; of the fat of geese, of
opobalsam, or nard, of each, lb. j ; of wax, of Colophonian rosin,
of common rosin, of each, lb. iss ; of euphorbium, of turpen-
tine, of opoponax, of each, oz. vj ; of castor, oz. iij ; of the
herbs from which the juice is formed, of each, lb. j, is to be
taken and boiled like the former.

The acopon of Azanites. Of hog's lard, lb. ij ; of the fat of
bulls, of rosin, of Colophonian rosin, of the medicine oesypum,
of wax; of each, lb. j ; of galbanum, oz. iij.

TJie acopon of Basil'ms. Of marshmallows, of chamomile,
of melilot, of linseed, of fenugreek, of each, oz. iss ; of
amomum, oz. iij. These things are macerated in sext. viij of the
wine of Ascalon or the Cilician for three days, and boiled to a
milky consistence. Then lb. v of the juice, with lb. ivss of old
oil are boiled until a moderate quantity of the juice remain ;
and then there are added to it of butter, oz. vj ; of turpentine,
oz. iv ; of the fat of geese, oz. xv ; of stag's marrow, triturated
Avith a little oil, oz. v; of white wax, lb. iij.

The acopon Lysiponimn. Of pepper, of castor, of storax,
of mastich, of aloes, of elecampane, of iris, of each, oz. iv ; of
euphorbium, of costus, of ammoniac perfume, of myrrh, of
marjoram (sampsuchum), of frankincense, of cyperus, of cassia
fistula, of the seed of rosemary, of each, oz. iij ; of adarce, of
amomum, of bdellium, of xylobalsam, of each, oz. ij ; of Indian
leaf, of spikenard, of pellitory, of saffron, of each, oz. j ; of
opobalsam, lb. j ; of the ointment of nard, of the ointment of
privet, of glcucinum, of each, lb. i j ; of wax, lb. j.

584 ACOPA, ETC. [book vii.

A fetid acopon from Galen's ivork, secundum genera. Of
•wax, of turpentine, of each, dr. xxiv; of galbanum, of am-
moniac perfume, of each, dr. vj ; of old oil, hemin. ij ; of stag's
marrow, dr. viij. Use both undiluted and diluted.

Another fetid acopjon. Of turpentine, dr. Ivj ; of wax,
dr. xxviij ; of oesypum, of honey, of each, dr. vj ; of stag's
marrow, dr. vj ; of ammoniac perfume, of galbanum, of aphro-
nitrum, of bay ben-ies, of each, dr. vj ; of old oil, sext. j ; of
wine, cyath, ij. Some add also of castor, dr. iij.

The barbaric acopon from euphorbium, for ischiatic diseases,
and many other purposes. Of opoponax, oz. j ; of Tuscan
wax, lb. j; of turpentine, lb. iiss; of galbanum, oz. j; of
ammoniac perfume, oz. ij ; of euphorbium, of castor, of white
pepper, of each, oz. ij ; of stag's marrow, oz. iv ; of oesypum,
oz. iv ; of lemnestis, (a saline concretion), it is the same as
adarce, oz. ss ; of the oils of storax, of bay, of iris, and of
sweet marjoram, of each, oz vj ; of old oil, lb. ij ; of hedy-
chroum, oz. vj.

The acopon called Pyxis. Of Colophonian rosin, lb. iss ; of
turpentine, oz. viij ; of ammoniac perfume, oz. iij ; of frankin-
cense, oz. ix ; of old oil, lb. ij ; of the juice of linseed, lb. j ; of
cow's milk, lb. j ; of the fat of geese, oz. vj ; of butter, oz. viij ;
the whites of xxiv eggs. Having prepared it, lay it up in a
vessel of box wood.

The acopon from the fir, of Galen. Of the ripe seed of the fir
tree, j Italian modius, i. e. sext. xvj ; of oil, lb. xv ; of wax,
lb. ivj of rosin, of pine-nut, or of turpentine, of each, oz. iv.
Ha\dng bruised the seed of the fir, add it to the oil, and allowing
it to remain forty days, filtrate and throw away ; and having
mixed the other things, use for spontaneous lassitude, para-
lysis, and coldness of the joints. But if the necessity for
using it be urgent, we must boil the seed of the fir with the
oil, mixing with them, sext. iv of water, to prevent them
from being burnt. They are used in podagric and arthritic
affections.

The same otherwise. Of oil, hemin. xxv, i. e. sext. xiiss ; of
the fruit of the fir, mod. j, i. e. sext. xvj ; of the rosin of ash,
lb. iij ; of the rosin of pine-nut or of turpentine, lb. iij ; of
wax, lb. j.

The acopon from the black ptoplar, for the same affections.

SECT. XIX.] ACOPA, ETC. 585

Insteud of the fruit of the fir, adding an equal quantity of the
fruit of the black poplar, prepare the other things in like
manner.

The liniment of Zosimus, celebrated for tremhlings. Of pine
rosin, oz. xvj ; of wax, oz. iv; of old oil, lb. j ; of opoponax,
oz. ij ; of adarce, oz. j ; of euphorbium, oz. j ; of natron, oz. iv ;
of tender aphronitrum, oz. iv. Triturate the natron, euphor-
bium, and adarce with wine, then add the opoponax, and tri-
turate together. Melt the soluble substances separately with
alkanet, that they may acquire colour, and ha\dng cooled, mix.

The drojJttw, or calefacient plaster Gallus. Of Oribasius. Of
the Colophonian rosin which is redolent of frankincense, of
pine rosin, and of that which is called the woody, being found
only in Italy, of the pitch of ships, of dried pitch, of each,
lb. iv; of wax. lb. iv; of roasted rosin, oz. xv; of Brutian
pitch, lb. ij ; of natron, lb. j ; of bitumen, of galbanum, of
adarce, of pellitory, of each, oz. vj ; of opoponax, of euphor-
bium, of white hellebore, of pepper, of each, oz. iv ; of sulphur
vivum, oz. iij ; of castor, of ammoniac, of the wild grape dried,
of each, oz. ij ; of Sicyonian oil, lb. j ; of opobalsam, oz. vj.

Otherwise, a simjjle dropax. Of wax, lb. j ; of dried pitch,
lb. iss ; of Brutian pitch, lb. j ; of pine pitch, lb. iss ; of roasted
rosin,lb.j, oz. iij. Having first prepared the part with natron, apply.

The preparation of a sinapism. On the preceding day, di-ied
figs are to be macerated in tepid water, and next day they are
to be properly filtrated and strongly pounded. Then some
acrid mustard, such as the Syriac and Egyptian, is to be tritu-
rated separately, pouring on it a little of the infusion, and
mixing and forming into a mass ; if we wish to form a strong
sinapism, joining two parts of mustard to one of dried figs, but
if weak, in the inverse proportion ; and if a moderate one,
mixing equal parts. If the mustard before it is triturated, be
allowed to macerate in vinegar, as some do, it becomes weaker.
After the mustard has been cleared away, and the bath used,
if the pain continue violent, or if redness and blisters super-
vene, we are to wet a cloth in the juice of mallows, or of fenu-
greek, with oil of roses, and apply. Then we may use the rose
cerate with ceruse. But in cases of paralysis, when the sensi-
bility is impaired, care must be taken, and the part frequently
uncovered and examined, for often they are burnt immoderately

586 ACOPA, ETC. [book vii.

without being sensible of it. And goat's dung, applied with
vinegar, is more efficacious than mustard, especially in diseases
of the hip-joint.

The liniment from toriting-ink acting as a rubefacient, espe-
cially in cases of hemicrania. From the ivorks of Alexander.
Of euphorbium, of writing-ink, of each, dr. iv ; of troglodytic
myrrh, of crocomagma, of white pepper, of each, oz. iij ; of
saffron, dr. ij ; of vinegar, q. s., so that these things may be
properly triturated, and become of the consistence of the sordes
in baths ; and then anoint with it, beginning from the middle
of the eyebrow to the whole temple, especially if it be bare of
hairs ; and after it cools, anoint again, and when the remedy
acts properly, let the man be put into a bath.

CoMM. Commentary, Le Clerc says of the Acopa : " On les
" * ' appelloit acopa comme qui diroit, Unguens qui otent les douleurs,
ou la lassitude, parcequ'on s^en servoit principalement pour
le delasser, ou pour apaiser les douleurs qu'on sent apres le
travail et la fatigue." (Hist, de la Med.) Galen explains that
although this class of ointments derived their name from their
being oiiginally used as soothing applications to parts which
were pained from severe exertion, they came afterwards to be
applied for various other purposes, as for removing all deep-
seated pains, iudui"ations, contractions, and the like. Their
consistence, he says, is nearly the same as that of the liquid
cerates or the ointments made from wax and oil. According
to their qualities, he adds, they have the epithets of emollient,
calefacient, anodyne, relaxant, or alterative, applied to them.
He describes, in prose and verse, the composition of an almost
countless variety of these preparations. (De med. sec. gen. vii.)
Celsus says of the acopa : " Acopa quoque utilia ner^ds sunt."
He gives formulae only for two acopa, which consist of aromatic
and stimulant medicines mixed with oil or some fragrant
ointment, (v, 25.) Oribasius divides them into three kinds,
the emollient, the calefacient, and the scarifacient ; the last
being a near approach to sinapisms. On the acopa see further
Scribonius and Actuarius.

The liniments of the ancients seem to have been very much
the same as those of the moderns. Celsus says of them :
" ''E-y^ptCTra autem Graeci vocant liquida qui illinuntur.''

SECT. XIX,] ACOPA, ETC. 587

(v, 243.) In consistence and qualities they nearly resembled Comm.
the acopa^ being composed of a large proportion of oil with a ' — " — '
small quantity of wax or honey. Myrepsus gives prescriptions
for a considerable number of them.

The dropax is thus described by Le Clerc : " On etendoit
une certaine quantite de cette emplatre sur la toile, ou
la peau ; on appliquoit cela sur quelque partie du corps, on le
levoit, ou on Parrachoit, et on 1' appliquoit derechef, reiterant
souvent la meme chose, pour faire rougir la partie, dans le
dessein d'attirer en dehors les humours, ou les sues qui servent
a la nourriture des parties, ou dans la vue d'ouvrir les pores.
Pour rendre cette emplatre plus efficace on y ajoutoit quelque-
fois des poudres acres, comme du pyrethre, du poivre, du sel,
du soufre. On emploit aussi le dropax pour faire tomber, ou
pour arracher le poil de quelque partie." (Hist, de la ]\Ied.)
Heyschius appears to have confounded the dropax with the
psUothron or depilatory. The former was merely a sort of
calefacient plaster, and was applied to parts not covered with
hairs. Oribasius says of it that it is prepared like the
malagma. When it is desired to make it calefacient, he
directs us to add to it pellitory, the seed of rosemary, and
bitumen ; when desiccative, the sulphur vivum, salts, and the
ashes of vegetables ; and when it is wished to make it of such
a nature as to scarify the parts, he directs us to add to it
limnesium (adarce) and spm'ge. The part to which it is to
be apphed, he says, if M^eak, should be shaven, but in the more
robust, and when a stronger application is requu-ed, it need
not be shaven, unless it is to be applied to the head, cliin, or
pubes. Myrepsus commends the following dropax : " Take of
bitumen, oz. ij ; of wax, oz. j, sext. j ; of dried pitch, dr. j ; of
pine-rosin, of natron, of each, oz. j ; of sulphur vivum, of pelli-
tory, of white hellebore, of adarce, of each, sext. j ; of stavesacre,
of spurge, of each, dr. i ; of oil, q. s." Certain forms of the
dropax seem to have been allied to the blistering plasters of
the moderns. On this sul)ject we cannot do better than copy
the remarks of Dr. Clinch, in his Preface to RufFus Ephesius :
'' Quantum usus cantharidum, ex quibus hodierna vesicantia
ubique fere componuntur, veteribus innotuit, vir Doctissimus
Johannes Freind luculenter satis explicuit. Nequeo autem hie

588 ACOPA, ETC. [book vii.

CoMM. silentio transire^ quam gra^ater erratum sit a Georgio Baglivi,
• ' qui Oribasii meminit^ utpote primi ex Arabibus^ qui de usu
vesicaiitium scripsit^ quum eundem et Graeeum fuisse^ et
Grsecorum idiomate seripsisse, nemo nou noverit. Is profecto
aliquid suggerit de eo vesicantium generCj quae dropaces et
sinapismi dicuntur, qui ex sinapi, pipere^ pyretbro et ejusmodi
acribus medicamentis couficiebantui-j et semel quidem cantha-
ridum mentiouem facit^ ueutiquam rero^ quod scio, de bis
loquitur tanquam de medicinal qua ad vesicas in cute excitandas
utebantur. ^Etius quidem dropacis formam exbibuit, qu8e tres
cantharidum dracbmas recipit, unde dropax exulcerans vulgo
audit."

Oribasius gives, from Antyllus, a most interesting and judi-
cious account of tbe sinapism. He says that it does not suit
•oith acute diseases, or, at least, only "svben tbe patient is of
an inert constitution, and tbe sensibility is obtuse. It is
applicable, however, he says, in almost all chronic diseases
when other remedies have failed, except in the case of an
ulcer in the lungs or liver, or when the disease is seated in
a cartilaginous part. He recommends it in all cases of dimi-
nished sensibilitv. The onlv acute diseases in which he re-
presents it as applicable ai'e lethargy, catochus, carus, or fevers
attended with loss of heat and diminished sensibility. Like
our author, he directs us to prepare the sinapism with dried
figs and mustard. Aetius, upon the authority of Archigenes,
details its medicinal properties in nearly the same terms.
Both Aetius and Oribasius represent goat^s dung, pounded
with vinegar, as being equally efficacious as the sinapism, and
applying particularly to ischiatic diseases. jNIyrepsus's account
agrees exactlv with that of our author. He mentions that
some macerate the figs in vinegar instead of water, but says
that it renders the preparation weaker. The x^rabians pre-
pared the sinapism exactly as the Greeks, and applied it in
similar cases. See Mesne (De Unguentis, i.)

SECT. XX.] OINTMENTS. 589

SECT. XX. DIFFERENT PREPARATIONS OF OILS AND

OINTMENTS.

Of unguents and ointments, or of oils in the form of oint-
mentSj some are simple, lia\ang only one article added to the
oil, and some are prepared and compounded from more sub-
stances. Of the simple some are formed from flowers put into
the oil, such as the oil of roses, that of chamomile, and the
susinum, or oil of lilies ; some are formed from fruits and
seeds, and some from certain shoots, as of rue, -which are boiled
along with the oil, none of the flowers admitting boiling, and
therefore they are rather exposed to the sun. But if their
fragrance be strong and permanent, if exposed for a number of
days to the sun, they become finer and more useful, such as the
oils of roses and chamomile. But such flowers as are weaker
and more volatile bear less insolation, being easily dissipated,
such as the lily and violet. Of those formed from fruits and
seeds, some are formed from them added whole to the oil, such
as the melinum or oil of apples ; and some have them pounded
or altered, and the oily part of them remoyed, either by being
squeezed out in a press and thus separated, such as the oils of
walnuts, of sesame, of almonds, of lentisk, of bay, of Palma
Christi, of radish, and the like. The compound ones are prin-
cipally composed of aromatic herbs, which are boiled in the oil
with wine, must, or water, and filtrated, some j tiices, and some-
times fats and marrows, being mixed with the oil. Of these,
some being of a strictly oily consistence, are called, simply,
ointments or unguents, as the gleucinum, nardinum, sicyonium,
and cyprinum : but some having the consistence of acopa, and
receiying wax, rosin, or the like, into their composition, are
called myracopa, such as the decamp'on, amaracinum, and those
resembling them. And some are boiled only once, namely,
such as do not consist of complex materials, as the metopium,
mastichinum, and sicyonium ; and some at two, three, or four
successive additions, the articles which are most difficult to boil
being first put in, such as rosewood, spathe, frankinccnse-tree,
and bay ; then the aromatics, Indian-leaf, spikenard, amomum,
savin ; and, last of all, the j aices, fats, marrow, and perhaps

590 OINTMENTS. [book vii.

wax and rosins being added. The juice of balsam, or opobalsam,
is not boiled at all, but is added after the boiling is over, and
the ointment moderately cooled ; and of the ointments some do
not admit of boiling at all, but the ingredients are only mixed,
as the mendesium; but some, when wishing to prepare the
green ointment, after taking it from the fire, an oz. iss of well-
triturated verdigris having been put into lb. v of oil, as in the
cyprinum and amaracinum, dip the ointment in this mixture.
The simple ointments are possessed of the powers of the articles
added to them, or Avhich are pounded in them, the oil being
but the groundwork (as it were) or vehicle of them. The
nature of all the complex ointments inclines to heating; but
some are powerfully calefacient and emollient, so as to agree
with cases of ancylosis and infarction, as the metopium, men-
desium, marciatum. The pentamyron is more moderate, as
the decamyron is stronger, so as to abrade the surface ; but
those which are moderately hot are subtile, paregoric, and
digestive, such as the susinum, amaracinum, irinum, crocinum,
foliatum. Some, in addition to their heating qualities, are
sufficiently desiccative and cutting, such as the cyprinum and
sicyonium : some are powerfully heating, and rather tonic, and
hence they agree with the stomach and viscera in particular
when relaxed, such as the mastichinum, nardinum, gleucinum;
but the most tonic are those prepared from wild olives ; but
some ointments are used only by women for their fragrant
smell, as the foliatum, spicatum, commagenum, and those called
moschelsea or compositions of musk and oil.

The rosaceum, or oil of roses. Of red roses deprived of
their nails (or the white extremities of their flowers), and dried
for a night and a day, oz. iij ; of the oil of unripe olives, one
Italian sextarius. Having bound up the vessel carefully, so
that it may not evaporate, expose to the sun in open air for
forty days, and then deposit the vessel, not on the pavement,
but upon a table : some instead of the insolation put the vessel
into a well, in order that its fragrance may be preserved by the
cold, but others bury it underground.

The chamcEmelinum, or oil of chamomile. Of the flower of
chamomile, without the white petals, which has been dried for a
night and a day, oz. ij ; of oil, one Italian sextarius. Cover
over the vessel with a plain piece of cloth, so as to allow it to

SECT. XX.] OINTMENTS. 591

transpire for forty days, after wliich it is to be carefully covered
over and laid up.

The anethinum, or oil of dill. Of the hair of the green dill,
dried, oz. j ; of sweet oil^ an Italian sextarius : expose to the sun
in like manner. The oil of dill may likewise be prepared at
once, without exposure to the sun ; for the hair of dried dill
may be boiled in a double vessel, and used; and the oil of chamo-
mile may be prepared in like manner ; but they are weaker
than those from green dill, and especially if made by exposure
to the sun.

The liliaceum, or oil of lilies, called also susinum, perhaps
from having been invented in Susa. Of the petals of white
lilies, dried in like manner, oz. ij are to be added to an Italian
sextarius of oil, and carefully covered over so as to prevent it
from evaporating, and exposed to the sun for three days, after
which, the first being filtered and thrown away, other two
ounces are to be added for other three days, and thus laid up.

The comjjound susinum, or oil of lilies. Of oil, sext. iij ; of
aromatic cane, oz. v ; of myrrh, oz. v ; of cardamom, oz. iij ;
of the petals of lily, deprived of their nails and dried, lb. j ;
of cinnamon, oz. iij ; of Cilician safiron, oz. v. The whole
process is to be divided into three successive additions. First,
we are to macerate the myrrh and the calamus in wine for five
days, stirring it three times a day, and then we are to boil
it with the oil for a very short time. Secondly, we are to
macerate the cardamom in water for three days, stirring it in
like manner, and then we are to boil it with the oil for one
hour. Having filtrated, we add to the pure oil the third part
of the lilies, and after three days, again having filtrated, we
put in the other third of the lilies ; and again, after three days
having filtrated and thrown away the first, we are to add the
remainder with triturated saffron. But after other three davs,
the oil being filtrated, we add to it the cinnamon pounded, or,
instead of it, arnabo, or double the quantity of cassia or car-
pesium, and lay it up.

The iaton, violaceum, or oil of violets. They prepare the
oil of violets, some from the purple, some from safi'ron-like, and
some from white violets, adding oz. iij of the leaves deprived
of their nails to an Italian sextarius of the oil of unripe olives ;
and covering it up carefully to prevent it from evaporating ;

592 OINTMENTS. [book vii.

they insolate it for ten days, clianging tliem three times after
every three days Kke the hlies. And in laying them up,
they add a few completely dried.

The melinum, or oil of apples. This is prepared from Cydo-
nian apples or quinces, which are to be rubbed externally with
a piece of cloth and cut into pieces with their bark ; and then
lb. iij of them are to be added to x Italian sext. of oil of unripe
olives, and insolated for forty days.

The sesaminum, or oil of oily-grain. The oil of sesame is
prepared from oily grains bruised, softened, and squeezed in
strainers with screws, or from the oily part separated in hot
water and laid up in vessels of glass.

The raphaninum, or oil of radishes. And this is prepared
after the same manner in Egypt from the seed of the radishes
with small roots, pounded, and the oil separated.

The ricinmn, oil of Palma Christi, or castor-oil. This also
is prepared after the same manner in Egypt from the seed of
the riciuus, which is called croton, similarly pounded or levi-

gated.

The cegirinum, or oil of the black poplar. It is found in the
season of spring when there is much rosin in the seed. For
breaking down the grains of black poplar, they add oz. iv of
them to sext. j of sweet oil and insolate for forty days, or boil
in a double vessel for three hours, and thus filtrate and lay up.

The amyf/dalinum,- or oil of almonds. This is prepared like
the aforementioned, pure bitter almonds being bruised, a little
water poured in, and the oil separated as described above.
Some add oz. ij of pounded almonds to an Italian sextarius of
sweet oil, and boil in a double vessel.

The oil of almonds, which is called metopium. The Egyp-
tians, who invented this oil, called it metopium, because it
contains galbanum, and the shrub from which the galbanum
is got is called metopium. It admits the following things :
of the oil of unripe olives, sext. xx ; of bitter almonds, lb. ij ;
of cardamom, lb. j ; of the schoenanth, of calamus aromaticus,
of carpobalsam, of each, lb. j ; of myrrh, of galbanum, of each,
oz. vj ; of turpentine, lb. ij ; of fragrant wine to soak the dry
articles, sext. iv; of Attic honey, lb. iij. The rosin and galba-
num being triturated and dissolved in part of the oil, we put
them into the other things boiled, and then add the honey.

SECT. XX.] OINTMENTS. 593

When all the things are properly mixed, and while it is still
tepid, we remove it from the fire and strain it, for it becomes
thick when it cools.

The baJaninum, or oil of acorns. The oil of acorns is prepared
like the oil of almonds, from the acorns of oaks.

The caryinum, or oil of walnuts. This is prepared like the
aforesaid, from old walnnts.

Laurinum, or oil of buy. The plain oil is formed in the
same manner from the fruit of bay, but the mixed is prepared
thus : of ripe olives, sext. j is added to sext. ij of bay-berries,
and all pounded and expressed. Some mix equal parts of
each.

The lentiscinum, or oil of lentisk. And this is prepared in
the same manner as the oil of bay, from the fruit of lentisk,
in two ways, by itself and with olives, not ripe but sour.

The mastichinum, or oil of mastich. The most simple kind
is formed of Chian mastich, oz, j, being added to an Italian
sextarius of oil of unripe olives, and boiled in a double vessel.
Some add also, of wormwood and of storax, of each, oz. j.

A more complex oil of mastich. Of oil, sext. l ; of elecam-
pane, lb. V j of xylobalsam, lb. x ; of the schoenanth, lb. v ; of
cardamom, lb. vij ; of mastich, lb. v ; of the wood of mastich,
lb. viij ; of turpentine, lb. iij ; of the hair of wormwood, lb. j ;
of fragrant wine, sext. v ; of water, sext. j. The dry things
being previously macerated in wine for three days, are mixed
with the oil and the water, and boiled for six hours, and
then the mastich and turpentine are added, and being pro-
perly mixed are filtrated, and when cooled are put into a
vessel.

The simple sicyonian, or oil of cucumbers. This is prepared
by adding oz. ij of the dried root of the wild cucumber to an
Italian sextarius of oil, and boiling in a double vessel.

The compound oil of cucumbers. Of oil, sext. x ; of the
scraped root of the wild cucumber, lb. j ; of wild thyme, of
melilot, of each, oz. v ; of fatty dead pines, of marsh-mallows,
of each, oz. v ; of asplenium, oz. vj ; of fenugreek, sext. ij.
The fenugreek is first soaked in the water for one day and
then filtrated, and is added to the things mentioned with oil
and sext. ij of wine ; and when all are boiled, there are added
of stag's maiTow, triturated with a little oil, oz. iv ; of the

III. 38

594 OINTMENTS. [book vii.

grease of fowls^ oz. iv ; and when tlie oil is again filtrated, it
is to be deposited in a vessel. Some also expose it to the sun
after boiling forty days.

Another oil of cucumbers, more efficacious. Of the juice of
elaterium, sext. iij ; of round and of long birthworh, of storax,
of elecampane, of hyssop, of iris, of colocynth, of pennyroyal,
of origany, of cyperus, of frankincense-tree, of centaury, of
bay-leaves, of each, oz. ij ; of oil, sext. v. Having mixed, boil
until but little of the juice remain.

The cyprinum, or oil of privet, from the works ofPosidonius.
Of oil, sext. j ; of cyperus, of elecampane, of iris, of each, lb. j ;
of sampsuchum, of hyssop, of the seed of chaste-tree, of sage,
of each, oz. iij ; of the flower of privet, lb. j. All the other
things haAdng been previously macerated in wine for one day,
are to be boiled with the oil for six hours. To the pure filtrated
oil the privet is added, if the green be at hand, with its tender
branches not bruised, but otherwise the dried are to be pounded
with a little water, and boiled for an hour and a half. But if
you wish to give it colour after taking it from the fire, add of
pure verdigris, lb. iss. Posidonius, wishing to avoid the acri-
mony of the verdigris, directs, after the boiling, to leave the
oil for three days in a vessel not tinned, and it will acquire the
colour, with its powers unimpaired.

Another formula for the oil of jjfivet. Of citron-leaves, of
bay -leaves, of iris, of cyperus, of sage, of each, oz. iij ; of
frankincense-tree, of the long birthwort, of the seed of chaste-
tree, of each, oz. iv ; of elecampane, of rosewood, of each,
oz. vj ; of nie, oz. ij ; of cypress, oz. ij ; of oil, sext. j. Having
first macerated these things in wine, boil with oil ; and having
filtrated, add again of xylobalsam, of xylocassia, of each, oz. iv ;
of sampsuch, of cumin, of myrtle, of storax, of mastich, of
each, oz. iij ; of opoponax, oz. ij ; of the flower of privet, oz. vj ;
of verdigris, oz. j.

T}ie amaracinum, or oil of marjoram. Of elecampane, lb. x ;
of xylobalsam, lb. xx ; of cyperus, lb. viij ; of the schoenanth,
of rosewood, of savin, of each, lb. viij ; of opoponax, of seed of
amaracus, of each, lb. ij ; of primary oil^ sext. Ixxx ; of fragrant
oil, sext. V. All the other things, being first macerated in
wine, are to receive the first addition, but the second addition
is to be the savin ; and the former articles are to be boiled

SECT. XX.] OINTMENTS. 595

six hours, but this only three. Some dip it and add of verdi-
gris, oz. iij.

TJie irinmn, or oil of iris. Of iris, of rosewood, of cyperus,
of each, lb. v; of opoponax, oz. iij ; of alkanet, oz. ij ; of oil,
sext. XXX ; of water, sext. xv. Some add also, of the schoe-
nanth, oz. vj ; of cassia, oz. iij ; of xylobalsam, oz. v^ ; of Celtic
nard, oz. vj. All these things, being bruised, are to be first
macerated in water and oil for five days, and then boiled in a
double vessel for six days, and laid up.

The crocinum, or oil of saffron, in which is contained the
composition of another crocomagma. Of the fragrant oil of
unripe olives, lb. j ; of calamus aroraaticus, oz. v ; of troglo-
dytic myrrh, oz. v ; of cardamom, oz. vij ; of Cilician saffron,
oz. vj. The first addition is to be of the calamus and myrrh,
which, being triturated with wine, are to be macerated for
three days, and three times a day stirred with a spatula of
palm : then they are to be boiled with the oil. The second
addition is to consist of the cardamom which has been mace-
rated in the water for one day before ; and the third, of the
saffron in wine. Some add other five ounces of the myrrh
with the saffron. Having filtrated, the pure oil is laid up.
The whole deposit of the articles is formed into trochisks,
which, being dried, constitute what is called the crocomagma.

The Mendesium. It is so called because it was invented in
Egypt where Mendes is worshipped. It receives of the oil of
acorns, lb. x (in another formula, sext. x) ; of myrrh, of cassia
fistula, of each, oz. iij; of tui'pentine, lb. x (in another formula,
sext. x) ; of cinnamon^ oz. iij. This is not boiled, but the
dry things being put in, are stirred for sixty days : then the
turpentine being melted, is added to part of the oil, and
afterwards stirred for sixty days, in which state it is laid up.

The marciatum. Of mastich, of wax, of storax, of each,
oz. iij ; of the medicine oesypum, oz. ss ; of opobalsam, oz. iss;
of oil of nard, of gleucinum, of oil of unripe grapes, of eacli,
oz. iij ; of stag's marrow, oz. iss ; of turpentine, oz. j.

The oil of unripe olives. The first addition. — Of rosewood,
of the branches of palms, of melilots, of iris, of the schcenanth,
of xylobalsam, of dried roses, of swect-cane, of eacli, oz. iij; of
oil of unripe olives, lb. x ; of the juice of unripe olives, sext. x.

The second addition. — Of Indian leaf, of amomum, of spike-

596 OINTMENTS. [book vii.

nard, of costus^ of cloves, of cassia, of cassamum, of each,
oz. iij (in another formula also, of arnabo, oz. iij) ; of wine, q. s.

The third addition. — Of frankincense, of ammoniac perfume,
of storax, of bdellium, of myrrh, of mastich, of each, oz. iij ; of
"wine, q. s. ; of white wax, oz. v ; of opobalsam, oz. vj (some
make it oz. A-iij). The articles of the first addition are to be
first macerated for one day in the juice of unripe olives and
the oil ; but those of the second in another vessel, in Aminaean
or some other old and fragrant wine, stirring every day with
a spatula of palm three times for three days ; after which boil
in a vessel lined with tin ; first, the articles of the first addition
until little remain of the unripe olive juice : then, immediately
add those of the second with the ^dne. But it is better, having
first filtrated, to add these things to the pure oil; and when
boiled until little of the wine be left, in order that the oil mav
not be burnt, take it off tbe fire and filtrate, and add again
to the pure oil the succulent articles of tbe third addition,
which have been preWously triturated in a mortar with wine
sucli as I mentioned, all except the storax, for it, if added with
the other things, is straightway dissolved. And they are to
be boiled upon coals until the preparation appears to be in a
proper state, when it is to be taken ofi" the fire and allowed
to cool. Next day, having filtrated the oil carefully, and
warmed it sufiiciently upon the fire, add the wax, and when it
is taken oflf, stir with a spatula. After it is cooled add the
opobalsam, and lay it up in vessels of glass.

The gleucinmn, or oil of must. The fii'st addition. — Of oil,
sext. X ; of Aminsean must, sext. vj ; of rose-wood, oz. iv ; of
palm-branch, oz. vj ; of the scboenanth, oz. vj ; of melilots,
oz. iv ; of roses, oz. j ; of mjTrh, oz. iij ; of bay-leaves,
oz. ij J of frankincense-tree, oz. vj ; of xylobalsam, oz. vj ; of
elecampane, oz. \] ; of long birthAvort, oz. iij ; of iris, oz. iij.
Macerate these things in the must.

The second addition. — Of Celtic nard, oz. iv; of cassamum(or
sow-bread), oz. ij ; of cyperus, of cassia, of spikenard, of asarabacca,
of amomum, of costus, of sampsuch, of each, oz. iij ; of calamus
aromaticus, of cloves, of Indian leaf, of each, oz. j ; of carda-
mom, oz. iv. Macerate in fragrant wine.

The third addition. — Of mastich, oz. iv; of troglodytic
myrrh, of bdellium, of each, oz. ij ; of ladanum, oz. iij ; of liquid

SECT. XX.] OINTMENTS. 597

storax, of male frankincense, of each, oz. iv ; of opobalsam,
oz. YJ (some add also of saffron, oz. ij). Prepare like the oint-
ment from unripe olives, except the wax. But here the articles
of the two additions are to be macerated for seven days.

The nardinum Cyzicenum, or nard oil of Cyzicus. The first
addition. — Of primary oil, sext. x; of rose-wood, of cyperus, of
elecampane, of iris, of xylobalsam, of birthwort, of cardamom,
of the schoenanth, of each, oz. x] ; of sampsuch, oz. iv ; of
sa^^n, oz. ij. Some add also of calamus aromaticus, oz. ij.
These thing are to be macerated in sext. iv of fragrant wine.

The second addition. — Of cassia, of cassamum, of arnabo,
of each, oz. i j ; of spikenard, oz. iij ; of cloves, oz. j ; of costus,
of amomum, of each, oz. ij (some add also of Celtic nard,
oz. ij). These things are to be macerated in wine.

The third addition. — Of troglodytic myrrh, of aloes, of
frankincense, of each, oz. ij ; of storax, oz. iij ; of mastich,
oz. iv ; of opobalsam, oz. vj (some add also oz. j of saffron,
triturated in wine). Prepare this also as said above.

TJie decamyron, or oil containing ten ingredients. Of spike-
nard, of Indian leaf, of euphorbium, of pepper, of costus, of
adarce, of each, oz. j ; of mastich, oz. iss ; of opobalsam, oz. \j ;
of oil of nard, lb. j ; of wax, oz. \].

The pentamyron. Of storax, oz. j ; of mastich, oz. ij ; of
white wax, oz. iij -, of opoponax, oz. iv ; of nard, oz. v.

The foUatum, or ointment of Indian leaf. Of Indian leaf,
oz. iij ; of amomum, oz. j ; of cassia, oz. vj ; of ladanum, oz. j -,
of white pepper grains, xl ; of troglodytic myrrh, dr. j. These
things being bruised and sifted are to be again triturated in a
mortar, with the addition of one pound of oil of nard. To
render the medicine darker, triturate the burnt barks of walnuts
in a mortar, and add ; then mix of opobalsam, cochl. iij, and use.

Commentary. The preparation of oils and ointments is Com.m.
fully treated of by Dioscorides in the first book of his INIateria ' "
Medica ; and in like manner by Pliny (H. N. xv, 7, and
xiii, 2.) See also Avicenna (v, 1, 10, 11) ; Serapiou (vii, 25) ;
Haly Abbas (Pract. x, 19) ; and Mesne (De Unguentis et
De blcis.)

Notwithstanding the importance of these articles for medi-
cinal and pharmaceutical purposes, we think it unnecessary to

598 CENANTHARIA. [book vii.

CoMM. treat of them more at large, as our author's account is sufti-

' ' ' ciently ample and accurate, and few articles of any great

consequence are omitted by him. It will be remarked that

most of the unguents and ointments here described are of a

fragrant nature.

SECT. XXI. ON GENANTHARIA.

It is not because they contain the wild vine (oenanthe) that
they are called oenantharia, for some of them have no wild
vine at all j but it is from the wine and flower of the lilies that
they have obtained this appellation. The oenantharia are used
b}^ some solely for their fragrance, and for luxury alone ; these
persons having them poured over their bodies after coming out
of the bath, and having their tables wiped with sponges dipped
in them. But to those who use them properly, they prove reme-
dies in cases of paralysis and syncope, if mixed with the tonic
cataplasms, for the stomach; and to convalescents more especially
from febrile diseases. They are to be poured upon the bodies
of such persons, and applied to their noses if they can still in-
hale. For they are drawn in deeply, and strengthen the mental
and vital spirits. They are useful, likewise, as preservatives
from pestilential diseases, when the state of the atmosphere
appears to be of this nature. The following is the cenantharium
of Posidonius, which he calls Mesopotameuum.

The prejjaration of the cenantharium. Of cassia, of myrrh, of
frankincense, of Indian leaf, of amomum, of mastich, of costus,
of carpobalsam, of opobalsam, of each, oz. iij ; of fatty storax,
oz. iv ; of fragrant Aminsean wine, x Italian sext. Having
pounded and filtrated all the things, divide the storax into small
pieces, put into a vessel with a broad mouth along with the
leaves of lilies, dried the preceding day and stripped of theii*
nails, placing them alternately ; let the lilies be ccc in number;
then put in the wine and the opobalsam, which have been
mixed and stirred together before their addition, and having
covered up the mouth of the vessel, expose to the sun for forty
davs. Use after the bath, as a restorative from disease,
sprinkling the house and vessels with it, or dipping sponges in
it and applying to the face.

Another, of our own invention. Of costus, oz. iij ; of spike-

SECT. XXII.] PERFUMES. 599

nard, of arnabo, of cloves, of each, oz. j ; of amomum, oz. iij; of
cassia, of wild vine, of calamus, of each, oz. ix ; of storax, of
opobalsam, of each, oz. iv ; lilies, ccc ; of Falernian wine, sext. x.
Prepare after the same manner.

Commentary. See also Aetius (sii, 116) and Myrepsus Comm.
(§ 37.) The CEnantharia were fragrant preparations, made " ' '
with wine and aromatics. The prescriptions given by Aetius
and Myrepsus are so similar to our author's that we need not
repeat them. We are not aware of the Arabian authors
hax-ing treated of them anywhere ; at all events, they have not
done so bv this name.

SECT. XXII. ON PERFUMES AND CYPHI.

In materials the cyphi are intermediate between the trochisks
which are drunk and the antidotes. We use them sometimes
in fumigations on account of their fragrance, and so also the
perfumes ; sometimes we smell to them, in order to concoct
catarrhs and defluxions, and as deobstruents, and to clear the
parts about the brain, and as preservatives from pestilential
disorders ; they are also taken by the mouth for these purposes,
and to concoct matters lodged in the chest, and for cold affec-
tions in the liver : hence the ancients invented the antidotes
called cyphoid. They are mixed also with compound medicines,
and more especially with epithemes and antidotes.

Suffimentum rosatum, rose jici'fume. Of costus, of amomum,
of myrrh, of cassia, of each, oz. j ; of Chian storax, of bdellium,
of onyx, of moss, of ladanum, of each, dr. ij ; of pure roses,
oz. xxix ; of opobalsam, of wine, q. s.

Sujffimentum liliaceum, the perfume from lilies. Of lilies
deprived of their nails (i. e. the white parts of their flowers), lb. j;
of primary storax, oz. ix ; of spikenard, oz. iij ; of costus, of
cloves, of amomum, of mastich, of burnt onyches, of honey, of
each, oz. iss ; of opobalsam, oz. v ; of wine, q. s. Triturate and
form trochisks.

The cyphi t nay num called tlie solar, consistiny of thirty-six in-
gredients. Of storax, of myrrh, of bdellium, of ladanum, of rose-
wood, of elecampane, of each, oz. vj ; of Celtic nard, of Indian

600 PERFUMES. [book vii.

leaf, of cypress-seedj of ammoniac perfume, of pine-nuts, of the
moss of trees (splanclinon), or, instead of it, of two large
onyclies, of carpobalsam, of each, oz iij ; of cassia, of iris, of
seseli, of sphagnon (muscus arboreus?), of cyperus, of carda-
mom, of sweet- cane, of each, oz. v ; of dried roses, of saffron, of
spikenard, of savin, of the root of kingspear (but some use the
juice), of each, oz. iv ; of lacaphthus (it is the bark of a pine or
of some other tree), oz. ix ; of costus, of the flower of schoe-
nanth, of each, oz. ij ; forty large juniper-berries and fifty
small ; of amomum, of turpentine, of pure palm-nuts, of each,
lb. j j of dried figs without their stones, of dried grapes without
their stones, of each, lb. ij ; of scummed honey, lb. v. Posidonius
adds, likewise, of fragrant wine, sext. iij.

Another cyphi, called the lunar, consisting of twenty-eight
ingredients. Of bdellium, of elecampane, of each, oz. vij ; of
schoenanth, oz. ij ; of the moss of trees, oz. v ; fifty small
juniper-berries ; of cardamom, oz. v ; of rose-wood, oz. vij ; of
cassia fistula, oz. v ; of spikenard, oz. ij ; of cyperus, oz. v; of
the root of kingspear, of savin, of each, oz. iv; of cypress-
seed, of Celtic nard, of malabathrum with the leaves, of dried
roses, of each, oz. iij ; of costus, of saflron, of each, oz. ij ; of
ladanum, of myrrh, of each, oz. vij ; of fatty dried figs, of
grapes deprived of their stones, of each, lb. ij ; of pine-nuts,
oz. viij ; of turpentine, lb. j ; of storax, oz. vij ; of fatty palm-
nuts, lb. j ; of honey, lb. v ; of fragrant wine, q. s.

CoMM. Commentary. See Aetius (xiii, 37) ; Oribasius (Synopsis, iii);

' — • — ' Myrepsus (i, 299) ; Actuarius (Meth. Med. v, 6.) These are
sweet-smelling compositions which were used as restoratives,
or in order to sooth. The following suffitus of Oribasius is
soporific : Of storax, of amomum, of costus, of ammoniac per-
fume, of Scythian bdellium, of the root of mandrake, of the
juice of poppy. The cyphoid antidotes of Myrepsus are very
multifarious compositions, consisting of a great variety of aro-
matics, mixed up with honey and fragrant wines.

Similar preparations are described by the Arabians among
the confections and antidotes. See Avicenna, Serapion, and
Haly Abbas.

SECT. XXIV.] PESSARIES. 601

SECT. XXIII. THE PREPARATION OF MASUCHA, WHICH SOME

CALL MASUAPHIUM.

Of melilots, oz. x ; of the ^yood of balsamura^ of rose-wood^
of savin, of myrrh, of amomum, of the schoenanth, of bay-
leaves, of the fat of myrrh [stacte), of storax, of calamus aroma-
ticus, of sampsiichum, of each, oz. ij ; of iris, oz. v ; of Indian
leaf, of saffron, of each, oz. j ; of opobalsam, oz. ss ; of gum,
lb. j ; of dried roses, oz. \] ; of wine, q. s.

Commentary. See Aetius (xiii, 118) ; Myrepsus (^ xxi, 14) ; Comm.
Actuarius (Meth. Med. v. 8.) The following is Myrepsus's ' *
formula for the suffimentum called Masucha : Of yellow aloes,
of bay-leaves, of costus, of amomum, of cardamom, of cassia, of
carpobalsam, of ladanum, of each, lb. iss ; of myrrh, of iris, of
mehlot, of Indian leaf, of roses, of the leaves of olive, of Celtic
nard, of each, lb. ss oz. iij ; of saffron, oz. iij ; of galbanum,
oz. ss ; of gum, lb. iss ; of fragrant wine, q. s.

SECT. XXIV. ON pessaries, FROM THE WORKS OF ANTYLLUS.

Pessaries are applied to the womb. There are three different
kinds of them ; for some are emoUient, some astringent, and
some are anastomative, i. e. they open the mouths of vessels.
We use the emollient in inflammations of the womb, in ulce-
ration and coldness of it, in ascension upwards, eversion and
inflation thereof. They are prepai'cd from Tuscan wax, the
oil of privet and of lilies, the fat of geese and of fowls, un-
salted butter, burnt rosin, stag's marrow, fenugreek, and the
like. The anastomative, or those which open the mouths of
vessels, are used when we wish to recall the menstrual purga-
tion that has been stopped, or to correct the state of the womb
when it is shut up or contracted. These are prepared from
honey, mugwort, dittany, the juice of cabbage, liquorice, the
juice of horehound, rue, scammouy, or the like. The astrin-
gent are used in cases the reverse of those for which tlie
anastomative are applied ; for they restrain the female dis-
charge, contract the womb when it is open, and impel it

602 PESSARIES. [book vii.

upwards wlien prolapsed. The materials of the astringent
have been akeady pointed out in the chapter on CoUma and
Trochisks. The pessary is to be made of the thickness of
of bath sordes, and a little thicker ; and then some wool,
like a narrow tent, is to be doubled and dipped in the medicine,
and applied to the mouth of the womb, having a long thread
attached to it to draw down the pessary readily when it is
thought proper. — The Saffron Pessary, for inflammations,
eversions, hardness, and inflation of the womb : Of white wax,
of calf's marrow, of each, dr. xvj ; of stag's marrow, dr. xj ;
of the grease of geese, dr. Aiij ; of the grease of fowls, dr. viij ;
of mastich, dr. iv ; of the medicine oesypum, dr. iij ; of honey,
dr. ij ; of saffron, dr. ^iij ; of rose oil, q. s. Triturate the
saffron with the milk of a woman. — The Golden Pessary, an
excellent emollient : Of saffron, dr. j ; of unwashed wool
(oesypum), dr. j ; of stag's marrow, dr. ij ; of tui-pentine, of
"wax, of the grease of geese, of each, dr. iij ; the yelks of
sixteen eggs roasted ; of oil, of iris, of roses, q. s. — The
Libanian Pessary, being emmenagogue, and agreeing excel-
lently with affections of the womb : Of nard ointment, oz. vj ;
of Tuscan wax, oz. v ; of the ointment of lilies, oz, iv ; of fresh
hog's lard, oz. iij ; of the grease of geese and of domestic
fowls, of stages marrow, and of the ointment of amaracus, of
each, oz. ij ; of bull's tallow, of turpentine, of oesypum, of each,
oz. j. It is dissolved in a double vessel, as are all the other
pessai'ies. — The Pessary Enneapharmacus : Of the ointment of
roses, of that of ricinus, of turpentine, of wax, of honey, of the
grease of geese and of oxen, of stag's marrow, and of butter,
equal parts. — The Titian emollient Pessary : Of wax, oz. xj ;
of Colophonian rosin, oz. ivss ; of bull's tallow, oz. iv ; of
ammoniac perfume, oz. iv. Triturate the ammoniac with water.
— -The Egyptian Pessary : Of honey, of turpentine, of butter,
of oil of roses or of lilies, of saffron, of each, p. j ; and when
there is no inflammation and the parts are foul, of verdigris,
p. ss. — The Pessary called Genitura, for conception: Of butter,
oz. vj j of the medicine oesypum, of stag's marrow, of the
grease of geese and of domestic fowls, of turpentine, of aloes,
of each, oz. iij ; of Tuscan wax, oz. vj ; of oil of roses, lb. ij ;
of myrrh, of cassia, of each, oz. ij ; of spikenard, oz. j ; of
honey, q. s.

SECT. xxiv.J PESSARIES. G03

Commentary. The pessaries of the ancients bore no re- Comm.
semblance to the instruments of box- wood and other solid " '
materials now used to prevent prolapsus of the uterus. Those
of the ancients were medicated ointments or liniments^ which were
generally applied to the natural parts upon wool, most commonly
for the purpose of correcting the menstrual discharge. A modern
authority describes them in the following terms : " Pessaries
are made like a finger, of medicines for the womb, taken into a
long linen bag, well- waxed, or incorporated with honey, ladanum,
galbanum, wax and juices. They are in shape like a suppository,
but longer and thicker." Schroder (Chym. Dispensat. p. 134).
They were also frequently resorted to for the wicked purpose
of producing abortion. Hippocrates, in his Oath, obligates the
medical apprentice not to give such a pessary to a woman.
Pessaries of this description consisted of strong stimulants, such
as cantharides, elaterium, colocynth, &c. The emmenagogue
pessaries were formed of such-like ingredients, weakened by
mixture with others of less activity.

Celsus gives a very distinct account of pessaries. He says
of them : " Sed alia quoque utilia sunt ; ut ea, quaj foeminis
subjiciuntur j Traacrovg Grseci vocant. Eorum hffic proprietas
est : medicamenta composita molli lana excipiuntur, eaque lana
naturalibus conditur." (v, 21.) He gives formulae for seven
pessaries. One, for expelling the dead foetus, consists of pome-
granate rind pounded with water, (v, 21.)

Pessaries are treated of at great length by Oribasius, Aetius,
and Actuarius, and preparations are described for every imagin-
able condition of the uterus, Aetius gives formulae for pessaries
to procure sterility, the ingredients of which, for the most
part, are powerful astringents and bitters. But Myrepsus is
the most copious writer on this subject, for he describes the prepa-
ration of forty-five pessaries (§ 38). Their ingredients, of course,
are various, according to the purpose for which they are to be
applied. The Emmenagogue consist of cumin, ginger, birth-
wort, the pulp of colocynth, castor, musk, rue, &c., mixed up
with wax, suetj or honey.

As there is nothing original in the views of the Arabians, we
need only say with regard to them that they prepared and ap-
plied pessaries on the principles laid down by their Grecian
masters. See, in particular, Rhases (Cont. xxii) ; Aviccuna
(iii, 21, 2) ; Serapion (dc /Egritudinibus Matricis.)

604 SUCCEDANEA. [book vii.

SECT. XXV, ON MEDICINES WHICH MAY BE SUBSTITUTED FOR

ONE ANOTHER, FROM THE WORKS OF GALEN.

In Alexandria, he says, wishing to obtain the campion
(lychnis) for a certain woman who was in danger, and not
having got it, if I had not found and used the seed of acan-
thium, the woman would have been soon lost. Hence, having
been requested by my companions, I made out a list of the
medicines which may be substituted for one another, in order,
beginning with this same article :

Instead of the seed of acanthium, campion (lychnis),
southern -wood (abrotonum), origany.
agallochus, sweet-cane (calamus aromaticus).
agaric, euphorbium.

Indian aloes, glaucium, lycium, or centaurium.
winter-cherry (halicacabus), the seed of strychnos.
asphaltum, the Bruttian liquid pitch,
aconite or wolfsbane, the root of the wild iris,
wormwood, southernwood,
opobalsam, myrtle-juice,
quicklime (calx-viva), adarce.
alkanet, hyacinth,
sal ammoniac, Cappadocian salts,
arsenic, sandarach.
starch, dried flour,
ammoniac perfume, bee-glue.

rose-wood (aspalathus), the fruit of heath, or the seed of the chaste-
tree,
aracus (a species of pulse), Indian corn,
bitter almonds, wormwood.
Armenian sfone, Indian ink.
the elder, thorn.

prickly-poppy (argemone), seriphium.
kingspear, the juice of beet,
wall-pepper, the juice or leaves of lettuce,
maiden-hair, aphroselinum.
Ethiopian olive, two parts of the tears of acacia.
Asian stone, gagate stone, or sal ammoniac burnt,
fox's grease, that of a bear,
shoots of the black poplar, sampsuchum.
buprestis, bugs (blatta;).
butter, cow's milk coagulated,
the juice of balsam, the juice of myrrh.

SECT. XXV.] SUCCEDANEA. 605

Instead of bdellium, the aromatic moss of trees (sphagnus).
gentian root, aromatic parsley.
Samian earth, the Egyptian leucographis.
Eretrian earth. Thebaic lime,
turnip, the sun-tlower.
liquorice juice, the juice of mulberry,
vulture's dung, pigeon's dung,
soft earth, plumbago,
doryciiium, the seed of henbane,
dittany, sage.

bay-berries, dried wild thyme,
carrot, the seed of water-parsnip,
diphryges, Phrygian stone,
dracunculus, wake-robin,
sage, calamint.

the tear of olive, the juice of hypocistis.
wild thyme, potamogeton.
the seed of rocket, the seed of hedge-mustard,
the juice of elaterium, the juice of the leek,
the seed of hedge-mustai-d, soapwort.
the fruit of heath, the gall omphacitis.
ebeny, the wood of the lotus,
the leaves of wild fig, the dung of ibis (?).
the root of butcher's broom, the leaves of the mulberry (?).
black hellebore, the root of papyrus (?).
enneaphyllon, the potamogeton.

old oil, boil a double quantity of oil with old hog's lard.
ginger, pellitory.

deadly carrot (thapsia), the juice of the black chamseleon.
thapsia, the seed of cresses or rocket,
sulphur vivum, red arsenic (sandaracb).
the rust of iron (rubigo ferri), the squama ferri.
the mistletoe of the oak, that of black chamaeleon.
Illyrian iris, the aromatic elecampane,
cinnamon, double the quantity of cassia,
cyperus, the large juniper,
cardamom, cyperus.
costus, juniper-berries,
juniper-berries, ladanum.
calamus aromaticus, the moss of trees,
saffron, crocomagma.
crocomagma, Indian aloes,
castor, laserwort (assafoetida).
calamine, the Egyptian leucographis.
the tallow of the crocodile, that of the sea-dog.
hemlock (conium), the seed of coriander,
cautharides, phalangia.

G06 SUCCEDANEA. [book vii.

Instead of the seed of bastard safiron, the seed of chaste-tree,
the juice of ivy, that of peach,
the palma Christi, the sordes from the palestra,
the root of capers, the root of heath or tamarisk,
the dung of the turtle, pigeon's dung,
ceraunium, leucographis.
coral, moly.

cat's dung, that of the ichneumon,
dragon's blood (cinnabaris), the rhodoides.
cumin, the seed of cabbage,
field basil (clinopodium), the sun-flower,
calamint, the wild mint.

colocynth, the seed of the palma Christi called croton.
navelwort (cotyledon), the onocardium.
• Colophonian rosin, the pitch of ships,
cynosbatos, the seed of the winter cherry,
hnseed, the juice of beans,
pumice stone, Cretan earth. f.;

cyphi, burnt dried fig.
buccina, oysters,
cardamom, xylocarpasum.

wax, bruised beans boiled and pounded with bee-glue,
frankincense, the terra ampelitis.
lathyrides (a species of spurge), the granum Cnidium.
dittander (lepidium), madder,
the magnet, the Phrygian stone,
the Phrygian stone, the agerat.
the seed of lovage, the seed of carrot.
the stone pyrites, the stone pyrobolus.
the flower of the stock gilly-flower, soapwort.
the seed of the lotus, the seed of beet,
the root of dittander, the leaves of capers,
the sea-hare, the sea-shell (?).

the root of dock, the root of pellitory.

Indian leaf (malabathrum), cassia or Indian nard.

mandrake (mandragora), dorycnium.

myrtle oil, the juice of mulberry.

mastich, the juice of lentisk (?)

myrobalan, rue.

mallows, fenugreek.

honey, rob.

manna (of frankincense ?), the bark of frankincense.

mice dung, an equal quantity of flies.

stag's marrow, stag's grease or the marrow of a calf.

quinces, melilots.

Cyprian misy, Cyprian ochre.

spignel, myrobalan.

sKCT. XXV.] SUCCEDANEA. (507

Instead of tho juice of mulberries, the leaves of brambles,
roasted misy, diiihryges.
Syriac nard, the aromatic rush,
navew, tiirnip-seed (?).
xylobalsam, the root of stock gilly-flower.
poppy-juice, the juice of mandragora.
opopouax, the milk of midberry.
Cyrenaic juice, Syriac juice,
juice of carpasum, the juice of myrtle,
juice of the fig, the juice of mulberry,
juice of the willow, the juice of the black ivy.
juice of the rose bay, the mistletoe of the oak.
juice of the cenauthe, that of the cultivated vine-tree,
all-good (hormiuum), linseed.
rice, barley-flour.
Italian wine, Mendesian wine.
Rhodian wine, austere wine,
the star of Bethlehem (ornithogallum), anthyllis.
the unripe olive, the gall omphacitis.
onocardium, the herb psyche,
juice of hog's fennel, liquorice-juice,
bee-glue, ladanum.

canker-worm of the pine, the wasps on the unripe rosin,
pepper, ginger.
fern, the seed of cneoros.

polypody, the root of mezereqp, or of the chamasleon.
vervain, ground poplar,
polytrichon, wormwood,
rosin of the fir-tree, turpentine rosin,
dried roses, the dried leaves of the peach-tree,
oil of radishes, the oil of ricinus (castor oil),
rhodoides, Sinopic ochre.
Colophonian rosin, the pitch of ships,
aromatic rush, cardamom.
Cyprian spodium, the ashes of olive-leaves,
troglodytic myrrh, the calamus aromaticus.
stag's grease, the grease of geese,
grease of the hyena, the grease of foxes,
grease of the fox, the grease of the bear,
root of soapwort, the root of the black hellebore,
satyrium, the seed of rocket,
salamander, the green lizard,
aromatic moss of trees, the sweet-rush,
syricum (psoricum .'), litharge,
dross of lead, the scoria argenti.
marjoram (sampsuchum), the dried culinary sumach,
mustard, cresses.

608 SUCCEDANEA. [book vii.

Instead of sagapen, dried pine rosin.

scammony, the internal parts of the seed of palma Christi.

pine-nuts, the seed of cucumber.

alum, fossile salt.

the skink, satyrium.

antimony, the squama sens.

sweet rush, the root of knot-grass.

dross of copper, the Egyptian melanteria.

water-cress, basil.

cultivated grape, the flesh of the Syrian palm.

Saunder's herb, southernwood.

the shell of the cuttle-fish, pumice-stone.

orchis (serapias), the root of poeony.

squill, bolbus.

sesamoides, what remains after the filtration of amaranth.

Indian grain. Unseed.

the seed of henbane, the seed of sweet briar.

juice of hypocistis, the juice of acacia.

liquid pitch, opoponax.

unscoured wool (oesypum), the marrow of a calf.

hyacinth, the flower of woad.

St. John's wort, the seed of dill.

burnt lees of wine, sandarach.

sea-weed, alkanet.

valerian, the moss of trees.

the gall of the hyaena, the gall of partridge.

the gall of the viper, that of the ichneumon.

gall of the shrew-mouse, that of the camel,

gall of the camel, that of the swift.

galbanum, sagapen.

germander, the root of the wild dock.

chamomile, anthemis.

ceruse, the dross of lead (scoria plurabi).

fleawort, the marsh lentil (lens palustris).

basil (ocimum), water-cress (sisymbrium).

ocimoides, the wild mint.

CoMM. Commentary. This is taken from a work ascribed to Galen,
' — ' — ' the authenticity of which, however, is very doubtful. Cornarius
has attempted many corrections of the text, and we have found
ourselves compelled to make other alterations.

SECT. XXVI.] WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 009

SECT. XXVI. ON WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.

The weight is determined by the degree of heaviness ; the
measure by the capacity of the vessel : but the vessel is the
measure either of a dry or of a liquid quantity. So then
there are three differences of a measured quantity : first, that
of weight ; second, that of a dry substance, and, as it were, of
such things as can be heaped ; and third, that of a liquid.
There being many and almost infinite varieties of weights and
measures according to the practice of places, and of those
who use them, we shall treat only of those which are familiar
to all.

On the characters used by the Greeks for indicating weights
and measures. But since some do not indicate these by whole
letters, but by characters, it will be better for us, in imitation
of the ancients, to explain these characters in the first place.

First, then, the letter ^ having alpha placed above it, signifies
chalcus (i. e. oereus), thus ^ ; but if the -^ has o, chus (i. e.
congius), thus -^^ ; but if oi, chcenix, thus ^<"j but if t?, cheme,
thus y^^ ; K if it has e placed above it, and a straight line
obliquely intersecting the lower curvature of it indicates
aeration (i. e. siliqua), thus li« ; but if the K has v, cijathus,
thus IjL^ and if o cotyle (i. e. hemina), thus \i°. The circum-
flex line not surrounded by anything, and placed altogether

obliquely, indicates obolus, thus c^ ^ ; but if there are two

lines not surrounded, they signify two oboli, thus ^IZI^, which
make a gramma (i. e. scrupulum), which is indicated by y
having p near it, intersected by a straight line, thus y^. Two
lines united at one extremity so as to make an angle, like the
two wings which join the straight line of the letter K, indicate
drachma [or drachm) , vi'hxch. is synonymous with holca, thus <.
But the holca is properly indicated by A with o in its middle,
thus X. But if tlie X has t, it indicates libra (a pound), thus
X. Some, however, indicate a pound, by another line inter-
secting the line of the X obliquely, thus X. But T having the
letter o within its angle, signifies uncia (an ounce), thus Yc
The letter ^t having v in its middle, indicates mna, or mina,
thus Ji ; but if the jx has v, it indicates mystrum, thus /i ; but if

III. 39

dr.

viij

scr.

"J

oboli

ij

610 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. [book vii.

£, medimnus, thus ju ; and if o, modius, thus jx. The letter r
followed by a |0 with a v about it, indicates tryhlium, thus Tpv
The letter ^, if it has £ placed above it, indicates xestes (i. e.
sextarius), thus ^. But if it has o written above, it signifies
oxybaphum (i. e. acetabulum), thus ^°. Some indicate a sextarius
by a ^, with a straight line intersecting it, thus ^. The letter
T), having fi placed above it, indicated hemina, thus ^. The
letter k prefixed to p, and having fx placed above it, indicates
ceramium, thus k^^.

On Weights.

The Attic and Egyptian mna (i. e. mina) contains oz. xvj.
The Roman mina „ oz. xx.

The libra (i. e. pound) „ oz, xij.

The uncia (i. e. ounce)
The drachma (i. e. drachm)
The scrupulus (i. e. scruple)
The obolus contains ceratia or siliquse iij.

The siliqua contains chalci (i.e. arei or (ereoli) ij.and|.
So that an obolus contains viij sereoli.

On the Measures of Liquids.

The Italic ceramium contains choes (or congii) viij.
The chus or congius contains sextarii vj.

The sextarius contains cotylse ij, which are also called tryblia.
The cotyla, or tryblium, contains great mystra iij, but ace-
tabula iv.
The gt'eat mystrum contains acetabulum j, and a third.
The acetabulum contains cyathus j, and a half.
The cyathus contains small chemce, or small mystra ij.

But if you would wdsh to know the measure of the weights
of liquids (for there are many diff'erences of liquid substances
according to weight), we shall illustrate this by the example of
oil, wine, and honey. Honey, then, is heavier than wine by a
fourth part, and a tenth part more, which makes altogether
almost a third part. For the same measure of honey as of
wine contains the weight of the wine and a third part more.
Honey is heavier than oil by one half; for it contains the
whole weight of the oil, and a half part of the weight besides.
Wine exceeds oil by a ninth part, for it contains the whole

SECT. XXVI.]

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.

Gil

weight of the oil and a ninth part more. In order to make
this appear more manifest, we shall subjoin, as in a diagram,
the proportion of the particular measures, it being obvious that
the words oil, ivine, and honey, are to be understood as
expressed in every line of the series.

The Italian

Of oil.

Of wine.

Of honey.

Ceramium contains

lib. Ixxij

lib. Ixxx . .

lib. cviij.

Chus, or congius .

lib. ix . .

lib. X . . .

lib. xiiss.

Sextarius . . .

oz. xviij . .

oz. XX . .

oz. xxvij.

Cotyle or liemina

oz. ix . .

oz. X . . .

oz. xiiiss.

Great my strum

oz. iij . .

oz. iij, scr. viij

. . oz. ivss.

Acetabulum . .

dr. xviij . .

oz. ij, scr. xij

oz. iij, scr. ix

Cyathus . . . .

dr. xij . .

oz. iss, scr. iv

oz. ij, dr. ij.

Small mystrum

dr. vj . .

scr. XX . .

dr. ix.

Oribasius says, on the authority of Adamantius, that the
Italian sextarius of wine contains oz. xxiv by measure, but
lb. j oz. -sdij by weight; and that a sextarius of honey contains
lb. iiss by weight.

On the Measures of Dry Substances.

The Egyptian artaba contains modii . iij.

The Egyptian and Italian modlus contains chcenices viij.

The cho&nix contains sextarii . . ij.

The sextarius contains two semisextarii, which are called
heminse.

The hemina contains cyathi viij.

The Attic medimnus contains hemiecta xij.

The hemiecton contains chcenices iv. Hence the medimnus
contains modii vj, chcenices xlviij, and sextarii xcvj.

But of these it is not easy to give the weight, because of
dry things the difference, according to the inclination of the
balance, is immense.

The end of the Seventh and Last Book of Paulus tEgineta.

CoMMENTARV. Scc, further, Galenus (De Pond. etMens.); Comm.
Cleopatra (Dc P. etM.) ; Celsus (v, 17) ; Pliny (H. N. xxi, 34); '—'^
Rhemnus Fannius (De Pond, et Metr.) ; INIarcellus Empiricus;
Pollux (Onomast.) ; Hesychius et Suidas (pluries) ; Scrapion
(de Antid. vii, 37) ; Avicenna (v, 2, 8.) The best modern
writers on the weights and measm-es of the ancients are.

612 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. [book vii.

CoMM. Arbuthnot (On Ancient Coins^ Weights, and Measures) ;
Milligan (Prsefatio et Notse in Celsum); Poucton (Metrologie) ;
Eaper (Philosopli. Transact. London, 1770, 1771) ; J. F.
Wurm (De Pond. &c.) ; Conger (Weights, Measures, &c. of
the Greeks and Romans.)

Since a proper knowledge of this subject is indispensably
necessary, in order to attain a practical acquaintance with
ancient pharmacy, we shall not scruple to avail ourselves
freely of the information contained in the works of the
modern authorities referred to above. It will be seen, that
in the following sketch, we have followed Arbuthnot very
closely ; indeed, it is proper to mention, that when we origi-
nally wrote this, our concluding Commentarj', we were not
acquainted with the labours of Wurm and Conger. We now
remark that, although the later authorities agree with Arbuthnot
on general principles, they differ from him on a few points, as
will be perceived upon a comparison of his tables with those of
Conger. The discrepance between them, we find, arises from
two causes, only one of which, it Avill be observed, is of any
practical importance. First : Arbuthnot mixes the fractional
with the decimal mode of computation, whilst Conger uses the
decimal method alone. Second : They give different estimates
of the length of the Pes. For example, Arbuthnot states the
contents of the ligiila to be ~ pint, and the decimals '117^
solid inch ; whereas Conger rates it at the decimals '62 pint,
or the decimals '69 solid inch. Now the 48th part of a pint
equals the decimal '6, which, when added to the former deci-
mals "117 solid inch, amounts to "717 : the difference between
this number and -69 is -027, which being multiplied succes-
sively by the tabular values of the ligula, cyathus, acetabulum,
&c., and the product divided by the number of solid inches
in a pint, gives 12 pints, or 1 gal. 2 qts. as the difference
between Arbuthnot's and Conger's contents of the amphora.
By Arbuthnot's table the contents of the amphora is 7 gal.
1 pint, 10"66 solid inches ; by Conger's, it is 5 gal. 2 qts.
1 pint, and the decimal '64 of a pint. For example,

gal. qts. pts. sol. inch.
Arbuthnot's amphora =70 1 10-66
Conger's "=521

Difference 12 0 10-66

SECT. XXVI.] WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 613

The Pes is tlie standard from which the contents of the Comm.
amphora, and of the other names of weights and measures in
the table are deduced ; and, as our authorities assign slightly-
different estimates to the length of the pes, the other measures
in the table are consequently affected by this difference in the
assumed standard. Arbuthnot assumes the pes to be 11-604
inches, whereas Conger, with the later authorities, makes it to
be -97075 ft. or 11-649 inches. Now the amphora, being the
cube of the pes, equals, according to Arbuthnot, 1562-5112
solid inches, whereas the cube of Conger's pes makes the am-
phora to contain 1580-75 solid inches.

Having thus pointed out the source of the discrepance
between the tables of Arbuthnot and the later authorities,
we shall now proceed with our extracts, beginning with Dr.
Milligan, who, although he can have no pretensions to be
reckoned an original authority on the subject, has been par-
ticularly fortunate in giving from Targa and Arbuthnot, a very
lucid exposition of the weights, measures, and characters, which
occur in the works of Celsus.

Extracts from Dr. ISIilligan's edition of Celsus.
Characterum m Celso obvenientium Tabula.

p ...

Pondo : cum aliis notis junctum quasi pondere ;
Anglice, by weight, significat.

p., per se . . .

1 Libra.

X • . .

1 Denarius.

non per se .

1 sextantem deuominationis antecedentis siguat

r per se .

fere unius cb-achmse sextantem.

2 sextantis.

1 sextantem.

^ sextantis.

Z ...

1 sextantem.

8 ...

1 sextantem.

Porro P. =, P"^, PZ, P8, characteres compositi sunt, qui
omnino secundum tabulam superiorem, librie sextantem singuli
significant. Pari quoque ratione, P. X. =, P. X.~, P. X. Z,
P. X . 8, denarii sextantem, vel uncise quadrigesimam secundam
partem designat.

Notse Celsi lectoribus negotii nonnihil facessere solent. Cum
ipso igitur, id anticipandum nobis erit ; ut ponderum divisio

614 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. [book vii.

CoMM. quam decimo septimo libri quiuti capite descripsit, hie quasi
' ' ' prserogetur.

Libra

Uncia

Denarius

Sextans

Obolus

^Uncias duodecim.
Denarios septeru.
valet / Sextautes sex.
I Obolum unum.
I Scrupulum dimidium.

Denarius autem (Greaves, Diss, on the Denarius) grana 62
{English Troy iveight) hahebat ; unde imcise essent 434,
sextanti ejus lOi grana; fere scrupuhim dimidium, ut Celsus,
loco citato, docet.

His prseposites scire licet,

a. Notam P., per se libram significare.

^'. Notam = , sextatem indifFerenter significare, sed non
drachmae magis quam librae, vel cujuslibet denominationis
praecedentis, sextantem. Sic Notam P.=, uncias duas aequare.

y. Notam = ==, duos sextantes indicare.

^'. Notam — , sextan tis dimidium representare.

f. Notam X, Denarium indicare = i unciae. Quam vero
notam, propter similitudinem, librarii saepe cum X, decern in-
dicante confundunt. Nam K, perinde ac X decem olim signi-
ficabat.

Videmus ergo Notam P, libram esse; cum aliis autem notis
'pondo significat, quasi pondere (Anglice by iveight) adeo ut ista
textus P. K =, Denarii sextantem pondere, vel grana 10^ in-
dicet. Pari ratione P. K, denarius pondere, vel absolute
denarius, qui grana 62, est.

Porro P. = , P Z, P 8, P~, librae sextantem pondere:
P. K=, P. X Z, P. K 8, P. X-^ denarii sextantem, vel
unciae quadragesimam secundam partem, designant.

Constat 1. Denarium K-omanum grana Trojana Britan-
uica 62| pependisse.

2. Pedem Romanum pollicum Britannicorum 11"604
valuisse.

Ab his sequitur, pedem Romanum, ad pendulum latitudinis
Londinii per spatium inane, ad 62 Farenheiti thermometri
calefactum, oscillans, rationem habere quam 11'604 ad 39*1393.
Porro congium Romanum ad congium [gallon) Britannicum
Imperialem, ut 189-64 ad 274, esse.

SKCT. XXVI.] WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 615

Tabula Ponderum et Mensurarum Pliniana. Comm.

= 1 obolus . = 10 chalci.

1 denarius argenteus = 1 drachma Attica . ^ C oboli . . =: 60 chalci.

1 cyathus . . . . = 10 drachmae . . . = 60 oboli . . ^ 600 chalci.

1 acetabulum . . . = 15 drachmae . . . = 90 oboU . = 900 chalci.

1 hemina . . . . = 60 drachma; . . . = 360 oboli . . = 3600 chalci.

1 mna =100 drachma; . . . = 600 oboli . . = 6000 chalci.

Tabula Ponderum Celsiana.

1 sextans . ^ 1 obolus.
1 scrupulus . = 24- sextantes = 2 -(- oboli.
1 denarius = 3 scrupuli . = 6 sextantes . = 6 oboli.
1 uucia . . = 7 denarii . ^ 21 scrupuli . = 42 sextantes . = 42 oboli.

Sed ut ostendemus, 1 denarius =: 62 grana (Troy weight), hinc 62 grana = 1
denarius = 6 sextantes = 6 oboli; dividendo, 10^ grana = 1 sextans = 1 obolus.

Tabida, jwndera Trojana, tam mensurarum caj)acitatis, tam gravitatis,

Romanorum sistens.

Urna. Libra.

Uncia. Denarius. Scrupulus.

Sextans.

Chalcus.

Giaua.

Amphora =: 2 =80

= 960 =6720 =

20160 =

40320 =

403200 =

420480

Urna . 1 =40

= 480 =3360 =

10080 =

26160 =

210600 =

210240

Congius J = 10

= 120 = 840 =

2540 =

5040 =

50400 =

52920

Sextarius . 1§

= 20 = 140 =

420 =

840 =

8400 =

Libra . . 1

= 12 = 84 =

252 =

504 =

5040 =

Hemina

^= 60 =

180 =

360 =

3600 =

Acetabulum .

. 2j= 15 =

45 =

90 =

900 =

Sesqi-cyathus

2\= 15 =

45 =

90 =

900 =

Cyathus

. 13= 10 =

30 =

60 =

600 =

Sescuncia .

. u= ioi =

31| =

63 =

630 =

Uncia .

. 1 = 7 =

21 =

42 =

420 =

Cochleare .

. . . 2^ =

n =

15 =

150 =

Drachma

1 =

3 =

6 =

60 =

62^

Denarius* .

. 1 =

3 =

6 =

60 =

62^

Scrupulus

1 =

2 =

20 =

20i

Scrupulus dimidiatus

1 =

10 =

10^

Obolus

1 =

10 =

lOi

Sextans

. 1 =

10 =

lOJ

Chalcus .

1 =

l3'6

* Denario infra banc lineam 02 grana, compendii numerique rotundandi gratia
tribuimus. Qui accuratiora volunt ^ illud Grajvii in valorem per denariorum colum-
nam ducant, et nostris superaddant.

Sed post tot annorum lapsum, quomodo ista ponderaad nostra Trojana referamus?
Diligentia antiquariorum illud perfacile effecit. Inclytus enim /. Greevesius Anglia;
decus, pondus Denarii, per plurima exemplarium centena, in Italicis aliisquc cimeliis
conservata, ipsa statera trutinavit : et pondus omnium nieliorum denariorum ad
grana Trojana 62| librare repcrit. Sed cognito denarii, qui vetcribus non tantum
nummus fuit, sed pondcris rerum arl)iter, pondcrc, ccterarum denominationum
valorem calculo simplicissimo, in granis Trojauis habcbis.

[book VII.

CoMM. Tabula Pondenim ac Mensvrarv.m relationis quas passim Celsus
' * ' v.surj)avit .

a

1 Uncia 1 =

a;

■ 1

• 2

2 Sextans .

3 Quadrans

4 Triens .

5 Quincunx

6 Semis .

4 B 7

n
1

a
1

TO — TT

as

3
T3

J__4__2— _4__1 -_. 4 — - 2 ^ 4 ^

TT

3
TT

4
TT

•1 S 5 5 5 1 3 3

'■ S — 1 5 9 2 TT — T2

1 = 6 = 2 =

1 =

8 5

1 =

1 =

1
2
3
5

6 1

TT 5

7 Septunx

8 Bes

8 Octunx

9 Dodrans ....

10 Dextans ....

11 Deunx

His cujusvis unitatis, librae, unciae, denarii, congii, partes
unciae, distributae erant.

7
TT

s
9

t\

6
9

o

8
TT

fT

TT

7
T2

1 = 1^

Characteres-

=,z,

S. S."
V.

-S.—

— s —

S= —
duodecimae, hoc est

Extracts from Dr. Arbuthnot's Tables of Ancient Coins,
Weights, and Measures.

1. Roman Measures of Capacity for things Liquid.

English Wine Measure.

Gall. Pints. Sol. Inc. Dec.

Ligula

Ot's

0-1 17t?,

Cyathus

Aceta

bulum
Quartarius

Dhora
Culeus

0
0
0
0
0
0
3
7
143

0^
Oi
0^

4^

0-4691

I2

0-704i

1-409

2 1 Hemina

2-818

4 1 2 1 Sextarius

5-636

48 1

24 1 12 1 6 1 Congius

4-942

96 48 1 24 1 4 1 Urna .

5-33

384 1

192 1 96| 48| 8| 2 | Amj

10-66

460801

11520

38401 19201 960 1 160 | 40 | 20

11-095

2. Attic Measures of Capacity for things Liquid.

9'

r20

MvffTpOV

2 I Koyxv
2

5 I 4|

Kva^oQ

4 I KoTvXri

m

24 1 12 I 8 1 2\S£(rri]S
360 I 288 I 144 I 72 | 48 | 12 | 6 | Xoug

4320 I 3456 1 1728 I 864 | 576 1 144 | 72| 12| Mtrp>?ri7C 10

English Vt'

ine Measure.

Gall.

Pints.

Sol. Inc. Dec

^0

0-0356

0-0712

A

0-089

0-178

0-356

0-535

1
2

2-141

4-283

25-698

19-626

SECT. XXVI.]

3. Attic Measures of Capacittj for things Dry.

COMM.

Kox^iapiov

10 I Kua^oQ

15 1 m'OK(>€a<pov
601 6 1 4|Kori'\;j

1201 12 I 8 I 2 I ZiffTiig

1801 18 1 12 1 3 1 HlXolvtK

8640 I 864 I 576 I 144 | 72 | 48 | Mt^t/ti^oc

N.B. Besides this Medimnus, -which is the Medicus, there was
Georgim, equal to 6 Roman Modii.

English Coro Measure.

recks. Gals.

Pints. Sol. Inch.

0 0

0 0-276

0 0

0 2-763

0 0

0 4-144

0 0

0 16-579

0 0

0 33-158

0 0

1 15-705

4 0

6 3-501

?, there w

as a Medimnus

4. Less ancient Grecian and Roman Weights reduced to English

Troy Weight.

Lentes

96
144

Siliquae

Obolus

2 I ScrupuUim

3 I Drachma

8 I 4 I 11 1 Sextula

12 1 6| 2 I l^lSiciUcus

8 1 23

48 1 24 1 8 I 6 I 4

2 I mPuella .
3 I Uncia

576 I 288 I 96 | 72 | 48 | 36 1 12 | Libra

Lb.

Oz.

Dwta.

Gis.

Qfi

3^

9i

18^^

6^

6|

13f

If

13f

N.B The Roman ounce is the English avoirdupois ounce which they divided into
7 denarii as well as 8 drachms ; and since they reckoned their denarius equal to the
Attic drachm, this will make the Attic weights ^ hea\-ier than the correspondent
Roman weights.

The above Tables are thus given by Conger.

I. Roman Measures of Capacity.
For Liquids (Unit : Amphora = 5fg gallons).

Cub. inch Gal. Qts. Pints.

Ligula

Cyathus

Aceta

mlum
Quartarius

irins
Congius

la

1 Amphora

0-69

2-74

8-23

16-47

32-93

197-59

799-38

1580-75

3161501

2
3
2
0

0-02

0-08

m

0-24

2 1 Heniina

0-48

4 2 1 Sext£

0-95

24 12 6

1-70

96 48 24

4 Uri

0-82

192 96 48

8 2

1-64

46080

11520

3840 1920 960

160 40

20 1 Culeus

0-80

COMM.

II. Grecian Measures of Capacity.
For Liquids (Unit. M£rp>jr)je = H gallons).

Ko^Xt

apiov

XTf/lt]

Ml) or

pov
K6yx»?

rr»je .
Xovg

OlTl] . Cub. ft.

MiTprjTtjg 1

10 13

100 137

1000 1372

Cub. inch.

0-27
0-55
0-69
1-37
2-74
4-12
8-23
16-47
32-93

197-59
1183-56

643-13
1247-26

375-60

310-

2^

n

2|

2\Kva9oc

n

3 m'OKv€a(pov

6 3 2\TEraprov

12 6 4 2|Korj;X»;

24 12 8 4 2|Sec

144 72 48 24 12 6|

864 432 288 144 72 36

6|A

1728 864 576 288 144 72

12 2

[book VII.

Gal. Qts.

Pints.

0-008

0-016

0-02

0-04

0-08

0-12

0-24

0-48

0-95

1-70

0-23

0-46

0-60

1-97

1-70

III. Grecian Pleasures of Capacity.
For things Dry (Unit. Mf^i/xvog =13 bushels).

KoxXia

piov
KvaOc

>G
1 'OKvf-

'a^ov
KoTvXr]

n

4|

2 1 S«ffr»je

4 2 XoTi'i?

16 8 4 1

HfllSKTOV

32 16 8

2 1 'Ekto^

64 32 16

4 2 1 Tp

11520

192 96 48

12 6 3

Cub. ft.

3 I MiStfivoQ 1

10 18

100 182

1000 1829

Cub. iuch.

0-22
2-74
4-12
16-47
32-93
65-86
263-46
526-92
1053-83
143-35
511-
1654-
989-

Diis. Pka. Qta. Piuta.

•008

-079

•12

•48

•95

1-90

3 1-61

7 1-21

1 7 0-43

1 1 5 1-28

14
142

1 0 0-8

2 3 2-

1426 0 7 2-

IV. Roman Weights.
(Unit: Libra = 10 oz. 10 dwts. 9-5 grs. Troy weight.)

Siliqua

a'l Obolus

2 I Scrupulum

Semisextula

2 1 Sexlula

.36

3 1^ 1 Sicilic

Duella

n

Semiuncia

2 1 Uucia

24 12 1 Libra

1728OO 67600 28800 14400 7200 4800 3600 2400 1200 100 | Cent. pod. 87

Troy weight.
Lb. Oz. Dwts. Grs.

2-9

8-8
17.5
11-1
22-1

9-2
20-3
18-4
12-8

9-.5
171

10
7

2
4
5
8
17
10
19

Avoirdupois

weight.
Lb. Oa. Dwts.
0^1 1
0^32
0-64
1-28
2-56
3-85
5-13
7-69
15-39
867
2-85

II
2

SECT. XXVI.] WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 619

The denarius was tlie chief silver coin among the Romans. Comm.
As a vreight it was the 7th part of a Roman ounce. It is
from this standard that both the value of the Roman weights
and coins are deduced.

The industrious, learned, and honest Mr. Greaves affirms
that having in Italy and elsewhere perused many hundred
Denarii consulares, he found, by frequent and exact trial, the
best of them to amount to 62 grains English.

The Roman ounce is certainly our avoii'dupois ounce ; but
I must own that I have differed in a small matter from
Mr. Greaves in settling the quantity of Troy grains contained
in an ounce avoirdupois. The denarius, according to my sup-
position, will come out 62|| grains.

That the denarius was the 7th part of the Roman ounce is
clear from multitudes of passages. Celsus (v, 17) : Sed et
antea sciri volo in uncia pondus denariorum esse septem.

Celsus di\ided the denarius into sLx parts, which he called,
unciae ; uncia being a general word for the division of any
integer. This was done in imitation of the Greek physicians,
who, after the manner of their country, divided their drachma
into 6 oboh.

The common mark of the denarius was an X or X, in imita-
tion of which, among the Latin physicians, it grew to an *.

Of the Roman Pondo. The pondo argenti, amongst the
Romans, is a sort of numeral expression of sums of money,
and is different from the common libra which consisted only
of 84 denarii, or 96 drachms, for as, as, pondo, and mina,
amongst ancient authors generally pass for the same.

Pondo is an indeclinable word, and when it is joined with
numbers it signifies libra ; but when it is joined to other
weights, it stands for the same thing as araOfxt], or oX/crj in the
Greek, signifying the same with pondus, or weight in general.

Of Roman Weights. The Romans used the libra, which they
divided into 12 unciae, or ounces, and the later Greeks, in
imitation of them, had their litra, which they divided after the
same manner.

They divided their ounce into 3 dueUce, and likewise into
6 sextula (sextula among the Greeks was called t^oyioj', and
corruptly, araiyiov). Another division of their ounce was into
4 sicilici. They likewise divided their ounce into 7 denarii.

620 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. [book vii.

CoMM. Then thev divided it into S drachins. The 12tli part of an

' • ' ounce tliey called cUmidia sextula. It was likewise divided into

24- scrupicla, or rather scriptula, called by the Greeks, yoapixaTa.

The denarius was divided into 2 victoriati, not only as a piece
of money but as a weight. The denarius was also divided
into 6 sextantes^ in imitation of the 6 oboh of a drachm ; ac-
cording to which division a sextans would contain, in English
Troy weight, about 63 grains. Celsus mentions the quadrans
denarii and the triens denarii.

The value of the Eoman pound is determined, as in the
tables, from the value of the denarius, viz. 5245^ Troy grains ;
according to the common reckoning it is 5256 ; this small
difference proceeds from assuming the avoirdupois ounce to the
Troy ounce precisely as 51 to 56.

Greek Weights. The talent was the greatest weight as well
as the greatest sum of money among the Greeks. And this
ponderal talent was di\dded, as the nummary talent, into
60 mince, and every mina into 100 drachmce.

A drachma was \ of the ounce and ^ part of a mina. The
Greeks used the expression t^'itov riiiiZ^ayjiov to signify
2\ drachms. The old division of drachma was into 6 oboli.

An obolus contained 6 ^oXkoi, or, as the Latins call them,
cereoli.

An »j/nw|3oXov, or semiobolus, contains 1 siliqua and a half,
and 4 cereoli, according to Cleopatra, but 3 only according to
Diodorus (Ap. Suidam.)

XaX/cog, or sereolus contained the 6th part of an obolus, and
7 XtTrrci, according to Suidas.

The KiiTTov was the 7th part of an sereolus, and was called
by the Latins minuta, and sometimes minutia, and is not
divided into any lesser weight.

The Greeks used the ovy-y'ia, and di\'ided it as the Romans
did. They used the /ctpdrtov, in Latin, siliqua, which was
the 1^ of a drachma.

The medical weights were the mina, of 16 Roman ounces,
as appears from Dioscorides and Galen, and Cleopatra (in Cos-
meticis) who tells you that mina, as a weight, contains 16
ounces, 128 di-achms, 384 scriptula, 768 oboli, 1052 lupini,
2304 siliquse, 6144 sereoli. But when Celsus and Scribonius
Largus make use of a denarius of about 62j| grains, the

SECT. XXVI.] WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 621

draclima being supposed equal to that ; 100 such drachmae Comm.
must have made a mina of 62225~ grains, whereas, a mina of 16
ounces is about 7000 Troy grains, or our avoirdupois pound.

The physicians likewise made use of the litra of 96 drachms.
The ovyyia, or uncia, being divided as usually. The Kt^ariov,
or siliqua, as mentioned before, was likewise a common weight
among the physicians ; and the airaoiov, or grain, \ of the siHqua.

The Romans dividing their ounce into 7 denarii, and like-
wise into 8 drachms ; the Greeks of later ages dividing likewise
their ounce into 8 drachms, and the Roman denarius being
supposed equal to the Greek drachma, have occasioned great
confusion in the expressions of authors about the weights of
both nations. It is evident there was an Attic mina of 16
Roman ounces, namely, the more ancient one, and another of
12i ounces. By ounces is here meant Roman ounces, which
is our avoirdupois ounce. So that the most ancient mina Attica
was exactly our avoirdupois pound. Cleopatra speaks of the
two different mime, the first of 16 and the other of 12i ounces.
Dioscorides mentions only that of 16 ounces ; and though it is
mentioned by the physicians, it is not what they prescribed
by, but perhaps like our avoirdupois weight, what their gross
drugs were at first bought and sold by.

Of Arabian Weights. The Arabian weights used by their
physicians, Serapion, Rhases, and Avicenna, are a mixture of
the Greek and Roman weights, and derived from them. Their
manes is a corruption of the Hebrew maneh, or the Greek mina:
there were two of them, one of 20 ounces, and another of 16.

Kesti

if

1 Kirat

le ancient Arabian weights reduced to Ti
Danich .....

Ob
Al

' weights.

Lb. Oz.

0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 0
0 10
icatica 1 2

Dnrts

18
18
11

Gra.

1 2

6t',

m Onolossat ....

9fR

1 6

3 1 2 |Garme

18t\

1 18 1

9 6 1 3 jDarchimi

06^

41|

1 20^1

10| 6f| 3f| li Denarius

14t?

1 72 1

36 24 1 12 1 4 1 3^ Sextarium

2^

1 144 1

72 48 1 24 1 8 1 7 2 1 Sacros .

11728 1

864 576 |288 | 96 | 84 24|12|RateI

13f

|2304 1

1152 1768 |384 128 |112 36 1 16 1 1^1 Manes

lOf

Greek Measures of Capacity. In reducing the Greek solid
measures to the English, I shall make use of the ■){pvQ, which

622 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. [book vii.

CoMM. made in weight 720 drachms, according to all authors ; sup-
' — * — ' pose of rain-water, the ancients making no difference betwixt
the weight of that and of wine. Taking the heaviest Attic
drachm, which is the 100th part of the old Attic mina, or our
avoirdupois pound, and neglecting the small difference in the
tables, I shall state it at 70 grains Troy. According to this
drachm, the weight of the Attic xovq must be 50,400 grains.
There are in a solid foot 1728 soUd inches, weighing 76 pounds
of rain water: by this experiment 760 grains make 3 solid inches;
therefore, 50,400 make 198*94737 sohd inches, the number of
the solid inches in the yovg ; which is 6 pints, 25,698 solid
inches, somewhat less than the Roman congius, though the Greek
•youc and Roman congius are used indifferently as the same
measure by ancient authors ; as likewise are the 6th part of
them, the ^eartig and sextarius, and the 12th the /cotuXjj and the
hemina. There is great probability that the Greeks measured
the capacity of their vessels by the weight of oil, the product of
their country. For the physicians, speaking of these measures,
always mention their weight in oil ; and Galen, speaking of the
cotyla, saith thatHeras understood the cotyla to be of 60 drachms
reducing the weight to oil. I find likewise that it is a general
supposition among the ancients that the weight of oil was to
that of wine, as 9 to 10 ; so 72 pounds of oil is made equal in
bulk to 80 pounds of wine, 9 pounds of oil to 10 of wine, and
so everywhere. According to our experiments, the weight of oil
is to that of wine or fresh-water, as 476 to 527, which is very
near, as 9 to 9-96. So small a difference may be accounted
for by the oil weighing less in a warm country than in ours.

The largest Greek measure for things liquid was the Attic
/jitTprtTriQ, which contained 12 choes. It is also called aij.(l>op£vg,
KaSog, Kepafiiov.

The \ovg, or yoeuc contained 12 cotylee. It is also called
Xayvi'oq, or Xayvvov, \dyr]i'ov, or lagena. The Greek physicians
sometimes use -^ovg for the Roman congius, the difference being
but small. The Grecians in later times borrow the ^iar-nq from
the Roman sextarius. It was the 6th part of the yovq.

The Attic /cotuAjj was one half of the ^iarnq. It is also
called TpyjSXtoi'.

The o^v'/Ba^oi/ was a measure answering to the Roman ace-
tabulum. Phny saith it was the 4th part of the hemina.

SECT. XXVI.] WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. 623

(H. N. XV, c. ult.) Hesychius saith it was called aig, aXig, Comm.
(ia(j)ioi', and ■yajSfi'oi'.

KvaOoQ was the 12th part of the ^forj/c-

Koyyr} was so called from a shell. There were a greater
and a less. The greater was equal to the oxybaphum, and the
lesser to one half of the cyathus.

Mvar^ov, or ixvgtXov, SO called from hvq. Of this measure
there were two kinds, the greater of which was the 16th part
of the cotyla, and the lesser the 4th part of the cyathus. The
mystrum is called j3ap/3oc by Hesychius.

Xr/'^rj was so named from a shell-fish. There was a greater
or rustic cheme, the 20th part of the cotyla ; but the lesser,
which the physicians used, was the 30th pai't of the cotyla.

The KoyXia^iov, in Latin, cochlear, was the smallest measure
for liquids : it is equal to one half of the cheme. See the
Table,

Ch'eek Measures of things Dry. M.i^if.ivoq, or jueStjitvoi', was
a measure for dry things, such as wheat, barley, flour, &c., and
contained 48 choenices.

Xod'i^ is a dry measure containing 3 cotylse, and so was
li of the ^£(TTT)c: /cotuAjj, oHu'jSa^oi', KvaOog, and Ko'^Xiapiov
were also used as measures for things dry. Their capacity and
proportion to one another is the same as when they are mea-
sures for liquids, which have been shown already.

The Roman Measures of Capacity. The amphora, which
contained 8 congii, was the cube of a pes, or foot. The con-
gius itself, the cube of \ foot. The pes being settled, as equal
to 11-604 inches, its cube 1562'5112, gives the contents of the
amphora in solid inches ; and divided by 8, gives 195*3139
inches for that of the congius.

The greatest measure among the Romans of liquid things,
was the culeus, or culleus, containing 20 amphoraj. A culeus
also contains 40 wns, the urn being half the amphora.

The amphora is otherwise called quadrantal, ceramium, cadus,
and /uT^riTijg IroXtKoc- The imia is the 40th part of the culeus,
and the half of the amphora.

The conc/ius was the 8th part of the amphora, and the 4th of
the urna : it contained 6 sextarii. The congius in English
measure contains 207*0676 solid inches, that is, 7 pints 4*942
solid inches.

The sextarius urbicus was the 6th part of the congius. This

624 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES. [book vii.

CoMM. sextarius is dmded into two hemiiKB, or cotyI(P. It is also
' * ' divided into four quartarii which are the half of a hemina. A
sextarius is also di\ided into 8 acetabula. The parts of the
sextarius were like those of the as, uncia, sextans, quadrans,
triens, quincunx, semis, septunx, bes, dodrans, dextans, deunx,
by which words a certain number of cyathi is meant, a cyathus
being the 12th part of the sextarius. The sextarius castrensis
was double of the urbicus.

Hemina, the half of the sextarius, contains 2 quartarii, 4
acetabula, 6 cyathi, 24 ligulse.

Quartarius, as we have said, was the fourth part of the sex-
tarius.

The acetabulum was the half of the quartarius.

Cyathus was the 12th part of the sextarius.

The ligula, or lingua, contained one 48th of the sextarius.

Cochlear, cochleare, and cochlearium, often denote a spoon,
and sometimes a measure equal to the ligula.

There was also among the E-oraans a libra mensuralis, which
the Greeks called XtVoo /uTciKt], and distinguished from the
X'lrpa aradf-UKi], or libra ponderalis. This consisted of 12 ounces,
and was divided as the as. It was made commonly of horn,
and divided by 12 lines, marking the ounces. This libra men-
suralis weighed 10 ounces of oil, and of wine, 11 oz. 2 scr., 1
obolus, and 1 siliqua, according to the ponderal libra. The
ancients all along supposed the weight of oil to be, to that of
wine, as 9 to 10. This proportion of the specific gravity of
these two liquors holds in this computation; for 11 oz., 2 scr.
1 ob. 1 sil., make 1600 siliquae ; and 10 ounces make 1440
siliquje; and dividing both by 160, makes it as 9 to 10, Ac-
cording to this weight of wine assigned by Galen, the libra
mensuralis contained 19'085 solid inches, somewhat less than
% of our pint, wine measure. But the Roman measures vary-
ing, in all appearance this originally was designed to contain
12 ponderal ounces of water, according to which weight it
would be equal to 20-612 solid inches, the difference between
the two being only 1*527 soHd inches.

Roman Measures of Capacity for things dry. The modius
was the thii'd part of the amphora, or quadrantal, which was
one half of the medimnus. The semimodius contained 8 sextarii.
Sextarius and hemina are also measures of dry things, as so
also quartarius, acetabulum, cyathus and concha.

SECT. XXVI.]

Table of the Roman Measures of capacity for things Dry.

COMM.

Eu^Hsh Corn Measure.
Pecks. Gal. Pints. Sol. inch.

Ligula
4 1 Cyathus

tarius
Semimodius .
2 1 Modius

0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0

1
•i

0
0

001
004

6 1 1^ 1 Acetabulum
24 1 6 4 Hemina

006
0-24

48 1 12 1 8 2 1 Sex

0-48

384 1 96 1 64 16 | 8

3-84

768 1 192 1 128 32 | 16 |

7-68

Of the Arabian Measures. The knowledge of the Arabian
measures is necessary for those who read the Arabian physicians,
such as Avicenna, Rhases, Serapion, Mesue, and Haly Abbas.

Dorach, equal to the Roman amphora.

Aldorach, equal to 2 xestse.

Joheni, equal to the congius of the Romans.

Kist, equal to a Roman sextarius.

Korboni, equal to the hemina.

Kiliathi, equal to one half of the cotyla.

Kestuf, equal to the acetabulum.

Cuathum, equal to the cyathus.

Falgerin, equal to the cochleare par^Tim.

Briala, a measure of uncertain capacity.

Mustarum, the greater equal to 3 hemina, the lesser equal
to \ cyathus. A corruption of the Greek fxvar^ov.

Hemina

Sextarius

Modius

Hemina

Sextarius

Congius

Urna

Amphora

Culeus

K07V\»J

XoCc

Decimal Tables.
Roman Measures for things Dry.

Attic Measures for things Dr}'.

0-5074 pint.
1-0148 pints.
1-0141 pecks.

0-9903 pint.

1-486 pints.

1-0906 bushels.

Roman Measures for things Liquid.

0-59759 pint.

1-19518 pints.

7-1712 pints.

. • . . 3-5857 gallons.
7-1712 gallons.

2-27 hogsheads.

Attic Measures for things Liquid.

0-5742 pint.
1-1483 pints.
6-8900 pints.
10-335 gallons.

WEIGHTS AND MEASURES,

[book VII.

CoMM. A Table of the more usual Characters of Weights and Measures

used by the Greek and Roman Authors.
'Metralogie/ p. 95.

Notes ponderales des Romains.

From Paucton,

Granum
Teruiicius

Libella

Simplium

Sestertius, Nummus

Scriptulum, Scripulum, Gramma

Victoriatus, Quinarius

Hemisescla

Denarius, drachma

Sextula, sescla, exagion, stagion

Semisicilicus

Sicilicus, sesquisextula

Duella, binae sextulse

Semuncia

Uncia, oungia, ouggia

Sescuncia ....

Sextans ....

Quadrans ....

Triens ....

Quincunx

Semissis, Semis, Selibra

Septunx ....

Bessis, Bes

Dodrans ....

Decunx, Dextans

Deunx ....

Libra, litra, pondo, as, monas

Dupondium

T.

HS.Jis.ttS.N. .

\.u,v,

2-'

\\.uir.i3

o o .z .

l.ooo
. oooo ,

■ ST-

H

y — ■

TP.R.LL .

SECT. XXVI.]

G27

Notes ponderales des Grecs.

COMM.

Chalcous

XX-^^^-

Keration, siliqua

K'K' ^

Heiniobolon

0!^Z

Gramma ....

ys-

Obolos ....
Diobolon ....

\ . ■ .O^.C>5.C*.
00-— ^ •

Triobolon, Tropaicon

T. / .9

Tetraobolou

9 •

Drachme, ungros, holce

. a^.A.^.'j.^.^./'.^^^

Ouggia, uncia .
Mna, Mina

. mix ^^^

Litra, Libra

• A-A-^^-

Talanton, talentum .

.T-o:-

Notes mensurales des Romains,

Cyathus .

Quartarius

Hemina, libra mensuralis

Sextarius .

Congius

Demodius

Modius

Uma

Quadrantal, amphora

Manipulus, une poignte

Paxillus, une pinc^e .

KKYCi/.Cv.TI
OS. z,^. H.

m.Ms.chs.

^YEIGHTS AND MEASURES.

[book VII.

COMM.

Notes mensurales des Grecs.

Cheme

Kochlearion, Ligida .

Mystron .

Kyathos .

Oxybaphon, Baphion

Kotyle, TrybUon

Xestes

Choinix, Cboenix

Cbous

Medimnos

Keramion, Metretes, Cados

XX-
X-

The end of the Commentary on Paulus tEgineta.

GENERAL INDEX.

Abrong, an article in the Arabian Ma-
teria Medica, vol. iii, p. 471.

Abrotanum, see Southernwood.

Abscess, on the nature and general treat-
ment of, ii, 54-9 ; surgical treatment
of, 305-8 ; of the womb, and treatment
thereof, 385-6.

Absintliium, varieties of, and their uses
in medicine, iii, 63, 64.

Acacia, its medicinal properties, iii, 26.

Acallis, its properties in medicine, iii, 26.

Acauthium, its medicinal properties, iii,
23.

Acanthus, its medicinal properties, iii, 27.

Acarus, its medicinal properties, iii, 29.

Acetabulum, one of the ancient measures.
See Measures.

Achates, or Agate, its medicinal powers,
iii, 221, 223.

Achores, an eruptive disease of the scalp,
i, 346, 348.

Acinus, account of, and its properties as
a medicine, iii, 28.

Aconite, symptoms and treatment of
poisoning by, ii, 220; its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 29.

Acopa, or Restorative Ointments, on the
composition of, iii, 581-9.

Acorns, sometimes used as articles of
food by the ancients, i, 137.

Acrochordones, description and general
treatment of, ii, 48 ; surgical treatment
of, 276.

Actual cautery, application of, to the
head, ii, 248, 250.

Adarce, probably a species of zoophyte,
iii, 22 ; its uses in medicine, ibid.

Adhesion of the eyelids, surgical treat-
ment of, ii, 273, 274.

^gilops, symptoms and nature of the

disease, with general treatment, i, 4 13,

427 ; surgical treatment of, ii, 285-8 ;

an article in the Mat Med., iii, 24.

jErugo, or Verdigris, nature of, and its

uses in medicine, iii, 142.
Ms, or Copper, see Copper.

jEthiopis, its properties as a medicine,

iii, 25.
Affusion of cold water, its use in tetanus,

i, 404, 406, 407.
Agallochum, its properties as a medicine,

iii, 18.
Agaric, its uses in medicine, iii, 19.
Ageratum, its uses in medicine, iii, 20.
Agglutinants, list of used in the treat-
ment of ulcers, ii, 101 et seq.
Agrostis, or Grass, its properties as a

medicine, iii, 20.
Airs, on the different kinds of, i, 161.
Alauda, or Lark, its uses in medicine, iii,

190.
Albaras, a term used by the Arabians for

Lepra, ii, 21.
Alchemy, the ancient wn-iters on medicine

make no allusions to, iii, 17 ; Firmicus

the earliest writer on, ibid.
Alcsea, or Vervain-mallow, its medicinal

uses, iii, 33.
Alcyonia, on the varieties of, and their

medicinal properties, iii, 33, 34.
Ale, see Zythus.
Alica, a preparation from spelt, nearly

the same as chondrus, i, 123.
Alkalies, their use in pneumonia, i, 481 ;

general properties in medicine, iii, 185.

See further Lixivial.
Almonds, description of their dietetical

properties, i, 136 ; their uses in medi-
cine, iii, 41.
Alabastrites, account of, and its uses in

medicine, iii, 226.
Aloe, varieties of, and their medicinal

properties, iii, 34.
Alopecia, see under Hair.
Alphos, description of, ii, 16, &c., 33-5 ;

the Lepra alphoides of modern noso-

logists, 23.
Alsine, or Chickweed, its medicinal pro-
perties, iii, 35.
Alsander, see under Smyrnium.
Altha;a, or Marshmallow, its medicinal

properties, iii, 32.

Alum, different kinds of, known to the
ancients, and their uses, iii, 360, 361.

AMne discharges, their characters in
fevers, i, 222.

Alypon, its medicinal properties, iii, 35.

Alysson, or ^ladwort, its medicinal pro-
perties, iii, 36.

Amaracus, or Marjoram, its uses in me-
dicine, ui, 36.

Amaranth, its medicinal properties, iii, 37.

Amaurosis, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 421, 434.

Amber, see under Electrum, Ambergris,
and Karabe.

Ambergris, its medicinal properties as
given by the Arabians, iii, 426 ; un-
known to the Greeks and Romans,
ibid.

Ambrosia, account of its medicinal pro-
perties, iii, 27.

Amenorrhoea, treatment of, i, 609-14.

Amethyst, account of the gem, and its
medicinal properties, iii, 224.

Amiantus, its uses in medicine, iii, 228.

Aminsean ^Yine, used in the treatment of
lieutery, i, 521.

Amrai, or Bishop's ^Yeed, its medicinal
properties, iii, 38.

Ammoniac, description of the different
kinds of, and their uses, iii, 38, 39.

Amomum, discussion on the ancient, and
its medicinal properties, iii, 42 ; amo-
mum grana paradisi, known to Ebn
Baithar, 436.

Ampeloprasum, its uses in medicine, iii,
40.

Amphisbaena, treatment of persons stung
by, ii, 180, 181.

Amphora, see under Weights.

Amputation of the extremities, ii, 409-
414.

Amulets, their use in quartans, i, 248;
in epilepsy, 378, 381 ; in gout, 670.

Annirca, or Lees of Oil, its medicinal pro-
perties, iii, 39.

AmygdaliE, see Almonds.

Aniylum, or Starch, its medicinal uses,
iii, 41.

Anabrochismus, description of the ope-
ration, ii, 270.

Anacardium, treatment of poisoning by,
ii, 242 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 450.

Anagalbs, or Pimpernel, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 43.

Anagyrus, its medicinal uses, iii, 43.

Anchusse, or Alkanets, their varieties and
medicinal properties, iii, 21.

Anethum, or Dill, its medicinal proper-
ties, iii, 46.

Aneurism, surgical treatment of, ii, 312-6.

Angina, see Quinsy.

Angiology, description of the operation,

ii, 254-6.
Animals, parts of, used as articles of

food, i, 149.
Anisum, or Anise, its uses in medicine,

iii, 46.
Ankle, on dislocations at, ii, 506-8.
Anonis, Ononis, or Rest-harrow, its uses

in medicine, iii, 47.
Antirrinon, or Snapdragon, its medicinal

uses, ui, 47.
Anthrax, or Carbuncle, treatment of the

disease, ii, 78, 79 ; the gem, its uses

in medicine, iii, 221, 224.
Anthyllis, its medicinal powers, iii, 46.
Antiades, or Indurated Tonsils, treatment

of, ii, 299.
Antimony, account of its medicinal uses,

iii, 356.
Anus, on Imperforate, and the treatment

thereof, ii, 405 ; on fistulas of, and

their treatment, 399 ; general diseases

of, i. 600, 605.
Aphace,or "Wild Vetch, its medicinal uses,

iii, 62.
Aphronitrum, account of it, and its

powers in medicine, iii, 62.
Apochyma, or Old Pitch, its medicinal

uses, iii, 48.
Apocynum, its deleterious effects, ii, 242.

See also Brassica canina.
Apolinose, application of it to fistula;

and hemorrhoids, ii, 401, 403.
Apoplexy, symptoms and treatment of,

i, 392.'
Appetite, loss of, in fevers, and treatment

thereof, i, 311.
Apples, their characters as articles of

food, i, 134 ; their uses in medicine,

iii, 250.
Apricot, its characters as an article of

food, i, 133.
Arabs, eulogium on the ancient, by

Beckniann, iii, 479.
Arabian Stone, account of, and its powers

in medicine, iii, 225.
Arbute, its characters in medicine, iii,

184.
Arcion, or Burdock, its medicinal powers,

iii, 51.
Arctium, its medicinal powers, iii, 51.
Ardent Fevers, symptoms and treatment

of, i, 260 et seq.
Arena, or Sand, its uses in medicine, iii,

38.
Aigemone, or Prickly Poppy, its medi-
cinal powers, iii, 49.
Arisarum, or Friar's Cowl, its uses in

medicine, iii, 49.

G31

Aristolochia, or Birthwort, varieties of,

and their medicinal powers, iii, 50.
Arnieniacum, or Arnieuium, account of,

and its uses, iii, 52.
Ann, on fractures of, and their treatment,

i", 456-64.
Armpits, of fetid smells in the, i, 506.
Arnabo, ditKculty of determining what

it was, iii, 52.
Arsenic, treatment of poisoning by, ii,

235, 236 ; kinds known to tlie ancients,

236 ; iii, 54 ; its uses in medicine, iii,

53, 54. See also Sandarach.
Artamita, its virtues in medicine, iii, 457.
Artemisia, or Mugwort, its medicinal

powers, iii, 52.
Arteriacs, on the nature and composition

of, i, 473.
Arteriotomy, description of the operation,

ii, 253.
Arthritis, symptoms and treatment of,

657 et seq.
Artichoke, not described by any of the

ancients but Columella, i, 114.
Artologani, a species of bread, i, 122.
Arum, a plant resembling the di'agon-

herb, i, 114.
Arum, or Wakerobin, its medicinal

powers, iii, 53.
Asarabacca, its properties as a medicine,

iii, 55.
Asclepias, or Swallow-wort, its medicinal

powers, iii, 56.
Ascyrron, a species of hypericum, its

medicinal uses, iii, 57.
Ash, its virtues as a medicine, iii, 247.
Ashes, nature of the ancient, and their

medicinal powers, iii, 372.
Asian Stone, its medicinal powers, iii,

221, 224.
Asp, treatment of persons stung by, ii,

187, &c. ; a variety of the common

viper, 189.
Aspalatiius, its medicinal powers, iii, 57.

See Rosewood.
Asparagi, the young shoots of plants, i,

116; uses of asparagus in medicine,

iii, 58.
Asphaltos, or Bitumen, its medicinal

powers, iii, 60.
Asphodel, or Kingspear, its uses in me-
dicine, iii, 61.
Asplenium, or Spleenwort, its medicinal

powers, iii, 58.
Ass, flesh of the wild, sometimes used as

an article of food, i, 149.
Aster Atticus, account of, and its virtues

in medicine, iii, 59.
Asthma, svmptoms and treatment of, i,

475, &c.

Astragalus, or Wild Liquorice, its virtues

in medicine, iii, 60.
Astragalus, on dislocations of the bone,

ii, 507, 508.
Atheroma, description and general treat-
ment of, ii, 94, 95 ; surgical treatment

of, 311, 312.
Atractylis, or Distatf-thistle, its uses in

medicine, iii, 61.
Atranientum sntorium, sometimes used

as a poison, ii, 242 ; account of, and

its uses in medicine, iii, 402.
Atriplex, or Orache, its medicinal powers,

iii, 61.
Autopvrus, a coarse kind of bread, i,

122'.
Azederach, introduced into the practice

of medicine by the Arabs, iii, 449.

Baccharis, or Ploughman's Spikenard, its

uses in medicine, iii, 66.
Baldness, treatment of, see under Hair.
Balaustium, or Flower of Pomegranate,

its uses in medicine, iii, 66.
Balote, or Base Horehound, its medicinal

uses, iii, 67.
Balsamum, or Balsam-tree, its uses in

medicine, iii, 67.
Bamboo-cane, sugar procured from, i,

319. See Sugar.
Barb, the fish, described bv Ausonius, i,

161.
Barley, its character as an article of food,

i, 123; its medicinal uses, iii, 195.
Basil, as au article of food, i, 115; its

virtues in medicine, iii, 423.
Basilisk, treatment of persons stung by,

ii, 189 ct seq.
Bass, the fish, its characters as an article

of food, i, 161.
Bastard SaftVon, see Cnicus.
Baths, description of the ancient, i, 67-

73 ; public, of the Romans, 68 ; mode

in which the ancients took them, 68 ;

natural baths or spas, 71.
Batos, or Bramble, its medicinal uses,

iii, 68.
Baum, its medicinal uses, iii, 248.
Bay-tree, its uses in medicine, iii, 93,94.
Bdellium, account of, iii, 70, 439.
Bean, characters of the different varieties

of, i, 126; its uses in medicine, iii, 199.
Bear's Grease, its use in the cure of bald-
ness, i, 342.
Bear's Breech, see Acanthus.
Beasts, general characters of their flesh as

food,i, 145 ; formed the principal part

of man's food in the heroic age, ibid.
Beccafigo, the ficcdula of the Romans, i

142.

Bee-glue, see Propolis.

Beef, its characters as an article of food,
i, 148.

Beet, used as an article of food, i, 112 ;
its uses in medicine, iii, 371.

Behen, dissertation upon, iii, 478.

Benet noctis, see Epinyctis.

Ben-nut, or Nut-ben, its medicinal
powers, iii, 65.

Berberis, or Berberry, its introduction
into medicine, iii, 438.

Bereugemish, or Ozimum Gariofilatum,
iii, 477.

Bettonica, or Bettony, on its characters
as a medicine, iii, 71.

Bezoar, account of its introduction into
medicine, iii, 426.

Bindweed, its medicinal powers, iii, 283.

Bird-lime, see Viscum.

Birthwort, see Aristolochia.

Bishop's Weed, see Ammi,

Bitumen, see Aspbaltos.

Blatta Pistrina, its uses in medicine, iii,
337.

Blitum, or Elite, its properties as a pot-
herb, i, 114 ; its uses in medicine, iii,
72.

Blood, medicinal properties of the various
kinds of, iii, 25.

Bones, their medicinal uses, iii, 287.

Borax, or Tincar, account of, iii, 476.

Bothrion, see Ulcers of the Eyes.

BotiTs, or Goose-foot, its medicinal uses,
iii, 73.

Brain, ancient physiologj- of the, i, 83 ;
its uses in medicine, iii, 99.

Bramble, see Batos.

Bran, see Crimnon.

Bread, description of the varieties of,
known to the ancients, i, 122 ; pre-
pared with leaven or yeast, 123 ; its
uses in medicine, iii, 55.

Breasts, on the diseases of, i, 504 ; male,
morbidly resembhng female, ii, 336.

Brine, see Muria.

Britannica, account of, and its uses in
medicine, iii, 77, 78.

Brocoli, its dietetical characters accord-
ing to Rhases, i, 113.

Bronchocele, sui'gical treatment of, ii,
316.

Bronchotomy, said to have been per-
formed by Hippocrates in quinsy, i,
166. For a description of the opera-
tion, see Laryngotomy.

Broom, its uses in medicine, iii, 351.

Broth, account of its medicinal uses, iii,
126.

Bruised nail, on the treatment of, ii,
415.

Brvon, or Lichen, its medicinal uses, iii,
78.

Bryony, its uses in medicine, iii, 79.

Bubo, nature and treatment of, ii, 71-3.

Bubonocele, general account of, and its
treatment, i, 589 ; surgical treatment
of, ii, 377-9.

Bubonium, see Aster Atticus.

Buccellatum, the name of a sort of bread,
i, 125.

Buccellatus, a compound purgative medi-
cine, iii, 494.

Buccinae, their uses in medicine, iii, 170.

Buckthorn-plantain, see Coronopus.

Buckthorn, see Rhamnus.

Bugs, see Cimices.

Buglossuin, used as an article of food, i,
115; its medicinal powers, iii, 77.

Bulbi, the esculent, difficult to deter-
mine exactly, i, 118; medicinal powers
of the esculent and emetic, iii, 73.

Bulimia, or Bulimos, treatment of, in
fevers, i, 313.

Bullae, see Phlyctsnse.

BuU's-blood, treatment of poisoning by,
ii, 230, 231.

Bunium, or Earth-nut, its medicinal
powers, iii, 74.

Buphthalmum, or Ox-eye, its medicinal
powers, iii, 76.

Buprestis, treatment of poisoning by, ii,
203 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 74.

Burncow, see Buprestis.

Burns, on the treatment of, ii, 42-5.

Burning, or application of the Cautery
to, the eyelids, ii, 265 ; the armpits,
330 ; for empyema, 332 ; over the
liver, 335 ; over the spleen, 336 ; over
the stomach, 336 ; over the hip-joints,
394.

Bustard, or Otis, a delicious article of
food, i, 142.

Butcher's-broom, its medicinal powers,
iii, 94.

Butter, its uses by the ancients in food
and medicine, iii, 74-6.

Buzeiden, probably the Orchis morio, iii,
459 ; its uses in medicine, ibid.

Cabbage, its properties as a pot-herb, i,
113; taken to prevent intoxication,
176 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 193.

Cacalia, see Cacanus.

Cacanus, account of, and its uses in me-
dicine, iii, 148.

Cachexia, nature and treatment of, i, 568.

Cactos, nature of, and its effects as a
poison, ii, 240, 241.

Cadmia, or Calamine, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 149.

Caeliac affection symptoms and treat-
ment of, i, 520.

Calais, account of, as a medicine, iii, 228.

Calamagrostis, or BuII-reed, its medi-
cinal powers, iii, 151.

Calainintli, its uses in medicine, iii, 151.

Calamus aromaticus, or Sweet-cane, its
medicinal powers, iii, 152.

Calculus, see Lithotomy ; general treat-
ment of, i, 541 ; of the uterus, 632.

Callus, treatment of redundant, in frac-
tures, ii, 476 ; of distortion from, 477 ;
on bones which have not united for
want of, 477.

Caniphora, its characters as given by the
Ara'jians, iii, 427.

Canals, nature of these surgical instru-
ments, ii, 471.

Cancers, symptoms and general treat-
ment of, ii, 79-83; surgical treatment
of, ii, 334-336.

Canine appetite, in fevers, treatment of,
i, 314.

Canker-worms of Pines, their uses in
medicine, iii, 302.

Cannabis, or Hemp, its uses in medicine,
iii, 155,

Canopum, or Elder, see under Elder.

Cantharis, treatment of poisoning by, ii,
201 et seq ; uses of in medicine, iii, 153.

Caparis, or Caper-tree, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 155.

Carbuncle of the eyelids, treatment of,
1,419, 432; general nature and treat-
ment of, ii, 75, 79 ; the gem scarcely
used as a medicine, iii, 224.

Carcinoma, of the eyelids, i, 419, 432.

Cardamom, its medicinal properties, iii,
157.

Cardiac disease, account of from Celsus,
C. Aurelianus, and Aretaeus, i, 292
et seq.

Carline Thistle, its characters as an article
of food, i, 113.

Carobs, or Siliqua;, an inferior article of
food, i, 137.

Carious Wood, its uses in medicine, iii,
326.

Carpesia, treatment of poisoning by, ii,
218.

Carpesium, falsely taken for cubebs, its
uses in medicine, iii, 159.

Carrot, or Staphylinus, its characters as
an article of food, i, 118.

Cartilaginous fishes, their characters as
articles of food, i, 169 et seq.

Carum, or Caraway, its virtues as a medi-
cine, iii, 158.

Carus, symptoms and treatment of the
disease, i, 372.

Caryophyllon, or Cloves, its properties

as a medicine, iii, 160.
Cassamum, the fruit of the Balsam-tree,

iii, 161.
Cassia, its virtues as a medicine, iii, 161.
Cassia fistida, its medicinal characters as

given by the Arabians, iii, 429-31 ; of

the Greeks a very different substance,

iii, 161.
Cassia lignea, same as the Cassia bark of

the moderns, iii, 161.
Castor, supposed by the ancient autho-
rities the testicles of the beaver, iii,

162 ; its characters as a medicine, 163,
Castor-oil Plant, its characters as a medi-
cine, iii, 170, 171. See Ricinus.
Castration, description of the operation,

iii, 379.
Catalepsy, symptoms and treatment of, i,

369, &c.
Catapliora, treatment of in fevers, i, 301,
Cataract, surgical treatment of, ii, 280-5.
Cateri)illar, or Eruca, its properties as a

medicine, iii, 153.
Catarrh, symptoms and treatment of, i,

469.
Caucalis, or Wild Carrot, its uses in

medicine, iii, 163.
Cauda pudendi, symptoms and treatment

of the disease, ii, 381 382.
Causus, see Ardent Fevers.
Catheterism, description of the operation,

ii, 351.
Cedrus, or Juniper, its medicinal uses,

iii, 164,
Celandine, or Chelidonium, its uses in

medicine, iii, 412.
Cenchrinus, treatment of persons stung

by, ii, 186.
Centaury, its uses in medicine, iii, 165.
Cepsea, its uses in medicine, iii, 169.
Cephalalgia, symptoms and treatment of,

i, 350.
Cephalaca, symptoms and treatment of,

i, 355.
Cera, or Wax, its uses in medicine, iii,

169.
Cerastes, a variety of the Egyptian viper,

ii, 189 ; treatment of persons stung

by, 187-9.
Cerasia, or Cherries, history of, as an

article of food, i, 132, 133 ; their uses

in medicine, iii, 167.
Ceratonia, see Carob-tree.
Ceruse, treatment of poisoning by, ii,

234 ; nature of, 235 ; its characters as

a medicine, iii, 420.
Cetacca, or Large Fishes, account of, i,

170.
Ceterach, sec Asplcniiun.

G34

Chalazia of the eyelid, surgical treatment

of, ii, 275.
Chalcanthos, disquisition on, iii, 402.

See Atramentum sutorium.
Chalcitis, disquisition on the nature of,

iii, 399-401.
Chamseleon, treatment of poisoning by,

ii, 208 ; its characters as a medicine,

iii, 407.
Chamsedrops, its characters as a medi-
cine, iii, 410.
Chamjedrys, or Germander, its uses in

medicine, iii, 406.
Chamoeleuce, or Ground Poplar, its uses

in medicine, iii, 407.
Chamaemelmu, or Chamomile, its uses in

medicine, iii, 408.
Chamajpitys, or Ground Pine, its virtues

in medicine, iii, 409.
Chamffisyce, or Ground Fig, its virtues

in medicine, iii, 410.
Chameljea, its characters in medicine, iii,

410,412. See Mezereon.
Characters for the different weights and

measures, iii, 626-28.
Chaste-tree, see Yitex.
Cheese, varieties of, and their characters

in dietetics, i, 155, 156; its uses in

medicine, iii, 382.
Chemosis, svmptoms and treatment of,

i, 412, 425.
Cherry, see Cerasion.
Chesnuts, their characters as articles of

food, i, 138.
Chickweed, see Alsine.
Chickpea, see Cicer.
Chilblains, treatment of, i, 676.
Chironian Ulcers, symptoms and treat-
ment of, ii, 114.
Cholagogues, nature of, and list according

to Mesue, iii, 489; to Margravius, 490.
Cholera, symptoms and treatment of, i,

515 et seq.
Chondrile, or Gum Succory, its characters

as a medicine, iii, 414.
Chondrus or Farro, is a sort of shelled

grain prepared from spelt, i, 123 ;

used as a medicine, iii, 415.
Cicada or Tree-hopper, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 390.
Cicatrices of the eyes, treatment of, i,

418 ; treatment of black, ii, 118.
Cicer, or Chickpea, its uses as a medicine,

iii, 112.
Cichorium, or Succory, its medicinal

powers, iii, 176.
Cider, ancients well acquainted with the

preparation of, i, 134.
Cimices, or Bugs, their medicinal powers,
iii, 188.

Cinara, difficulty of determining what it
was, i, 113.

Cinnabaris or Sanguis Draconis, its uses
in medicine, iii, 171.

Cinnamon, its medicinal powers, iii, 172.

Cinquefoil, see Quiiiquefolium.

Circsea, or Enchanter's Nightshade, its
medicinal powers, iii, 173.

Circumcision, description of the opera-
tion, ii, 349, 350.

Circocele, surgical treatment of, ii, 370,
372.

Cistus or Rock-rose, its \"irtues as a
medicine, iii, 174.

Citron, its characters as an article of
food, i, 137.

Clavus, or Corns, on the treatment of, i,
678 ; of the feet, treatment of, ii, 416,
417.

Cla^icle, on fractures of, ii, 447, 450 ; on
dislocations of, ii, 482, 484.

Clematis, or Virgin's Bower, its medicinal
uses, iii, 177.

Clinopodium or Field-basil, its medicinal
uses, iii, 178.

Clitoris, sursjical treatment of enlarged,
ii, 381, 382.

Clysters, description of the ancient, i, 57.

Cnicus, or Bastard Saffron, its powers as
a medicine, iii, 178 ; used as an anti-
dote to poisons, ibid ; its general uses
in medicine, iii, 175.

Coagulated MOk, treatment of poisoning
by, ii, 231.

Cocoa-nut, its charactei's as a mechcine,
iii, 438.

Cochlese, or White Snails, esteemed as a
delicacy by the Romans, i, 168 ; uses
of, in medicine, iii, 192.

Cockle, see ^Egilops,

Coeloma, see Ulcers.

Cold, treatment of personsinjured by, i, 49.

Collyria, varieties of, and their composi-
tion, iii, 548, 558.

Colic, symptoms and treatment of, i,
531, &c.

Coltsfoot, its medicinal uses, iii, 72.

Colocynth, description of, and its uses in
medicine, iii, 183.

Comfrey, see Symphytum.

Conchyha, their uses in medicine, iii, 178.

Condisi, poisonous substance treated of
by the Arabians, ii, 242.

Condyloma of the Uterus, treatment of,iii,
382,383; of the anus, treatment of,405.

Congius, see Weights.

Contagion, history of ancient opinions
on, i, 284, 288.'

Continued or Synochous Fevers, symp-
toms and treatment of, i, 256.

Contusion of the Ears, treatment of, i,

440, 445.
Convza, or Fleabane, its medicinal uses,

iii', 185.
Copper, the ancient varieties of, and their

uses in medicine, iii, 404, 406.
Copperas, see under Chalcanthos.
Coralliuui, or Coral, its medicinal uses,

iii, 187.
Cordial Medicines, Arabian doctrines re-
garding the nature of, iii, 473.
Coriander, its medicinal properties, iii,

189.
Coris, its uses in medicine, iii, 189.
Cork, its uses in medicine, iii, 393.
Cornus, or Cornel, its medicinal uses, iii,

193.
Corns, see Clavus.
Coronopodium, prol)al)ly the same as the

Corouopus, i, 670 ; its purgative

powers, iii, 495.
Corouopus, or Buckthorn-plantain, its

characters as a medicine, iii, 190.
Cos, or "Whetstone, account of, iii, 227.
Cosmetics of the ancients, see under

Hair.
Costus, account of, and its properties in

metUcine, iii, 190, 192.
Cotton, the Horon, or Bombax of the

Arabians, iii, 464, 465.
Cotton-thistle, see Acanthium.
Cotyledon, or Navel-wort, its uses in

medicine, iii, 192.
Cough, treatment of, i, 309, 470, &c.
Counter-fissure, ancient opinions regard-
ing, ii, 440.
Crab, its uses in medicine, iii, 158.
Crab-tree, see Epimelis.
Crane, a nutritious but indigestible article

of food, i, 143.
Crane-bill, see Geranium.
CratKogonon, its medicinal uses, iii, 194.
Cress, used as a seasoner by the ancient

Persians, i, 114.
Crimnon, or Bran, its medicinal uses,

iii, 196.
Crises in Fevers, account of, i, 198, &c.
Critical Davs, ancient opinions regarding,

i, 190, cS^c.
Crithmon, or Samphire, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 195.
Crocodiles, treatment of persons bitten

l)y, ii, 193.
Crocodilium, its medicinal uses, iii, 197.
Croconiagma, composition of, iii, 531,

593.
Crustacea, their characters as articles of

food, i, 170.
Crocus, or Saffron, its uses in medicine,

iii, 198.

Cubebs, introduced into medicine by the

Arabians, iii, 463.
Cucumber, its characters as an article of

food, i, 128, 129 ; its uses in medicine,

iii, 335.
Cucurbita, see Gourd.
Cudweed, see Gnaphahum.
Culeus, see Weights.
Cumin, its uses in medicine, iii, 203.
Cupping, ancient modes of performing,

iii, 326, 330.
Curds and Whey, the Schistou of the

ancients, i, 155.
Cuttle-fish, see under Sepia.
Cyanus, account of, and its medicinal

uses, iii, 200.
Cyathus, see under Weights.
Cynanchc, see under Quinsy.
Cyperus, its uses in medicine, iii, 204.
Cyphi, composition of, iii, 599, 600.
Cypress, its uses in medicine, iii, 204,
Cytisus, its medicinal uses, iii, 206.

Daffodil, or Narcissus, its medicinal

uses, iii, 266.
Damascenes, their characters in dietetics,

i, 136.
Darnel, its medicinal virtues, iii, 26.
Date, used in various ways as an article

of food, i, 135 ; wine prepared from,

ibid.
Daucus, see Carrot.
Defluxion on the Eyes, treatment of, i,

411.
Dehquium Animi, treatment of, in fevers,

i, 327 ; distinction between it and

syncope, 328.
Delirium Tremens, case of, related by

Hippocrates, i, 407.
Demoniacs, what the persons so desig-
nated in Scripture probably were, i,

383.
Dende of the Arabians, either the lignum

colabrinum or crotou tiglium, iii, 448.
Dentifrices, list of, and their uses, i, 455,
Dei)ilatories, composition of, and their

uses, i, 342, 588.
Dessert,or Mensa secunda, articles served

at the, i, 131.
Diabetes, svmptoms and treatment of,

i,547.
Diarrhoea, general treatment of, i, 520 ;

colliquative in fevers, i, 298, 299.
Dictamnus, or Dittany, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 95.
Dietetics, ancient authorities on, i, 107.
Diets, or Meals, of tlic ancients, i, 108.
Difficult Lal)our, treatment of, i, 646 ct

seq.
Dill, see Anethum.

DiocLES, epistle of, to Antigonus, i, 183 ;
remarks on, 186.

Diospolites, composition of, iii, 519.

Diphryges, or Husk of Brass, its uses in
medicine, iii, 95.

Dipsacus, or Teasel, its medicinal powers,
iii, 95.

Disorder of the Eye, treatment of, i,
423.

Distaff-thistle, see Atractylis.

Dislocations, see Luxations,

Dittany, see Dictamnus.

Diudar, an Indian pine described by the
Arabians, iii, 450, 451.

Diuretics, officinal, for persons in health,
i, 54.

Dock, or Runiex, noticed as an article of
food, i, 115. See Lapathum.

Dogsbane, or Brassica canina, its medi-
cinal properties, iii, 48.

Dog-rose, or Hip-tree, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 203.

Dorcas, the Gazelle, its flesh reckoned
■wholesome and delicious, i, 148 ; pulse
named from, i, 212, 216, 221.

Dorycnium, modern opinions regarding,
ii, 225 ; its medicinal uses, iii, 96.

Dracunculus, or Dragon-herb, its charac-
ters as a pot-herb, i, 114; its medi-
cinal virtues, iii, 97.

Drachm, see Weights.

Dropaces, or Calefacient Plasters, com-
position of, iii, 581, 587.

Dropsy, treatment of, i, 569 et seq. ;
surgical treatment of, see Paracentesis.

Dross of Silver, its uses in medicine, iii,
106.

Dryinus, treatment of persons stung by,
ii, 181, 182.

Dryopteris, or Oak-fern, its medicinal
virtues, iii, 97.

Duck, its characters as an article of food,
i, 143.

Duella, see Weights,

Dung, its uses in medicine, iii, 186.

Dyspepsia, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 513, &c.

Dysentery, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 505, &c.

Dysuria, treatment of, i, 517.

Ear, on the diseases of, i, 437 et seq.

Eagle-stone, or ^Etites, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 227.

Earths, the medicinal, of the ancients,
iii, 83, 85.

Earthworms, the uses of, in medicine,
iii, 85.

Ebeny, its medicinal powers, iii, 98, 99.

Ecchymosis, treatment of, ii, 87.

Echidna, treatment of persons stung by,

ii, 177-180.
Echinos, different kinds of, and their

uses in medicine, iii, 121.
Echium, or Viper's Bugloss, its medicinal

properties, iii, 122.
Ecpiesmus, a disease of the eye, treat-
ment of, i, 422, 436.
Ectropion, symptoms and general treat-
ment of, i, 413, 427 ; surgical treat-
ment of, ii, 427.
Eel, its characters as an article of food,

i, 160.
Eggs, their characters as given by the

dietetical authorities, i, 144 ; how the

ancients preserved them, ibid. ; their

uses in medicine, iii, 422.
Elaphoboscus, its medicinal powers, iii,

104.
Elaterium, treatment of poisoning by, ii,

239, 2i0; its medicinal powers, iii,

102, 103.
Elatine, or Toadflax, its medicinal powers,

iii, 104.
Elbow, on dislocations at the, ii, 489-

492.
Elder, two species of, and their uses in

medicine, iii, 30.
Elffiomeli, nature of, and its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 102.
Electrum, or Amber, its medicinal uses,

iii, 129.
Elecampane, its uses in medicine, iii, 105.
Elephant, use of its hoofs in medicine,

iii, 106.
Elephantiasis, symptoms and treatment

of, ii, 1-14 ; probably the original of

syphilis, 14; still prevalent in certain

countries, 15.
Elechrysum, or Shrubby Everlasting, its

uses in medicine, iii, 109.
Elm, its medicinal powers, iii, 312.
Emaciation, on the treatment of, i, 82-

84.
Embryotomy, or Embryulcia, description

of the operation, ii, 387-392.
Emery, description of, and its uses in

medicine, iii, 226.
Emetics, on the administration of, iii,

503-510.
Emmenagogues, account of, i, 612, &c.

See Menstrual Discharge.
Emphysema, symptoms and treatment of,

ii, 84, 86 ; of the eyes, i, 412, 426.
Empetrum, or Black-berried Heath, its

uses in medicine, iii, 100.
Emplastic medicines, description of, iii, 7.
Encanthis, symptoms and treatment of,

i, 430, &c. ; surgical treatment of, ii,

276.

Endive, its characters as an article of
food, ii, 113; its uses in medicine, iii,
319.

Enterocele, description and general treat-
ment of, i, 589 ; surgical treatment of,
ii, 372, 377.

Ephemeral Fevers, symptoms and treat-
ment of, i, 225, 235.

Ephemeron, treatment of poisoning hy,
ii, 222 ; same as the colchicum and
hermodactylus ; its medicinal powers,
iii, 119.

Epidemic diseases, account of, i, 273, &c.

Epimedium, or Barrenwort, its uses in
medicine, iii. 111.

Epimelis, or Crab-tree, its medicinal
uses, iii, 112.

Epinyctis, symptoms and treatment of
the disease, ii, 39, 40.

Epistaxis, general treatment of, i, 457;
in fevers, treatment of, i, 325.

Epipactis, or Bastard Hellebore, its uses
in medicine, iii, 112.

Epithymum, or Dodder of Thyme, its
uses in medicine, iii. 111.

Epulis, surgical treatment of, ii, 294.

Erica, see Heath.

Erinos, or Water-basil, its medicinal
powers, iii, 114.

Eruca, or Rocket, its virtues in medicine,
iii, 118.

Eryngo, its medicinal uses, iii, 132.

Erysipelas, symptoms and treatment of,
ii, 65-70 ; on tlie use of liquid appli-
cations for, 70 ; of the brain, i, 365 ;
of the anus, i, 602.

Erysipelatous Fevers, on the treatment
of, i, 269 et seq.

Erysimum, or Hedge-mustard, its medi-
cinal uses, iii, 117.

Erythrodanum, or Madder, its medicinal
uses, iii, 116.

Euphorbium, treatment of poisoning by,
ii, 241 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 119.

Eupatorium, doubts respecting, and its
uses in medicine, iii, 1 18.

Exanthemata of the head, and treatment
of, i, 345 ; symptoms and treatment of,
ii, 37-39.

Excoriations, treatment of, ii, 47.

Exercises, description of those used by
the ancients, i, 20-27.

Exomphalos, or Umbilical Hernia, treat-
ment of, ii, 340-342.

Eye, on the general diseases of, i, 409
et seq.

Face, on the affections of, i, 452.
Facies Hippocratica, description of, i,
190,191.

Fagara or Fagre, a medicinal substance
described by the Arabians, iii, 456.

Far, or Spelt, its dietctical characters,
i, 123 ; its virtues in medicine, iii, 123.

Farro, seeChondrus.

Fats, their uses inmedicine, iii, 354,355.

Faufel, an Arabic medicine, probably
areca catechu, iii, 454.

Favi, nature and treatment of, ii, 97-99.

Fel, an Arabic medicine not well under-
stood, iii, 448.

Female Flux, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 617 et seq.

Fennel, its uses in medicine, iii, 242.

Fennel, Giant, its uses in medicine,
iii, 265.

Fenugreek, its medicinal powers, iii, 373.

Fermentum, or Leaven, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 126.

Fern, its uses in medicine, iii, 312.

Fevers, symptoms and treatment of, i,
187-335; ancient authorities upon,
187.

Fici, symptoms and treatment of, i, 347.

Field-basil, see Clinopodium.

Fig, its characters as an article of food,
i, 129, 132; green figs, their medicinal
uses, iii, 272 ; ripe figs, 362, 363.

Filix, or Female Fern, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 136.

Fingers, surgical treatment of preterna-
tural, ii, 331.

Fir-tree, its medicinal powers, iii, 103,
104.

Fistula, general treatment of, ii, 129, &c.;
surgical treatment of, 396-399.

Fistula Lachrymalis, see ^gilops.

Fishes, their characters as articles of food,
i, 157 et seq.

Fissures of the uterus, i, 645, &c. ; of the
feet, 176 ; of the anus, ii, 405.

Flamingo, its tongue reckoned a great
delicacy, i, 143.

Fleawort, treatment of poisoning by,
ii, 211.

Foot, on the fractures at the, ii, 470.

Forceps, in midwifery known to Avicenna,
i, 650 ; one found in the house of an
obstetrix at Porapei, 652.

Fowls, account of as articles of food, i,
139, cS:C.

Fox, see V'ulpes.

Fractures, account of, and their differ-
ences, ii, 427-478 ; of the skull, 429 ;
complicated with a wound, 472.

Frankincense, its medicinal uses, iii, 217.

Freckles on the face, remedies for, i, 452.

Friar's Cowl, see Arisarum.

Friction, the i)reparatory described, i, 19;
different kinds of, 28.

Frog, not used as an article of food by

the aucieiits, i, 166 (misspelt rog) ;

uses in medicine, see Raua.
Fructus horeei, or Summer Fruits, their

characters, i, 128.
Frumentacea, their characters as articles

of food, 1,120, &c.
Fucus marinus, or Sea-weed, its uses in

medicine, iii, 397.
FuUgo, or Soot, its medicinal powers,

iii, 56.
Fumaria, or Fumitory, its medicinal uses,

iii, 159.
Furunculus, symptoms and treatment of,

ii, 73-75.

Gagate, or Jet, used as a test of epilepsy,
i, 380 ; its virtues iu medicine, iii,
225.

Galactites, account of, and its medicinal
powers, iii, 222.

Galangal, or Galanga, account of its in-
troduction into medicine, iii, 433.

Galbanum, its uses in medicine, iii, 398.

Galiopsis, its medicinal uses, iii, 81.

Galium, its medicinal uses, iii, 80.

Gall, or Bile, its uses in medicine, iii, 413.

Gallaj, or Galls, their medicinal uses,
iii, 168.

Gall-stones, noticed by Alexander Tral-
lian, i, 566 ; by Haly Abbas, and
others, 586.

Ganglion, nature and treatment of,ii,50,
51 ; surgical treatment of, 317, 318.

Gangrene, or Sphacelus, symptoms and
treatment of, ii, 59-61.

Garlic, its uses in medicine, iii, 345.

Gastrorapbe, description of the ope-
ration, ii, 342-345.

Gazelle, or Dorcas, used for food, i, 148.

Genital organs, on the diseases of, i, 600 ;
Celsus the best authority on, 604.

Gentian, its uses in medicine, iii, 82.

Geodes, account of, iii, 226.

Geranium, or Cranebill, its medicinal
uses, iii, 83.

Germander, or Chama;drys, its uses in
medicine, iii, 406.

Gilbenee, or Cerbera manghas, its intro-
duction into medicine, iii, 467.

Gilt-head, its characters as an article of
food, i, 165.

Ginger, see Zingiber.

Gingidium, or Toothpick Fennel, used as
a pot-herb, i, 113 ; its medicinal uses,
iii, 86.

Gith, or Nigella, its uses in medicine,
iii, 245.

Glass, account of the ancient, and its
uses in medicine, iii, 383, 384.

Glaucium, or Horned Poppy, its medi-
cinal uses, iii, 87.
Glaucoma, account of the disease, i,

421-434.
Glaux, or Milkwort, its medicinal uses,

iii, 87.
Gluten, or Glue, its uses in medicine,

iii, 181.
Glycyrrhiza, or Liquorice, its medicinal

uses, iii, 88.
Gnaphalium, or Cudweed, its medicinal

powers, iii, 89.
Goat's-flesh, its characters as an article

of food, i, 148.
Goat's-horn, its uses in medicine, iii, 166.
Godwit, probably the attagen of the an-
cients, i, 140 ; much sought after as an

article of food, ibid.
Gongylis, or Tiunip, its medicinal uses,

iii, 90. See Turnip.
Gonorrhoea, symptoms and treatment of,

i, 593.
Goose, characters of as an article of food,

i, 143.
Goose-foot, see Botrys.
Gordylium, see Tordylium.
Gourd, use of as an article of food, i,

127, 128 ; its medicinal uses, iii, 182.
Gout, varieties and treatment of, i,

657-676.
Gramen, or Grass, see Agrostis.
Granum Gnidium, account of, and its uses

in medicine, iii, 179.
Granum tinctorum, iii, 180.
Granum Kelkel, iii, 466.
Grape, account of its qualities as an arti-
cle of food, i, 132.
Grape-stones, their uses in medicine,

iii, 86.
Gromwel, see Lithospermum.
Ground-ivy, or Chamsecissos, its uses in

medicine, iii, 407.
Ground-poplar, or Chamaeleuce, its uses

in medicine, iii, 407.
Groundsel, see Senecio.
Gudgeon, used as an article of food,

i, 163.
Gum, its medicinal powers, iii, 184.
Gypsum, or Mineral White, treatment of

poisoning by, ii, 233 ; modern writers

on toxicology have overlooked, 234;

its characters as a medicine, iii, 91.
Gyris, or Pollen, its medicinal powers,

iii, 91.

Haematite, or Bloodstone, its use in
haemoptysis, i. 489 ; its general uses in
medicine, iii, 200, 222.

Haematemesis, described by Actuarius,
i, 515.

Ilacmorrhus, on the treatment of persons
stung by, ii, 183-185; a vai'iety of the
viper, 185.

Hager Albuzecb, an Arabian mechcine,
iii, 476.

Hager xVlcazaha, an Arabian medicine,
iii, 477.

Hager Salachil, or Lapis corneolus,
account of, iii, 476.

Haggis, see Isicia.

Hair, on the diseases of, i, 337, &c. ;
compositions for dyeing, 342 ; hair and
nails said to grow after death, 345 ;
its uses in medicine, iii, 380.

Hake, the fish, noticed by several an-
cient writers, i, 165.

Halimus, or Sea-pursiane, used as an
article of food, i, 1 13 ; its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 32.

Hand and Fingers, on fractures of the
bones of, ii, 465, 466.

Hare, characters of as an article of food,
i, 149.

Hartshorn, its uses in medicine, iii, 166.

Heads, their medicinal uses, iii, 167.

Headache, treatment of in fevers, ii, 301 ;
general treatment of, 350.

Heart, temperaments and physiology of,
i, 94 et seq. ; on the afl'ections of, 501.

Hearing, difficult, treatment of, i, 440.

Heath, its medicinal powers, i, 113.

Hectic Fevers, svmptoms and treatment
of, i, 266, &c.'

Hedera, or hy, its uses in medicine, iii,
175.

Hedge-mvtstard, see Erysimum.

Hedychroum, on the composition of,
iii, 510.

Hellebore, the "WTiite and the Black, on
poisoning by the White, ii, 239 ; their
uses in medicine, iii, 107 ; modes of
administering the White, 503 et seq. ;
Bastard, see Epipactis.

Heliotropium, or Sunflower, its medi-
cinal uses, iii, 128.

Hemlock, treatment of poisoning by, ii,
211, &c. ; effects of in the case of
Socrates, 212; its uses in medicine,
iii, 206.

Hemina, see Weights.

Hemerocallis, or Lily of the Valley, its
uses in medicine, iii, 131.

Hemicrania, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 355, &c.

Hemionitis, or Moonfem, its medicinal
uses, iii, 131.

Hemiplegia, see Apoplexy.

Hemorrhage, ancient modes of treating,
i, 448, and ii, 127, &c. ; from the nose
in fevers, i, 326.

Hemorrhoids of the Womb, general treat-
ment of, i, 603 ; surgical treatment of,
ii. 382, 383 ; of the anus, treatment of,
403.

Henbane, varieties of, and their uses in
medicine, iii, 386.

Hepialus, a species of quotidian, i,
251, 252.

Hermodactylus, its use in gout, i, 660,
&c. ; its uses in medicine, iii, 1 14 ; pre-
paration of, 494.

Hermaphrodites, account of, and their
treatment, ii, 381.

Hernia, different species of, i, 589, &c.

Herpes, symptoms and treatment of,
ii, 61.

Hiccup, treatment of in fevers, i, 321.

Hierae, on the composition of, iii, 500-3.

Hieracites, description of, and its uses in
medicine, iii, 227.

Hip-joint, symptoms and treatment of
dislocations at, ii, 498-504 ; on frac-
tures of its bones, ii, 454, 455.

Hippocampus, its medicinal powers,
iii, 143.

Hippolapathum, its uses in medicine,
iii, 143.

Hippomarathmni, or Horse-fennel, its
uses in medicine, iii, 143.

Ilippophaes, its medicinal uses, iii, 144.

Hippopotamus, or Sea-horse, its medi-
cinal uses, iii, 144.

Hipposehnum, or Horse-parsley, its me-
dicinal uses, iii, 144.

Hippuris, or Horse's-tail, its uses in me-
dicine, iii, 144.

Holostium, its medicinal powers, iii, 274.

Honey, its uses as an article of food, i,
178 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 246.

Honeysuckle, French, its medicinal
powers, iii, 128.

Hops, or humulus lupulus, its medicinal
powers, as stated by Mesne, iii, 471.

Hordeolum, or Stye, symptoms and
treatment of, i, 414, 427.

Horehound, see Marrubium.

Horon, or Bombax, disquisition on, iii,
471. See also Cotton.

Horned Poppy, see Glaucium.

Husk of Brass, its medicinal uses, iii, 95.
Sec Diphrjges.

Hyacinth, the herb, its uses in medicine,
iii, 382, 383 ; the gem, its uses in medi-
cine, 475.

Hydatids, described by Aretacus, Galen,
and Rhases, i, 574 ; by Hippocrates,
564 ; of the eyelids, operation for the
removal of, ii, 271.

Hvdragogues, list of, and their action,
"iii, 492.

Hydrargynis, see Mercury.
Hydrocephalus, surgical treatment of,

'ii, 250-253.
Hydromel, account of its uses and modes

of preparing, i, 179.
Hydrops uteri, described by Hippocrates,

i, 573. See Dropsy.
Hydrocele, description of the operation

for, ii, 365-368.
Hydrophobia, history of and modes ef

treatment, ii, 127 et seq.
Hvdropiper, its uses in medicine, iii,

385.
Hvdrus, treatment of persons stung bv,

'ii, 185, 186.
Hypecoum.its uses in medicine, iii, 388.
Hypercatharsis. treatment of, iii, 499.
Hypericum, account of, and its uses in

medicine, iii, 388.
Hypocistis, its uses in medicine, iii,

389.
Hypoglossum, its uses in medicine,

iii, 389.
Hvpopia, or Bruised Spots, treatment of,

'i, 452.
Hj'popyon of the eye, general treatment

of, i, 417, &c. ; surgical treatment of,

ii, 279, 280.
Hypospadiaeum, or Imperforate Glans,

treatment of, ii, 347.
Hypospathismus, description of the ope-
ration, ii, 256-258.
Hyposphagma of the eves, treatment of,

1,412, &c.

Ichthyocolla, its medicinal uses, iii, 148.
Icterus, etymology of the term, i, 582.

See Jaundice
Idaean root, inquiry what it was, and its

uses in medicine, iii, 140.
Ignis Persicus, inquiry what disease it

was, ii, 70-78.
Ignis sacer, inquiry what disease it was,

ii, 68.
Ileus, s\'mptoms and treatment of, i,

539, &c.
Imagination, influence of, in pregnant

women, on the foetus, i, 2, 3.
Imperforate meatus auditorius, treatment

of, ii, 288 ; pudendum, treatment of,

383,384; anus, treatment of, 405.
Impetigo, term used by Celsus, ii, 19;

misapplied by the Arabians, 21, &c.
Impotence, means for removing, i, 46,

599.
Impostors in the profession, account of,

ii, 245.
Incubus, svmptoms and treatment of, i,

388, &c'.
Indigestion, on the treatment of, i, 44.

Infancy, diseases of, i, 10-12.

Infants, on the management of, i, 8
et seq.

Inflammation of the eyes, treatment of,
i, 410 et seq.

Inflation of the stomach, symptoms and
treatment of, i, 514; of the womb,
treatment of, 632.

Ink, description of the ancient, iii,
243-4.

Inspectiones cadaverum, practised by the
ancients, i, 503, 567.

Instruments for operations on the skull,
ii, 434.

Intemperaments, description and treat-
ment of, i, 101.

Intercurrent pulse, characters of, i, 220.

Intermitting pulse, characters of, ibid.

Intoxication, on the treatment of, i,
43.

Inula, see Elecampane.

Iris, varieties of, and their uses in medi-
cine, iii, 145-6.

Iron, its uses in medicine, iii, 334.

Isatis or "Woad, its medicinal uses, iii,
146.

Ischiatic disease, symptoms and treat-
ment of, i, 682, &c.

Isicia, an account of, and their composi-
tion, i, 171.

Isinglass-fish, not used as an article of
food, i, 162.

Isopyrum or Bogbean, account of, and
its virtues in medicine, iii, 146-7.

Ixia, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 221 ;
probably was the CarUna acaulis, ibid.

Jasper, its uses in medicine, iii, 221,

223.
Jaundice, svmptoms and treatment of,

i, 580.
Jaw, on fractures of the lower, ii, 445,

447 ; on dislocations of, 479, &c.
Jesemin, probably a species of jasminum,

iii, 458.
Judaic Stone, its medicinal powers, iii,

221, 223.
Jujubes, their characters as articles of

food, i, 137 ; are the serica of Galen,

ibid.
Juniper, varieties of used in medicine,

iii, 50, 164.
Jusculum, or Broth, its medicinal pro-
perties, iii, 126.

Kadi, an Arabian medicine, account of,
iii, 460.

Karabe, disquisition on the, iii, 453-4 ;
probably not amber as generally sup-
posed, ibid

Kidneys, on the diseases of the, i, 541,
&c. ; hemorrhage of, 546, 555 ; hard
ness of, 546, 556.

Kingspear, see AsphodeUis.

Knapweed, see Stcebe.

Kustberkush, an Arabian medicine ; the
Tamarix orientaHs, iii, 467.

Lactuca, or Lettuce, used in insomno-
lency by Galen, i, 182, 183 ; its medi-
cinal uses, iii, 137, 138.

Ladanum, its uses in medicine, iii, 208.

Lagophthalmos, or Hare-eye, treatment
of, ii, 266.

Lagopus, its uses in medicine, iii, 208.

Lampsana, or Nipplewort, its medicinal
powers, iii, 209,

Lamprey, account of as an article of
food, i, 165.

Lana, or Wool, its medicinal uses, iii,
113.

Lapathum, or Dock, its medicinal uses,
iii, 210.

Lapis Lazuli, its medicinal uses, iii, 477.
See Cyanus.

Lapis Ljmcnrius, account of, iii, 227.

Lapis Specularis, account of, iii, 351.

Lappa, or Cleavers, its characters as a
medicine, iii, 47.

Lark, sometimes used as an article of
food, i, 141 ; its medicinal uses, iii,
193.

Laryngotomy, description of the opera-
tion, ii, 303-5.

Lassitude, varieties of, and their treat-
ment, i, 30-6.

Lathvris, a species of spmge, its uses,
iii," 209.

Lauriis, see Bay-tree.

Laurus Herba, see Butcher's Broom.

Laxatives to persons in health, i, 54.

Lead, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 237 ;
ancients well acquainted with its dele-
terious qualities, 237, 238 ; it uses in
medicine, iii, 255.

Leaf, the Malabathrum, or Cassia-leaf,
iii, 397.

Leaven, see Fermentum.

Leeches, treatment of persons who have
swallowed, ii, 207, &c. ; on bleeding
by means of, 328, &c.

Leek, see Porrura.

Lees of Wine, their uses in medicine, iii,
380.

Leg, on fractures of the, ii, 469.

Lehibach, probably the Mussaenda fron-
dosa, iii, 467.

Lemon, said to have been noticed by
Avicenna,!, 137 — statement corrected ;
described by Ebn Baithar, iii, 472.

Lentes, see Weights.

Lentils, used as articles of food, especi-
ally by the Egyptians, i, 126 ; their
uses in medicine, iii, 392.

Lentiscus, or Lentisk, its medicinal uses,
iii, 365.

Leontopetalon, or Lion's Leaf, its uses in
medicine, iii, 212.

Lepidium, or Pepperwort, its uses in
medicine, iii, 212.

Lepra, or Leprosy, symptoms and treat-
ment of, ii, 16, &c. ; term lepra not
used by Celsus, 19.

Lethargv, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 366, &c.

Leucas, its medicinal powers, iii, 215.

Leucacantha, or White-thorn, its uses in
medicine, iii, 214.

Leuce, description of the disease, ii,
31, 32; the snow-white leprosy of
the Jews, 32 ; mixed with elephan-
tiasis, 33.

Leucoma, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 418, 431.

Lichen, description of the disease, ii, 24
&c. ; tendency to pass into lepra and
scabies, 25, 26 ; described by the
Aral)ians under the term impetigo, 26 ;
tropicus, by what ancient authors
described, ibid.

Lichen, the vegetable, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 211.

Lientery, ^symptoms and treatment of,
i, 520, &c.

Ligature, use of in wounds of arteries,
ii, 130.

Lily, its uses in medicine, iii, 196. See
under Nymphtea.

Lime, treatment of poisoning by, ii,
235, 236 ; its uses in medicine, iii,
380.

Limpets, see Tellinae.

Limonium, or Sea Lavender, its uses in
medicine, iii, 211.

Liniments, composition of, iii, 581-7 ; to
the anus and navel, 502, 503 ; to the
mouth and throat, 541, 544.

Linseed, sometimes used as an article of
food, i, 127 ; its characters as a medi-
cine, iii, 230.

LipjTia, account of the fever, iii, 252.

Liquorice, see Glycyrrhiza.

Litharge, treatment of poisoning by, ii,
236, 237 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 219.

Lithontriptics, ancient views regarding,
i, 549 et seq.

Lithospermum, or Gromwel, its charac-
ters as a medicine, iii, 229.

Lithotomy, history of ancient opinions
on, ii, 354-63.

Liver, physiology of, i, 98 ; affections of,

560 et seq ; of animals used as an

ai'ticle of food, 151 ; its properties

and uses as a medicine, iii, 131.
Lividity, on the treatment of, i, 39.
Lixivia, or Lyes, account of the ancient,

and their uses, iii, 184.
Lizard, its uses in medicine, iii, 328.
Locust, used as an article of food, i, 143 ;

used in medicine, iii, 30.
Lolium, see Darnel.
Lonchitis, or Rough Spleenwort, its uses

in medicine, iii, 233.
Looseness of the bowels, treatment of in

fevers, i, 324.
Lotus-tree, account of as an article of

food, i, 138 ; the medicinal powers of

the herb, iii, 236.
Lovage, its characters as a medicine, iii,

219.
Love, syTnptoms and treatment of, i,

391.
Lungs, temperaments and physiology of,

i, 83 et seq. ; their uses in medicine,

iii, 304.
Lupine, an inferior article of food, i, 127 ;

its characters as given by Galen, ibid. ;

its uses in medicine, iii, 136.
Luxations, account of, ii, 478 et seq. ; of

the lower jaw, 479-82; sometimes

fatal, 481, 482 ; comphcated with a

wound, 509; a fracture, 510, 511.
Lycanthropia, description of the disease,

i, 389 ; Burton and Mead's opinions

respecting, 390.
Lycium, account of, and its virtues in

medicine, iii, 234.
Lychnis, or Campion, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 235.
Lycopsis, or Hound's-tongue, its uses in

medicine, iii, 234.
Lvdian Stone, its uses in medicine, iii,

'327.
Lyes, see Lixivia.
Lysimachium, its medicinal powers, iii,

235.

Mace, improperly identified with Macer,

iii, 436 ; its uses in medicine, 436-38.
Macer, conjectures respecting, iii, 237.
Mackerel, account of its qualities from

Xenocrates, i, 162.
Mad Dogs, see Hydrophobia.
Madarosis, or Milphosis, treatment of,

i, 415, 429.
Madder, see Erythrodanum.
Madwort, see Alysson.
Magnet, ancient opinions regarding the,

and its uses in medicine, i, 225.
Mahaleb, what it probably was, iii, 458.

Maiden-hair, its properties as a medicine,

iii, 22.
Maimed parts, treatment of, iii, 294.
Malabathrum, account of, and its uses in

medicine, iii, 237.
Malingerers, on the detection of, ii, 244.
Mallows, characters as a potherb, i, 112 ;

its uses in medicine, iii, 238.
Mamira, account of, iii, 239.
Mandragora, or ]\landrake, treatment of

poisoning by, ii, 218, 219; its uses in

medicine, iii, 240.
Mania, symptoms and treatment of, i,

383 et seq.
Manna Thuris, description of, i, 451,

and iii, 125 ; account of the different

kinds of manna, iii, 443-45.
Margaritae, or Pearls, their uses in medi-
cine, iii, 473.
Marjoram, see Amaracus.
Marrow, its uses in medicine, iii, 257.
Marrubiiim, or Horehound, its charac-
ters in medicine, iii, 309.
Masticatories, on the composition of, i,

59, 60.
Mastich, its uses in medicine, iii, 423.
I\Iasucha, composition of, iii, 601.
Maudlin, see Ageratum.
Materia Medica, list of ancient authorities

upon, iii, 3.
Maza, how prepared, i, 124.
Meadow Rue, see Thalictrum.
Meadow Saffron, see Hermodactylus.
Meals of the ancients, i. 108. See Diets,
ileasles, ancient history of, i, 330.
Measures, full account of those used by

the ancients, iii, 609-27.
Meatus auditorius, imperforate, ii, 288 ;

extraction of bodies from, 289-91.
Meconium, account of, iii, 250.
Medium, its characters as a medicine, iii,

249.
IMedlars, their characters as an article of

food, i, 135.
Meisce, or Mes, account of, iii, 464.
Meizaragi, the Cocculus Indicus, its uses

in medicine, iii, 460.
Melas, symptoms and treatment of, ii,

16 ; the Lepra nigricans of Willan, 23,

&c.
Melancholv, symptoms and treatment of,

i, 380, &c. '
Melaena, noticed by Actuarius, i, 515.
Melca, a preparation from milk, i, 155.
^'Telanogogues, Ust of, and theu* action,

iii, 491.
Melanteria, account of, and its uses in

medicine, iii, 244.
Melilot, its characters as a medicine, iii,

247.

Melititis, or Honey Stone, its uses in
medicine, iii, 220, 222.

Meliceris, treatment of, ii, 94, 96.

Melon and Melopepon, acconnt of, i, 129.

Memory, supposed to be connected with
the posterior part of the brain, i, 90,
373 ; on the loss of, and of reason,
372.

Memphites, account of, iii, 228.

Men, on the bite of, ii, 193.

Mentagra, account of the disease, ii, 27.

Mentha, or Mint, its medicinal powers,
iii, 127.

Menstrual Discharge, ancient theories
regarding, i, 608 ; retention of, 609
et seq.

Mercurj', treatment of poisoning by, ii,
238 ; knowledge of, possessed by the
ancients, 239 ; its uses in medicine,
iii, 385.

Merle, the fish, used as an article of food,
i, 164.

Metasyncritica, or Alteratives, account of,
i, 353.

Mezereon, see Chameljea.

Mial, or Storax humida, probably the
Liquidambar orientale, iii, 460 ; its
uses in ancient medicine, ibid.

Milk, its characters as an article of food,
i, 150 et seq. ; methods of preparing
and using it, 154 et seq.; characters
of good milk in a nurse, and mode of
correcting bad, 6, 7 ; its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 79.

Milkwort, see Glaux.

Millet, its characters as an article of food,
i, 124 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 163.

Millefoil, its medicinal powers, iii, 260.

Millepedes, or Slaters, their medicinal
uses, iii, 276.

Misy, account of, and its uses in medicine,
iii, 253.

Mole, two species of, in the uterus de-
scribed, i, 630.

MoUusca, account of the articles belong-
ing to this class, i, 169.

Molv, or M'ild GarUc, its uses in medicine,
iii, 262.

Moonfem, see Hemionitis.

^lorphea, use of the term by the Arabians,
ii, 23 ; by modern authorities, 35.

Morochthus, its medicinal uses, iii, 221,
223.

Mouth, on the diseases of the, i, 454.

Mugwort, see Artemisia.

Mulberry, its characters when used for
food, i, 132 ; its uses in medicine, iii,
256.

Muluchia, or Jews' Mallow, its virtues,
iii, 468.

Murena, much esteemed as an article of
food, i, 162; treatment of persons
stung by, ii, 191.

Muria, or Brine, its medicinal powers,
iii, 34.

Mus Araneus, treatment of persons stung
by, ii, 175, 176.

Musa, the Musa paradisiaca, drtues of,
iii, 473.

Mushrooms, their properties, as given by
the dietetical writers, i, 119; treat-
ment of persons poisoned by, ii, 228
et seq. ; kinds of, known to the an-
cients, ii, 229 ; their uses in medicine,
iii, 250.

Muscles, their uses in medicine, iii, 257.

Musk, its virtues, as stated by the Arabian
authorities, iii, 468-70.

Must, account of, i, 177.

Mustard, its characters when used as an
article of food, i, 115 ; its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 263.

Mustela, or Weasel, its uses in medicine,
iii, 8.

Mutton, its characters as an articleof food,
i, 148.

Myagrum, or Gold of Paradise, its uses
in medicine, iii, 257.

Mydriasis, or Dilatation of the Pupil,
treatment of, i, 133.

Myopia, treatment of, i, 422, 436.

Myrmecia, description and treatment of,
ii, 48, 49 ; surgical treatment of, 417.

Myrobalans, description of, and their uses
in medicine, iii, 440-3.

Mvirh, or !Mvrrhis, its uses in medicine,
iii, 260, 261.

Myn-h, or Myrrha, the gum-resin, its uses
in medicine, iii, 348.

Myrtle, its uses in medicine, iii, 261.

Nails, on the diseases of the, i, 680 et seq.
Nard, different species of, and their uses,

in medicine, iii, 264, &c.
Nasturtium, its uses in medicine, iii, 156.
Nausea, in fevers, on the treatment of,

i, 319.
Navel, protrusion of, and its treatment,

i, 587.
Nefrin,orNerfin, probably the Narcissus

orientalis, its virtues, iii, 467.
Nerium, or Oleander, poisoning l)y, ii, 242,

its virtues as a medicine, iii, 268,
Ner\-es, of motion and sensation distinct,

i, 398 ; on wounds of, ii, 133 et seq.
Nettle, noticed as a potherb by Theo-

phrastus, i, 113; its medicinal proper-
ties, iii, 27.
Neuras, what it probably was, and its uses

in medicine, iii, 267.

Nightmare, see Incubus.

Nightingale, used as an article of food,
i, 141.

Nipplewort, see Lampsana.

Nitre, nature of the ancient, and its medi-
cinal powers, iii, 231.

Nitri spuuia, description of, iii, 62, 63.

Noises in the ears, treatment of i, 433,
439.

Nose, on diseases of the, i, 446 ; on frac-
tures of the, ii, 443.

Nutmeg, see Mace.

Nurse, on the choice of, i, 3, 4.

Nux Henden, or Bauden, account of, iii,
463.

Nux Mechil, account of, iii, 463.

Nux Methel, account of, iii, 462.

Nux Vomica, cUsquisition on, iii, 461.

Nux Juglans and Avellana, their uses in
medicine, iii, 159.

Nyctalopia, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 420, 433.

Nymphsea, or Water-lily, its uses in medi-
'cine, iii, 268, 269.

Oak, medicinal powers of the different

kinds of, iii, 98.
Oak-fern, see Dryopteris.
Oats, their character as an article of food,

i, 124.
Obesity, on the treatment of, i, 80.
Obolus, see Weights.
Ocimoides, its uses in medicine, iii, 424.
Ocyraum, or Basil, not esteemed as a

potherb, i, 115.
(Edema, symptoms and treatment of, ii,

83, 84."
ffinanthe, its medicinal powers, iii, 271.
CEnanthai'ia, description of, iii, 598, 599.
CEsypum, orUuscoured Wool, its uses in

medicine, iii, 272.
Oils, on the composition of, iii, 589-98 ;

their medicinal powers, 100, &c.
Ointments, composition of, iii, 589-98.
Old age, regimen suitable for, i, 36, 37.
Oleander, its effects as a poison, ii, 242 ;

its uses in medicine, see Nerium.
Olive, gi-eatly esteemed by the ancients,

i, 135; its medicinal uses, iii, 99,

100.
Olyra, see Spelt.
Omphacium, or Juice of the Unripe Grape,

its uses in medicine, iii, 274.
Onagra, or Tree Primrose, its medicinal

uses, iii, 275.
Oneirogmon, symptoms and treatment of,

i, 594.
Onion, its dietetical qualities as given by

various authorities, i, 118; its medi-
cinal virtues, iii, 199.

Onobrychis, or Cockshead, its uses in
medicine, iii, 276.

Ononis, or Restharrow, its medicinal
powers, iii, 278.

Onosma, its uses in medicine, iii, 275.

Onyx, what it was, and its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 277.

Operative surgery, ancient writers upon,
ii, 247.

Ophthalmv, symptoms and treatment of
409, &c., 423.

Ophites, description of, and its powers in
medicine, iii, 226.

Ophiasis, see Hair.

Opium, see Poppy, disquisition on its ac-
tion, ii, 215; particular account of its
uses in medicine, iii, 279-83.

Orache, its characters as a potherb, i,
114.

Orange, not noticed by any ancient author,
i, 134 — this statement corrected ; de-
scribed by the Arabians, iii, 472.

Orchis, its medicinal properties, iii, 286.

Orobanche, or Holly-rose, its medicinal
virtues, iii, 285.

Orpine, see Telephium.

Orthopnoea, see Asthma.

Os Sacrum, on ulceration over, in fevers,
i, 329 ; on fractiu-es of, ii, 455, 456.

Osiris, or Toad-flax, its uses in medicine,
iii, 287.

Ostracites, its uses in medicine, iii, 226.

Othonna, or African Marygold, its medi-
cinal uses, iii, 271.

Oxyacantha, its uses in medicine, iii, 279.

Oxygal, a preparation from milk, i, 155.

Oxylipus, a species of bread described by
Galen, i, 123.

Oxymel of Julian, composition of, iii, 493.

Oysters, British, highly esteemed, i, 169;
their uses in medicine, iii, 288.

Ozaena, symptoms and treatment of, i,
447-50."

Pain, the different kinds of, and their
treatment in fevers, i, 296 et seq.

Paleness, how to be remedied, i, 39.

Paliurus, description of, and its uses in
medicine, iii, 290.

Palm-tree, characters of its fruit, i, 135.

Palpitation of the heart, nature and treat-
ment of, i, 502.

Panaces, or All-heal, the medicinal uses
of its different varieties, iii, 290-92.

Pancratium, or Sea-daffodil, its uses in
medicine, iii, 290.

Panchrestos, a collvrium of Erasistratus,
i, 413.

Panic, a vaiiety of Millet, which see ; its
medicinal uses, iii, 110.

Pap, description of, and its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 23.
Papyrus, its uses in medicine, iii, 292.
Paracentesis abdominis, description of,

ii, 337.
Paralysis, treatment of, i, 392 et seq. ;

of the bladder, 548.
Paraphimosis, description and treatment

of, ii, 348.
Parget, see Gypsum.
Paronychia, or see ^^^litlo\v.
Paronychia, or Whitlow Grass, its uses

in medicine, iii, 292.
Parotis, treatment of the disease, i,

441-45.
Parsley, Marsh, its medicinal powers,

iii, 106 ; mountain, 284 ; stone, 298.
Partridge, its characters as an article of

food, i, 140.
Parulis, or Gum-boil, treatment of, i, 455 ;

surgical treatment of, ii, 294.
Pastinaca marina, its uses in medicine,

iii, 380.
Patella, on the fractures of, ii, 468.
Pea, characters and varieties of, i, 127.
Peacock, first used as an article of food

by Q. Hortensius, i, 141.
Peach, doubtful if the Persica of the

ancients, i, 132.
Pear, its character as an article of food,

i, 134.
Pear-quinces, or Struthia, uses in medi-
cine, iii, 251.
Pediculi of the head, treatment of, i,

349 ; of the eyebrows, treatment of,

414,429.
Pellis, or Skin, its medicinal uses, iii, 94.
Pennyroyal, seePulegium.
Peplus and Peplium, their medicinal uses,

iii, 294.
Pepper, ancient opinions regarding cor-
rected ; its uses, iii, 294, 295.
Peppermint, seeLepidium.
Perch, its characters as an article of food,

i, 163.
Perfumes, account of, iii, 599, 600.
Pcriclvmenon, its uses in medicine,

iii, 296.
Periscyphismus, description of the ope-
ration, ii, 2.j9 ; similar to " the long

issue of the scalp," ibid.
Perry, well known to the ancients,!, 134.
Persica, account of as an article of food,

i, 133.
Perspiration, how to render fragrant,

1,38.
Pessaries, description of, iii, 601, 602.
Pctroselinou, sec Parsley.
Peucedannm, or Hog's FenueJ, its uses in

medicine, iii, 298.

Phalangia, or Venomous Spiders, symp-
toms and treatment of persons stung

by, ii, 169, 170.
Phalangites or Spiderwort, its uses in

medicine, iii, 393.
Phalaris, its uses in medicine, iii, 393.
Pharicum, treatment of poisoning by, ii,

226 ; opinions regarding this poison,

227.
Phary nx, treatment of substances fixed

in,'ii,302.
Pheasants, cbaracters of their flesh when

used for food, i, 141.
Phillyrea, or Mock Privet, its uses in

medicine, iii, 394.
Philo, antidote of, iii, 515.
Phimosis, surgical treatment of, ii, 347.
Phimus of the womb, treatment of, ii,

383, 384.
Phlegm, collections of in the stomach,

i, 51.
Phlegmagogues, Ust of, and their action,

iii, 49.
Phlegmon of the brain, treatment of,

i, 364.
Phoenix, the herb and tree, account of,

iii, 393.
Phormium, account of, iii, 396.
Phrenitis, symptoms and treatment of, i,

359 et seq.
Phrygian Stone, its medicinal powers, iii,

221,223.
Phthisis, symptoms and treatment of, i,

493; of the eyes, i, 420.
Phthiriasis, description of the disease,

i,30.
Phyllites, its uses in medicine, iii, 398.
Pica, a disease of pregnancy, i, 2, 3.
Pickled Fishes, account of, i, 171.
Pickles, their uses in medicine, iii, 368.
Picraof Galen, account of, iii, 520.
Pigeon, its characters as an article of food,

i, 140.
Pike, the lucius of Ausonius, its charac-
ters, iii, 161.
Piles, see Hemorrhoids.
Pimpernel, see Anagallis.
Pine, fruit of, used as an article of food,

i, 132; medicinal qualities of the wild,

iii, 207.
Pintada, or Guinea-fowl, the Afraa\-is of

Horace, and the meleagris of yElian,

i, 142.
Pistadiio-nut, its characters as an article

of food, i, 136.
Pitch-tree, its uses in medicine, iii,

299, 300.
Pityusa, its medicinal powers, iii, 303.
Pityocampa, or Pine Caterpillar, treat-
ment of poisoning by, ii, 205.

G4G

Pityriasis, symptoms and treatment of, i,

345 et seq.
Placenta, treatment of retention of, ii,

392-94.
Plague, symptoms of, from Ruffus, i, 277 ;

ancient history of the, i, 280 et seq.
Plane-tree, its uses in medicine, iii, 303.
Plantain, or Plantago, its medicinal uses,

iii, 52.
Plasters, composition of, iii, 558-76 ;

emollient, composition of, 576-81.
Pleurisy, symptoms and treatment of, i,

496 et seq.
Plumbago, its medicinal powers, iii, 254.
Pneumatic sect, in medicine ; Aretaeus

belonged to the, i, 467.
Pneumatocele, surgical treatment of, ii,

370-2.
Pneumonia, symptoms and treatment of,

i, 480.
Poisons, preservatives from, ii, 193 ;

general treatment of, 196 et seq. ; ca-
talogue of, 200.
Polenta, a sort of malt prepared from

barley, i, 123.
Poley, its uses in medicine, iii, 204.
Polycnemon,its medicinal powers, iii, 307.
Polygalon, or Milkwort, its medicinal

powers, iii, 305.
Polygonaton, or Solomon's Seal, its me-
dicinal powers, iii, 305.
Polygonum, or Knot-grass, its medicinal

powers, iii, 306.
Polypody, its medicinal powers, iii, 307.
Polypus, or Sarcoma of the Nose, treat-
ment of, i, 447-9 ; sm-gical treatment

of, 291-4.
Pomegranate, its characters as given by

the dietetical authorities, i, 134.
Pompion, its characters as an article of

food, i, 127 ; its uses in medicine, iii,

195.
Pompholyx, description of, and its uses

in medicine, iii, 308.
Pondo, on the meaning of the term, iii,

614, 619.
Poplar, the White, its medicinal uses, iii,

206.
Poppy-juice, treatment of poisoning by,

ii, 213 et seq.; poisoning by horned

poppy, 226.
Poppies, their uses in medicine, iii, 249.
Pork, greatly esteemed by the ancients

as an article of food, i, 147; Arabian

iiuthorities prejudiced against, ibid.
Porrum, or Leek, its characters as an

article of food, i, 118 ; as a medicine,

iii, 310.
Potamogiton, or Pondweed, its medicinal

powers, iii, 309.

Poterrhium, its medicinal powers, iii, 309.

Potherbs, used by the ancients, i, 110-15.

Potions, officinal, on the composition of,
iii, 544-7.

Powders, preparations of, iii, 536-41.

Powder of lollas (misspelt gollas), iii,
541.

Prepuce, treatment of deficiency of the,
ii, 346 ; adhesion to the glans, 349.

Priapism, symptoms and treatment of, i,
597 et seq.

Prickly Poppy, see Argemone.

Privet, its uses in medicine, ii, 205.

Procidentia oculi, symptoms and treat-
ment of, i, 417-30.

Procidentia ani, symptoms and treat-
ment of, 604.

Prognostics, Hippocrates the great master
of, i, 190 ; of fevers, 191 et seq.

Prunus, or Plum, its characters as a me-
dicine, iii, 186.

Pruritus, or Prurigo, description and
treatment of, ii, 27 et seq.

Propolis, or Bee-glue, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 311.

Propoma, account of, iii, 546.

Pseudo-bunium, or BastardRape, its uses
in medicine, iii, 419.

Pseudo-dictamnus, or Bastard Dittany,
its uses in medicine, ibid.

Psora, symptoms and treatment of, ii,
16 et seq.

Psoricum, account of, and its uses in
medicine, iii, 421.

Psorophthalmia, symptoms and treatment
of, i, 413-26.

Psydracia, description of, i, 345.

Psyllium, on poisoning by, ii, 211 ; its
uses in medicine, iii, 420, 421.

Ptarmica, or Sneezewort, its uses in me-
dicine, iii, 311.

Pterygia of the eyes, symptoms and treat-
ment of, i, 418 et seq. ; of the nails,
treatment of, 680-3 ; surgical treat-
ment of, ii, 275.

Ptillosis, symptoms and treatment of, i,
415.

Ptisan, preparation and uses of, i, 123,
124.

Pubes, on fractures of the bones of the,
ii, 454.

Pulegium, or Pennyroyal, its medicinal
uses, iii, 87.

Pulse, or Legumen, varietiesof, and their
characters as articles of food, i, 125
et seq.

Pidse, arterial, abstract of Galen's system
of the, i, 202 et seq.

Pnmex, or Pumice-stone, its medicinal
uses, iii, 173.

Purgatives, simple, account of, iii, 480-
93 ; compound, account of, 493 at seq. ;
modus operandi of, according to the
ancient authorities, 485-88 ; modern
opinions on, 488 ; management of
those who have taken, 497.

Purpuras, their uses in medicine, iii, 308.

Putrid Fevers, symptoms and treatment
of, i, 235-7.

Pvcnocomou, its medicinal powers, iii,
"313.

Pyrethrum, or PeUitory, its medicinal
powers, ibid.

Pvrites, its uses in medicine, iii, 221,
'223.

Pyrum, or Pear, characters of the fruit
as an article of food, i, 134 ; its uses
in medicine, iii, 48.

P}Tumsylvestre,itsusesinmedicine,iii,63.

Quails, characters of their flesh as an

article of food, i, 141.
Quartans, symptoms and treatment of, i,

249 et seq.
Quartarius, see Weights.
Quercus, see Oak.
Quince, in trreat repute as an article of

food, i, 134.
Quinquefolium, or Cinquefoil, its uses in

medicine, iii, 293.
Quinsy, symptoms and treatment of, i,

464 et seq.

Rabbit, little used by the ancients as an

article of food, i, 149.
Radish, its characters as an article of

food, i, 118 ; its characters as a medi-
cine, iii, 315.
Rags, the uses of in medicine, ibid.
Raisins, their uses in medicine, iii, 59.
Rale, remarks on the ancient terms for,

i, 482.
Rana;, see Frogs.
Ranula, svmptoms and treatment of, i,

456-61".
Ranunculus, or Crowfoot, its uses in

medicine, iii, 69.
Rapum, see Turnip.
Recrementum, or Dross, different kinds

of, and their medicinal uses, iii, 347.
Regimen, rules regarding, i, 73-84.
Regius morbus, the same as jaundice, i,

584.
Rell-mouse, the glis of the Romans, used

for food, i, 149.
Rennets, the uses of in medicine, iii, 314.
Repletion, nature and treatment of, i,

41, 42.
Resina;, or Resins, their uses in medicine,

iii, 317.

Restharrow, see Onions.

Rhabarbarum, or Rhubarb, account of its
introduction into medicine, iii, 478,
479.

Rhacosis of the scrotum, surgical treat-
ment of, ii, 479.

Rhagadia, or Fissures of the Anus, i, 607.

Rhamnus, or Buckthorn, its uses in me-
dicine, iii, 315.

Rbaphanus, see Radish.

Rlieum, discussion on the ancient plant;
and its uses in medicine, iii, 317.

Rheumatism, see Arthritis.

Rhodomel, purgative medicine from, iii,
493.

Rhus Coriaria, or Sumach, its uses in me-
dicine, iii, 321.

Rhyas, symptoms and treatment of,i,416.

Ribes, what plant it was, and its charac-
ters in medicine, iii, 472.

Ri1)s, fractm-es of, and their treatment,
ii, 452, 454.

Rice reckoned an astringent article of
food, i, 124.

Ricinus, or Palma Christi, its medicinal
uses, iii, 170.

Risors in fevers, treatment of, i, 305,
306.

Rocket, see Eruca.

Rock-rose, see Cistus.

Roe, characters of its flesh as an ai-ticle
of food, i, 149.

Roses, their uses in medicine, iii, 318.

Rosea radix, or Rosewood, its uses in
medicine, iii, 319.

Rosemary, its uses in medicine, iii, 216.

Roughness of the tongue in fevers, treat-
ment of, i, 318.

Rupture of the flesh, treatment of, ii, 86.

Ruta, or Rue, its medicinal uses, iii,
300.

Rush, varieties of, and their uses in me-
dicine, iii, 366.

Sabina, or Savin, its uses in medicine,

iii, 77.
Saffron, see Crocus.
Sagapen, its medicinal uses, iii, 322.
Sage, or Salvia, its medicinal uses, iii,

104.
Salamander, treatment of poisoning by,

ii, 204 ; its characters in medicine, iii,

323.
Sales, or Salts, their medicinal characters,

iii, 31.
Salix, or Willow, its medicinal uses, iii,

14 7.
Salmon, not noticed by any Greek writer,

i, 164 ; description of, from Ausonius,

ibid.

Salts, see Sales.

Salvia, see Sage.

Sambucus, see Elder.

Samphire, or Cretlimum, its uses in me-
dicine, iii, 195.

Sampsuchum, its uses in medicine, iii,
324.

Sandal-wood, its uses in medicine, iii, 488.

Sand, see Arena.

Sandaracli, or Realgar, treatment of
poisoning by, ii, 235, 236 ; its medici-
nal uses, iii, 324.

Sandarach, or Gum-vernix, account of, iii,
451.

Sandyx, its uses in medicine, iii, 325.

Sanguis Draconis, see Cinnabaris.

Sapphire of the ancients, what it probably
was, iii, 228.

Sarcocele, surgical treatment of, ii, 369.

Sarcocol, its characters in medicine, iii,
327.

Sardonian Herb, what it was, and treat-
ment of poisoning by, ii, 225, 226-

Satyriasis, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 596 et seq.

Satyrion, its medicinal uses, iii, 327.

Saxifrage, its uses in medicine, iii, 327.

Scabies, disease not unknown to the
ancients, ii, 23.

Scammony, its uses in medicine, iii, 341.

Scapula, on fractures of, ii, 450, 451.

Scandix, or Shepherd's Needle, in little
repute as a potherb, i, 114 ; its uses in
medicine, iii, 342.

Scarus and Sparus, their characters as
articles of food, i, 165.

Scirrhus, of the uterus, i, 629 ; symp-
toms and general treatment of, ii, 89,
90.

Schoenanth, or Lemon-grass, account of,
and its uses in medicine, iii, 366.

Sclerophthalmia, svmptoms and treat-
ment of, i, 413,426.

Scolopendra, treatment of persons stung
by, ii, 174 ; its uses in medicine, iii,
344.

Scolopendrium, its uses in medicine, iii,
344.

Scolymus, iised as a potherb, the Scoly-
mus Hispanicus, i, 114; its uses as a
medicine, iii, 341.

Scordium, or Water Germander, its uses
in medicine, iii, 345.

Scordoprason, or Garlick-leek, its uses
in medicine, iii, 346.

Scorpioides, its uses in medicine, iii, 346.

Scorpion, on persons stung by, ii, 171,
172.

Scourges, treatment of persons beaten
with, ii, 45.

Scrofula, symptoms and general treat-
ment of, ii, 91-94 ; surgical treatment
of, 309, 310.

Scrupulum, see Weights.

Scurvy, supposed to be alluded to by
Hippocrates, i, 579.

Scytala, treatment of persons stung by,
ii, 180, 181.

Sea-dragon, treatment of persons stung
by, ii, 191.

Sea-hare, treatment of poisoning by, ii,
205.

Sea-scorpion, treatment of persons stung
by, ii, 192.

Sea-tortoise, or Turtle, preparation from
the blood of, ii, 192.

Seasons, regimen befitting the diflferent,
i, 73.

Sea-water, its medicinal uses, i, 133.

Sebesten-plum, its uses in medicine, iii,
258.

Secacul, a species of pastinaca, its virtues
in medicine, iii, 659.

Secundines, see Placenta.

Selenite, account of, and its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 229.

Semen, on redundance of, i, 48.

Semi-tertians, svmptoms and treatment
of, ii, 271.

Sempervivum, or Wall-pepper, its uses
in medicine, iii, 23.

Senecio, or Groundsel, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 132.

Senna, account of its medicinal uses,
from the Arabians, iii, 431.

Sepia, or Cuttlefish, its uses in medicine,
iii, 331.

Seps, or Chalcidic Lizard, its uses in
medicine, iii, 332.

Service, its characters as an article of
food, i, 135 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 270.

Seriphon, what it was, and its virtues in
medicine, iii, 329.

Serpyllum, or Wild Thyme, its uses in
medicine, iii, 116.

Serran, a fish used as an article of food,
i, 164.

Sesame, a heavy article of food, i, 127 ;
its characters in medicine, iii, 331.

Sesamoides, its characters as a medicine,
iii, 331.

Seseli, or Hartwort, its medicinal uses,
iii, 330.

Sextarius, see Weights.

Sextula, see Weights.

Shad-fish, or Silurus, its uses in medi-
cine,.iii, 337.

Shells, their medicinal uses, iii, 288.

Shoulder, on dislocations at the, ii,
484-9.

Sicilicus, see Weights.

Sideritis, or Ironwort, its virtues in

medicine, iii. 333.
Sight, on dimness of, i, 40.
Siligo, a variety of the ancient flour, i,

120, 121.
Siliqua, see Weights.
Silk, medicinal virtues attributed to

by the Arabians, iii, 474.
Silpliium, or Laserwort, account of, and

its uses in medicine, iii, 337.
Similago, a variety of the ancient flour,

i, 120, 121.
Simples, number of, described by Ebn

Baithar, iii, 4 ; by Avicenna, iii, 5 ; by

Rhases, iii, 5 ; by Dioscorides, iii, 5 ;

in the Edinburgh Dispensatory, iii, 5.
Sinapisms, account of, and their uses,

iii, 582, 588.
Sinuous Ulcers, description of, ii, 119.
Siriasis, a disease of infancy, i, 16.
Sirsen frigiduni, the Arabian name for

lethargy, i, 369.
Sisarum, or Garden Parsnip, its virtues

in medicine, iii, 340.
Sison, or Bastard Stone-parsley, its uses

in medicine, iii, 339.
Sisvnibrium, its uses in medicine, iii,

340.
Sium, or Water I'arsnip, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 339.
Skink, its uses in medicine, iii, 342.
Skidl, fractures of, and their treatment,

ii, 429-42.
Sleep, on the philosophy of, and its ap-
plication to medicine, i, 181.
Slough of a serpent, its medicinal uses,

iii, 85.
Smaragdus, or Emerald, little used in

tlie practice of medicine, iii, 229.
Smallpox and Measles, history of ancient

o])inions upon, i, 320 et seq.
Smilax, see Yew.
Smcgmata, nature and varieties of, iii,

540, 541.
Smyrniuni, its characters as a potherb,

i, 114 : its uses in medicine, iii, 349.
Snail, its uses as an article of food, i,

1G8.
Snap-dragon, see Antirrhinum.
Sneezing, treatment of in fevers, i,300.
Sneezewort, see Ptarmica.
Soap, account of the ancient, and its uses

in medicine, iii, 326.
Soda, an Arabico-barbaric term forcepha-

l.Ta, i, 355.
Somnolency, see Cataphora.
Sonc]ins,or Sow-thistle, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 350.

Soot, see Fuligo.

Sordes balneorum, its uses in medicines,
iii, 88 ; palestrae, its uses in medicine,
322 ; gymnasiorum, its uses in medi-
cine, ibid.

Sori, disquisition on the nature of, and
its uses in medicine, iii, 367.

Sotera, antidote of, iii, 517.

Southernwood, its properties as a medi-
cine, iii, 17.

Sow-bread, its effects as a poison, ii, 242 ;
its medicinal uses, iii, 201.

Sparganium, its uses in medicine, iii,
350.

Spasms, svmptoms and treatment of, i,
401.

Specillum, description of the instrument,
ii, 273, 402.

Spelt, its characters as an article of food,
i, 123; its medicinal uses, iii, 123.

Specularis, account of, and its uses in
medicine, iii, 229.

Sphacelus of the Brain, treatment of, i,
315.

Sphondylium, or Sow-parsnip, its medi-
cinal uses, iii, 365.

Spider, treatment of persons stung by
the, ii, 171; and Spider's-web, their
uses in medicine, iii, 49.

Spignel, or Meum, its properties as a
medicine, iii, 252.

Spikenard, its uses in medicine, iii, 264.

Spina alba, see Thorn.

Spina ventosa, description of the disease,
ii, 497.

Spine, see Vertebrae.

Spinach, a wholesome and laxative pot-
herb, according to Rhases and Haly
Abbas, i, 113 ; the Greeks and Romans
unacquainted with, ibid. ; its uses in
medicine, iii, 478.

Spitting of blood, symptoms and treat-
ment of, i, 483 et seq.

Spleen, on the diseases of, i, 577.

Spleenwort, see Asplenium.

Spodium, account of, and its uses in medi-
cine, iii. 352.

Sponge, the medicinal uses of, iii, 351.

Spontaneous generation, ancient opinions
upon, ii, 145, 149.

Sprains, on the treatment of, ii, 86.

Spurges, variety of, and their uses in
medicine, iii, 374.

Sputa, characters of in fevers, i, 228.

Spurge Olive, see Chamelaia.

Squama a^ris and Squama fcrri, their iises
in medicine, iii, 213,214 ; squama acris
resembles aes ustum (misspelt astum),
ibid.

Squash, whether or not the melopepon

of the ancients, i, 129.
Squill, or Scilla, its medicinal uses, iii,

157 ; vinegar of squills, 514 ; oxymel

of squills, 515 ; Galen's medicine from,

ibid.
Stachys, or Base Horehound, its uses in

medicine, iii, 354.
Stag, see Roe.
Starch, its characters as an article of

food, i, 123 ; its uses in medicine, see

Amylum.
Stapliylinus, probably included both the

carrot and parsnip, i, 118 ; its uses in

medicine, iii, 353.
Starling, its flesh used as an article of

food, i, 140.
Staphyloma, surgical treatment of, ii,

278, 279.
Steatoma, general treatment of, ii, 94-

96; surgical treatment of, 311, 312.
Stellio, symptoms and treatment of

poisoning by, ii, 175 ; its properties as

a medicine, iii, 56.
Stercus, see Dung.

Sterility, causes and treatment of, i, 641.
Sternutatories, list of, and modes of

using, i, 447-51.
Sternum, on fractures of, ii, 451, 452.
Stock Gillyflower, its uses in medicine,

iii, 215."
Stcebe, or Knapweed, its uses iu medi-
cine, iii, 356.
StcEchas, or Cassidony, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 357.
Stomach affections, physiology of, i, 90 ;

treatment of, 303, 507 et seq.
Stones, account of those used in medi-
cine l)y the ancients, iii, 220 et seq.
Stones in sponges, account of, iii, 226.
Storax, its uses in medicine, iii, 362.
Stork, sometimes used as an article of

food, i, 143.
Strabismus, or Squinting, treatment of,

i, 422-35.
Strawberries, noticed by Virgil and Ovid,

i, 138.
Strychnos, or Nightshade, its uses in

medicine, iii, 358 ; varieties of, 359.
Struthium, account of, in medicine and

otherwise, iii, 357.
Stucco, see Gypsum.
Sturgeon, its characters as an article of

food, i, 165.
Succedanea, list of in medicine, iii, 604

et seq.
Succus Cyrenaicus, Medicus, and Syria-

cus, nature and uses of, iii, 283.
Succory, its characters as an article of

food, i, 112 ; its uses in medicine, iii,
176, 177.

Sudor, or Sweat, its medicinal uses, iii,
140.

Sndorifics, on the nature of, i, 61.

Sufl'usion, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 420.

Sugar, anciently procured from the bam-
boo-cane, i, 179 ; its virtues in medi-
cine, iii, 246, 247.

Sun, treatment of persons injured by the,
i, 52.

Sunflower, see Heliotropium.

Sulphur, varieties of, and their uses in
medicine, iii, 135, 136.

Suppositories, composition of, i, 58.

Surmullet, its characters as an article of
food, i, 162. See Trigla.

Swallows, their uses in medicine, iii,
413.

Swallow-wort, see Asclepias.

Swan sometimes used at the table, i,
143.

Sweat, see Sudor.

Swine's flesh, see Pork.

Sycamores used as an article of food, i,
137 ; its uses in medicine, iii, 363.

Symphytum, or Comfrey, its uses in me-
dicine, iii, 364.

Svnchvsis of the eyes, treatment of, i,
'422", 436.

Syncope, treatment of in fevers, i, 288.

Synochous fevers, treatment of, i, 256.

Syphilis probably a modification of ele-
phantiasis, ii, 14.

Tamarinds, their characters in medicine,
iii, 439, 440.

Tamarisk, its medicinal uses, iii, 259.

Tar-water, its uses in medicine, iii, 301.

Tastes, definitions of the diff"erent kinds
of, iii, 6-16.

Taurocolla, its uses in medicine, iii, 369.

Teasel, see Dipsacus.

Tedse, or Dead Pines, their uses in medi-
cine, iii, 91, 92.

Teeth, preservatives of, i, 39 ; treatment
of diseases of the, i, 454 et seq.; ex-
traction of, ii, 296, 297.

Telephium, or Orpine, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 373.

Telephian ulcers, description of, ii, 114
et seq.

Tellinae, or Limpets, uses of in medicine,
iii, 369.

Tembul, the piper betel, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 454, 455.

Temperaments, account of the, i, 84
et seq.

Tench, described by Ausonius, and pro-
bably by the Greeks, i, 165.

Tenesmus, symptoms and treatment of,
iii, 523 et seq.

Tertian fevers, symptoms and treatment
of, ii, 238.

Terminthus, nature and treatment of, ii,
75 ; a species of ectliyma, ibid.

Testacea, or Shell-fish, i, IGG, &c.

Testicle, on the physiology of the, i, 100;
of the diseases of the, 591.

Tetanus, account of the symptoms and
treatment of, i, 403.

Teucrium, or Tree-germander, its uses in
medicine, iii, 371.

Tlialictrum, or Meadow-rue, its medi-
cinal uses, iii, 134.

Thapsia, or Deadly Carrot, treatment
of poisoning by, ii, 239, 240 ; its uses in
medicine, iii, 134.

Theodoretus, antidote of, iii, 520.

Therapeutics, the Galenic system of, as
given by Acitius, iii, 6-16.

Theriac trochisks, composition of, iii,
511 ; salts, composition of, 512 ; gene-
ral history of the theriac of Andro-
machus, 525-28.

Thigh, on the fractures of the, ii, 466,
467.

Thirst, treatment of in fevers, 1,316.

Thorn, White, its uses in medicine,
iii, 28.

Thrush, much esteemed by the ancients
as an article of food, i, 140.

Thyites, account of, and its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 228.

Thymbra, or Savoiu^', its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 139.

Thymelffia, or Spurge-flax, its medicinal
uses, iii, 139.

Thymi, on the penis, treatment of, ii, 350 ;
womb, treatment of, 382, 383.

Thymus, or Thyme, its uses in medicine,
iii, 138.

Tinea, a term used in the Arabian trans-
lations, i, 349.

Toad, treatment of poisoning by the,
ii,206.

Tongue-tied, surgical treatment of infants
so affected, ii, 297, 298.

Tonsils, on inflammation of the, i, 457,
462 ; indurated, surgical treatment of,
ii, 299.

Toothpick Fennel, see Gingidium.

Tophi, or Clialk-stoin;s, account of,
i, 664.

Tordylium, probably a species of seseli,
ill,' 90, 91.

Torpedo, i(s application in medicine, i,
359, and iii, 266.

Toxicology, ancient authorities upon,
ii, 156.

Toxicum, symptoms and treatment of
poisoning by, ii, 227, 228 ; uncertainty
regarding the nature of, ibid.

Trachoma, svmptoms and treatment of, i,
414-28.

Tragum, or Stinking St. John's Wort, its
medicinal characters, iii, 377.

Tragoriganum, its uses in medicine,
iii, 377.

Tragus, account of, and its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 378.

Travellers, proper regimen for, i, 76.

Tremblings, symptoms and treatment of,
i, 407 et seq.

Tribulus, or Caltrops, its medicinal cha-
racters, iii, 378.

Trichiasis, description and general treat-
ment of, i, 415, 430 ; surgical operation .
for, ii, 259-65.

Trigla, or Surmullet, its uses in medicine,
iii, 379.

Tripoliuni,its uses in medicine, iii, 379.

Trochisks, the composition of, iii, 528-
536.

Trutfle, its characters as an article of
food, i, 119; Romans passionately
fond of, 120; its uses in medicine, iii,
385.

Turbot, what species of the rhombus it
was, and its dietetical characters, i,
161.

Turnip, varieties of, cultivated by the
Romans, i, 117; its dietetical charac-
ters, ibid. ; its medicinal cliaracters,
iii, 90.

Turpentine, its uses in medicine, iii, 369.

Tui-peth, one of the medicines introduced
by the Arabians, iii, 369.

Turtle, the Land, its dietetical characters,
i, 141.

Turtle, or Sea-tortoise, sometimes used
as food by the ancients, i, 168.

Tussilago, see Coltsfoot.

Tutia, see under Pompholyx.

Tvplius, original meaning of the term, i,
'253.

Ulceration, over the os sacrum in fevers,
i, 329.

Ulcers, of the eyes, treatment of, i, 416-
430 ; of the ears, 439-43 ; of the nose,
447-50; of the uterus, 628; list of
ancient authorities upon, ii, 99 ; treat-
ment of, in general, 99 et seq.

Ulna and Radius, on the fractures of the,
ii, 464.

Uml'cr, much esteemed as a pickle, i,
164.

Urchin, the Sea, its characters as an
article of food, i, 168.

Urine, characters of, i, 224 ; ancient
authorities upon, 225 ; unpublished
MSS upon, 228 ; incontinence of, 548 ;
its properties in medicine, iii, 289.

Urna, see Weights.

Urtica, see Nettle.

Usnen, probably the Salsola fruticosa, its
medicinal uses, iii, 456.

Uterine hemorrhage, treatment of, i, 615
et seq.

Uterine inflammation, treatment of, 620
et seq.

Uterus, ancient descriptions of, i, 623 ;
abscess of the, 623 et seq. ; ulcers of
the, 625 et seq.; cancers of the, 627
et seq. ; scirrhus and scleroma of the,
629 et seq. ; mole of the, see Mole ;
inflation of the, 632 ; suffocation of
the, 633 ; prolapsus of the, 638 et seq.

Uva of the tonsUs, treatment of, ii, 300,
302.

U\Tila, on the diseases of the, i, 457.

Valerian, Greek, its uses in medicine, iii,

304 ; common, its uses in medicine,

396.
Varices, excision of, ii, 406-10.
Vari, on the treatment of, on the face, i,

452, 453.
Venery, on the effects of, i, 44.
Venesection, description of the operation,

ii, 318-26.
Venomous animals, presen-atives from,

ii, 155; treatment of persons stung

by, 157.
Venter, or Stomach, uses of the different

kinds of, i, 179.
Verbascum, or Petty Mullein, its uses in

medicine, iii, 394.
Verdigris, see jErugo.
Vermes in the ears, treatment of, i, 439-

444.
Vennilion, see Granura Tinctorum.
Vertebrae, on fractures of the, and their

treatment, ii, 455 ; on luxations of

the, 493.
Vertigo, symptoms and treatment of, i,

374 et seq.
Vertz, disquisition on the nature of, iii,

457.
Vers^ain, or Verbenum, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 296.
Vervain Mallow, see Alcaea.
Vetch, varieties of, and characters as an

article of food, i, 127.
Vinegar, its uses in medicine, iii, 278.
Vinous tinctures of the ancients, iii, 546,

547.

Violet, its medicinal characters, iii, 142.

Viper, treatment of persons stung by the,
ii, 177-80; its uses in medicine, iii,
120.

Viper's Bugloss, see Echium.

Virgin's Bower, see Clematis.

Viscum, or Birdlime, its medicinal
uses, iii, 141.

Vitex, its properties as a medicine, iii,
20.

Vitis sylvestris, or Wild Vine, its medici-
nal characters, iii, 40.

Vociferation, description of the ancient
mode of performing, i, 29.

Volubilis, account of the different arti-
cles described under this name, iii,
470.

Vulpes, or Fox, its uses in medicine, iii,
36.

Wakerobiu, see Arum.

Walnuts and Filberts, their dietetical

characters, i, 136.
Wall-pepper, its properties as a medicine,

iii, 23.
Wasps and Bees, treatment of persons

stung by, ii, 168, 169.
Watchfulness, causes and cure of, i, 152 ;

treatment of in fevers, i, 299, 300.
Water, its uses in medicine, iii, 380.
Waters, on the different kinds of, and

their qualities, i, 64-7.
Water-basil, see Erinos.
Water-pepper, its uses in medicine, iii,

385.
Water, or Wine, dangerous effects of a

large draught of, ii, 243.
Wax, see Cera.
Weapons of war, treatment of wounds

inflicted by, ii, 418-27.
W^easel, see Mustela.
Weights, full account of those used by

the ancients, iii, 609-27.
Wheat, full account of its dietetical cha-
racters, i, 121 ; its uses in medicine,

iii, 314.
Whites, see Female Flux.
Whitlow, on the treatment of, i, 678.
Wild Thyme, see Sei-pyllum.
Willow, see Salix.
Wine, dietetical characters of, i, 172 et

seq. ; ancient mode of forcing by heat,

174; of cooling with ice, ibid.; its

medicinal uses, iii, 272.
Woad, see Isatis.
Wolfsbane, see Aconite.
Womb of a sow reckoned a delicate

article of food, i, 151.
Wool, see Lana; scourings of, used in

medicine, iii, 272.

Worms, intestinal, description of, and
their treatment, ii, 139 et seq. ; list of
ancient writers on, 145 ; earth, in
nlcers, treatment of,ii, 107 ; their uses
in medicine, iii, 85.

Wren, recommended in calculus, i, 542.

Wrinkles, how to be treated, i, 37.

Wrist, on dislocations at the, ii, 492,
493.

Xanthium, or Clutburr, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 269.

Xerophthalmia, symptoms and treatment
of, i, 413, 42G!

Xiphium, or Bulbous Iris, its uses in
medicine, iii, 270.

Xyris, or Wild Cornflag, its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 269.

Yarrow, or Achillea, uses of in medicine,

iii, 358.
Yew, treatment of poisoning by, ii, 223,

224.

Zambach, a species of jasminum, first
described by the Arabians, iii, 458.

Zeduary, account of, and its uses in medi-
cine, iii, 434, 436.

Zerumbet, see under Zeduary.

Zingiber, or Ginger, uses of in medicine,
iii, 123.

Zythus, or Ale, medicinal uses of, iii,
124.

THE END.
