This  is  a reproduction  of  a library  book  that  was  digitized
by  Google  as  part  of  an  ongoing  effort  to  preserve  the
information  in  books  and  make  it  universally  accessible.

Google"  books

http://books.google.com

v

SI I's

Digitized  by

Google

Digitized  by

Digitized  by

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

*•

HISTORY  OF  THE-  LRNGOBARDS

''  bv  ; v'  r

; • { - V ' , j ; ? ■>  > \ G ' ■>  *«  ’

PAUL  ’ THE  DEACON  ” '

TRANSLATED  BY

WILLIAM  DUDLEY  FOULKE,  LL.D.

With  Explanatory  and  Critical  Notes,  a Biography  of  the  Author,
and  an  Account  of  the  Sources  of  the  History

PUBLISHED  BY

THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  HISTORY.
UNIVERSITY  OF  ^PENNSYLVANIA
PHILADELPHIA,  ig07

Sold  by  Longmans,  Green  & Co.
91  and  93  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York

Digitized  by  Google

V A ' \

sk  -O  -

✓

Copyright,  1906,

BY

WILLIAM  DUDLEY  FOULKE.

Digitized  by  Google

27(5154

PREFACE

Mommsen  declares  that  Paul  the  Deacon's  history
of  Italy,  from  the  foundation  of  Rome  to  the  beginning
of  the  time  of  the  Carlovingians,  is  properly  the  step-
ping-stone from  the  culture  of  the  ancient  to  that  of  the
modern  world,  marking  the  transition  and  connecting
both  together ; that  the  Langobards  upon  their  immi-
gration into  Italy  not  only  exchanged  their  own  lan-
guage for  that  of  their  new  home,  but  also  adopted  the
traditions  and  early  history  of  Rome  without,  however,
abandoning  their  own ; that  it  is  in  good  part  this  fact
which  put  the  culture  of  the  modern  world  upon  the
road  on  which  it  moves  to-day ; that  no  one  has  felt  this
in  a more  living  manner  than  Paul,  and  that  no  one  has
contributed  so  much  through  his  writings  to  secure  for
the  world  the  possession  of  Roman  and  Germanic  tra-
dition by  an  equal  title  as  did  this  Benedictine  monk
when,  after  the  overthrow  of  his  ancestral  kingdom,  he
wrote  its  history  as  part  of  the  history  of  Italy.1

Whatever  therefore  were  his  limitations  as  an  author,
the  writings  of  Paul  the  Deacon  mark  an  epoch.  They
constitute  the  first  step  toward  the  making  of  modern
history,  and  give  him  the  right  to  be  reckoned  as  a kind
of  humbler  Herodotus  of  mediaeval  times.  And  in  fact,
although  he  is  for  the  most  part  a compiler  and  without

1 Neues  Archiv.,  V,  p.  53.

(iii)

Digitized  by

iv

PREFACE.

great  originality,  his  work  recalls  in  several  ways  the
characteristics  of  the  “ Father  of  History.”  It  contains
a priceless  treasure  of  legends  and  quaint  tales,  having
their  source,  not  indeed  in  Hellenic,  Persian,  Lydian  or
Egyptian  traditions,  but  in  sagas  like  those  of  the  Norse-
men, and  it  is  written  with  a naive  and  picturesque
charm  that  must  commend  it  greatly  to  the  lovers  of
literary  curiosities.  Paul  has  something  of  the  gossipy
nature  of  Herodotus,  and  although  without  gross  super-
stition, he  has  much  of  the  simple  credulity  and  fond-
ness for  the  marvelous  which  add  to  the  attractiveness,
while  they  detract  from  the  authority  of  the  work  of
his  great  Greek  predecessor.  As  a veracious  historian,
Paul  is  perhaps  not  much  better  nor  worse  than  the
average  of  the  monastic  chroniclers  of  the  time,  for
although  he  is  a man  of  extensive  learning,  and  although
he  gives  us  everywhere  proofs  of  his  good  faith,  and
even  of  his  impartiality  in  respect  to  the  struggles  be-
tween his  own  people  and  their  enemies,  he  has  not  that
critical  judgment  which  the  requirements  of  modern
history  demand.

Paul  the  Deacon  was  one  of  the  best  known  authors
of  the  Middle  Ages.  This  is  shown  by  the  great  num-
ber of  the  manuscripts  of  his  works  which  still  exist,  by
the  abundant  use  made  of  them  by  subsequent  authors,
and  by  the  early  editions  that  appeared  shortly  after  the
invention  of  printing  and  indeed  all  through  the  16th
and  1 7th  centuries. x But  amid  the  more  stirring  events

1 Waitz  (M.  G.  SS.  Rer.  Langob.,  p.  28  et.  seq .)  gives  a list  of
these  manuscripts  and  editions.

Digitized  by

Google

PREFACE.

V

of  modern  times  his  work  became  to  a large  extent  over-
laid and  forgotten.  Muratori  published  Paul’s  “ History
of  the  Langobards  ” in  the  first  volume  of  his  Italian
series  in  1723,  but  it  remained  for  German  scholarship
to  bring  it  again  to  the  attention  of  the  world  and  to
subject  it  to  critical  treatment  in  the  way  its  importance
deserved.  Dr.  Bethmann  during  the  early  part  of  the
last  century  began  an  investigation  of  Paul’s  works  which
extended  over  a great  portion  of  his  life.1  He  ex-
amined and  compared  a vast  number  of  manuscripts,
traveling  for  this  purpose  through  various  parts  of  Ger-
many, Holland,  Belgium,  France  and  Italy,  but  died  be-
fore his  edition  of  the  “History  of  the  Langobards”
was  given  to  the  press.  His  work  was  completed  by
Waitz  in  1 876  in  the  “ Monumenta  Germanise  ” in  an  edi-
tion in  which  one  hundred  and  seven  manuscripts  are
referred  to  and  compared,  and  in  which  most  of  the
sources  of  the  history  are  referred  to  in  appropriate
foot-notes.  In  the  same  year  Dahn  published  a pains-
taking criticism  of  Paul’s  life  and  writings  in  his  “ Lango-
bardische  Studien.”  A complete  discussion  by  Dr.  R.
Jacobi  of  the  sources  from  which  Paul  derived  his  his-
tory appeared  in  the  following  year,  1877,  which  for
thoroughness  and  accuracy  is  a model  of  German  scholar-
ship Mommsen  followed  in  1879  with  an  able  criti-
cism of  some  of  the  most  important  features  of  Paul’s
work,  published  in  the  Neues  Archiv  der  Gesellschaft
fur  altere  deutsche  Geschichtskunde,  Vol.  V.,  p.  53.
Some  of  his  views  as  to  the  sources  from  which  Paul

1 Waitz  (p.  12).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

vi

PREFACE.

had  taken  his  history  were  contested  by  Waitz  in  a subse-
quent number  of  the  Archiv  in  the  same  year,  as  well
as  by  Schmidt  in  his  monograph  “ Zur  Geschichte  der
Langobarden."  Further  investigations  were  made  con-
cerning the  “ Origo  Gentis  Langobardorum,”  one  of
Paul's  sources,  by  Bruckner,  Koegel,  Kraus  and  others.

The  “ History  of  the  Langobards  ” has  been  translated
into  German,  French  and  Italian,  but  I was  greatly  sur-
prised, when  investigating  some  matters  connected  with
the  early  history  of  Venice,  in  the  Marcian  library  of
that  city,  to  find  that  no  English  version  existed.  Mr.
Thomas  Hodgkin,  in  Vols.  V and  VI  of  “ Italy  and
Her  Invaders,"  does  indeed  make  liberal  extracts,  but
the  work  is  one  which,  from  its  importance,  ought  to  be
presented  to  English  readers  entire,  hence  this  transla-
tion. I have  prefixed  to  it  an  account  of  Paul's  life  and
writings,  with  a historical  and  literary  estimate  of  his
work,  and  the  translation  is  accompanied  by  explanatory
notes.  Waitz's  text  has  been  used.1

In  Appendix  I there  is  a brief  discussion  concerning
the  ethnological  status  of  the  Langobards.  In  Appendix
II  an  account  is  given  of  the  sources  from  which  Paul
derived  his  history.  Appendix  III  contains  Paul's  poems
in  honor  of  St.  Benedict,  which  are  found  in  the  original
text  of  Paul's  history,  but  have  no  proper  connection
therewith  and  have  therefore  been  placed  in  the  Ap-
pendix. They  are  altogether  omitted  in  the  German  and

1 There  is  a more  recent  text  by  Giuseppi  Vettach  (Archeografo
Triestino,  1898-99)  based  upon  the  Friulan  MS.  at  Cividale.  As
this  MS.  is  incomplete,  it  seemed  better  to  follow  Waitz's  edition,
which  is  an  admirable  one,  and  based  upon  all  the  MS.

Digitized  by  v^ooole

PREFACE.

vii

Italian  translations  I have  consulted,  perhaps  from  the
difficulty  of  rendering  them  in  any  intelligible  form.  The
second  book  of  the  “ Dialogues  of  Gregory  the  Great,”
however,  gives  the  key  to  their  meaning.  I am  quite
conscious  that  the  verses  into  which  they  have  been
rendered  are  not  poetry,  but  insist  that  in  this  respect,
as  in  others,  my  version  follows  the  original  pretty
closely.  They  are  only  inserted  from  a desire  to  make
the  translation  complete.

I have  endeavored  everywhere  to  keep  as  near  the
text  as  the  essential  differences  between  the  two  lan-
guages will  allow.

I desire  to  acknowledge  the  courtesy  of  Thomas
Hodgkin,  from  whose  history, “ Italy  and  Her  Invaders,”
I have  copied  with  his  permission  the  three  maps  first
used  in  this  work.

Richmond,  Ind.,  Feb . 1906.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

Digitized  by

EXPLANATION  OF  REFERENCES.

In  all  explanatory  notes  as  well  as  in  the  Introduction  and  the
Appendices,  the  following  abbreviations  are  used:

* ‘ Waitz  ’ ’ indicates  the  edition  of  ‘ ‘ Pauli  Historia  Langobard-
orum”  in  “Monumenta  Germaniae,  Scriptores  Rerum  Lango-
bardicarum,”  from  which  this  translation  is  made,  and  unless
otherwise  stated,  the  matters  referred  to  will  be  found  in  connec-
tion with  the  book  and  chapter  (the  page  not  being  given)  corre-
sponding to  those  of  this  translation.

“Abel”  refers  to  the  German  translation  entitled  4 ‘ Faulus
Diakonus  und  die  iibrigen  Geschichtschreiber  der  Langobarden,  ”
by  Dr.  Otto  Abel.”  (Second  edition  revised  by  Dr.  Reinhard
Jacobi,  Leipsic,  1888;  published  as  Vol.  15  of  the  series
“Geschichtschreiber  der  deutschen  Vorzeit,”  and  the  matters
referred  to,  unless  otherwise  stated,  will  be  found  either  in  the
text  or  notes  of  the  book  and  chapter  corresponding  to  those  of
this  translation.

“Giansevero”  indicates  the  Italian  translation  entitled  “Paolo
Diacono,  Dei  Fatti  de*  Langobardi,  ’ ’ by  Prof:  Uberti  Giansevero
(Cividale,  1899),  and  the  matters  referred  to  will  be  found  in  the
book  and  chapter  corresponding  to  those  of  this  translation.

“ Bethmann  * * unless  otherwise  stated  refers  to  one  of  his  articles,
“Paulus  Diakonus  Leben.”  “Paulus  Diakonus  Schriften,”
“Die  Geschichtschreibung  der  Langobarden,”  contained  in  the
tenth  volume  of  the  “ Archiv  der  Gesellschaft  fur  Sltere  deutsche
Geschichtkunde  ” (Hanover,  1849).

“Jacobi”  refers  to  “ Die  Quellen  der  Langobardengeschichte
des  Paulus  Diaconus.  Ein  Beitrag  zur  Geschichte  deutscher  His-
toriographic,” by  Dr.  R.  Jacobi  (Halle,  1877).

“Mommsen”  to  an  article  “Die  Quellen  der  Langobarden-
geschichte des  Paulus  Diaconus  ” by  Th.  Mommsen  in  volume  V,

(ix)

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

X

EXPLANATION  OF  REFERENCES.

p.  53,  of  the  “Neues  Archiv  der  Gesellschaft  ftir  altere  deutsche
Geschichtskunde  ” (Hanover,  1879).

“ Hartmann  ” to  the  second  volume  of  “ Geschichte  Italiens  im
Mittelalter,  ” by  Ludo  Moritz  Hartmann,  being  the  32d  work  of
the  series  “Geschichte  der  europaischen  Staaten,”  edited  by
Heeren,  Ukert,  Giesebrecht  and  Lamprecht  (Gotha,  1903).

‘ * Dahn  ” to  “ Paulus  Diaconus,  ‘ ’ by  Felix  Dahn,  Part  I (Leip-
sic,  1876).

“ Hodgkin*'  to  “ Italy  and  her  Invaders,”  by  Thomas  Hodg-
kin (Clarendon  Press,  1895).

“Zeuss”  to  “Die  Deutschen  und  die  Nachbarstamme,  ” by
Kaspar  Zeuss  (Gottingen,  1904).

“Schmidt**  to  “Zur  Geschichte  der  Langobarden,  * * by  Dr.
Ludwig  Schmidt  (Leipsic,  1885).

“Pabst”  to  “ Geschichte  des  langobardischen  Herzogthums**
in  Vol.  II,  p.  405,  “Forschungen  zur  deutschen  Geschichte,”
(Gottingen,  1862.)

“ Bruckner  **  to  “ Die  Sprache  der  Langobarden,”  by  Wilhelm
BrUckner  (Quellen  und  Forschungen,  Part  75,  Strasburg,  1895).

“Koegel”  to  “Geschichte  der  deutschen  Litteratur,”  by  Ru-
dolf Koegel,  Vol.  I,  Part  I (Strasburg,  1894).

“Wiese**  to  “Die  aglteste  Geschichte  der  Langobarden,’*
by  Robert  Wiese  (Jena,  1877).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

PAGB

Preface iii

Explanation  of  References  to  Authorities  ....  ix

INTRODUCTION.

Life  and  Writings  of  Paul  the  Deacon,  with  a Historical  and
Literary  Estimate  of  his  Work xv

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Book  I.

Original  abode  and  early  migrations  of  that  people  before
their  invasion  of  Italy — [Descriptions  of  Germany] 1 — Strug-
gles with  the  Wandals,  Assipitti,  Bulgarians,  Heroli  and
Gepidae — [Account  of  Justinian’s  reign — Poems  in  honor
of  St.  Benedict — See  Appendix  III.] i

Book  II.

Relations  of  Narses  with  the  Langobards  and  events  leading
to  the  immigration  into  Italy — Invasion  and  conquest  by
Alboin — [Account  of  Fortunatus — Description  of  the  pro-
vinces of  Italy] — Murder  of  Alboin — Cleph — Interregnum
and  government  by  the  dukes  . 53

1 The  episodes  and  collateral  matters  of  the  history  are  enclosed  in  brackets,

(xi)

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

xii  TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

Book  III.

[St.  Hospitius] — History  of  the  Interregnum — Forays  into
Gaul  and  invasions  of  Italy  by  the  Franks — Reign  of
Authari — [Events  in  the  Eastern  Empire] — His  wooing —
His  death — Agilulf  succeeds  him

Book  IV.

Reigns  of  Agilulf,  Adaloald,  Arioald,  Rothari,  Radoald,
Aripert,  Perctarit,  and  Godepert — Accession  of  Grimoald —
[Accounts  concerning  the  empire,  Gregory  the  Great,
Benevento,  the  Hunnish  invasion,  and  the  author's
ancestry]

Book  V.

Reigns  of  Grimoald,  Perctarit  and  Cunincpert,  and  rebellion
of  Alahis — [Events  regarding  the  empire,  Benevento,
Spoleto  and  Friuli]

Book  VI.

Conclusion  of  Cunincpert*  s reign — Liutpert,  Raginpert,  Ari-
pert II,  Ansprand,  Liutprand — [Events  in  Benevento,  the
empire,  Spoleto,  and  among  the  Franks  and  Saracens]

APPENDIX  I.

Ethnological  Status  of  the  Langobards

APPENDIX  II.

Sources  of  Paul’s  History  of  the  Langobards— (a)  Frankish
sources — Gregory  of  Tours — Fredegarius  (?) — (b)  Langobard
soutces — Origo  Gentis  Langobardorum — Secundus  of  Trent
— (c)  Roman  sources — Eugippius,  Gregory  the  Great,
Marcus  Casinensis,  Venantius  Fortunatus,  Autpert,  Life  of
Columban,  Pliny,  Justin,  Cosmographer  of  Ravenna,  Virgil,

Digitized  by

Google

PACK

94

IS*

209

250

315

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

xiii

FAG*

Donatus,  Victor,  Festus,  Isidore,  Jordanes,  Justinian,  Liber
Pontificalis,  Bede,  Lost  Annals,  Madrid  Catalogue,  Speier
and  Bamberg-Oxford  Catalogues  of  the  provinces  of  Italy.
Index  of  Sources 3*8

APPENDIX  III.

Poems  in  honor  of  St.  Benedict — (Book  I,  ch.  26,  of  the

History)

General  Index

MAPS.

1.  The  Langobard  Migrations  from  the  First  to  the  Sixth

Century 41

2.  The  Campaign  of  the  Langobards  Dukes  in  Gaul  . . . 100

3.  The  Duchy  of  Tridentum 143

4.  The  Provinces  of  Italy  according  to  Paul  the  Deacon  • . 380

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

Digitized  by

Digitized  by

Digitized  by

INTRODUCTION.

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF  PAUL  THE  DEACON  WITH
A HISTORICAL  AND  LITERARY  ESTIMATE
OF  HIS  WORK.1

Paul  the  Deacon,  sometimes  called  Paul  Warne-
fried  from  the  name  of  his  father,  belonged  to  a dis-
tinguished if  not  noble  Langobard  family2 *  whose  orig-
inal founder  Leupchis  came  from  Pannonia  to  Italy
with  king  Alboin,  settled  in  the  plain  of  Friuli  3 not  far
from  Cividale4  and  left  behind  him  at  his  death  five
sons  who,  while  still  young,  were  carried  away  into
captivity  on  the  occasion  of  the  irruption  of  the  Avars
into  the  country  about  the  year  six  hundred  and  ten.

1 The  greater  part  of  what  is  known  of  the  life  of  Paul  the  Dea-
con is  set  forth  in  an  article  by  Dr.  Ludwig  Bethmann,  published
in  the  Archiv  der  Gesellschaft  fur  altere  deutsche  Geschichtkunde
(Vol.  X,  p.  247,  see  p.  254).  The  sources  from  which  the  facts
are  taken  are  there  given  in  great  detail  and  with  full  analysis.
The  above  account  is  mainly  a condensed  paraphrase  of  the  most
important  portions  of  Bethmann’ s article.  Where  I have  taken
any  statement  from  another  source,  that  fact  is  mentioned  in  a
note.

* Dahn,  3,  4.

* The  epitaph  of  Paul  declares  that  the  ancestral  estate  lay  upon
the  banks  of  the  Timave  (Waitz,  p.  23).

4 Dahn,  3,  8.

(XV)

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

xvi

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

Four  remained  permanently  in  bondage,  but  Lopichis,
the  fifth,  when  he  had  reached  the  age  of  manhood,
resolved  to  escape,  and  after  many  adventures  returned
to  Italy.*  There  he  found  that  his  ancestral  home  was
without  a roof  and  full  of  briers  and  bushes,  and  that
his  inheritance  was  in  the  hands  of  strangers.  With  the
help  of  relatives  and  friends  he  restored  the  house,  yet
he  could  not  recover  the  rest  of  the  father’s  property.
He  had  a son  Arichis,  who  was  the  father  of  Warne-
fried,  and  Warnefried  by  his  wife  Theudelinda,  had  a
daughter  who  retired  at  an  early  age  into  a cloister,  and
two  sons,  Arichis  and  Paul.

Paul  was  born  in  Friuli*  somewhere  between  the
years  720  and  730  He  was  educated  probably4  at
the  court  of  king  Ratchis  who  reigned  from  744  to  749,
or  at  the  ducal  court  of  his  father  Pemmo  somewhat
before  that  time.5  Paul  speaks  of  Flavianus  as  his

'Paul’s  Hist.  Langob.,  IV,  37  infra.

* It  is  probable  but  net  certain  that  he  was  bom  in  Cividale
(Dahn,  8 ; Tamassia  in  Atti  e Memorie  del  Congresso  Storico  in
Cividale,  1899,  p.  15).

8 Bethmann  (p.  255)  places  it  at  730,  earlier  commentators  (id,
note)  say  720;  Waitz  (p.  13),  720  to  725;  Hodgkin  (p.  71),  about
725.  The  precise  date  is  unknown.

♦Uncertain  however  (Dahn,  9-10).

5 The  place  of  his  education  is  uncertain.  Bethmann  (p.  255)
thinks  it  was  in  Pavia.  Abel  (p.  x)  thinks  it  more  probable  it  was
at  the  ducal  court  of  Ratchis  or  his  father  Pemmo  in  Cividale.  His
writings  show  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the  affairs  of  the  ducal
family  of  that  city  (Tamassia  in  Atti  e Memorie  del  Congresso
Storico  in  Cividale,  1899,  p.  15).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

xvil

teacher1  and  the  instruction  he  received  must  have  been
excellent,  if  it  be  judged  by  the  wide  scope  of  his  at-
tainments. Among  other  things  he  learned  the  Greek
language.

At  a later  period  we  find  evidences  of  his  faithful  at-
tachment to  Arichis,  Duke  of  Benevento  and  his  wife
Adelperga,  the  daughter  of  Desiderius,  the  last  Lango-
bard  king.  In  the  spring  or  summer  of  763,  he  wrote  a
poem  in  thirty-six  trochaic  lines  giving  the  chronology
of  the  different  ages  of  the  world  and  concluding  with
verses  in  honor  of  King  Desiderius,  of  his  son  Adelchis
and  of  the  ducal  pair. 9 It  was  written  in  the  form  of
an  acrostic  and  the  initial  letters  of  each  verse  spelled
the  words  “ Adelperga  Pia.”  That  this  intercourse  with
the  duke  and  duchess  continued  a long  time  appears
from  Paul's  letter  to  Adelperga  written  several  years  later
in  which  he  speaks  of  his  interest  and  participation  in
her  studies.  3 He  had  recently  given  her  to  read  the
ten  books  of  the  Roman  history  of  Eutropius,  but  as
she  complained  that  these  were  too  short  and  contained
nothing  regarding  the  history  of  Christianity,  Paul
wrote  for  her  one  of  his  principal  works,  his  “ Roman
History ” in  which  he  expanded  Eutropius  from  other
sources  and  in  six  additional  books  brought  it  down  to
the  fall  of  the  dominion  of  the  Goths  in  Italy  with  the

1 Felix  the  grammarian,  the  uncle  of  Flavianus,  was  an  intimate
friend  of  king  Cunincpert.  See  Book  VI,  Ch.  7 infra.

*Waitz,  13;  Dahn,  76.

8 Dahn,  14  note.  It  seems  probable  that  he  was  her  instructor,
perhaps  at  her  father’s  court  in  Pavia  (Atti  e Memorie  del  Con-
gresso  Storico  in  Cividale,  1899,  p.  18).

Digitized  by

Google

XVlii  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

intention  of  continuing  it  at  a later  time  down  to  his  own
days.  With  a letter  which  is  a beautiful  memorial  to
the  pious  and  cultured  princess,  he  gave  her  this  work
some  time  between  the  years  766  and  774*  and  the
book  (although  of  little  importance  to  us  now  since  its
statements  are  taken  almost  wholly  from  other  well-
known  sources)  • became  for  nearly  a thousand  years  a
text-book  of  the  history  of  the  Empire  of  the  West.

There  has  been  attributed  to  Paul  on  doubtful  author-
ity,1 2 3 a hymn  in  praise  of  John  the  Baptist,  the  protect-
ing saint  of  the  Langobards, 4 which  has  become  widely
celebrated  and  is  still  sung  on  June  24th  of  each  year
by  the  whole  Catholic  church.  From  the  first  syllable
of  each  of  the  verses  of  this  hymn,  ut,  re,  mi,  fa,  sol,
la,  Guido  of  Arezzo  took  the  names  for  his  notes,  and
the  present  system  of  musical  solmisation  had  its  origin
here.  It  would  seem  from  his  writings  that  Paul  had
traveled  considerably  in  Italy,  for  descriptions  of  things
in  Pavia,  Bobbio,  Monza,  Asti,  Rome  and  Benevento
appear  to  be  given  from  personal  observation.  These
journeys  (except  the  one  to  Rome)  were  probably
taken  before  he  became  a monk.5  It  is  not  known
when  or  where  Paul  received  his  consecration.  Charle-

1 Bethmann  says  between  766  and  781,  but  Mommsen  (77  note)
shows  that  this  history  was  completed  before  774,  in  which  year
Arichis  exchanged  his  title  of  duke  for  that  of  prince.  See  also
Dahn,  15.

2 Dahn,  16.

8 See  article  by  Capetti  (Atti  e Mem  one  del  Congresso  Storico
in  Cividale,  1899,  p.  68).

4 Dahn,  18,  19.  8 Dahn,  27,  28.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

xix

magne  calls  him  a deacon  in  his  circular  written  after
782  1 regarding  the  collection  of  homilies,  and  he  so
speaks  of  himself  in  his  homily  upon  St.  Benedict.
Elsewhere  he  calls  himself  merely  Paul,  but  among
others  he  goes  by  the  name  of  Paul  the  Deacon.  It  is
uncertain  when  and  why  he  became  a monk,2  but  it  was
in  all  probability3  at  the  Benedictine  monastery  of
Monte  Cassino,  the  most  famous  cloister  of  that  time
where  his  former  patron,  king  Ratchis,  was  perhaps  still
living  when  Paul  there  took  his  vows.  Only  this  is  cer-
tain, that  he  became  a monk  before  his  journey  to
France,  therefore  before  782.  It  was  either  before  this
journey  or  during  his  sojourn  in  that  kingdom  that  he
wrote  two  poems  in  honor  of  St.  Benedict  and  one  in
honor  of  St.  Scolastica.4  These  poems,  his  sermon  on
St.  Benedict  and  his  letters  show  his  devotion  to  the

1 Probably  about  786,  Dahn,  21.

* It  was  very  likely  before  he  wrote  this  Roman  history  (Ta-
massia  in  Atti  e Memorie  del  Congresso  Storico  in  Cividale,  1899,
p.  18).

•Dahn,  23.

4 In  the  first  of  these  poems  Paul  speaks  of  himself  as  “an
exile,  poor,  helpless,**  which  it  is  claimed  he  would  hardly
have  done  after  he  had  become  one  of  the  favorites  of  Charle-
magne, and  these  expressions  add  weight  to  the  contention  of
Dahn  that  he  probably  entered  the  cloister  as  a refuge  after  the
fall  of  the  Langobard  monarchy  in  774  (Dahn,  23-26).  Ta-
massia,  however  (Atti  e Memorie  del  Congresso  Storico  in  Civi-
dale,  1899,  pp.  21,  22),  believes  that  his  exile  there  mentioned
refers  to  his  involuntary  detention  at  the  court  of  Charlemagne,
and  that  the  favor  he  refers  to  in  this  distich  is  his  return  to  his
beloved  monastery.  The  two  poems  to  St.  Benedict  are  given  in
Appendix  HI.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

XX

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

founder  of  the  Order  he  had  joined  and  his  zeal  in  his
monastic  life.1 * *

In  the  meantime  Charlemagne  had  conquered  the
kingdom  of  Italy.  Pavia  had  fallen  in  June,  774,*
Desiderius,  the  last  of  the  Lombard  kings,  had  been
made  a prisoner  and  his  son  Adelchis  had  been  forced
to  flee  from  the  country  * Charlemagne  had  left  as
Duke  of  Friuli,  one  Hrodgaud,  who  afterwards  rose  in
rebellion  against  him,  but  the  king,  entering  Italy,  quickly
suppressed  the  revolt  and  returned  home.4  At  the
time  of  this  insurrection,  that  is,  about  Easter,  776,  it
would  seem  that  Charlemagne  had  taken  prisoner  Paul's
brother  Arichis,  who  was  probably  among  the  followers
of  Hrodgaud,  and  that  the  king  had  confiscated  his
property,  so  that  his  wife  (as  Paul  says)  “had  to  beg
bread  in  the  streets  with  trembling  lips"  for  her  four
children.5  In  the  seventh  year  of  this  imprisonment
Paul  addressed  to  the  king  an  elegy  beginning:  “The
words  of  thy  servant,"  to  move  him  to  mercy,  and  in
order  to  obtain  his  brother's  release  he  also  crossed  the
Alps  and  presented  himself  at  the  court  of  the  mon-
arch. There  from  the  banks  of  the  Moselle  he  wrote
to  Theudemar,  the  abbot  of  the  monastery  at  Monte
Cassino,  on  the  10th  of  January,  probably  in  the  year
783, 6 the  following  letter:

“ To  my  master  and  father,  dearest  abbot  Theudemar,

1 Hodgkin,  V,  72.  a Dahn,  29.

•Eginhard’s  Annals,  year  774.

♦Id.,  776.  *Waitz,  p.  15.

• Bethmann,  p.  297.  Contra  Dahn,  31.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

xxi

cherished  with  all  my  heart,  your  humble  and  devoted
son  Paul : 1

“ Although  a great  distance  separates  me  from  your
companionship,  a strong  love  for  your  society  affects
me  which  cannot  be  severed,  and  so  great  a desire  for
you  and  for  my  superiors  and  brothers  torments  me
every  moment  that  I cannot  express  it  in  the  brief  com-
pass of  a letter.  For  when  I think  of  the  time  I de-
voted to  holy  things  and  the  pleasant  situation  of  my
little  cell;  of  your  kindly  sympathy;  of  the  pious  troop
of  so  many  champions  of  Christ  eager  in  the  service  of
God ; of  the  shining  examples  of  particular  brothers  in
virtues  of  every  kind ; of  our  sweet  converse  on  the
excellencies  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  then  a desire
seizes  me  and  I cannot  keep  back  my  tears.  I live  here
among  Catholics  and  good  Christians.  All  receive  me
well ; kindness  is  eagerly  shown  me  for  your  sake  and
for  that  of  our  father  Benedict;  but  in  comparison  with
your  cloister,  the  royal  palace  is  a dungeon  to  me ;
compared  with  the  calm  of  your  monastery,  life  here  is
a stormy  gale.  This  country  keeps  me  only  in  my
poor,  weak  body ; with  my  whole  soul,  in  which  alone
I am  strong,  I am  with  you.  It  seems  to  me  that  now
I am  listening  to  your  delightful  songs ; now  I am  sit-
ting in  the  refectory  to  be  refreshed  more  by  the  read-
ing than  by  the  food ; now  I perceive  the  various  occu-
pations of  each  of  you ; now  I see  how  it  goes  with  the
old  and  the  sick ; now  I tread  the  holy  threshold  which
is  as  dear  to  me  as  heaven.  Believe  me,  my  master  and

1Waitzp.  1 6,  Bethmann,  260  et  seq.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

xxii

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

father,  believe  me  you  holy  and  venerable  band,  I am
kept  here  for  a while  only  by  a feeling  of  pity,  only  by
the  injunctions  of  love,  only  by  the  demand  of  the  soul,
and  what  is  still  more  than  all  this,  by  the  quiet  power
of  our  lord,  the  king.  But  as  soon  as  I am  healed  and
the  Lord  through  our  gracious  sovereign  shall  take  away
from  my  prisoners  the  night  of  sorrow  and  the  yoke  of
misery,  I will  straightway,  as  soon  as  I can  obtain  leave
from  our  gracious  prince,  return  to  you  without  delay,
and  neither  money,  nor  property,  nor  treasures  of  gold,
nor  the  love  of  any  man  shall  keep  me  from  your  com-
pany. I implore  you  therefore,  sweetest  father,  and
you,  O dearest  fathers  and  brothers,  that  our  good
father  and  teacher  Benedict  may  procure  it  through
his  merit  with  Christ  that  I can  return  to  you  right
soon.  I trust  indeed  in  our  God,  who  never  lets  any
one  be  cheated  in  good  wishes,  that  he  may  restore  me
to  you  with  fitting  fruit  for  my  toil 1 according  to  the
desire  of  my  longing  heart.  I do  not  need  to  write  to
you  to  pray  for  our  sovereigns  * and  their  army,  since  I
know  you  are  doing  this  unceasingly.  Pray  Christ  also
for  the  lord  abbots  by  whose  special  kindness  according
to  the  royal  grace  I live  here.  Your  number,  my  be-
loved ones,  is  so  great  that  if  I wished  to  mention  you

1 Probably  this  refers  to  the  liberation  of  his  brother,  though  the
meaning  is  not  clear  (Dahn,  35  note).

* Charlemagne  and  his  sons,  Pepin  and  Louis,  who  were  conse-
crated as  kings  at  Easter,  781,  in  Rome.

* Probably  abbot  of  St.  Vincent  or  St.  Amulf  in  Metz,  says  Beth-
mann  (p.  262,  note).  Dahn  (p.  33)  insists  there  is  no  evidence  of
this.

Digitized  by

Google

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

xxiii

all  one  by  one,  this  whole  page  would  not  suffice  for
your  names.  Wherefore  I greet  you  all  in  common
and  pray  you  not  to  forget  me.  But  I ask  you,  my
master  and  venerable  abbot,  to  write  me  concerning
your  welfare  and  that  of  the  brothers,  and  what  fortunes
the  present  year  has  brought,  and  at  the  same  time  to
send  the  names  of  the  brothers  who  have  been  released
from  earthly  fetters  and  have  gone  to  Christ.  For  I

hear  that  many  of  them  have  died,  but  especially ,

who,  if  it  is  really  so,  has  taken  with  him  no  little  part
of  my  heart.  Farewell,  most  holy  father.  Deign  to
remember  your  son.”

“ Now  of  the  month  of  Janus  the  tenth  full  day  was  elapsing

When  this  letter  was  sent  from  the  shore  of  the  glassy  Mosel,

Brothers  and  father  dearest,  infinite  greetings  I give  you.”  1

Finally,  the  deliverance  of  the  prisoners  seems  to  have
been  obtained.  A lively  correspondence  in  verse  be-
tween Paul  and  the  king  is  shown  in  poems  which  have
come  down  to  us  containing  hints  of  jests,  enigmas  and
occurrences  now  lost.  In  one  of  these  Paul  thanked
the  king  and  praised  heaven  that  had  let  him  see  the
light  after  the  darkness.  In  his  answer  “ Paule  sub
umbroso,”  Charlemagne*  rejoices  at  this  change  in
Paul’s  feelings,  but  declares  that  he  has  still  left  three
questions  unanswered,  namely — whether  he  himself  will
bear  heavy  chains  or  lie  in  a hard  dungeon,  or  go  to  the

1 The  verses  are  omitted  in  the  letter  as  given  by  Dahn  (79-81).

* In  such  correspondence  the  king  was  probably  represented  by
some  poet  or  grammarian  of  his  court.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

xxiv

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

Northmen  and  convert  their  king  Sigfrid,  “ the  impious
lord  of  a pestiferous  realm/*  and  “ touch  his  forehead
with  sanctifying  water/*1 * * 4  Paul  answers  that  as  the
Northmen  know  no  Latin  he  will  seem  like  a dumb  beast
to  them  and  they  no  better  to  him  than  shaggy  goats,
but  he  has  no  fear,  for  if  they  know  he  comes  with  the
name  of  Charlemagne  protecting  him,  they  will  not  dare
lift  a finger  against  him,  and  if  Sigfrid  refuses  baptism
Paul  will  drag  him  to  the  foot  of  Charlemagne’s  throne
with  his  hands  bound  behind  his  back,  nor  will  his  gods
Thonar  and  Waten  (Thor  and  Wotan)  be  of  any  avail.*
In  another  poem,  “ Cynthius  occiduas/*  Paul  relates  to
the  king  that  a messenger  was  sent  to  him  from  the
court  the  evening  before  with  fiery  arrows  3 from  his  old
and  dear  friend  Peter.  Early  in  the  morning  he  has-
tened to  the  court  for  the  contest,  but  the  shortness  of
the  time  did  not  allow  him  to  retort  suitably On  the
following  morning,  however,  Peter  would  repent  that  he
had  treated  his  friend  as  an  enemy.  Evidently  Peter  of
Pisa  is  meant,  who  appears  to  have  been  a kind  of  liter-
ary fag  for  Charlemagne.*  Peter  writes  on  another  oc-
casion to  Paul,  “ Lumine  purpureo,”  that  a riddle  had
been  proposed  to  him  which  he  did  not  know  how  to
solve ; what  his  weak  arms  could  not  do,  Paul,  who  was

1 An  embassy  from  Sigfrid  seeking  peace  had  come  to  Charle-

magne in  782  (Dahn,  40-41).

* Hodgkin,  V,  77.  * Meaning  letters.

4 See  Dahn’s  explanation  (43).

6 Dahn  believes  that  Peter’s  letter  was  a challenge  to  some  sort
of  a contest,  perhaps  of  improvised  verses  (42,  43).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

XXV

“ a great  light  upon  the  mountain,”  would  accomplish.
He,  the  mighty  one  in  books  who  recently  had  been
able  to  loose  strong  fetters  (perhaps  this  refers  to  ob-
taining the  freedom  of  the  prisoners1 *)  might  also  solve
this  riddle.  Paul  afterwards  determined  (probably  at
the  king’s  earnest  desire)  to  remain  at  least  a consider-
able time  in  France.  Charles  expresses  his  great  joy  at
this  determination  in  a poem  composed  by  Peter,
“ Nos  dicamus,”*  and  deems  himself  happy  that  the  most
learned  of  poets  and  seers,  a Homer  in  Greek,  a Virgil
in  poetry,  a Philo  in  Hebrew,  a Tertullus  in  the  arts,  a
Horace  in  the  metrical  art,  a Tibullus  in  expression —
that  this  man  will  strike  his  roots  in  the  soil  of  his  affec-
tion and  no  more  turn  his  heart  to  his  old  home.  He
especially  thanks  Paul  for  the  instruction  in  Greek  which
he  is  giving  to  so  many,  particularly  the  clergy  who  are
soon  to  accompany  his  daughter  Rotrud  to  Constanti-
nople.3 Thus  a glory  will  be  raised  up  for  France  which
he  the  king  had  never  hoped  for  before.  Paul  in  his
answer  “Sensi  cujus,”4  modestly  disclaims  any  right  to
these  compliments.  He  knows  very  little,  he  says ; he
cannot  offer  treasures  to  the  king,  but  only  his  good
will ; only  the  anchor  of  his  love  keeps  him  at  court ; he

1 See  Dahn,  44,  however.

* Waitz  (p.  17)  gives  this  poem.

•Rotrud  was  betrothed  in  Rome  on  Easter  781  to  the  heir  of
the  throne  of  Byzantium  (Dahn,  46,  47).  She  was  then  only  nine
years  old  and  her  departure  for  Constantinople  was  to  take  place
some  years  later.  The  match  was  broken  off  by  Charlemagne  in
March,  787  (Dahn,  47,  48).

4 Waitz,  p.  18.

Digitized  by

Google

xxvi

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

does  not  seek  foolish  glory  in  the  sciences ; if  the  clergy
in  Constantinople  could  not  utter  any  more  Greek  than
they  had  learned  from  him,  they  would  stand  there  like
dumb  statues.  Yet  still,  to  show  himself  not  quite  un-
skilled in  languages,  he  subjoins  the  translation  of  a
Greek  epigram  that  he  remembers  from  his  school  days.
On  another  occasion  Paul,  in  a poem  to  the  king  which
is  now  lost,  expressed  the  wish  that  God  might  still  add
fifteen  years  to  the  term  of  his  life,  the  same  as  to  Heze-
kiah.  Charles  in  his  answer  by  the  pen  of  his  secretary
Alcuin,1  wishes  Paul  a prolongation  of  life  for  fifteen
hours  and  makes  merry  with  him  that  he  first  wanted  to
cut  off  the  neck  of  his  enemy  with  a sword  and  now
could  hold  neither  shield  nor  sword  on  account  of  his
fear  and  old  age.

We  see  from  these  and  other  poems  how  the  king
himself  took  part  in  the  verses,  jokes,  riddles  and  con-
tests with  which  the  learned  circle  at  his  court  amused
itself.  Charlemagne  well  understood  how  to  draw  ser-
vice from  the  many-sided  learning  of  Paul.  Upon  the
king’s  command,  Paul  wrote  epitaphs  to  Queen  Hilde-
gard,  to  her  daughters  Adelheid  and  Hildegard,  and  to
Pepin’s  daughters,  Adelheid  and  Rotaidis  with  which
the  king  (probably  in  78 3)*  caused  their  graves  in  St.
Arnulf  at  Metz  to  be  decorated.  3 About  this  time  also
Paul  gave  to  Charlemagne  an  extract  from  the  work  of
Pompeius  Festus  “ On  the  Signification  of  Words,”  and
Mommsen  well  observes  (p.  97)  that  among  the  char-

1 Hodgkin,  V,  77.  * Dahn,  48,  49.

•Abel,  p.  xvi ; Waitz,  p.  19.

Digitized  by

Google

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

XXV11

acteristic  traits  of  our  remarkable  scholar,  it  was  not  the
least  engaging  that  Paul  took  an  interest,  not  merely  in
the  Roman  historians,  but  in  the  lexicon  of  the  language
and  antiquities  of  Rome.  A more  important  task  was
the  collection  and  revision  of  the  homilies  of  the  fathers
of  the  church  which  he  made  by  order  of  the  king,  and
which  was  possibly  commenced  about  this  time, 1 * * * * * * though
not  completed  until  after  his  return  to  Monte  Cassino.
Paul’s  collection  has  been  in  use  for  a thousand  years
in  the  whole  Catholic  church  and  it  is  easy  to  see  what
a profound  influence  he  has  had  in  this  way  not  only
upon  the  church  but  upon  culture  and  literature.

It  was  after  783  8 that  Paul  wrote,  upon  the  request  of
Angilram,  Bishop  of  Metz  3 a history  of  the  bishops
of  that  diocese.  In  this  work,  which  was  written  in  the
manner  of  the  “ Book  of  the  Popes/*  he  treats  with  special
minuteness  of  detail  of  the  family  and  ancestry  of  Charle-
magne, and  it  is  clear  that  his  object  is  to  justify  the  rise
of  the  Carlovingians  to  the  throne  and  to  represent  them
as  a legitimate  sovereign  house.  Besides  this  work  he

1 Bethmann  (p.  265)  considers  that  this  collection  was  written
A.  D.  783.  Dahn  (pp.  52,  53)  followed  by  Waitz  (p.  20)  infers
from  the  poem  written  to  Charlemagne  (see  same  page)  that  it  was

not  finished  until  after  Paul’s  return  to  the  monastery  of  Monte

Cassino  and  that  it  must  have  been  written  between  786  and  797

(Dahn,  54).

1 After  the  marriage  of  Charles  with  Fastrada,  says  Abel  (p.

xvii)  but  before  she  had  borne  him  any  children.  See  also

Dahn,  49,  50.

* Hist.  Langob.,  infra  VI,  Ch.  16.  Angilram  died  m 791  (Abel,
p.  XVII).

Digitized  by

Google

xxviii

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

composed  a catalogue  of  the  bishops  in  short  verse.
Most  of  the  time  that  Paul  was  in  France  he  prob-
bably  spent  at  Dietenhofen*  and  Metz.  Sometimes
however  he  stayed  for  a while  at  other  places,  as  in
Poicticrs  in  the  cloister  of  St.  Hilarius*  where,  at  the
request  of  the  abbot  Aper,  he  composed  an  epitaph  on
the  poet  Venantius  Fortunatus.*  When  Paul  was  at
Charlemagne’s  court  he  was  lodged  in  a hospitium  not
far  from  the  palace  and  was  entertained  by  the  king.4

But  the  longing  for  his  own  cloister  forced  him,  after
a few  years,  to  abandon  France,  and  in  the  summer  of
787  we  find  him  again  in  Benevento.  He  either  crossed
the  Alps  with  the  king  in  December  786,  or  he  had
already  left  France  before  this  expedition.  It  was  at
Rome  and  possibly  on  his  way  to  Monte  Cassino  that
he  composed  a short  biography  of  Gregory  the  Great,5
though  the  date  of  that  work  is  not  certainly  known.6
On  the  25th  of  August  787,  shortly  after  his  return  to
Benevento,  his  patron  Arichis  died.  Paul  celebrated
his  memory  in  a beautiful  epitaph  composed  in  distichs,
a memorial  which  honors  the  faithful  devotion  of  the
poet  as  well  as  the  prince.7

The  respect  and  love  which  Paul  enjoyed  in  the  clois-

'Hist.  Langob.,  infra  I,  5.  *Hist.  Langob. , II,  13.

•Id.

4ftodgkin,  V,  p.  76.

* Abel,  xvn,  Waitz,  p.  22.

* It  was  some  years  before  he  wrote  the  third  book  of  his  History
of  the  Langobards  (III,  24  infra).

* This  was  written  before  the  summer  of  788  (Dahn,  55).

Digitized  by

Google

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

xxix

ter  is  testified  by  his  pupil  Hilderic  in  an  epitaph  which
attributes  to  him  piety,  love,  peaceableness,  patience,
simplicity,  concord,  in  short,  “ every  good  quality  at
one  and  the  same  time.”  Charlemagne  also  repeatedly
expresses  his  heartfelt  affection  and  honor  for  the  old
man  in  the  poems  “ Christe  pater”  and  “ Parvula  rex
Carolus.”  The  king  visited  Monte  Cassino  in  the  spring
of  787  and  formed  the  project  of  improving  monastic
life  in  the  Frankish  kingdom  from  its  example.  Some-
time after  his  return  home x he  asked  the  abbot  Theu-
demar  to  give  him  for  this  purpose  a copy  of  the  “ Rule
of  the  Order”  from  Benedict’s  original  manuscript,
and  also  to  send  him  the  monk  Joseph  whom  he  de-
sired to  place  at  the  head  of  his  own  model  cloister.
The  abbot  assigned  to  our  Paul  the  duty  of  answering
the  king  in  the  name  of  the  monastery.  It  is  said  that
this  became  the  occasion  for  a detailed  explanation  of
the  Rule,  which  Paul  composed  at  the  request  of  the
abbot  and  monks.*  It  was  also  after  he  returned  to  the
cloister  that  he  composed  the  sermons  attributed  to  him,
of  which  only  four  have  been  preserved,1 * 3  as  well  as  the
last  and  most  important  work  of  his  life  “ The  History
of  the  Langobards.”  When  he  gave  his  Roman  History
to  Adelperga  he  had  the  design  of  bringing  it  down  at
a later  period  to  his  own  time.4  Other  things  had  oc-

1 Perhaps  in  792  (see  Dahn,  62).

* Dahn  (62-63)  disputes  Paul’s  authorship  of  this  work.

•The  MSS.  are  described  by  Bethmann,  (302).  Dahn  (71)
considers  the  sermons  not  sufficiently  authenticated.

•Abel,  p.  xix.

Digitized  by  v^ooole

XXX

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

curred  in  the  meantime.  The  fall  of  the  Langobard
kingdom  had  made  a great  change.  Now  in  the  even-
ing of  a long  and  active  life,  from  the  sun-lit  heights  of
the  quiet  monastery,  he  thought  again  of  his  old  plan
and  carried  it  out  in  an  altered  form  as  the  history  of
his  own  people  into  which  he  interwove  what  seemed
appropriate  in  the  history  of  the  Frankish  kingdom  and
the  Eastern  empire.1  But  before  its  completion,  death
carried  the  old  man  away.  The  13  th  day  of  April  was
the  day  of  his  death,  but  the  year  is  unknown.®  He
was  buried  in  the  cloister  near  the  chapter  hall,  and  the
monk  of  Salerno  afterwards  saw  his  epitaph,  but  at  the
present  time  every  trace  of  his  tomb  has  disappeared.

1 The  connection  between  his  Roman  and  Langobard  histories  ’
is  very  close.  The  first  is  brought  down  to  Totila’s  death  in  552
and  the  16th  book  closes  with  the  statement  that  what  remains  to
be  said  of  the  good  fortune  of  the  emperor  Justinian  is  to  be  re-
lated in  a subsequent  book.  This  subsequent  book  never  ap-
peared, but  the  “ History  of  the  Langobards  **  took  its  place.  The
events  of  Justinian’s  reign  described  in  the  Roman  history,  the
Persian  war,  the  conquest  of  Africa  and  the  Gothic  kingdom,  are
compressed  into  the  smallest  compass,  while  matters  omitted
in  the  Roman  history  are  treated  more  in  detail,  e.  g.f  the  con-
quest of  Amtalas,  king  of  the  Moors,  the  laws  of  Justinian,  the
building  of  St.  Sophia  and  the  general  estimate  of  Justinian’s
character.  The  Gothic  war  is  resumed  at  the  point  where  the
Roman  history  breaks  off,  that  is — with  the  struggle  between
Narses  and  Buccellinus,  A.  D.  553,  except  that  the  account  of  the
sending  of  auxiliary  troops  by  the  Langobards  to  Narses  is  pre-
fixed to  it,  although  this  occurred  during  Totila’s  life  (Mommsen,

77).

1 It  occurred  probably  between  A.  D.  790  and  800  (Hodgkin,

V,  78).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

XXXI

Paul’s  life  was  the  life  of  a man  of  learning.1  It  was
not  given  to  him  to  develop  great  qualities.  Quiet  and
modest,  but  honored  and  loved  by  all  who  lived  with
him,  and  dear  to  his  royal  and  princely  patrons,  he
found  complete  contentment  in  retirement  and  in  his
work  as  an  instructor  and  author.  No  reproach  has
anywhere  been  made  against  him.  No  dishonorable
trait  appears  in  his  work,  or  in  his  life.  Everything
which  has  been  written  to  him  or  about  him  expresses
only  love  and  honor.  Lofty  flights  were  unknown  to
him;  his  fundamental  traits  were  fidelity,  devotion  to
his  prince  and  love  for  his  people.  His  religious  ten-
dency was  of  a practical  and  reasonable  kind.  He  was
disinclined  to  questions  of  dogmatic  controversy  and
contemplative  speculation.  In  his  Life  of  St.  Gregory
he  declares  it  unnecessary  to  relate  miracles,  since  there
is  no  need  of  them  in  order  to  judge  of  men.

Paul’s  culture  belongs  to  the  most  comprehensive  of
his  time.  A Langobard  by  birth,  he  learned  from
childhood  the  language  of  his  people,  its  laws,  its  cus-
toms and  its  old  historic  legends,  the  rich  fragments  of
which  adorn  his  historical  work.  The  Latin  language,
the  ancient  and  Christian  authors  and  whatever  else  be-
longs to  the  culture  of  a churchman,  he  studied  under
one  of  the  best  teachers  of  the  Langobard  kingdom  and
perhaps  (according  to  the  statement  of  his  pupil  Hil-
deric)  under  the  encouragement  of  the  king  himself.
But  what  particularly  distinguished  him,  especially  in
France,  was  his  knowledge  of  Greek,  which  was  there
very  rare.

1 Bethmann,  273.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

xxxii

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

His  general  learning  was  not  inferior  to  his  unusual
knowledge  of  languages.  The  Bible,  the  fathers  of  the
church,  the  current  classics,  Eutropius,  Florus,  Eusebius,
Orosius,  Prosper,  Jordanes,  Fortunatus,  Gregory  the
Great,  Gregory  of  Tours,  Isidore  Eugippius,  the  various
lives  of  the  popes,  Marcus  of  Monte  Cassino,  Ambrosius,
Autpert,  Secundus  of  Trent,  the  old  Langobard  chron-
icle, Rothari's  book  of  laws,  the  lives  of  Columban,  Arn-
ulf,  etc.,  are  mentioned  and  used  by  him,  and  they  will
be  far  from  all  that  he  has  read.

His  many-sided  learning  is  shown  in  his  manner  of
writing  which  evinces  a diligent  reading  of  the  classics
and  much  training.  His  language  on  the  whole  is  cor-
rect, though  barbarisms  occur  on  account  of  the  fact
that  the  Latin  language  in  the  Middle  Ages  was  by  no
means  a dead  one,  but  had  a peculiar  and  inevitable
development  as  a living  tongue.  These  barbarisms  are
found  in  equal  measure  in  all  the  writings  of  the  time,
not  excepting  Bede,  Alcuin  and  Eginhard.1

1 After  a thorough  review  of  the  manuscripts  and  their  genealo-
gies, Waitz  (Neues  Archiv  I,  p.  561),  differing  from  Bethmann,  at-
tributes to  Paul  himself,  and  not  merely  to  his  copyists  and  tran-
scribers, numerous  departures  from  the  ordinary  rules  of  orthog-
raphy and  grammar.  In  addition  to  mere  mistakes  and  varia-
tions in  spelling,  e.  g.,  doctor  for  ductor  (Paul  Hist.  Langob.,  II,
9),  and  irregular  verbal  forms,  accesserant  for  acciderant  (III , 5),
sinebit  (V,  8)  erabamus  (V,  40)  vettit  for  veils t (II,  4),  inrucrit  for
inrueret  (VI,  24);  we  find  such  expressions  as  tnirum  dictum  for
dictu  (IV,  2);  the  use  of  domui  as  a genitive  (VI,  16,  23);  the
omission  of  the  final  s in  the  genitive,  e.  g.,  superiori  (IV,  16)  ;
caesarem  used  as  vocative  (III,  12)  ; the  forms  juvenulus  (V,  7),
primis  (I,  9)  meaning  “at  first;**  ad  for  a or  ab,  e.  g.t  ad

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

PAUL  THE  DEAC6N.  XXXlil

Paul  belongs  in  language  and  expression  to  the  best

Suavis  (III,  7);  adducunt  for  abducunt  (IV,  37).  Among  the
grammatical  peculiarities  are  the  interchange  of  genders,  e.  g. ,
praefato  sinodo  (VI,  4),  ad  quod  prof ec  turn  (I,  4),  Jluvium  quod
(IV,  45),  montem  quoddam  (III,  34),  illud  omatum  (V,  13),  ritum
imperiale  (III,  12),  alium  consilium  (VI,  36),  talem  votum  (II,
27),  mu/tos pondus  (III,  34).

The  accusative  is  used  for  the  ablative  or  other  cases,  e.  g.t
manum  for  manu  (VI,  32),  gratiam  for  gratia  (VI,  44),  vitam  ex -
emptus  est  (VI,  56).  ducatum  expulit  (VI,  57),  adventum  extern -
tus  est  (IV,  8),  regnum  potitus  (VI,  35),  hoc  est  magnum  ihesau-
rum  (III,  11).  The  accusative  absolute  is  used,  e . g.t  vocatum
interpret em  (III,  2),  vocatum  pontificem  (III,  12),  Unulfum  ad -
scitum  (V,  2).  The  nominative  also  is  thus  used,  Franci  cum
Saxonibus  pugnantes , magna  stranges  facta  est  (IV,  31);  ad  cere-
brum ictus  prevenieus,  hostis  ab  equo  dejectus  est  (IV,  37).  Some-
times accusative  and  ablative  are  united,  especially  when  two  sub-
stantives belong  to  the  participle,  e.  g.y  ordinatis  Iboret  Aioncm  (I,
3),  Adunatis  gentibus  Rugorumque  partem  (I,  19),  Accepta  obside
sororem  (V,  8);  but  also  alone,  facta  pacem  (III,  27),  nemine  scien -
ten t (IV,  40),  relicto  puerum  (IV,  41),  Cyrum  ejecto  (VI,  34),  cum
residente  (VI,  37) — Also  the  nominative  and  ablative,  extmcto
Maurkio  e/us  filius  (IV,  36) — See  also  annum  et  mensibus  (IV,  44),
eodemque  volumen , eodem  codicem  (I,  25),  eodem  ostium  (V,  3),
eodem  cubiculum  (V,  2),  eadem  urbem  (II,  13),  eadem  civitatem
(VI,  13),  eadem  basilic  am  (III,  23),  eadem  provinciam  (VI,  24),
cuncta  suppeUectilem  (VI,  57),  in  medio  campum  (IV,  37),  regia
dignitatem  (III,  35),  subito  adventum  (V,  9),  eipugnaturum  (II,  1),
— We  find  also  the  use  of  improper  cases  after  prepositions,  in  in -
sulam  communivit  (VI,  19),  Habitaverunt  in  Pannoniam  (II,  7),
in  caelum  apparuisse  (IV,  1 5),  in palatium  manere  (V,  4),  in  silvam
latens  (V,  39),  in  medium  civitatis  concremari fecit  (VI,  49),  in  reg-
num gerebat  principatum  (VI,  23),  in  quam  partem  quiesceret  (V,
34),  cum  victoriam  (IV,  16),  de  adventum  (V,  8),  de  Unulfum  (V,
3),  de  Brittaniam  (VI,  37),  a Fano  civitatem  (VI,  57),  ab  orientis
partem  (II,  16),  Pro  redempiionem  (VI,  40),  sub  regulae  jugum

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

xxxiv

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

of  the  early  Middle  Ages. x He  was  not  born  to  be  a
poet  although  single  poems  of  his  are  not  lacking  in
beauties  and  he  manages  with  ease  the  different  kinds
of  verse.  He  chooses  in  preference  the  old  forms  of
versification,  the  hexameter,  the  elegiac,  Sapphic,
Alcaic,  and  Archilochian  meters,  but  he  also  uses  a

vivere  (VI,  40). — For  a subject  placed  in  the  accusative  see  Pan -
noniam  pertingat  (II,  8),  rex  Uutprandum  (VI,  58).  Ablative
forms  are  also  improperly  used,  in  Francia  viisit  (IV,  I),  in
Francia  fugeret  (VI,  35),  in  Alexandria  direxit  (VI,  36),  in  qua
confugerat  (III,  18),  in  basilica  confugit  (VI,  5 1),  in  gratia  rcceptus
(IV,  3),  ad  terra  (III,  24),  ad fine  (I,  21),  in partibus  divisus  (III,
24),  ob  detrimento  (III,  17),  per  medio  (V,  3),  apud  filio  (IV,  29),
apud  basilica  (IV,  42).  Sometimes  the  object  stands  in  the  abla-
tive, qua  gerebat  (I,  15),  qua  gestabat  (III,  30),  sua  faretra  sus -
pendit  (IV,  37),  prima  se  scribebat  (IV,  36),  manu  tetigit  (III,  30),
occasione  repperit  (III,  18),  eodem percussit  (IV,  51),  eodem poni
fecit  (III,  34),  bello gessisset  ( I V,  16),  evaginato  ense  tenens  (IV,  51).
Once  it  stands  in  the  dative,  ducatui  gubemavit  (VI,  3).  Some-
times the  nominative  appears  with  the  infinitive,  as  Gambara  pos-
tulasse,  Frea  consilium  dedisse — subjunxisse  (I,  8),  Peredeo  di -
^ rectus  esse  (II,  30).  We  find  also  the  letter  t added  to  the  infin-
itive, e.  g.,  se  vellet  for  se  velle  (V,  4).  From  these  instances
Waitz  infers  that  Paul’s  writing  was  greatly  influenced  by  the  cor-
rupt Latin  in  vogue  at  the  time.  No  doubt  this  is  true,  but  prob-
ably most  of  Paul’s  readers  will  attribute  the  larger  portion  of
these  errors  in  the  early  manuscripts  to  the  carelessness  of  an
original  amanuensis  or  of  ignorant  transcribers,  or  to  the' mere
oversight  of  the  learned  historian.  The  generally  grammatical
character  of  his  verse  would  indicate  that  he  had  a good  knowl-
edge of  what  correct  Latin  ought  to  be.

1 Abel  considers  (p.  xxi)  that  in  this  respect  the  History  of  the
Langobards,  which  he  left  incomplete,  is  inferior  to  his  remaining
works.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

XXXV

more  modern  form  consisting  of  three  lines,  each  com-
posed of  eight  long  and  seven  short  syllables.  From
the  affectations  which  gradually  got  the  upper  hand
among  the  Christian  poets  he  has  kept  himself  quite
free  with  two  exceptions,  the  acrostic  to  Adelperga,
composed  after  the  model  of  Ennodius  and  Fortunatus,
and  the  reciprocal  distichs  on  St.  Benedict1  and  Scho-
lastica,  where  the  first  part  of  the  first  line  is  repeated
at  the  end  of  the  second.  Rhyme  is  not  used  by
Paul.  His  hymn  on  the  translation  of  St.  Mercurius
would  be  an  exception,  but  for  this  very  reason  it  ap-
pears doubtful  whether  he  was  its  author.

Paul's  principal  work  was  in  history.  He  found  this
branch  of  knowledge  cultivated  in  several  directions.
They  include :

( 1 ) The  condensed  Roman  histories  of  the  time  with
additions  made  by  Christian  authors  to  include  Jewish
and  pre-Roman  history  as  well  as  the  history  of  the
church.

(2)  The  consular  lists  to  which  historical  observa-
tions were  added.

(3)  The  Annals,  a development  of  Easter  tablets,
which  were  hung  up  in  the  churches  in  the  effort  to
secure  uniformity  in  celebrating  church  festivals.

(4)  The  Chronicles,  an  extension  of  the  theory  of
the  Annals  to  general  chronology.

(5)  Accounts  of  the  “ Six  Ages  of  the  World."

(6)  Histories  of  particular  German  nations,  Franks,
Goths,  Anglo-Saxons,  etc.

1 See  Appendix  III.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

xxxvi

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

(7)  Biographies,  including  Lives  of  the  Saints  ?nd
the  Popes.1

Paul  attempted  only  the  first  and  the  last  two  of
these.

But  what  came  at  an  early  time  into  all  these  branches
of  historical  writing,  and  showed  in  a surprising  way  the
decadence  of  a spiritually  creative  life,  was  the  ever-in-
creasing  compiling  and  copying.  All  the  historians  of
the  time  copy  from  each  other  and  from  their  predeces-
sors, and  give  us  next  to  nothing  that  is  original.  Paul
could  not  withdraw  himself  from  the  spirit,  or  rather  the
lack  of  spirit  of  his  age.  He  was  also  properly  a com-
piler. It  was  his  nature  to  collect  and  transmit  in  more
convenient  form  what  was  at  hand,  not  to  create  any-
thing new.  Still,  there  is  never  with  him  a mere  rough
patching  together.  He  selects  and  examines  his  sources,
tries  to  bring  their  accounts  into  harmony,  and  in  a gen-
eral way  he  makes  use  of  criticism,  even  though  he  is
not  always  happy  in  this.  Especially  have  his  critical
efforts,  joined  with  his  method  of  compilation,  operated
injuriously  upon  his  chronology.  To  bind  together  the
fragments  of  his  different  sources  he  inserts  quite  arbi-
trarily the  words  “ After  some  years  ” or  “ At  this  time  ”
or  “ In  these  days  ” or  “ After  these  things,”  and  often
quite  erroneously,  so  that  phrases  of  this  kind  can  never
pass  as  authority,  since  they  have  their  origin  simply  in
a matter  of  style.  Sometimes  he  throws  into  confusion
the  sequence  of  the  narrative,  even  where  he  adheres  to
the  words  of  his  sources,  so  that  quite  a different  chron-

1 Bethmann,  278  to  282.

Digitized  by  v^ooole

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

xxxvn

ology  results.  Other  things  he  puts  together  very
loosely  without  natural  connection,  and  the  fact  that  he
puts  them  in  a certain  order  does  not  show  that  they
really  occurred  in  that,  order.1

For  chronology  therefore  he  must  be  used  with  the
greatest  caution,  and  where  he  differs  from  other  ancient
sources,  the  probability  is  that  the  error  is  with  him  and
not  with  them.9  He  is  not  lacking  in  other  errors,  but
these  are  much  oftener  to  be  attributed  to  his  sources
than  to  himself.  He  has  been  reproached  for  credulity,
and  certainly  scientific  criticism  is  not  his  prominent

1 Bethmann,  283,  284.  He  had  intended  to  write  merely  an  ex-
tension of  his  continuation  of  Eutropius.  This  would  belong  to
universal  history  and  would  be  written  in  chronological  order,  and
when,  in  place  of  this,  he  later  writes  a history  of  his  own  people,  he
was  still  unwilling  to  give  up  his  earlier  point  of  view  and  he  there-
fore pursues  his  history  in  three  threads  interweaving  in  briefer
fashion  with  his  extended  Langobard  narrative,  matters  concern-
ing the  Eastern  empire  and  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks  (Mommsen,
56).  This  is  by  no  means  to  the  advantage  of  the  narrative  since
the  principal  thread  of  the  story  is  continually  interrupted  without
any  proper  compensation  to  the  writer  in  the  matters  which  are
thus  interjected  and  which  are  generally  copied  almost  word  for
word  out  of  well-known  sources.  But  as  a mark  of  the  tendency
to  fuse  together  Roman  and  Germanic  traditions  and  history  it  is
of  the  highest  importance.

* His  chronological  arrangement  is  based  to  a considerable  ex-
tent upon  Bede’s  Chronicle  since  the  years  of  the  reigns  of  the
emperors  of  the  East,  besides  those  of  the  Langobard  kings  form
the  principal  support  of  the  order  of  his  narrative.  In  a very  few
cases  he  gives  the  indiction,  and  only  once  (in  regard  to  Alboin’s
invasion,  A.  D.  568)  the  year  of  our  Lord  (Jacobi,  3),

Die  ' by  CaOOQle

I

xxxviii  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF  ,

i

characteristic.  But  what  he  relates  of  miracle!  and
wonderful  things  is  due  in  part  to  the  times,  and  in  part
to  the  traditions  of  his  people  which  he  tells  with
affection,  without  everywhere  wishing  to  vouch  for  their
accuracy,  as  he  sometimes  lets  us  perceive.  His  love  of
truth,  the  first  quality  of  a writer  of  history,  is  unques-
tioned. He  desires  continually  and  everywhere  to  give
us  the  facts.  Where  he  fails  it  is  never  with  knowledge
and  will.

His  whole  nature  was  without  anger  and  prejudice.
Partisan  views,  passionate  judgments,  the  sacred  rage  of
a Tacitus,  an  Ambrose  or  a Jeremiah,  are  not  to  be  ex-
pected from  him,  but  rather  impartiality  and  independ-
ence of  judgment.  While  his  source,  the  official  “ Book
of  the  Popes,”  speaks  only  evil  of  Liutprand,  Paul  praises
him  in  the  most  decided  way.  On  the  other  hand,  all
his  love  for  his  people  does  not  prevent  his  doing  full
justice  to  Gregory  the  Great,  and  again,  with  all  his
reverence  for  Gregory,  in  the  contest  of  the  Pope  with
the  church  of  Aquileia,  he  decidedly  takes  the  part  of
the  latter.1  Muratori  accuses  him  unjustly  of  being  a
partisan  of  his  own  people.  He  undoubtedly  loved  his
people.  It  was  this  love  which  induced  him  to  write  his
history.  It  causes  him  to  speak  in  particular  detail  of
his  own  home,  it  prevents  his  becoming  a partisan  of
the  Catholics  and  the  admirers  of  Gregory  against  the

1 It  may  well  be,  however,  as  Cipolla  believes  (Atti  e Memorie
del  Congresso  Storico  in  Cividale,  1899,  p.  144)  that  Paul,  not
fully  understanding  the  controversy,  considered  that  Gregory  was
on  the  side  of  the  church  of  Aquileia.

Digitized  by

Google

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

XXXIX

Langobards,  but  it  has  not  induced  him  to  distort  the
truth,  or  to  set  forth  in  a partisan  manner,  nothing  but
the  glory  of  his  people,  and  if  he  sometimes  omits  things
where  his  silence  may  seem  partial,  for  example,  the
evil  things  that  Procopius,  the  “ Book  of  the  Popes,”
and  Gregory  relate  of  the  Langobards,  this  is  not
proof  that  he  wanted  to  conceal  them,  since  he  often
omits  other  important  facts,  and  he  relates  on  the  other
hand  many  things  disadvantageous  to  the  Langobards.
Indeed,  his  judgment  of  his  own  people,  as  well  as
of  individual  Langobards,  is  sometimes  severe.  He
shows  a desire  to  please  Charlemagne  in  the  long  di-
gression concerning  the  forefathers  and  family  of  that
king  in  his  “ History  of  the  Bishops  of  Metz,”  but  here
too  he  does  not  depart  from  the  truth ; and  when  he
says  Rome  desired  the  presence  of  Charlemagne  because
it  was  then  suffering  from  the  oppression  of  the  Lango-
bards, this  was  true  even  in  the  mouth  of  a Langobard,
and  that  he  praises  the  conqueror  of  his  people  on  ac-
count of  his  mildness  cannot  well  be  called  flattery.
He  shows  the  same  feeling  for  truth  and  simplicity  in
his  plain  diction.  There  are  no  speeches  according  to
the  manner  of  the  ancients  and  of  Jordanes;  there  are
no  great  character-portraits  depending  more  or  less
upon  the  coloring  of  the  artist;  there  is  no  word-
painting  with  the  single  exception  of  his  lively  descrip-
tion of  the  plague  in  Book  II,  Ch.  IV,  and  this  he
certainly  did  not  derive  from  his  imagination.1

1 The  paraphrase  from  Bethmann  (p.  286)  ceases  at  this  point.
The  remainder  of  the  article  is  from  the  authorities  given  below.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

xl

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

Mommsen*  says,  “ Paul  has  hardly  written  down  any
statements  which  he  himself  did  not  consider  true,  but
often  he  came  to  his  conviction  of  their  truth  by  means  of
conclusions  which  are  contestable  and  doubtful,  and  which
it  is  not  always  easy  to  follow.”  The  “ History  of  the
Langobards  ” gives  evidence  of  incompleteness  and  care-
lessness in  places,9  but  Mommsen  believes  that,  in  general,
Paul  cannot  be  so  much  accused  of  thoughtlessness  as  of
pondering  too  deeply  over  the  use  of  his  authorities  and
becoming  deceived  thereby,  and  he  adds  that  we  must  take
care  not  to  receive  as  evidence  his  mere  deductions,  as,
for  example,  where  Paul  finds  in  his  authorities  that  the
two  contending  kings,  Odoacar  and  Fewa,  both  reigned
over  the  Rugians,  and  reconciles  this  contradiction  by
attributing  the  sovereignty  of  Odoacar  to  a part  only
of  that  people.

Jacobi  concludes  his  comprehensive  and  scholarly  re-
view of  the  sources  of  the  “ History  of  the  Langobards  ”
with  the  observation  that  a great  part  of  Paul’s  state-
ments are  without  value  as  sources  of  history,  because
they  can  be  traced  back  to  other  sources  which  are  still
preserved ; that  that  which  cannot  be  so  traced  has  value
only  where  we  can  accept  the  view  that  he  has  accu-
rately followed  his  copy,  as  in  the  lost  work  of  Secundus ;
but  that  where  we  cannot  determine  from  the  form  of
the  unknown  source  the  manner  in  which  it  has  been
used,  our  knowledge  of  the  way  in  which  Paul  is  accus-
tomed to  work  must  admonish  us  to  exercise  the  great-
est caution ; that  much  that  he  relates  is  undoubtedly

1 Pp.  102,  103.  2 Jacobi,  2.

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

PAUL  THE  DEACON.

Xli

traditional,  but  that  in  spite  of  this,  Paul’s  “ History  of
the  Langobards,”  though  hitherto  prized  beyond  its
value,  must  be  reckoned  as  one  of  the  more  prominent
sources  of  the  Middle  Ages  on  account  of  the  consider-
able number  of  original  statements  which  it  contains.1
Among  the  critics  of  Paul  it  is  Jacobi  who  gives  him  the
lowest  rank,  and  this  is  doubtless  due  to  the  fact  that
his  point  of  view  considers  Paul’s  work  simply  as  a source
of  historical  facts  without  reference  to  the  literary  char-
acter or  the  general  tendencies  of  that  work.

Mommsen’s  view  is  a broader  one.  He  says : * “It  is
difficult  to  judge  of  the  spiritual  gifts  of  those  men  who
have  worked  upon  the  incunabula  of  history,  as  difficult
as  it  is  to  form  a correct  judgment  from  the  works  of
primitive  sculptors  and  painters  in  regard  to  the  artistic
qualifications  of  the  master.  But  without  doubt  Paul
takes  a peculiar  literary  position  to  this  extent,  that
Roman  culture  had  become  incorporated  in  him  to
such  a degree  as  is  quite  without  another  example  in
this  epoch.  He  wrote  indeed  the  Latin  of  his  time,  and
while  his  verses,  especially  the  hexameters  and  the  dis-
tichs,  are  relatively  correct,  he  did  not  refrain  from
using  in  prose  the  unclassical  forms  then  usual,  for
example,  the  accusative  absolute  (in  place  of  the  ab-
lative absolute)  and  the  participle  turned  into  a sub-
stantive quite  separated  from  any  context.  But  one
who  is  acquainted  in  any  degree  with  the  halting  and
bungling  writings  that  were  composed  at  that  time  looks
with  astonishment  upon  his  thoroughly  clear  and  gener-

1 Jacobi,  p.  87.  »Pp.  54,  55,  56.

Digitized  by  v^ooole

xlii

LIFE  AND  WRITINGS  OF

erally  correct  Latin,  his  reasonable  structure  of  sen-
tences, free  from  all  affectation,  and  his  skill  in  form
and  style.  Quite  apart  from  the  substance  of  his  nar-
rative it  is  well  to  picture  to  ourselves  how  he  has  con-
structed his  historical  work  out  of  the  most  scattered
sources  into  unity  of  form  and  with  full  mastery  over
the  style  of  the  whole.  The  ground-floor  of  his  work
is,  as  is  well  known,  the  condensed  historical  sketch  of
Eutropius,  elegant  in  its  way  and  taken  from  the  Greek
form.  It  is  evident  that  Paul  took  Eutropius  generally
for  his  model,  and  this  testifies  in  favor  of  his  correct
taste.  . . . But  it  is  remarkable  in  what  tolerable  fashion
he  has  moulded  together  the  pulpit  style  of  Orosius,  the
anecdotes  of  the  Books  of  Examples,  the  accounts
of  the  Roman,  Langobard  and  Frankish  annals  and
histories  (sometimes  disjointed,  sometimes  running  on
in  great  detail),  and  the  rude  legends  of  the  Langobard
Origo,  and  has  in  a way  tuned  them  up  and  tuned  them
down  to  the  manner  of  Eutropius,  going  as  far  back  as
King  Ianus  of  Italy  and  down  to  King  Liutprand.  This
involves  such  a knowledge  and  interest  in  classical  liter-
ature as  does  not  occur  again  in  the  same  breadth  and
fulness  before  the  time  of  the  Renaissance.  . . This
energy  in  Roman  classical  culture  was  united  in  Paul
with  an  earnest  national  feeling  which  was  rather  in-
creased than  diminished  upon  the  overthrow  of  the
Langobard  kingdom.  He  has  written  under  these  in-
fluences, and  even  to-day  his  pages  show  the  double
marks  of  classical  and  national  feeling.”

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

PAUL  THE  DEACON’S  HISTORY  OF  THE
LANGOBARDS.

book  a.

Chapter  I.

The  region  of  the  north,  in  proportion  as  it  is  removed
from  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  is  chilled  with  snow  and
frost,  is  so  much  the  more  healthful  to  the  bodies  of  men
and  fitted  for  the  propagation  of  nations,  just  as,  on  the
other  hand,  every  southern  region,  the  nearer  it  is  to  the
heat  of  the  sun,  the  more  it  abounds  in  diseases  and  is
less  fitted  for  the  bringing  up  of  the  human  race.  From
this  it  happens  that  such  great  multitudes  of  peoples
spring  up  in  the  north,  and  that  that  entire  region  from
the  Tanais  (Don)  to  the  west1 * * * * * * *  (although  single  places
in  it  are  designated  by  their  own  names)  yet  the  whole
is  not  improperly  called  by  the  general  name  of  Ger-
many. 9 The  Romans,  however,  when  they  occupied

1 Paul’s  designation  of  the  whole  region  from  the  Don  to  the

west,  as  Germany,  which  is  wholly  incorrect,  appears,  according

to  Mommsen  (p.  61),  to  have  come  from  his  misinterpretation  of

the  words  of  his  authority,  Isidore  of  Seville.

* Paul  appears  to  deduce  the  name  “Germany”  from  ger-

tninare  to  germinate.  Cf.  Isidore,  Etym.,  XIV,  4,  2.  This  fanci-

ful derivation  is  quite  different  from  that  given  by  Tacitus  (Ger-

mania, II),  who  derives  it  from  the  name  of  a single  tribe  after-

wards called  the  Tungrians,  who  were  the  first  to  cross  the  Rhine
and  drive  out  the  Gauls.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

2

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

those  parts,  called  the  two  provinces  beyond  the  Rhine,
Upper  and  Lower  Germany. 1 From  this  teeming  Ger-
many then,  innumerable  troops  of  captives  are  often
! led  away  and  sold  for  gain  to  the  people  of  the  South.
And  for  the  reason  that  it  brings  forth  so  many  human
beings  that  it  can  scarcely  nourish  them,  there  have  fre-
quently emigrated  from  it  many  nations  that  have  indeed
become  the  scourge  of  portions  of  Asia,  but  especially
of  the  parts  of  Europe  which  lie  next  to  it.  Every-
where ruined  cities  throughout  all  Illyria  and  Gaul  testify
to  this,  but  most  of  all  in  unhappy  Italy  which  has  felt
the  cruel  rage  of  nearly  all  these  nations.  The  Goths
indeed,  and  the  Wandals,  the  Rugii,  Heroli,  and  Turci-
lingi,3  and  also  other  fierce  and  barbarous  nations  have
come  from  Germany.  In  like  manner  also  the  race  of

1 4 4 Beyond  the  Rhine  ’ * means  in  this  case  on  the  left  bank  of
the  Rhine.  The  dividing  line  between  Upper  and  Lower  Ger-
many ran  a little  below  the  junction  of  the  Rhine  with  the  Moselle.
Mogontiacum  (Mayence)  was  the  capital  of  Upper  Germany,  and
Vetera  (Birten)  near  Wesel,  of  Lower  Germany.  (Mommsen’s
Geschichte  des  romischen  Reichs,  V,  pp.  107-109).  Although
these  two  provinces  included  at  various  times  more  or  less
territory  on  the  east  side  of  that  river,  it  was  only  a small  part  of
Germany  which  was  thus  occupied  by  the  Romans.  Germania
Magna,  or  Great  Germany,  east  of  the  Rhine,  remained  inde-
pendent.

2 The  Rugii  and  Turcilingi  were  tribes  first  mentioned  as  inhab-
iting the  shores  of  the  Baltic  sea  (Zeuss,  154-15  5).  They  were
subsequently  found  in  the  army  of  Attila  and  afterwards  dwelling
on  the  Danube.  The  Heroli  were  a migratory'  people  appearing
at  different  times  in  various  parts  of  Europe  (Zeuss,  476).  All
three  of  these  tribes  were  among  the  troops  of  Odoacar  in  Italy.
As  to  the  Heroli  and  Rugii  see  infra,  chs.  19  and  20,

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

BOOK  I.

3

Winnili, 1 that  is,  of  Langobards,  which  afterwards  ruled
prosperously  in  Italy,  deducing  its  origin  from  the  Ger-
man peoples,  came  from  the  island  which  is  called
Scadinavia, 3 although  other  causes  of  their  emigration 3
are  also  alleged. 4

Chapter  II.

Pliny  the  Second  also  makes  mention  of  this  island
in  the  books  which  he  composed  concerning  the  nature
of  things.  This  island  then,  as  those  who  have  ex-
amined it  have  related  to  us,  is  not  so  much  placed  in
the  sea  as  it  is  washed  about  by  the  sea  waves  which  en-
compass the  land  on  account  of  the  flatness  of  the
shores. 3 Since,  therefore,  the  peoples  established

lThe  word  means  “eager  for  battle”  according  to  Bruckner
(322).  According  to  Schmidt  (37)  it  is  related  to  the  Gothic  vinja ,
“pasture.”

* That  Paul  wrote  Scadinavia  and  not  Scandinavia  see  Momm-
sen, 62,  note  1.  In  the  Langobard  Origo  (see  Appendix,  II)
the  name  is  given  as  Scadan,  Scandanan  or  Scadanan ; in  the
Chronicon  Gothanum,  it  is  Scatenauge  (Mon.  Germ.  Hist.  Leges
IV,  p.  642).  Paul  appears  to  have  transformed  this  into  Scadinavia
from  Pliny’s  Natural  History  (Book  IV,  ch.  27,  p.  823,  Delphin
ed.).

3 Than  over  population  (Jacobi,  1 2).

4 The  other  causes  of  the  emigration  of  the  Winnili  may  be  those
suggested  in  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  where  the  prophetess  or
sibyl  Gambara  “declared  to  them  their  migration.”  “Moved
therefore  not  by  necessity,  nor  hardness  of  heart,  nor  oppression
of  the  poor,  but  that  they  should  attain  salvation  from  on  high,
she  says  that  they  are  to  go  forth.”  (Monument,  Germ.  Hist.
Leges,  IV,  641.).

6 What  Paul  meant  by  this  island  is  hard  to  decide  (Jacobi,  1 1).

Digitized  by

Google

4

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

within  the  island  had  grown  to  so  great  a multitude  that
they  could  not  now  dwell  together,  they  divided  their
whole  troop  into  three  parts,  as  is  said,  and  determined
by  lot  which  part  of  them  had  to  forsake  their  country
and  seek  new  abodes. 1

Hamm  erst  ein  (Bardengau,  51)  has  pointed  out  that  in  the  Middle
Ages  the  territory  in  the  north  of  Germany,  between  the  North
and  the  Baltic  seas,  was  included  under  the  name  of  Scandinavia,
and  claims  that  Paul  referred  to  the  so-called  Bardengau,  a tract
in  Northern  Germany,  southeast  of  Hamburg.  But  the  fact  that
Paul  calls  upon  Pliny  is  a proof  that  he  had  no  definite  idea  of
Scadinavia,  and  notwithstanding  the  extensive  movement  of  the
tide  upon  the  Elbe  and  the  important  changes  on  the  coast,  it  can
hardly  be  said  of  Bardengau  that  it  was  ‘ * surrounded  ’ ’ by  sea
waves.  Bluhme  (Die  Gens  Langobardonum  und  ihre  Herkunft),
without  sufficient  reason,  identifies  the  northernmost  part  of  the
Cimbrian  peninsula,  the  so-called  Wendsyssel,  with  Scadinavia.
(See  Schmidt,  36).

Schmidt  (38  to  42)  reviews  the  classical  authorities,  Mela,  Pliny
and  Ptolemy,  as  well  as  Jordanes,  the  Geographer  of  Ravenna,
and  the  Song  of  Beowulf,  and  concludes  that  the  word  refers  to
the  Scandinavian  peninsula  which  was  then  considered  an  island;
but  he  rejects  the  tradition  that  the  Langobards  actually  migrated
from  Sweden  to  Germany,  since  he  considers  that  they  belonged
to  the  West-German  stock,  which  in  all  probability  came  from  the
south-east,  while  only  North-Germans  (that  is,  those  races  which
were  found  settled  in  Scandinavia  in  historical  times)  appear  to
have  come  from  that  peninsula.  It  is  probable,  however,  that
the  Langobards  came  from  North-German  stock  (Bruckner,  25-
32),  and  while  there  can  be  no  certainty  whatever  as  to  the  place
of  their  origin,  it  may  well  have  been  Scandinavia.  ,

1 The  choosing  by  lot  of  a part  of  the  people  for  emigration  in
the  case  of  a famine  is  a characteristic  peculiar  to  German  folk-
tales (Schmidt,  42).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  I.

s

Chapter  III.

Therefore  that  section  to  which  fate  had  assigned
the  abandonment  of  their  native  soil  and  the  search  for
foreign  fields,  after  two  leaders  had  been  appointed
over  them,  to  wit : Ibor  and  Aio,1 * * * * *  who  were  brothers,
in  the  bloom  of  youthful  vigor  and  more  eminent  than
the  rest,  said  farewell  to  their  own  people,  as  well  as
their  country,  and  set  out  upon  their  way  to  seek  for
lands  where  they  might  dwell  and  establish  their  abodes.
The  mother  of  these  leaders,  Gambara  by  name,9  was
a woman  of  the  keenest  ability  and  most  prudent  in
counsel  among  her  people,  and  they  trusted  not  a little
to  her  shrewdness  in  doubtful  matters.

Chapter  IV.

I do  not  think  it  is  without  advantage  to  put  off  for
a little  while  the  order  of  my  narrative,  and  because  my
pen  up  to  this  time  deals  with  Germany,  to  relate  briefly
a miracle  which  is  there  considered  notable  among  all,
as  well  as  certain  other  matters.  In  the  farthest  bound-
aries of  Germany  toward  the  west-north-west,  on  the
shore  of  the  ocean  itself,  a cave  is  seen  under  a project-
ing rock,  where  for  an  unknown  time  seven  men  repose

1 Ibor  and  Aio  were  called  by  Prosper  of  Aquitaine,  Iborea  and

Agio  ; Saxo-Grammaticus  calls  them  Ebbo  and  Aggo  ; the  popu-

lar song  of  Gothland  (Bethmann,  342),  Ebbe  and  Aaghe  (Wiese,

14).

* The  word  gambary  according  to  Grimm  (Deutsche  Mythologie,

I,  336),  is  the  equivalent  of  strenuus.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

6

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

wrapped  in  a long  sleep,1  not  only  their  bodies,  but  also
their  clothes  being  so  uninjured,  that  from  this  fact
alone,  that  they  last  without  decay  through  the  course
of  so  many  years,  they  are  held  in  veneration  among
those  ignorant  and  barbarous  peoples.  These  then,  so
far  as  regards  their  dress,  are  perceived  to  be  Romans.
When  a certain  man,  stirred  by  cupidity,  wanted  to  strip
one  of  them,  straightway  his  arms  withered,  as  is  said,
and  his  punishment  so  frightened  the  others  that  no  one
dared  touch  them  further.  The  future  will  show  for
what  useful  purpose  Divine  Providence  keeps  them

1 This  is  the  version  by  Paul  of  the  story  of  the  Seven  Sleepers
of  Ephesus.  The  earliest  version  is  that  of  Jacobus  Sarugiensis,
a bishop  of  Mesopotamia  in  the  fifth  or  sixth  century.  Gregory  of.
Tours  was  perhaps  the  first  to  introduce  the  legend  into  Europe.
Mohammed  put  it  into  the  Koran ; he  made  the  sleepers
prophesy  his  own  coming  and  he  gave  them  the  dog  Kratin  also'
endowed  with  the  gift  of  prophecy.  The  commonly  accepted
legend  was,  however,  that  the  Seven  Sleepers  were  natives  of.
Ephesus,  that  the  emperor  Decius  (A.  D.  250),  having  come  to
that  city,  commanded  that  the  Christians  should  be  sought  out  and
given  their  choice,  either  to  worship  the  Roman  deities  or  die ;
that  these  seven  men  took  refuge  in  a cave  near  the  city;  that  the
entrance  to  the  cave  was,  by  command  of  Decius,  blocked  up  *
with  stone;  that  they  fell  into  a preternatural  sleep,  and  that  two
hundred  years  later,  under  Theodosius  II  (A.  D.  408-450),  the  cave
was  opened  and  the  sleepers  awoke.  When  one  of  them  went  to
the  city  stealthily  to  buy  provisions  for  the  rest  he  found  that  the
place  was  much  changed,  that  his  coins  were  no  longer  cur-
rent, and  that  Christianity  had  been  accepted  by  the  rulers  and
the  people.  The  original  legend  relates,  however,  that  after  awak-
ening they  died  (Curious  Myths  of  the  Middle  Ages,  S.  Baring-
Gould,  p.  93).  It  is  not  known  from  what  source  Paul  derived
his  version  of  the  story.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  1.

7

through  so  long  a period.  Perhaps  those  nations  are
to  be  saved  some  time  by  the  preaching  of  these  men,
since  they  cannot  be  deemed  to  be  other  than  Christians.

Chapter  V.

The  Scritobini,  for  thus  that  nation  is  called,  are
neighbors  to  this  place.  They  are  not  without  snow
even  in  the  summer  time,  and  since  they  do  not  differ
in  nature  from  wild  beasts  themselves,  they  feed  only
upon  the  raw  flesh  of  wild  animals  from  whose  shaggy
skins  also  they  fit  garments  for  themselves.1  They
deduce  the  etymology  of  their  name3  according  to
their  barbarous  language  from  jumping.  For  by  mak-
ing use  of  leaps  and  bounds  they  pursue  wild  beasts
very  skillfully  with  a piece  of  wood  bent  in  the  like-
ness of  a bow.  Among  them  there  is  an  animal  not
very  unlike  a stag, 3 from  whose  hide,  while  it  was
rough  with  hairs,  I saw  a coat  fitted  in  the  manner  of  a
tunic  down  to  the  knees,  such  as  the  aforesaid  Scritobini
use,  as  has  been  related.  In  these  places  about  the
summer  solstice,  a very  bright  light  is  seen  for  some
days,  even  in  the  night  time,  and  the  days  are  much
longer  there  than  elsewhere,  just  as,  on  the  other  hand,
about  the  winter  solstice,  although  the  light  of  day  is
present,  yet  the  sun  is  not  seen  there^and  the  days  are

1 What  is  said  about  the  Scritobini  (or  Scridefinni)  can  be  traced
to  one  and  the  same  source  as  the  account  of  Thule  given  in  Pro-
copius* Gothic  War,  II,  15,  or  of  Scandza  in  Jordanes*  Gothic
History,  3;  see  Zeuss,  684.

* Perhaps  from  schreiten , 14  to  stride,**  or  some  kindred  word.

3 A reindeer  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

8

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

shorter  than  anywhere  else  and  the  nights  too  are  longer,
and  this  is  because  the  further  we  turn  from  the  sun  the
nearer  the  sun  itself  appears  to  the  earth  and  the  longer
the  shadows  grow.  In  short,  in  Italy  (as  the  ancients
also  have  written)  about  the  day  of  the  birth  of  our
Lord,  human  statures  at  twelve  o'clock  measure  in
shadow  nine  feet.  But  when  I was  stationed  in  Belgic
Gaul  in  a place  which  is  called  Villa  Totonis  (Dieten-
hofen,  Thionville1)  and  measured  the  shadow  of  my
stature,  I found  it  nineteen  and  a half  feet.  Thus  also
on  the  contrary  the  nearer  we  come  to  the  sun  toward
midday  the  shorter  always  appear  the  shadows,  so  much
so  that  at  the  summer  solstice  when  the  sun  looks  down
from  the  midst  of  heaven  in  Egypt  and  Jerusalem  and
the  places  situated  in  their  neighborhood,  no  shadows
may  be  seen.  But  in  Arabia  at  this  same  time  the  sun
at  its  highest  point  is  seen  on  the  northern  side  and  the
shadows  on  the  other  hand  appear  towards  the  south.

Chapter  VI.

Not  very  far  from  this  shore  of  which  we  have
spoken,  toward  the  western  side,  on  which  the  ocean
*mjiin  lies  open  without  end,  is  that  very  deep  whirl-
pool of  waters  which  we  call  by  its  familiar  name  “ the
navel  of  the  sea."  This  is  said  to  suck  in  the  waves  and
spew  them  forth  again  twice  every  day,  as  is  proved  to
be  done  by  the  excessive  swiftness  with  which  the  waves
advance  and  recede  along  all  those  shores.  A whirl-
pool or  maelstrom  of  this  kind  is  called  by  the  poet

1 On  the  Moselle,  where  Charlemagne  held  his  court.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.  9

Virgil  “ Charybdis,”  which  he  says  in  his  poem 1 is  in
the  Sicilian  strait,  speaking  of  it  in  this  way :

Scylla  the  right  hand  besets,  and  the  left,  the  relentless
Charybdis ;

Thrice  in  the  whirl  of  the  deepest  abyss  it  swallows  the  vast
waves

Headlong,  and  lifts  them  again  in  turn  one  after  another
Forth  to  the  upper  air,  and  lashes  the  stars  with  the  billows.

Ships  are  alleged  to  be  often  violently  and  swiftly
dragged  in  by  this  whirlpool  (of  which  indeed  we  have
spoken)  with  such  speed  that  they  seem  to  imitate  the
fall  of  arrows  through  the  air,  and  sometimes  they  per-
ish by  a very  dreadful  end  in  that  abyss.  But  often
when  they  are  upon  the  very  point  of  being  overwhelmed
they  are  hurled  back  by  the  sudden  masses  of  waves
and  driven  away  again  with  as  great  speed  as  they  were
at  first  drawn  in.  They  say  there  is  another  whirlpool
of  this  kind  between  the  island  of  Britain  and  the  prov-
ince of  Galicia,*  and  with  this  fact  the  coasts  of  the  Seine
region  and  of  Aquitaine  agree,  for  they  are  filled  twice
a day  with  such  sudden  inundations  that  any  one  who
may  by  chance  be  found  only  a little  inward  from  the
shore  can  hardly  get  away.  You  may  see  the  rivers  of
these  regions  falling  back  with  a very  swift  current
toward  their  source,  and  the  fresh  waters  of  the  streams
turning  salt  through  the  spaces  of  many  miles.  The

1;Eneid,  VII,  420.

* In  the  northwestern  part  of  Spain.  Many  manuscripts  read
“the  province  of  Gaul.**  Evidently  Paul’s  knowledge  of  the
geography  of  these  parts  is  most  obscure.

Digitized  by  Google

10

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

island  of  Evodia  (Alderney)  is  almost  thirty  miles  dis-
tant from  the  coast  of  the  Seine  region,  and  in  this
island,  as  its  inhabitants  declare,  is  heard  the  noise  of
the  waters  as  they  sweep  into  this  Charybdis.  I have
heard  a certain  high  nobleman  of  the  Gauls  relating  that
a number  of  ships,  shattered  at  first  by  a tempest,  were
afterwards  devoured  by  this  same  Charybdis.  And
when  one  only  out  of  all  the  men  who  had  been  in  these
ships,  still  breathing,  swam  over  the  waves,  while  the
rest  were  dying,  he  came,  swept  by  the  force  of  the
receding  waters,  up  to  the  edge  of  that  most  frightful
abyss.  And  when  now  he  beheld  yawning  before  him
the  deep  chaos  whose  end  he  could  not  see,  and  half
dead  from  very  fear,  expected  to  be  hurled  into  it,  sud-
denly in  a way  that  he  could  not  have  hoped  he  was
cast  upon  a certain  rock  and  sat  him  down.  And  now
when  all  the  waters  that  were  to  be  swallowed  had  run
down,  the  margins  of  that  edge  (of  the  abyss)  had  been
left  bare,  and  while  he  sat  there  with  difficulty,  trem-
bling with  fear  and  filled  with  foreboding  amid  so  many
distresses,  nor  could  he  hide  at  all  from  his  sight  the  death
that  was  a little  while  deferred,  behold  he  suddenly  sees,
as  it  were,  great  mountains  of  water  leaping  up  from  the
deep  and  the  first  ships  which  had  been  sucked  in  com-
ing forth  again ! And  when  one  of  these  came  near
him  he  grasped  it  with  what  effort  he  could,  and  without
delay,  he  was  carried  in  swift  flight  toward  the  shore
and  escaped  the  fate  of  death,  living  afterwards  to  tell
the  story  of  his  peril.  Our  own  sea  also,  that  is,  the
Adriatic,  which  spreads  in  like  manner,  though  less  vio-
lently, through  the  coasts  of  Venetia  and  Istria,  is  be-

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

ir

»

lieved  to  have  little  secret  currents  of  this  kind  by  which
the  receding  waters  are  sucked  in  and  vomited  out  again
to  dash  upon  the  shores.  These  things  having  been
thus  examined,  let  us  go  back  to  the  order  of  our  nar-
rative already  begun.

Chapter  VII.

The  Winnili  then,  having  departed  from  Scadinavia
with  their  leaders  Ibor  and  Aio,  and  coming  into  the
region  which  is  called  Scoringa,1  settled  there  for  some

1 Scoringa,  according  to  Mullenhoff’s  explanation  in  which
Bluhme  concurs,  is  “Shoreland”*  (see  Schmidt,  43).  Bluhme
considers  it  identical  with  the  later  Bardengau,  on  the  left  bank
of  the  lower  Elbe  where  the  town  of  Bardowick,  twenty -four  miles
southeast  of  Hamburg,  perpetuates  the  name  of  the  Langobards
even  down  to  the  present  time.  Hammerstein  (Bardengau,  56)
explains  Scoringa  as  Schieringen  near  Bleckede  in  the  same  re-
gion. Schmidt  (43)  believes  that  the  settlement  in  Scoringa  has  a
historical  basis  and  certainly,  if  the  name  indicates  the  territory  in
question,  it  is  the  place  where  the  Langobards  are  first  found  in
authentic  history.  They  are  mentioned  in  connection  with  the
campaigns  undertaken  by  Tiberius  against  various  German  tribes
during  the  reign  of  Augustus  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  year  of  the
Christian  era,  in  the  effort  to  extend  the  frontiers  of  the  Roman
empire  from  the  Rhine  to  the  Elbe  (Mommsen,  Romische
Geschichte,  V,  33).  The  Langobards  then  dwelt  in  that  re-
gion which  lies  between  the  Weser  and  the  lower  Elbe.
They  were  described  by  the  court  historian  Velleius  Paterculus
(II,  106),  who  accompanied  one  of  the  expeditions  as  prefect  of
cavalry  (Schmidt,  5),  as  “more  fierce  than  ordinary  German
savagery,”  and  he  tells  us  that  their  power  was  broken  by  the
legions  of  Tiberius.  It  would  appear  also  from  the  combined
testimony  of  Strabo  (A.  D.  20)  and  Tacitus  (A,  D.  117)  that  the

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

12

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

years.  At  that  time  Ambri  and  Assi,  leaders  of  the

Langobards  dwelt  near  the  mouth  of  the  Elbe  shortly  after  the  be-
ginning of  the  Christian  era,  and  were  in  frequent  and  close  re-
lations with  the  Hermunduri  and  Semnones,  two  great  Suevic
tribes  dwelling  higher  up  the  stream.  Strabo  (see  Hodgkin,
V,  81)  evidently  means  to  assert  that  in  his  time  the  Hermunduri
and  Langobards  had  been  driven  from  the  left  to  the  right  bank.
Ptolemy  who  wrote  later  (100-161)  places  them  upon  the  left
bank.  Possibly  both  authors  were  right  for  different  periods  in
their  history  (Hodgkin,  V,  82).

The  expedition  of  Tiberius  was  the  high-water  mark  of  Roman
invasion  on  Teutonic  soil,  and  when  a Roman  fleet,  sailing  up  the
Elbe,  established  communication  with  a Roman  army  upon  the
bank  of  that  river,  it  might  well  be  thought  that  the  designs  of
Augustus  were  upon  the  point  of  accomplishment,  and  that  the
boundary  of  the  empire  was  to  be  traced  by  connecting  the  Dan-
ube with  the  Elbe.  The  dominions  of  Marobod,  king  of  the  Mar-
comanni,  who  was  then  established  in  Bohemia,  would  break  the
continuity  of  this  boundary,  so  the  Romans  proceeded  to  invade
his  territories.  An  insurrection,  however,  suddenly  broke  out  in
lllyricum  and  the  presence  of  the  Roman  army  was  required  in
that  region.  So  a hasty  peace  was  concluded  with  Marobod,  leav-
ing him  the  possessions  he  already  held.  It  required  four  suc-
cessive campaigns  and  an  enormous  number  of  troops  (Mommsen,
Rom.  Gesch.,  Vol.  V,  pp.  35-38)  to  suppress  the  revolt.  While
the  Roman  veterans  were  engaged  in  the  Illyrian  war,  great  num-
bers of  Germans  led  by  Arminius,  or  Hermann,  of  the  Cheruscan
tribe  rose  in  rebellion.  In  the  ninth  year  of  our  era,  Varus
marched  against  them  at  the  head  of  a force  composed  largely  of
new  recruits.  He  was  surprised  and  surrounded  in  the  pathless
recesses  of  the  Teutoburg  forest  and  his  army  of  some  twenty
thousand  men  was  annihilated  (id.,  pp.  38-44).  It  is  not  known
whether  the  Langobards  were  among  the  confederates  who  thus
arrested  the  conquest  of  their  country  by  the  Roman  army,
although  they  dwelt  not  far  from  the  scene  of  this  historic  battle.

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  I.

13

Wandals,  were  coercing  all  the  neighboring  provinces  by

They  were  then  considered,  however,  to  belong  to  the  Suevian
stock  and  were  subject,  not  far  from  this  time,  to  the  king  of  the
Marcomanni,  a Suevian  race  (id.,  p.  34;  Tacitus  Germania,  38-40;
Annals,  II,  45),  and  king  Marobod  took  no  part  in  this  war  on
either  side  as  he  had  made  peace  with  the  Romans.

The  defeat  of  Varus  was  due  largely  to  his  own  incompetency
and  it  would  not  appear  to  have  been  irretrievable  when  the  im-
mense resources  of  the  Roman  empire  are  considered.  Still  no
active  offensive  operations  against  the  barbarians  were  undertaken
until  after  the  death  of  Augustus  and  the  succession  of  Tiberius,
A.  D.  14,  when  in  three  campaigns,  the  great  Germanicus  thrice
invaded  Germany,  took  captive  the  wife  and  child  of  Arminius,
defeated  the  barbarians  in  a sanguinary  battle,  and  announced  to
Rome  that  in  the  next  campaign  the  subjugation  of  Germany
would  be  complete  (Mommsen,  id.,  pp,  44-50).  But  Tiberius  per-
mitted no  further  campaign  to  be  undertaken.  The  losses  suf-
fered by  the  Romans  on  the  sea  as  well  as  on  land  had  been  very
severe,  and  whether  he  was  influenced  by  this  fact  and  by  the  dif-
ficulty of  keeping  both  Gaul  and  Germany  in  subjection  if  the
legions  were  transferred  from  the  Rhine  to  the  Elbe,  or  whether
he  was  actuated  by  jealousy  of  Germanicus,  and  feared  the  popu-
larity the  latter  would  acquire  by  the  subjugation  of  all  Germany,
cannot  now  be  decided,  but  he  removed  that  distinguished  com-
mander from  the  scene  of  his  past  triumphs  and  his  future  hopes,
sent  him  to  the  East  on  a new  mission,  left  the  army  on  the  Rhine
divided  and  without  a general-in-chief,  and  adopted  the  policy  of
keeping  that  river  as  the  permanent  boundary  of  the  empire  (id.,
p.  5°-54).

Thus  the  battle  in  the  Teutoburg  forest  resulted  in  the  mainte-
nance of  German  independence  and  ultimately  perhaps  in  the  over-
throw of  the  Roman  empire  itself  by  German  barbarians.  It
marked  the  beginning  of  the  turn  of  the  tide  in  Roman  conquest
and  Roman  dominion,  for  although  the  empire  afterwards  grew  in
other  directions  yet  behind  the  dike  here  erected,  the  forces  grad-

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

14

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

war.  Already  elated  by  many  victories  they  sent  mes-

ually  collected  which  were  finally  to  overwhelm  it  when  it  became
corrupted  with  decay.

When  the  legions  of  Varus  were  destroyed,  the  head  of  the
Roman  commander  was  sent  to  Marobod  and  his  cooperation  so-
licited. He  refused  however  to  join  the  confederated  German
tribes,  he  sent  the  head  to  Rome  for  funeral  honors,  and  con-
tinued to  maintain  between  the  empire  and  the  barbarians,  the
neutrality  he  had  observed  in  former  wars.  This  refusal  to  unite
in  the  national  aspirations  for  German  independence,  cost  him  his
throne.  “ Not  only  the  Cheruscans  and  their  confederates  ” says
Tacitus  (Ann.  II,  45)  “who  had  been  the  ancient  soldiery  of
Arminius,  took  arms,  but  the  Semnones  and  Langobards,  both
Suevian  nations,  revolted  to  him  from  the  sovereignty  of  Marobod
. . . . The  armies  (Ch.  46)  ....  were  stimulated  by  reasons  of  their
own,  the  Cheruscans  and  the  Langobards  fought  for  their  ancient
honor  or  their  newly  acquired  independence,  and  the  others  for  in-
creasing their  dominion.  ’ ’ This  occurred  in  the  seventeenth  year
of  our  era.  Marobod  was  finally  overthrown,  and  took  refuge  in
exile  with  the  Romans,  and  it  was  not  long  until  Arminius,  ac-
cused of  aspiring  to  despotic  power,  was  assassinated  by  a noble
of  his  own  race  (Mommsen,  id.  54-56).  After  his  death  the  in-
ternal dissensions  among  the  Cheruscans  became  so  violent  that
the  reigning  family  was  swept  away,  and  in  the  year  47  they  asked
the  Romans  to  send  them  as  their  king  the  one  surviving  member
of  that  family,  Italicus,  the  nephew  of  Arminius,  who  was  born  at
Rome  where  he  had  been  educated  as  a Roman  citizen.  Accord-
ingly Italicus,  with  the  approval  of  the  emperor  Claudius,  as-
sumed the  sovereignty  of  the  Cheruscans.  At  first  he  was  re-
ceived with  joy,  but  soon  the  cry  was  raised  that  with  his  advent
the  old  liberties  of  Germany  were  departing  and  Roman  power
was  becoming  predominant.  A struggle  ensued,  and  he  was  ex-
pelled from  the  country.  Again,  the  Langobards  appear  upon  the
scene,  with  sufficient  power  as  it  seems  to  control  the  destiny  of
the  tribe  which,  thirty-eight  years  before,  had  been  the  leader  in

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  I.

IS

sengers  to  the  Winnili  to  tell  them  that  they  should
either  pay  tribute  to  the  Wandals 1 or  make  ready  for
the  struggles  of  war.  Then  Ibor  and  Aio,  with  the
approval  of  their  mother  Gambara,  determine  that  it  is
better  to  maintain  liberty  by  arms  than  to  stain  it  by  the
payment  of  tribute.  They  send  word  to  the  Wandals
by  messengers  that  they  will  rather  fight  than  be
slaves.  The  Winnili  were  then  all  in  the  flower  of  their
youth,  but  were  very  few  in  number  since  they  had
been  only  the  third  part  of  one  island  of  no  great  size.9

the  struggle  for  independence,  for  they  restored  him  to  the
sovereignty  of  which  he  had  been  despoiled  by  his  inconstant  sub-
jects (Tacitus  Annals,  XI,  16,  17).  These  events  and  other
internal  disturbances  injured  the  Cheruscans  so  greatly  that  they
soon  disappeared  from  the  field  of  political  activity  (Mommsen,
id.,  132).

During  the  generations  that  followed  there  was  doubtiess  many
a change  in  the  power,  the  territories  and  even  the  names  of  the
various  tribes  which  inhabited  Germania  Magna,  but  for  a long
time  peace  was  preserved  along  the  frontiers  which  separated
them  from  the  Roman  world  (id.,  p.  133).  It  is  somewhat  re-
markable that  none  of  those  events  appear  in  the  Langobard
tradition  as  contained  in  the  pages  of  Paul.

1 Hammerstein  (Bardengau,  71)  considers  the  Wends  who  were
the  eastern  neighbors  of  the  Langobards,  to  be  the  Wandals.
Jacobi  (13,  n.  1)  thinks  Paul  is  misled  by  the  account  of  Jordanes
of  the  struggles  of  the  Vandals  and  the  Goths.

* Although  it  belongs  to  the  legendary  period  of  the  Langobards,
there  may  well  be  some  truth  in  this  statement  of  the  refusal  to
pay  tribute.  Tacitus  (Germania,  40)  speaks  of  the  slender  num-
ber of  the  Langobards  and  declares  that  they  are  renowned  be-
cause they  are  so  few  and,  being  surrounded  by  many  powerful
nations,  protect  themselves,  not  by  submission  but  by  the  peril  of
battles.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

1 6 HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  VIII.

At  this  point,  the  men  of  old  tell  a silly  story  that
the  Wandals  coming  to  Godan  (Wotan)  besought  him
for  victory  over  the  Winnili  and  that  he  answered  that
he  would  give  the  victory  to  those  whom  he  saw  first  at
sunrise;  that  then  Gambara  went  to  Frea  (Freja)  wife
of  Godan  and  asked  for  victory  for  the  Winnili,  and
that  Frea  gave  her  counsel  that  the  women  of  the  Win-
nili should  take  down  their  hair  and  arrange  it  upon  the
face  like  a beard,  and  that  in  the  early  morning  they
should  be  present  with  their  husbands  and  in  like  man-
ner station  themselves  to  be  seen  by  Godan  from  the
quarter  in  which  he  had  been  wont  to  look  through  his
window  toward  the  east.  And  so  it  was  done.  And
when  Godan  saw  them  at  sunrise  he  said : “ Who  are
these  long-beards?”  And  then  Frea  induced  him  to
give  the  victory  to  those  to  whom  he  had  given  the
name.*  And  thus  Godan  gave  the  victory  to  the  Win-

1 A still  livelier  description  of  this  scene  is  given  in  the  • • Origo
Gentis  Langobardorum  ” (see  Appendix  II)  from  which  Paul  took
the  story.  “When  it  became  bright  and  the  sun  was  rising,
Frea,  Godan*  s wife,  turned  the  bed  around  where  her  husband
was  lying  and  put  his  face  toward  the  east,  and  awakened  him,
and  as  he  looked  he  saw  the  Winnili  and  their  wives,  how  their
hair  hung  about  their  faces.  And  he  said:  “Who  are  these  lopg-
beards ? ’ ’ Then  spoke  Frea  to  Godan:  “My  lord,  thou  hast
given  them  the  name,  now  give  them  also  the  victory.**  Momm-
sen remarks  (pp.  65,  66)  that  Paul  has  spoiled  the  instructive
story  why  one  does  better  to  put  his  business  in  the  hands  of  the
wife  than  of  the  husband,  or  rather  that  he  has  misunderstood  the
account.  The  fable  rests  upon  this,  that  Godan,  according  to
the  position  of  his  bed,  looked  toward  the  west  upon  awakening.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

17

nili.  These  things  are  worthy  of  laughter  and  are  to  be
held  of  no  account.1  For  ^victory  is  due,  not  to  the
power  of  men,  but  it  is  rather  furnished  from  heaven.

Chapter  IX.

It  is  certain,  however,  that  the  Langobards  were  after-
wards so  called  on  account  of  the  length  of  their  beards

and  that  the  Wandals  camped  on  the  west  side  and  the  Winnili
upon  the  east.  The  true-hearted  god  could  then  appropriately
promise  victory  to  his  Wandal  worshippers  in  the  enigmatical
sentence,  that  he  would  take  the  part  of  those  upon  whom  his
eyes  should  first  fall  on  the  morning  of  the  day  of  the  battle;  but
as  his  cunning  wife  turned  his  bed  around,  he  and  his  favorites
were  entrapped  thereby.  This  can  be  easily  inferred  from  the
Origo.  It  may  be  asked  what  the  women’s  hair  arranged  like  a
beard  has  to  do  with  Godan’s  promise.  Evidently,  the  affair  was
so  planned  that  the  astonishment  of  the  god  should  be  noted  when
he  looked  upon  these  extraordinary  long-beards  in  place  of  the
Wandals  he  had  supposed  would  be  there;  perhaps  indeed  his
cunning  wife  thus  drew  from  her  husband  an  expression  which
put  it  beyond  doubt  that  he  actually  let  his  glance  fall  in  the
morning  upon  the  Winnili.

That  the  account  in  the  Origo  was  a Latin  translation  of  a Ger-
man alliterative  epic  poem — see  Appendix  II.

1 Paul’s  narrative  of  the  origin  of  the  name  of  Langobards  gives
the  best  example  of  the  manner  in  which  he  has  treated  the
legends  which  have  come  down  to  him.  The  transposition  of  the
direct  speech  into  the  indirect,  the  introduction  of  the  phrase  “to
preserve  their  liberty  by  arms,  ’ ’ and  similar  classical  phrases,  the
new  style  and  historical  character  given  to  the  story,  speak  for
themselves ; but  still  the  Langobard,  in  treating  of  the  origin  of
the  proud  name  could  not  disown  his  national  character  and  even
where  1 1 the  ridiculous  story  told  by  the  ancients  ’ ’ sets  historical
treatment  at  defiance,  he  still  does  not  suppress  it  (Mommsen,  65).

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

i8

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

untouched  by  the  knife,  whereas  at  first  they  had  been
called  Winnili ; for  according  to  their  language  11  lang  ”
means  “ long  ” and  “bart”  “beard.”1  Wotan  indeed,
whom  by  adding  a letter  they  called  Godan  * is  he  who

1 This  derivation  comes  from  Isidore  of  Seville.  He  says,  11  The
Langobards  were  commonly  so-called  from  their  flowing  and  never
shaven  beards’*  (Etym.,  IX,  2,  94,  Zeuss,  109).  Schmidt,  al-
though he  believes  (p.  43)  that  the  change  of  name  was  a histori-
cal fact,  rejects  (44,  note  i)  this  definition,  since  he  considers  that
the  earlier  name  of  the  people  was  simply  * ‘ Bards,  ’ ’ to  which
“lang”  was  afterwards  prefixed.  Another  proposed  derivation
is  from  the  Old  High  German  word  bar/a , an  axe,  the  root  which
appears  in  “halbert”  and  “partizan”  (Hodgkin,  V,  84).  An-
other authority,  Dr.  Leonhard  Schmitz  (see  Langobardi  in  Smith’s
Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Geography)  argues  for  its  deriva-
tion from  the  root  bord , which  we  have  preserved  in  the  word
“ sea-board,”  and  he  contends  that  the  Langobards  received  their
name  from  the  long,  flat  meadows  of  the  Elbe  where  they  had
their  dwelling.  As  we  adopt  one  or  the  other  of  these  sugges-
tions, the  Langobards  will  have  been  the  long-bearded  men,  the
long-halbert-bearing  men,  or  the  long-shore-men.  Hodgkin  (V,
85)  as  well  as  Bruckner  (p.  33)  prefers  the  interpretation  given  in
the  text,  “Long-beards.”  Bruckner  remarks  that  the  name  of
the  people  stands  in  close  relation  to  the  worship  of  Wotan  who
bore  the  name  of  the  “long-bearded”  or  “gray-bearded,”  and
that  the  Langobard  name  Ansegranus , “He  with  the  Beard  of  the
Gods,”  showed  that  the  Langobards  had  this  idea  of  their  chief
deity.  He  further  shows  that  the  long  halbert  or  spear  was  noj  a
characteristic  weapon  of  the  Langobards.  He  also  (p.  30)  con-
siders Koegel’s  opinion  (p.  109)  that  the  Langobards  adopted  the
worship  of  Wotan  from  the  surrounding  peoples  after  their  migra-
tion to  the  Danube  is  not  admissible,  since  the  neighboring  Anglo-
Saxons  worshiped  Wotan  long  before  their  migration  to  Britain  as
their  highest  God.

* Or  Guodan  according  to  other  MSS,

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  I,

19

among  the  Romans  is  called  Mercury,  and  he  is  worshiped
by  all  the  peoples  of  Germany  as  a god,  though  he  is
deemed  to  have  existed,  not  about  these  times,  but  long
before,  and  not  in  Germany,  but  in  Greece.

Chapter  X.

The  Winnili  therefore,  who  are  also  Langobards,  hav-
ing joined  battle  with  the  Wandals,  struggle  fiercely,
since  it  is  for  the  glory  of  freedom,  and  win  the  victory.
And  afterwards,  having  suffered  in  this  same  province
of  Scoringa,  great  privation  from  hunger,  their  minds
were  filled  with  dismay.

Chapter  XI.

Departing  from  this  place,  while  they  were  arrang-
ing to  pass  over  into  Mauringa,  * the  Assipitti 9 block

* Mauringa  is  mentioned  by  the  Cosmographer  of  Ravenna  (I,
11)  as  the  land  east  of  the  Elbe.  Maurungani  appears  to  be
another  name  of  the  great  country  of  the  Elbe  which  lies  * ‘ in  front
of  the  Danes,  extends  to  Dacia  and  includes  Baias,  Baiohaim.  ’ '
Or  perhaps  Mauringa  was  merely  the  name  of  the  maurland  or
moorland  east  of  the  Elbe  (Zeuss,  472).  In  the  Traveler’s  Song,
which  had  its  origin  in  the  German  home  of  the  Angles  about  the
end  of  the  6th  century,  a Suevian  race  in  Holstein  bears  the  name
of  Myrginge,  and  this  song  also  mentions  the  Headhobards  (per-
haps identical  with  the  Langobards)  who  fight  with  the  Danes  in
Zealand  (Schmidt,  34,  47).  See  also  Waitz.

* Hodgkin  (V,  92)  conjectures  that  possibly  the  Assipitti  are  the
Usipetes  mentioned  in  Tacitus’  Annals  (I,  51).  See  Caesar  B.  G.
IV,  1,  4.  Bluhme  (see  Hodgkin,  V,  141)  places  them  in  the
neighborhood  of  Asse,  a wooded  height  near  Wolfenbuttel.  Such
identifications  of  locality  are  highly  fanciful.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

20

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

their  way,  denying  to  them  by  every  means  a passage
through  their  territories.  The  Langobards  moreover,
when  they  beheld  the  great  forces  of  their  enemies,  did
not  dare  engage  them  on  account  of  the  smallness  of
their  army,  and  while  they  were  deciding  what  they
ought  to  do,  necessity  at  length  hit  upon  a plan.  They
pretend  that  they  have  in  their  camps  Cynocephali,
that  is,  men  with  dogs’  heads.  They  spread  the  rumor
among  the  enemy  that  these  men  wage  war  obstinately,
drink  human  blood  and  quaff  their  own  gore  if  they
cannot  reach  the  foe.  And  to  give  faith  to  this  as-
sertion, the  Langobards  spread  their  tents  wide  and
kindle  a great  many  fires  in  their  camps.  The  enemy
being  made  credulous  when  these  things  are  heard  and
seen,  dare  not  now  attempt  the  war  they  threatened.

Chapter  XII.

They  had,  however,  among  them  a very  powerful
man,  to  whose  strength  they  trusted  that  they  could
obtain  without  doubt  what  they  wanted.  They  offered
him  alone  to  fight  for  all.  They  charged  the  Langobards
to  send  any  one  of  their  own  they  might  wish,  to  go  forth
with  him  to  single  combat  upon  this  condition,  to  wit ;
that  if  their  warrior  should  win  the  victory,  the  Lango-
bards would  depart  the  way  they  had  come,  but  if  he
should  be  overthrown  by  the  other,  then  they  would  not
forbid  the  Langobards  a passage  through  their  own
territories.  And  when  the  Langobards  were  in  doubt
what  one  of  their  own  they  should  send  against  this
most  warlike  man,  a certain  person  of  servile  rank

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

21

offered  himself  of  his  own  will,  and  promised  that  he
would  engage  the  challenging  enemy  upon  this  condi-
tion : that  if  he  took  the  victory  from  the  enemy,  they
would  take  away  the  stain  of  slavery  from  him  and  from
his  offspring.  Why  say  more  ? They  joyfully  promised
to  do  what  he  had  asked.  Having  engaged  the  enemy,
he  fought  and  conquered,  and  won  for  the  Langobards
the  means  of  passage,  and  for  himself  and  his  descend-
ants, as  he  had  desired,  the  rights  of  liberty.

Chapter  XIII.

Therefore  ! the  Langobards,  coming  at  last  into
Mauringa,  in  order  that  they  might  increase  the  number
of  their  warriors,  confer  liberty  upon  many  whom
they  deliver  from  the  yoke  of  bondage,  and  that  the
freedom  of  these  may  be  regarded  as  established,
they  confirm  it  in  their  accustomed  way  by  an  arrow,
uttering  certain  words  of  their  country  in  confirma-
tion of  the  fact.1  (Then  the  Langobards  went  forth

1 Complete  emancipation  appears  to  have  been  granted  only
among  the  Franks  and  the  Langobards  (Schmidt,  47  note  3).
This  system  of  incorporating  into  the  body  of  their  warriors  and
freemen,  the  peoples  whom  they  subjugated  in  their  wanderings,
made  of  the  Langobards  a composite  race,  and  it  may  well  be
that  their  language  as  well  as  their  institutions  were  greatly  af-
fected by  this  admixture  of  foreign  stock  (Hartmann,  II,  pp.  8,  9),
and  that  their  High-German  characteristics  are  due  to  this  fact.
This  system  of  emancipation  also  had  an  important  effect  in  further-
ing the  union  of  the  two  races,  Langobard  and  Roman,  after  the
Italian  conquest  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  15).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

22

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

from  Mauringa  and  came  to  Golanda,1  where,  hav-
ing remained  some  time,  they  are  afterwards  said  to
have  possessed  for  some  years  Anthaib  • and  Ban-
thaib,3  and  in  like  manner  Vurgundaib,4  which  we

1 Schmidt  thinks  this  was  further  east,  perhaps  on  the  right
bank  of  the  Oder  (p.  49).  He  considers  (see  Hodgkin,  V,  143)
that  the  name  is  the  equivalent  of  Gotland  and  means  simply
"good  land.**  Golanda  is  generally  considered,  however,  to  be
Gothland,  and  as  the  Langobards  were  found  in  Pannonia  in  the
year  166  at  the  time  of  the  war  with  Marcus  Aurelius,  and  as  the
Goths  emigrated  to  the  Euxine  probably  about  the  middle  of  the
second  century,  Hodgkin  (V,  10 1)  considers  it  probable  that  the
Langobards  at  this  time  were  hovering  about  the  skirts  of  the
Carpathians  rather  than  that  they  had  returned  to  Bardengau.
The  fact  that  when  they  were  next  heard  from,  they  were  occupy-
ing Rugiland  east  of  Noricum,  on  the  north  shore  of  the  Danube,
confirms  this  view.  Zeuss  takes  an  alternative  reading  for  Golanda
not  well  supported  by  manuscript  authority,  “Rugulanda,”  and
suggests  that  it  may  be  the  coast  opposite  the  isle  of  Rugen
(Hodgkin,  141).

•Anthaib,  according  to  the  improbable  conjecture  of  Zeuss,  is
the  pagus  or  district  of  the  Antae  who,  on  the  authority  of  Ptolemy
and  Jordanes  were  placed  somewhere  in  the  Ukraine  in  the  coun-
tries of  the  Dniester  and  Dnieper  (Hodgkin,  p.  141).  Schmidt
(p.  49)  connects  Anthaib  through  the  Aenenas  of  the  “Traveler’s
Song  * * with  Bavaria.  These  are  mere  guesses.

• Schmidt  connects  Banthaib  with  the  Boii  and  Bohemia  (49,  50).

4 Zeuss  connects  Vurgundaib  or  Burgundaib  with  the  Urugundi
of  Zosimus  which  he  seems  inclined  to  place  in  Red  Russia
between  the  Vistula  and  Bug.  These  names,  he  thinks,  lead  us  in
the  direction  of  the  Black  Sea  far  into  the  eastern  steppes  and  he
connects  this  eastward  march  of  the  Langobards  with  their  alleged
combats  with  the  Bulgarians  (Hodgkin,  V,  p.  14 1).  Bluhme  in
his  monograph  (Gens  Langobardorum  Bonn,  1868)  thinks  that
Burgundaib  was  the  territory  evacuated  by  the  Burgundians  when

Digitized  by  UaOOQle

BOOK  I.  23

can  consider  are  names  of  districts  or  of  some  kinds
of  places.1

they  moved  westward  to  the  Middle  Rhine  (Hodgkin,  V,  p.  142),
and  instead  of  the  eastern  migration  he  makes  the  Langobards
wander  westward  toward  the  Rhine,  following  a passage  of
Ptolemy  which  places  them  near  the  Sigambri.  He  believes  that
this  is  confirmed  by  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  which  says  that
they  stayed  long  at  Patespruna  or  Paderbom  and  contends  for  a
general  migration  of  the  tribe  to  Westphalia,  shows  the  resem-
blance in  family  names  and  legal  customs  between  Westphalia
and  Bardengau.  Schmidt  opposes  Bluhme’s  Westphalian  theory
which  indeed  appears  to  have  slender  support  and  he  more  plaus-
ibly connects  Burgundaib  (p.  49)  with  the  remnant  of  the  Burgun-
dians that  remained  in  the  lands  east  of  the  Elbe.  Luttmersen
(Die  Spuren  der  Langobarden,  Hanover,  1889)  thinks  that  Bur-
gundaib means  “the  valley  of  forts,”  and  was  perhaps  in  the  re-
gion of  the  Rauhes  Alp  in  Wurtemberg;  he  notes  the  fact  that  the
Swiss  in  Thurgau  and  St.  Gall  called  an  old  wall  built  by  an  un-
known hand  ‘ ‘ Langobardenmauer  * ’ and  he  claims  that  the  Lango-
bards were  members  of  the  Alamannic  confederacy  which  occupied
Suabia.  No  historical  evidence  of  this  appears  (Hodgkin,  V,  145).

1 Names  which  have  a termination  11  aib  ” are  derived  from  the
Old-High-German  eiba  (canton),  the  division  of  a state  or
population  (Schmidt,  49).

The  Latin  word  pagus  a district,  canton,  was  here  used  by
Paul  to  designate  these  subdivisions  instead  of  the  word  aldonus
or  aldones . of  the  Origo  from  which  Paul  took  this  statement.
This  word  aldonus  comes  from  aldius  or  aldio  the  “half-free,”
referring  to  the  condition  of  serfdom  or  semi-slavery  in  which
the  people  dwelt  in  these  lands.  Hodgkin  thinks  (V,  94)  the
Origo  means  that  the  Langobards  were  in  a condition  of  de-
pendence on  some  other  nation,  when  they  occupied  these  districts.
It  seems  more  probable  that  these  districts  were  so  called  because
their  inhabitants  were  subjected  by  the  Langobards  to  a condition
of  semi-servitude,  tilling  the  land  for  the  benefit  of  their  masters  as

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

24

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XIV.

Meanwhile  the  leaders  Ibor  and  Aio,  who  had  con-
ducted the  Langobards  from  Scadinavia  and  had  ruled
them  up  to  this  time,  being  dead,  the  Langobards,  now

was  afterwards  done  with  the  Roman  population  of  Italy  (Schmidt,
50).

The  migrations  described  by  modem  German  scholars  are
mostly  hypothetical.  The  fact  is,  it  is  idle  to  guess  where  were
the  different  places  mentioned  by  Paul  or  when  the  Langobards
migrated  from  one  to  the  other.  That  people  however  may
well  have  taken  part  (Hodgkin,  V,  88)  in  the  movement  of  the
German  tribes  southward  which  brought  on  the  Marcommanic
war  under  Marcus  Aurelius,  for  in  a history  written  by  Peter  the
Patrician,  Justinian’s  ambassador  to  Theodahad  (Fragment,  VI,
p.  124  of  the  Bonn,  ed.)  we  are  informed  that  just  before  that  war
6,000  Langobards  and  Obii  having  crossed  the  Danube  to  invade
Pannonia  were  put  to  rout  by  the  Roman  cavalry  under  Vindex
and  the  infantry  under  Candidus,  whereupon  the  barbarians  de-
sisted from  their  invasion  and  sent  as  ambassadors  to  Aelius  Bas-
sus,  who  was  then  administering  Pannonia,  Vallomar,  king  of  the
Marcommani,  and  ten  others,  one  for  each  tribe.  Peace  was
made,  and  the  barbarians  returned  home.  These  events  occurred
about  A.  D.  165.  (Hodgkin,  V,  88.)  It  is  clear  from  this  that
the  Langobards  had  left  the  Elbe  for  the  Danube  as  allies  or  sub-
jects of  their  old  masters,  the  Marcommani.  Where  the  home
was  to  which  they  returned  can  hardly  be  determined.  Hodgkin
believes  that  they  withdrew  to  some  place  not  far  distant  from
Pannonia,  while  Zeuss  (p.  471),  Wiese  (p.  28)  and  Schmidt  (35,
36)  believe  that  they  did  not  depart  permanently  from  their  orig-
inal abodes  on  the  Elbe  until  the  second  half  of  the  fourth  cen-
tury so  that  according  to  this  view  they  must  have  returned  to
these  original  abodes.  It  is  evident  that  a considerable  number
of  the  Langobards  must  have  lived  a long  time  on  the  lower  Elbe
— the  names  and  institutions  which  have  survived  in  Bardengau

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  I.

25

unwilling  to  remain  longer  under  mere  chiefs  (dukes)
ordained  a king  for  themselves  like  other  nations.*
Therefore  Agelmund, a the  son  of  Aio  first  reigned  over
them3  tracing  out  of  his  pedigree  the  stock  of  the  Gun-

bear  evidence  of  this.  It  is,  however,  highly  probable  that  when
the  bulk  of  the  nation  migrated,  a considerable  part  remained
behind  and  afterwards  became  absorbed  by  the  Saxon  tribes  in
the  neighborhood,  while  the  emigrants  alone  retained  the  name  of
Langobards  (Hartmann,  II,  part  I,  5).

After  the  Marcommanic  war,  information  from  Greek  or  Roman
writers  as  to  the  fortunes  of  the  Langobards  is  entirely  lacking
and  for  a space  of  three  hundred  years  their  name  disappears
from  history.

1 More  likely  the  reason  was  that  the  unity  of  a single  command
was  found  necessary.  Schmidt  believes  (p.  76)  that  the  people
like  other  German  nations,  were  divided  according  to  cantons,
that  the  government  in  the  oldest  times  was  managed  by  a general
assembly  that  selected  the  chiefs  of  the  cantons  who  were  prob-
ably, as  a rule,  taken  from  the  nobility  and  chosen  for  life.  In
peace  they  acted  as  judges  in  civil  cases,  and  in  war  as  leaders  of
the  troops  of  the  cantons.  As  commander-in-chief  of  the  whole
army,  a leader  or  duke  was  chosen  by  the  popular  assembly,  but
only  for  the  time  of  the  war.  Often  two  colleagues  are  found
together,  as  Ibor  and  Aio.  As  a result  of  their  long-continued
wars  during  their  wanderings,  the  kingly  power  was  developed
and  the  king  became  the  representative  of  the  nation  in  foreign
affairs,  in  the  making  of  treaties,  etc.  (p.  77).  But  the  influence
of  the  people  upon  the  government  did  not  fully  disappear.

* This  name  is  found  in  a Danish  song,  and  is  written  Hagel-
mund  (Wiese,  3).

* Mommsen  observes  (68)  that  even  those  who  recognize  a gen-
uine germ  of  history  in  this  legend  must  regard  as  fiction  this
connection  of  the  leaders  Ibor  and  Aio  with  the  subsequent  line  of
kings;  that  we  have  no  indication  regarding  the  duration  of  this

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

26

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

gingi  which  among  them  was  esteemed  particularly
noble.  He  held  the  sovereignty  of  the  Langobards,  as
is  reported  by  our  ancestors,  for  thirty  years.

Chapter  XV.

At  this  time  a certain  prostitute  had  brought  forth
seven  little  boys  at  a birth,  and  the  mother,  more  cruel
than  all  wild  beasts,  threw  them  into  a fish-pond  to  be
drowned.  If  this  seems  impossible  to  any,  let  him  read
over  the  histories  of  the  ancients  ’ and  he  will  find  that
one  woman  brought  forth  not  only  seven  infants  but
even  nine  at  one  time.  And  it  is  sure  that  this  occurred
especially  among  the  Egyptians.  It  happened  therefore
that  when  King  Agelmund  had  stopped  his  horse  and
looked  at  the  wretched  infants,  and  had  turned  them
hither  and  thither  with  the  spear  he  carried  in  his  hand,
one  of  them  put  his  hand  on  the  royal  spear  and  clutched
it.  The  king  moved  by  pity  and  marveling  greatly  at
the  act,  pronounced  that  he  would  be  a great  man.  And
straightway  he  ordered  him  to  be  lifted  from  the  fish-
pond and  commanded  him  to  be  brought  to  a nurse  to  be
nourished  with  every  care,  and  because  he  took  him  from

early  leadership,  and  that  it  may  as  well  have  lasted  centuries  as
decades.  The  events  already  described  probably  required  at  least
a number  of  generations  for  their  accomplishment.  The  words  in
the  text,  ‘ ‘ Ibor  and  Aio  who  had  . . . ruled  them  up  to  this
time,  ’ * appears  to  have  been  inserted  by  Paul  upon  conjecture  to
make  a continuous  line  of  rulers  and  is  plainly  an  error  (Waitz).

1 See  Pliny’s  Natural  History,  Book  VII,  ch.  3,  on  monstrous
births.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

2 7

a fish-pond  which  in  their  language  is  called  “ lama” 1 he
gave  him  the  name  Lamissio. a When  he  had  grown  up
he  became  such  a vigorous  youth  that  he  was  also  very
fond  of  fighting,  and  after  the  death  of  Agelmund  he
directed  the  government  of  the  kingdom.  3 They  say
that  when  the  Langobards,  pursuing  their  way  with  their
king,  came  to  a certain  river  and  were  forbidden  by  the
Amazons4  to  cross  to  the  other  side,  this  man  fought
with  the  strongest  of  them,  swimming  in  the  river,  and
killed  her  and  won  for  himself  the  glory  of  great  praise
and  a passage  also  for  the  Langobards.  For  it  had

1 Lama  is  not  a German  but  a Latin  word,  found  in  Festus  and
meaning  a collection  of  water  (Waitz).  It  lived  on  in  the  romance
languages.  DuCange  introduces  it  from  the  statutes  of  Modena,
and  Dante  used  it  (Inferno,  Canto  XX,  line  79).  It  meant,  how-
ever, in  Italian  at  this  later  period  “a  low  plain.”  If  Paul  or  his
earlier  authorities  took  it  for  Langobard  this  was  because  it  was
unknown  to  the  Latin  learning  of  that  time,  though  it  was  a cur-
rent peasant  word  in  Northern  Italy  with  which  a discoverer  of  an-
cient Langobard  tales  could  appropriately  connect  the  indigenous
king's  name  (Mommsen,  68).

s This  name  is  called  Laiamicho  or  Lamicho  in  the  Origo  and
the  form  used  here  by  Paul  seems  to  have  been  taken  from  the
Edict  of  Rothari  (Waitz).

•This  story  of  the  origin  of  Lamissio  is  inconsistent  with  the
statement  in  the  Prologue  of  the  Edict  of  Rothari  and  with  the
Madrid  and  La  Cava  manuscripts  of  the  0 Origo  Gentis  Langobar-
dorum”  which  say  that  he  was  “ of  the  race  of  Gugingus”  (see
Waitz,  also  Appendix  II ; Mommsen,  p.  68  ; Waitz,  Neues  Archiv,

V,  423).

4 This  appears  to  be  a transformation  into  classical  form  of  some
ancient  German  legend  of  swan-maidens  or  water-sprites  (Schmidt,
17,  note).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

28

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

been  previously  agreed  between  the  two  armies  that  if
that  Amazon  should  overcome  Lamissio,  the  Langobards
would  withdraw  from  the  river,  but  if  she  herself  were
conquered  by  Lamissio,  as  actually  occurred,  then  the
means  of  crossing  the  stream  should  be  afforded  to  the
Langobards. 1 It  is  clear,  to  be  sure,  that  this  kind  of
an  assertion  is  little  supported  by  truth,  for  it  is  known
to  all  who  are  acquainted  with  ancient  histories  that  the
race  of  Amazons  was  destroyed  long  before  these  things
could  have  occurred,  unless  perchance  (because  the
places  where  these  things  are  said  to  have  been  done
were  not  well  enough  known  to  the  writers  of  history
and  are  scarcely  mentioned  by  any  of  them),  it  might
have  been  that  a class  of  women  of  this  kind  dwelt  there
at  that  time,  for  I have  heard  it  related  by  some  that  the
race  of  these  women  exists  up  to  the  present  day  in  the
innermost  parts  of  Germany.  *

Chapter  XVI.

Therefore  after  passing  the  river  of  which  we  have
spoken,  the  Langobards,  when  they  came  to  the  lands
beyond,  sojourned  there  for  some  time.  Meanwhile,
since  they  suspected  nothing  hostile  and  were  the  less
uneasy  on  account  of  their  long  repose,  confidence,

1 Schmidt  (p.  50)  believes  that  the  story  of  Lamissio  is  a fabu-
lous expansion  of  the  original  myth  of  Skeaf.  The  germ  of  the
myth  is  that  a hero  of  unknown  origin  came  from  the  water  to  the
help  of  the  land  in  time  of  need.

•Perhaps  the  Cvenas  whom  fable  placed  by  the  Baltic  sea
or  gulf  of  Bothnia  in  “The  Land  of  Women”  (Zeuss,  686,  687).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

29

which  is  always  the  mother  of  calamities,  prepared  for
them  a disaster  of  no  mean  sort.  At  night,  in  short,
when  all  were  resting,  relaxed  by  negligence,  suddenly
the  Bulgarians,  rushing  upon  them,  slew  many,  wounded
many  more  and  so  raged 1 * * through  their  camp  that  they
killed  Agelmund,  the  king  himself,  and  carried  away  in
captivity  his  only  daughter.

Chapter  XVII.

Nevertheless  the  Langobards,  having  recovered  their
strength  after  these  disasters,  made  Lamissio,  of  whom
we  have  spoken  above,  their  king.  And  he,  as  he
was  in  the  glow  of  youth  and  quite  ready  for  the
struggles  of  war,  desiring  to  avenge  the  slaughter  of
Agelmund,  his  foster-father,  turned  his  arms  against  the
Bulgarians.  And  presently,  when  the  first  battle  began,
the  Langobards,  turning  their  backs  to  the  enemy,  fled
to  their  camp.  Then  king  Lamissio  seeing  these  things,
began  in  a loud  voice  to  cry  out  to  the  whole  army  that
they  should  remember  the  infamies  they  had  suffered
and  recall  to  view  their  disgrace ; how  their  enemies  had
murdered  their  king  and  had  carried  off  in  lamenta-
tion as  a captive,  his  daughter  whom  they  had  desired
for  their  queen.9  Finally  he  urged  them  to  defend
themselves  and  theirs  by  arms,  saying  that  it  was  better
to  lay  down  life  in  war  than  to  submit  as  vile  slaves  to
the  taunts  of  their  enemies.  Crying  aloud,  he  said

1 Read  for  dibachati , debacchati.

*Abel  (p.  251)  infers  from  this  the  right  of  succession  to  the

throne  in  the  female  line.

Digitized  by

Google

30

HISTORY  OF  THE  LAN^OBARDS.

these  things  and  the  like  and  now  by  threats,  now  by
promises,  strengthened  their  minds  to  endure  the  strug-
gles of  war ; moreover  if  he  saw  any  one  of  servile  con-
dition fighting  he  endowed  him  with  liberty,  as  well  as
rewards.  At  last  inflamed  by  the  urging  and  example  of
their  chief  who  had  been  the  first  to  spring  to  arms,
they  rush  upon  the  foe,  fight  fiercely  , ahd  overthrow
their  adversaries  with  great  slaughter,  and  finally,  taking
victory  from  the  victors,  they  avenge  as  well  the  death
of  their  king  as  the  insults  to  themselves.  Then  having
taken  possession  of  great  booty  from  the  spoils  of  their
enemies,  from  that  time  on  they  become  bolder  in  un-
dertaking the  toils  of  war.1

Chapter  XVIII.

After  these  things  Lamissio,  the  second  who  had
reigned,  died,  and  the  third,  Lethu,  ascended  the
throne  of  the  kingdom,  and  when  he  had  reigned  nearly
forty  years,  he  left  Hildeoc  his  son,  who  was  the  fourth
in  number,  as  his  successor  in  the  kingly  power.  And
when  he  also  died,  Gudeoc,.as  the  fifth,  received  the
royal  authority.2

1 Schmidt  (50)  regards  this  struggle  with  the  Bulgarians  as  hav-
ing no  authentic  basis  in  history  since  the  name  of  the  Bulgarians
does  not  occur  elsewhere  before  the  end  of  the  fifth  century.  11

* Mommsen  calls  attention  (p.  75)  to  the  close  relation  of  the
Gothic  and  Langobard  legends.  The  Goths  wandered  from  the
island  of  Scandza,  where  many  nations  dwell  (Jordanes,  Ch.  3),
among  them  the  Vinoviloth,  who  may  be  the  Winnili.  From
there  the  Goths  sailed  upon  three  vessel?  upder  their  king  Bench

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

31

Chapter  XIX.

In  these  times  the  fuel  of  great  enmities  was  con-
sumed between  Odoacar  who  was  ruling  in  Italy  now
for  some  years,1  and  Feletheus,  who  is  also  called  Feva,a

to  the  mainland  (Ch.  4,  17).  The  first  people  they  encountered
in  battle  were  the  Vandals  (Ch.  4).  Further  on  the  Amazons
were  introduced,  and  Mommsen  concludes  (p.  76):  “It  may  be
that  these  Langobard  and  Gothic  traditions  are  both  fragments  of
a great  legend  of  the  origin  of  the  whole  German  people  or  that
the  Gothic  story-teller  has  stirred  the  Langobard  to  the  making  of
similar  fables.  The  stories  of  the  Amazons  are  more  favorable  to
the  latter  idea.*'

Hodgkin  (V,  98)  also  notices  the  similarity  of  Langobard
history  to  that  of  the  Goths,  as  told  by  Jordanes.  But  Jordanes
exhibits  a pedigree  showing  fourteen  generations  before  Theodoric,
and  thus  reaching  back  very  nearly  to  the  Christian  era,  while
Paul  gives  only  five  links  of  the  chain  before  the  time  of  Odoacar,
the  contemporary  of  Theodoric,  and  thus  reaches  back,  at  furth-
est, only  to  the  era  of  Constantine.  This  seems  to  show  that  the
Langobards  had  preserved  fewer  records  of  the  deeds  of  their
fathers.  Hodgkin  (V,  99)  adds  that  it  is  hopeless  to  get  any
possible  scheme  of  Lombard  chronology  out  of  these  early  chap-
ters of  Paul;  that  his  narrative  would  place  the  migration  from
Scandinavia  about  A.  D.  320,.  whereas  the  Langobards  were
dwelling  south  of  the  Baltic  at  the  birth  of  Christ;  that  he  repre-
sents Agelmund,  whose  place  in  the  narrative  makes  it  impossible
to  fix  his  date  later  than  350,  as  slain  in  battle  by  the  Bulgarians,
who  first  appeared  in  Europe  about  479.

1 Here  the  tradition  of  the  Langobards,  as  stated  by  Paul,  begins
again  to  correspond,  at  least  in  part,  with  known  or  probable  his-
torical facts.

* The  manuscripts  of  the  “ Origo  Gentis  Langobardorum  ” spell
this  Theuvane  (M.  G.,  Script.  Rer.  Langob. , p.  3)  which  is  re-
quired by  the  meter  if  the  word  comes  from  an  epic  song  (Bruck-
ner, Zeitschrift  fur  Deutches  Alterthum,  Vol.  43,  p.  56).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

3*

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

king  of  the  Rugii.  This  Feletheus  dwelt  in  those  days
on  the  further  shore  of  the  Danube,  which  the  Danube
itself  separates  from  the  territories  of  Noricum.  In
these  territories  of  the  Noricans  at  that  time  was  the
monastery  of  the  blessed  Severinus,*  who,  endowed  with
the  sanctity  of  every  abstinence,  was  already  renowned
for  his  many  virtues,  and  though  he  dwelt  in  these
places  up  to  the  end  of  his  life,  now  however,  Neapolis
(Naples)  keeps  his  remains.*  He  often  admonished
this  Feletheus  of  whom  we  have  spoken  and  his  wife,
whose  name  was  Gisa,  in  saintly  language  that  they
should  desist  from  iniquity,  and  when  they  spurned  his
pious  words,  he  predicted  a long  while  beforehand  that
that  would  occur  which  afterwards  befel  them.  Odo-
acar  then,  having  collected  together  the  nations  which
were  subject  to  his  sovereignty,  that  is  the  Turcilingi
and  the  Heroli  and  the  portion  of  the  Rugii  he  already
possessed  3 and  also  the  peoples  of  Italy,  came  into
Rugiland  and  fought  with  the  Rugii,  and  sweeping  them
away  in  final  defeat  he  destroyed  also  Feletheus  their
king,  and  after  the  whole  province  was  devastated,  he  re-

1 At  Eiferingeh,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Kalenberg,  not  far  from
Vienna  (Waitz).

8 St.  Severinus  was  the  apostle  of  Noricum.  He  was  born  either
in  Southern  Italy  or  in  Africa.  After  the  death  of  Attila  he  trav-
eled through  the  territory  along  the  Danube  preaching  Christianity
and  converting  many.  He  died  A.  D.  482,  and  his  body  was
taken  to  Italy  and  finally  buried  at  Naples  (Waitz).

8 The  statement  that  Rugians  fought  upon  both  sides  was  the
result  of  Paul’s  effort  to  reconcile  the  accounts  of  two  contradictory
authorities  (Mommsen,  103).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

33

turned  to  Italy  and  carried  off  with  him  an  abundant
multitude  of  captives.  Then  the  Langobards,  having
moved  out  of  their  own  territories,1  came  into  Rugiland,2 *
which  is  called  in  the  Latin  tongue  the  country  of  the
Rugii,  and  because  it  was  fertile  in  soil  they  remained
in  it  a number  of  years.

Chapter  XX.

Meanwhile,  Gudeoc  died,  and  Claffo,  his  son,  suc-
ceeded him.  Claffo  also  having  died,  Tato,  his  son,  rose
as  the  seventh  to  the  kingly  power.  The  Langobards
also  departed  from  Rugiland,  and  dwelt  in  open  fields,
which  are  called  “ feld  ” in  the  barbarian  tongue.  3
While  they  sojourned  there  for  the  space  of  three  years,
a war  sprang  up  between  Tato  and  Rodolf,  king  of  the
Heroli.4  Treaties  formerly  bound  them  together,  and

1 Wiese  (p.  33)  believes  that  they  were  then  dwelling  in  upper
Silesia  not  far  from  the  head  waters  of  the  Vistula.

* Bluhme  considers  this  to  be  Moravia  (Hodgkin,  V,  142).  It
is  more  probably  the  region  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Danube  be-
tween Linz  and  Vienna  (Schmidt,  5 1).

• The  country  between  the  Theiss  and  the  Danube  in  Hungary
as  Schmidt  (52)  believes,  quoting  a passage  from  the  Annals  of
Eginhard  for  the  year  796:  “ Pippin  having  driven  the  Huns  be-
yond the  Theiss,  destroyed  completely  the  royal  residence  which
these  people  called  the  Ring , and  the  Langobards  the  Feld."
Since  Procopius,  (B.  G.  II,  14)  says  that  the  Langobards  were
then  tributary  to  the  Heroli,  Wiese  believes  (p.  35,  36)  that  they
were  compelled  by  the  Heroli  to  give  up  their  fertile  Rugiland.
The  Langobards  became  Christianized,  at  least  in  part,  about
this  time  (Abel,  241;  Schmidt,  51,  52).

4 The  Heroli  were,  says  Zeuss  (p.  476),  the  most  migratory

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

34

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

the  cause  of  the  discord  between  them  was  this:  the
brother  of  king  Rodolf  had  come  to  Tato  for  the  pur-
pose of  concluding  peace,  and  when,  upon  the  comple-
tion of  his  mission,  he  sought  again  his  native  country,
it  happened  that  his  way  passed  in  front  of  the  house
of  the  king’s  daughter,  who  was  called  Rumetruda.
Looking  upon  the  company  of  men  and  the  noble  escort,
she  asked  who  this  might  be  who  had  such  a mag-
nificent train.  And  it  was  said  to  her  that  the  brother
of  king  Rodolf  was  returning  to  his  native  country,  hav-
ing accomplished  his  mission.  The  girl  sent  to  invite
him  to  deign  to  take  a cup  of  wine.  He  with  simple
heart  came  as  he  had  been  invited,  and  because  he  was
small  in  stature,  the  girl  looked  down  upon  him  in  con-
temptuous pride  and  uttered  against  him  mocking  words.
But  he,  overcome  equally  with  shame  and  rage,  answered
back  such  words  as  brought  still  greater  confusion  upon
the  girl.  Then  she,  inflamed  by  a woman’s  fury  and
unable  to  restrain  the  rage  of  her  heart,  sought  to  accom-
plish a wicked  deed  she  had  conceived  in  her  mind.

among  all  the  German  tribes  and  have  wandered  over  nearly  the
whole  of  Europe.  They  appeared  on  the  Dneister  and  Rhine  ; they
plundered  in  Greece  and  in  Spain,  and  were  found  in  Italy  and
in  Scandinavia.  Hodgkin  believes  that  the  tribe  was  split  up  into
two  divisions,  one  of  which  moved  from  the  Baltic  to  the  Black
Sea,  and  the  other  eventually  made  its  appearance  on  the  Rhine.
It  was  the  eastern  branch,  which  at  the  close  of  the  5th  century
was  in  Hungary  on  the  eastern  shore  of  the  Danube,  with  which
the  Langobards  had  their  struggle  (Hodgkin,  V,  104).  The  cus-
toms of  the  tribe  were  barbarous.  They  engaged  in  human  sac-
rifices, put  the  sick  and  the  aged  to  death,  and  it  was  the  duty  of
a warrior’s  widow  to  die  upon  her  husband’s  tomb  (Hodgkin,  105).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  I.

35

She  feigned  patience,  put  on  a lively  countenance,  and
stroking  him  down  with  merry  words,  she  invited  him  to
take  a seat,  and  arranged  that  he  should  sit  in  such
a place  that  he  would  have  the  window  in  the  wall  at
his  shoulders.  She  had  covered  this  window  with  costly
drapery  as  if  in  honor  of  her  guest,  but  really,  lest  any
suspicion  should  strike  him,  and  the  atrocious  monster
directed  her  own  servants  that  when  she  should  say,  as
if  speaking  to  the  cup-bearer,  “ Prepare  the  drink,”
they  should  stab  him  from  behind  with  their  lances.
And  it  was  done ; presently  the  cruel  woman  gave  the
sign,  her  wicked  orders  were  accomplished,  and  he,
pierced  with  wounds  and  falling  to  the  earth,  expired.
When  these  things  were  announced  to  king  Rodolf  he
bewailed  his  brother’s  cruel  murder,  and  impatient  in
his  rage,  burned  to  avenge  that  brother’s  death.
Breaking  the  treaty  he  had  negotiated  with  Tato,  he
declared  war  against  him.1  Why  say  more  ? The  lines
of  battle  on  both  sides  come  together  in  the  open  fields.

1 Procopius  (B.  G.,  II,  14  et  seg.)  gives  a different  account  of  the
origin  of  this  war.  He  states  (Hodgkin,  V,  106)  that  the  warriors
of  the  tribe  having  lived  in  peace  for  three  years,  chafed  at  this
inaction  and  taunted  Rodolf,  calling  him  womanish  and  soft-
hearted, until  he  determined  to  make  war  upon  the  Langobards,
but  gave  no  pretext  for  his  attack.  Three  times  the  Langobards
sent  ambassadors  to  placate  him,  who  offered  to  increase  the
tribute  paid  by  their  nation,  but  Rodolf  drove  them  from  his  pres-
ence. Procopius*  reason  for  the  war  is  more  favorable  to  the
Langobards  than  that  given  by  Paul.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that
a rude  people  such  as  they  were,  might  consider  it  more  disgrace-
ful to  admit  that  they  had  paid  tribute  and  humbly  besought  justice
than  that  they  had  themselves  given  just  cause  for  war.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

36

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Rodolf  sends  his  men  into  the  fight,  but  staying  himself
in  camp,  he  plays  at  draughts,  not  at  all  wavering  in  his
hope  of  victory.  The  Heroli  were  indeed  at  that  time
well  trained  in  martial  exercises,  and  already  very
famous  from  their  many  victories.  And  either  to  fight
more  freely  or  to  show  their  contempt  for  a wound  in-
flicted by  the  enemy,  they  fought  naked,  covering  only
the  shameful  things  of  the  body.1  Therefore,  while  the
king  himself  in  undoubting  reliance  on  the  power  of
these  men,  was  safely  playing  at  draughts,  he  ordered
one  of  his  followers  to  climb  into  a tree  which  happened
to  be  by,  that  he  might  tell  him  more  quickly  of  the
victory  of  his  troops,  and  he  threatened  to  cut  off  the
man’s  head  if  he  announced  that  the  ranks  of  the  Heroli
were  fleeing.  The  man,  when  he  saw  that  the  line  of  the
Heroli  was  bent,  and  that  they  were  hard  pressed  by  the
Langobards,  being  often  asked  by  the  king  what  the
Heroli  were  doing,  answered  that  they  were  fighting
excellently.  And  not  daring  to  speak,  he  did  not  reveal
the  calamity  he  saw  until  all  the  troops  had  turned  their
backs  upon  the  foe.  At  last,  though  late,  breaking  into
voice  he  cried : “ Woe  to  thee  wretched  Herolia  who
art  punished  by  the  anger  of  the  Lord  of  Heaven.”
Moved  by  these  words  the  king  said : “ Are  my  Heroli
fleeing?”  And  he  replied:  “Not  I,  but  thou,  king,
thyself  hast  said  this.”  Then,  as  is  wont  to  happen  in
such  circumstances,  while  the  king  and  all,  greatly
alarmed,  hesitated  what  to  do,  the  Langobards  came

1 Jordanis  (ch.  49)  says  they  fought  light-armed.  Procopius
(Persian  war,  II,  25)  speaks  of  their  lack  of  defensive  armor.

Digitized  by  v^ooole

BOOK  I.

37

upon  them  and  they  were  violently  cut  to  pieces.  The
king  himself,  acting  bravely  to  no  purpose,  was  also
slain.  While  the  army  of  the  Heroli  indeed  was  scat-
tering hither  and  thither,  so  great  was  the  anger  of
heaven  upoq  them,  that  when  they  saw  the  green-
growing flax  of  the  fields,  they  thought  it  was  water  fit
for  swimming,  and  while  they  stretched  out  their  arms
as  if  to  swim,  they  were  cruelly  smitten  by  the  swords
of  the  enemy.1  Then  the  Langobards,  when  the  victory
was  won,  divide  among  themselves  the  huge  booty  they
had  found  in  the  camp.  Tato  indeed  carried  off  the
banner  of  Rodolf  which  they  call  Bandum,  and  his
helmet  which  he  had  been  accustomed  to  wear  in  war.2
And  now  from  that  time  all  the  courage  of  the  Heroli
so  decayed  that  thereafter  they  had  no  king  over  them

Procopius  (B.  G.,  II,  14)  gives  another  account  of  the  battle.
He  says  the  sky  above  the  Langobards  was  covered  with  black
clouds,  while  above  the  Heroli  it  was  clear,  an  omen  which  por-
tended ruin  to  the  Heroli,  since  the  war  god  was  in  the  storm
cloud  (Wiese,  39).  They  disregarded  it,  however,  and  pressed
on  hoping  to  win  by  their  superior  numbers,  but  when  they  fought
hand  to  hand,  many  of  the  Heroli  were  slain,  including  Rodolf
himself,  whereupon  his  forces  fled  in  headlong  haste  and  most  of
them  were  killed  by  the  pursuing  Langobards.  The  account  of
Procopius,  a contemporary  (490-565),  is  in  the  main  more  reliable
than  that  of  Paul,  whose  story  is  clearly  of  a legendary  character.
The  place  of  the  battle  is  uncertain.  The  date,  too,  is  doubtful.
Procopius  places  it  at  494,  but  after  a careful  argument,  Schmidt
(53,  54)  places  it  about  508.

* Bruckner  sees  in  the  superfluous  phrase  “ which  he  had  been
accustomed  to  wear  in  war, ' ’ the  marks  of  the  translation  of  a
German  composite  word  used  probably  in  some  early  Langobard
song  (Zeitschrift  fur  Deutsches  Alterthum,  vol.  43,  part  I,  p.  55).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

38

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.*

in  any  way.1  From  this  time  on  the  Langobards,  hav-
ing become  richer,  and  their  army  having  been  aug-
mented from  the  various  nations  they  had  conquered,
began  to  aspire  to  further  wars,  and  to  push  forward
upon  every  side  the  glory  of  their  courage.

Chapter  XXI.

But  after  these  things  Tato  indeed  did  not  long  re-
joice in  the  triumph  of  war,  for  Waccho,  the  son  of  his
brother  Zuchilo,*  attacked  him  and  deprived  him  of  his

1 It  is  not  true  that  the  Heroli  never  afterwards  had  a king
(see  next  chapter).  As  to  their  subsequent  history,  Procopius  says
(B.  G.,  II,  14)  they  first  went  to  Rugiland,  and  driven  thence  by
hunger,  they  entered  Pannonia  and  became  tributaries  of  the
Gepidae,  then  they  crossed  the  Danube,  probably  into  upper
Moesia  and  obtained  permission  of  the  Greek  emperor  to  dwell
there  as  his  allies.  This  took  place  in  the  year  512  (Hodgkin,
V,  1 1 2).  They  soon  quarreled  with  the  Romans  and  although
under  Justinian  they  came  to  profess  Christianity  they  were
guilty  of  many  outrages.  They  killed  their  king  Ochon,  but
finding  the  anarchy  which  followed  unendurable,  they  sent  to
Thule  (Scandinavia)  for  a royal  prince  to  rule  them  (Hodgkin,
1 1 3),  and  Todasius  set  forth  for  that  purpose  with  two  hundred
young  men  to  the  country  where  the  Heroli  were  living.  t That
fickle  people  had  now  obtained  a king,  Suartuas,  from  the  em-
peror Justinian,  but  they  changed  their  minds  again  and  deserted
to  Todasius,  whereupon  Suartuas  escaped  to  Constantinople,  and
when  Justinian  determined  to  support  him  by  force  of  arms,  the
Heroli  joined  the  confederacy  of  the  Gepidae  (p.  1 16).

* This  is  a misunderstanding  by  Paul  of  the  words  of  the  Origo
from  which  his  account  is  taken,  which  says  : “ And  Waccho  the
son  of  Unichis  killed  king  Tato,  his  uncle,  together  with  Zuchilo.*'
(M.  G.  H.  Script.  Rer.  Langob.,  p.  3.)  See  Appendix  II.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

39

life.  Tato’s  son  Hildechis  also  fought1  against  Waccho,
but  when  Waccho  prevailed  and  he  was  overcome,  he
fled  to  the  Gepidae  and  remained  there  an  exile  up  to
the  end  of  his  life.  For  this  reason  the  Gepidae  from
that  time  incurred  enmities  with  the  Langobards.  At
the  same  time  Waccho  fell  upon  the  Suavi  and  subjected
them  to  his  authority.*  If  any  one  may  think  that  this
is  a lie  and  not  the  truth  of  the  matter,  let  him  read
over  the  prologue  of  the  edict  which  King  Rothari  com-
posed 3 of  the  laws  of  the  Langobards  and  he  will  find

1 Procopius  (III,  35)  makes  Hildechis  the  son  of  Risulf,  a cousin
of  Waccho  (Hodgkin,  V,  1 17,  note  2).  He  states  that  Risulf  would
have  been  entitled  to  the  throne  upon  Waccho’ s death,  but  in
order  to  get  the  crown  for  his  own  son,  Waccho  drove  Risulf  by
means  of  a false  accusation  from  the  country;  that  Risulf  fled
with  his  two  sons,  one  of  whom  was  called  Hildechis,  to  the
Warni,  by  whom,  at  the  instigation  of  Waccho,  he  was  murdered;
that  Hildechis’  brother  died  there  of  sickness  and  Hildechis
escaped  and  was  first  received  by  a Slav  people  and  afterwards
by  the  Gepidae  (Schmidt,  59).

* It  is  hard  to  see  what  people  are  designated  by  this  name.  The
Suavi  who  dwelt  in  the  southwestern  part  of  Germany,  now  Suabia,
are  too  far  off.  Hodgkin  (p.  119)  suggests  a confusion  between
Suavia  and  Savia,  the  region  of  the  Save.  Schmidt  (55)  says,

4 * There  is  ground  to  believe  that  this  people  is  identical  with  the
Suevi  of  Vannius  who  possessed  the  mountain  land  between  the
March  and  the  Theiss.”  Other  events  in  Waccho’ s reign  are
mentioned  by  Procopius  (II,  22),  but  omitted  by  Paul.  For  in-
stance, in  the  year  539,  Vitiges,  the  Ostrogoth,  being  hard  pressed
by  Belisarius,  sent  ambassadors  to  Waccho  offering  large  sums  of
money  to  become  his  ally,  but  Waccho  refused  because  a treaty
had  been  concluded  between  the  Langobards  and  Byzantines.

* Paul  here  refers  to  the  famous  1 ‘ Origo  Gentis  Langobardorum  ’ *
from  which,  or  from  a common  original,  Paul  has  taken  much  of

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

40

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

this  written  in  almost  all  the  manuscripts  as  we  have
inserted  it  in  this  little  history.  And  Waccho  had  three
wives,  that  is,  the  first,  Ranicunda,  daughter  of  the  king
of  the  Turingi  (Thuringians) ; then  he  married  Aus-
trigusa,  the  daughter  of  the  king  of  the  Gepidae,  from
whom  he  had  two  daughters;  the  name  of  one  was
Wisegarda,  whom  he  bestowed  in  marriage  upon  Theu-
depert,  king  of  the  Franks,  and  the  second  was  called
Walderada,  who  was  united  with  Cusupald,  another  king
of  the  Franks,  and  he,  having  her  in  hatred,1  gave  her
over  in  marriage  to  one  of  his  followers  called  Garipald.*
And  Waccho  had  for  his  third  wife  the  daughter  of  the
king  of  the  Heroli,3  by  name  Salinga.  From  her  a son
was  born  to  him,  whom  he  called  Waltari,  and  who
upon  the  death  of  Waccho  reigned  as  the  eighth  4 king

his  early  Langobard  history.  See  Appendix  II.  Paul  appears
to  have  considered  the  Origo  as  the  Prologue  to  Rothari’s  Edict.
The  two  were,  however,  different,  though  both  were  prefixed  to
the  Edict  in  at  least  some  of  the  MSS.  Mommsen  (58,  note)
thinks  it  probable  that  the  Origo  was  not  an  official  but  a private
work,  prefixed  to  the  Edict  for  the  first  time  in  the  year  668.
Rothari  composed  the  Edict  and  not  the  Origo,  though  Paul
seems  to  have  considered  him  the  author  of  the  latter  (Jacobi  5).

1 Gregory  of  Tours  relates  (IV,  9)  that  he  repudiated  her  because
he  was  accused  by  the  clergy,  probably  on  account  of  some
ecclesiastical  impediment.

* Garipald  was  duke  of  the  Bavarians  (Greg.  Tours,  IV,  9 ;
Waitz  ; s eetn/ra  III,  10,  30).

•And  yet  Paul  has  just  told  us  in  the  preceding  chapter  that
at  this  time  the  Heroli  had  no  king.

4 An  error  in  enumeration,  Tato  being  mentioned  as  seventh  and
Waccho  omitted  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  kaOOQle

[f.  p.  41 J

Digitized  by  Google

Digitized  by

BOOK  I.

41

over  the  Langobards.  All  these  were  Lithingi;  for
thus  among  them  a certain  noble  stock  was  called.

Chapter  XXII.

Waltari,  therefore,  when  he  had  held  the  sovereignty
for  seven  years,1  departed  from  this  life,*  and  after  him
Audoin 3 was  the  ninth  4 who  attained  the  kingly  power
(546-565),  and  he,  not  long  afterwards,  led  the  Lango-
bards into  Pannonia.5

Chapter  XXIII.  *

Then  the  Gepidae  and  the  Langobards  at  last  give
birth  to  the  strife  which  had  been  long  since  conceived
and  the  two  parties  make  ready  for  war. 6 When  battle

1 Probably  539  to  546  or  thereabouts.  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  30.)

* Procopius  says  by  disease  (B.  G.,  Ill,  35).

• The  same,  probably,  as  the  Anglo-Saxon  and  English  “Edwin  ’ ’
(Hodgkin,  V,  122,  note  1).

4 The  race  of  Lethingi  became  extinct  with  Waltari.  Audoin
came  from  the  race  of  Gausus  (see  Chronicon  Gothanum,  M.  G.,
H.  LL.,  IV,  p.  644).

•Justinian,  says  Procopius  (B.  G.,  Ill,  33),  had  given  this
and  other  lands  to  the  Langobards  together  with  great  sums  of
money  (Schmidt,  58).  They  appear  to  have  been  in  fact  subsi-
dized as  allies  and  confederates  of  the  Roman  Empire  (Hartmann,
II,  1,  12),  and  it  seems  to  have  been  at  Justinian’s  instigation  that
Audoin  married  a Thuringian  princess,  the  great-niece  of  Theod-
eric,  who  after  the  overthrow  of  the  Thuringians  had  fled  to  Italy,
and  later  had  been  brought  by  Belisarius  to  the  court  of  Constan-
tinople (Hartmann,  II,  1,  14).  The  invasion  of  Pannonia  probably
occurred  not  far  from  546  (id.,  p.  30).

6 Paul  does  not  state  the  cause  of  this  war.  Schmidt  believes  (p.
58)  that  it  was  probably  begun  at  the  instigation  of  Justinian  whose

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

42

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

was  joined,  while  both  lines  fought  bravely  and  neither
yielded  to  the  other,  it  happened  that  in  the  midst  of
struggle,  Alboin,  the  son  of  Audoin,  and  Turismod,  the
son  of  Turisind  encountered  each  other.  And  Alboin,
striking  the  other  with  his  sword,  hurled  him  headlong
from  his  horse  to  destruction.  The  Gepidae,  seeing  that
the  king’s  son  was  killed,  through  whom  in  great  part
the  war  had  been  set  on  foot,  at  once,  in  their  discour-
agement, start  to  flee.  The  Langobards,  sharply  fol-
lowing them  up,  overthrow  them  and  when  a great  num-
ber had  been  killed  they  turn  back  to  take  off  the  spoils
of  the  dead.  When,  after  the  victory  had  been  won,

interest  it  was  to  break  up  the  friendship  of  two  peoples  who  threat-
ened to  become  dangerous  to  his  empire  and  that  in  addition  to
this,  the  desire  of  the  Langobards  to  get  the  important  city  of  Sir-
mium,  then  held  by  the  Gepidae  cooperated,  and  above  all,  the
hostile  feeling  which  had  been  called  out  by  contests  for  the  throne.
It  must  be  remembered  that  the  Heroli,  enemies  to  the  Lango-
bards, had  been  received  in  the  confederacy  of  the  Gepidae  and
that  Hildechis,  the  descendant  of  Tato,  was  harbored  by  the  Gepid
king  Turisind,  just  as  Ustrigotthus,  Turisind’s  rival  for  the  Gepid
throne,  and  son  of  Jiis  predecessor,  Elemund,  had  found  refuge  at
the  court  of  Audoin.  Prior  to  this,  both  nations  had  sought  the
alliance  of  the  emperor  (Hodgkin,  V,  1 22- 1 26).  Justinian  decided
to  help  the  Langobards  since  they  were  weaker  and  less  dangerous
to  him  than  the  Gepidae,  so  a Roman  army  of  about  10,000  cav-
alry and  1 500  Heroli  marched  against  the  Gepidae.  Upon  the
way  they  annihilated  a division  of  3,000  Heroli  who  were  allied  to
the  Gepidae,  and  the  Gepidae  made  a separate  peace  with  the
Langobards  (p.  129).  Audoin  demanded  of  Turisind,  king  of
the  Gepidae,  the  delivery  of  Hildechis,  but  the  latter  escaped  and
wandered  about  in  different  countries  (Schmidt,  60).

A secorld  war  between  the  Langobards  and  Gepidae  occurred

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  I.

43

the  Langobards  returned  to  their  own  abodes,  they  sug-
gested to  their  king  Audoin  that  Alboin,  by  whose  valor
they  had  won  the  victory  in  the  fight,  should  become  his
table  companion  so  that  he  who  had  been  a comrade  to
his  father  in  danger  should  also  be  a comrade  at  the
feast.  Audoin  answered  them  that  he  could  by  no  means
do  this  lest  he  should  break  the  usage  of  the  nation.
“ You  know,”  he  said,  “ that  it  is  not  the  custom  among
us  that  the  son  of  the  king  should  eat  with  his  father
unless  he  first  receives  his  arms  from  the  king  of  a for-
eign nation.”

about  549  (Procopius,  IV,  18),  when  a desperate  panic  seized  both
armies  at  the  beginning  of  a battle,  whereupon  the  two  kings  con-
cluded a two  years’  truce.  At  the  end  of  this  time  hostilities  Ijegan
anew.  Justinian  took  the  side  of  the  Langobards  and  sent  troops
into  the  field,  one  division  of  which,  under  command  of  Amala-
frid,  joined  the  Langobards,  while  the  rest  of  the  troops  remained
by  command  of  the  emperor  in  Ulpiana  to  quell  certain  disturb-
ances (Schmidt,  60,  61).  The  Langobards  pushed  into  the  territory
of  the  Gepidae  and  defeated  their  adversaries.  The  field  of  battle
was  probably  near  Sirmium.  Procopius  (B.  G.,  IV,  25)  puts  this
battle  in  the  seventeenth  year  of  the  war  (March,  551,  to
March,  552).  Probably  this  is  the  same  battle  which  Paul  re-
lates. The  Gepidae  now  begged  for  peace  which  was  accorded  to
them  through  the  intervention  of  Justinian.  As  a condition  the
Langobards  and  the  emperor  demanded  the  delivery  of  Hildechis.
But  as  the  Gepidae  were  resolved  not  to  violate  the  sanctity  of  a
guest,  and  as  the  Langobards  refused  to  deliver  Ustrigotthus,
neither  of  these  were  surrendered,  but  both  perished  by  assassina-
tion, not  without  the  knowledge  of  the  two  kings  (Schmidt,  62  ;
Hodgkin,  V,  134).

Digitized  by  kaOOQle

44

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXIV.

When  he  heard  these  things  from  his  father,  Alfeoin,
taking  only  forty  young  men  with  him,  journeyed  to
Turisind,  king  of  the  Gepi{Ja$  with  whom  he  had  before
waged  war,  and  intimated  \tie  cause  in  which  he  had
come.  And  the  king,  receiving  him  kindly,  invited  him
to  his  table  and  placed  frim  on  his  right  hand  where
Turismod,  his  former  son  had  been  wont  to  sit.  In  the
meantime,  while  the  various  dishes  were  made  ready,
Turisind,  reflecting  that  his  son  had  sat  there  only  a
little  while  before,  and  recalling  to  mind  the  death  of
his  child  and  beholding  his  slayer  present  and  sitting  in
his  place,  drawing  deep  sighs,  could  not  contain  himself,
but  at  last  his  grief  broke  forth  in  utterance.  “ This
place,”  he  says,  “ is  dear  to  me,  but  the  person  who  sits
in  it  is  grievous  enough  to  my  sight.”  Then  another
son  of  the  king  who  was  present,  aroused  by  his  father’s
speech,  began  to  provoke  the  Langobards  with  insults
declaring  (because  they  wore  white  bandages  from  their
calves  down)  that  they  were  like  mares  with  white  feet
up  to  the  legs,  saying:  “ The  mares  that  you  take  after
have  white  fetlocks.” 1 Then  one  of  the  Langobards  thus
answered  these  things : “ Go  to  the  field  of  Asfeld  and
there  you  can  find  by  experience  beyond  a doubt  how
stoutly  those  you  call  mares  succeed  in  kicking ; there
the  bones  of  your  brother  are  scattered  in  the  midst  of
the  meadows  like  those  of  a vile  beast.”  When  they

1 Or  hoofs.  Fetilus  for  petilus . The  white  hoof  of  a horse  was
so  called.  Others  make  it  foetidae , ‘ ‘ evil  smelling.  ’ ’ See  Gib-
bon, ch.  45.  Hodgkin,  V,  136.

Digitized  by  v^ooole

BOOK  I.

45

heard  these  things,  the  Gepidae,  unable  to  bear  the
tumult  of  their  passions,  are  violently  stirred  in  anger
and  strive  to  avenge  the  open  insult.  The  Langobards
on  the  other  side,  ready  for  the  fray,  all  lay  their  hands
on  the  hilts  of  their  swords.  The  king  leaping  forth  from
the  table  thrust  himself  into  their  midst  and  restrained
his  people  from  anger  and  strife,  threatening  first  to
punish  him  who  first  engaged  in  fight,  saying  that  it  is
a victory  not  pleasing  to  God  when  any  one  kills  his
guest  in  his  own  house.  Thus  at  last  the  quarrel  hav-
ing been  allayed,  they  now  finished  the  banquet  with
joyful  spirits.  And  Turisind,  taking  up  the  arms  of
Turismod  his  son,  delivered  them  to  Alboin  and  sent  him
back  in  peace  and  safety  to  his  father’s  kingdom.  Al-
boin having  returned  to  his  father,  was  made  from  that
time  his  table  companion.  And  when  he  joyfully  par-
took with  his  father  of  the  royal  delicacies,  he  related
in  order  all  .the  things  which  had  happened  to  him  among
the  Gepidae  in  the  palace  of  Turisind.®  Those  who
were  present  were  astonished  and  applauded  the  bold-
ness of  Alboin  nor  did  they  less  extol  in  their  praises
the  most  honorable  behavior  of  Turisind.

Chapter  XXV.

At  this  period  the  emperor  Justinian  was  governing
the  Roman  empire  with  good  fortune.  He  was  both
prosperous  in  waging  wars  and  admirable  in  civil  mat-
ters. For  by  Belisarius,  the  patrician,  he  vigorously
subdued  the  Persians  and  by  this  same  Belisarius  he

1 Read  Turisindi  with  many  MSS.  instead  of  Turismodi .

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

4 6

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

reduced  to  utter  destruction  the  nation  of  the  Wandals,
captured  their  king  Gelismer  and  restored  all  Africa  to
the  Roman  empire  after  ninety-six  years.  Again  by
the  power  of  Belisarius  he  overcame  the  nation  of  the
Goths  in  Italy  and  took  captive  Witichis  their  king.  He
subdued  also  the  Moors  who  afterwards  infested  Africa
together  with  their  king  Amtalas,  by  John  the  ex-con-
sul,  a man  of  wonderful  courage.  In  like  manner  too,
he  subjugated  other  nations  by  right  of  war.  For  this
reason,  on  account  of  his  victories  over  them  all,  he
deserved  to  have  his  surnames  and  to  be  called  Alaman-
nicus,  Gothicus,  Francicus,  Germanicus,  Anticus,  Alani-
cus,  Wandalicus,  and  Af ricanus.  He  also  arranged  in
wonderful  brevity  the  laws  of  the  Romans  whose  pro-
lixity was  very  great  and  whose  lack  of  harmony  was
injurious.  For  all  the  laws  of  the  emperors  which  were
certainly  contained  in  many  volumes  he  abridged  into
twelve  books,  and  he  ordered  this  volume  called  the
Justinian  Code.  On  the  other  hand,  the  laws  of  special
magistrates  or  judges  which  were  spread  over  almost
two  thousand  books,  he  reduced  to  the  number  of  fifty
and  called  that  work  by  the  name  of  “Digests”  or
“ Pandects.”  He  also  composed  anew  four  books  of
“Institutes”  in  which  the  texture  of  all  laws  is  briefly
described ; he  also  ordered  that  the  new  laws  which  he
himself  had  ordained,  when  reduced  to  one  volume,
should  be  called  In  the  same  way  the  “New  Code”
(Novels).  The  same  emperor  also  built  within  the  city
of  Constantinople  to  Christ  our  Lord,  who  is  the  wis-
dom of  God  the  Father,  a church  which  he  called  by  the
Greek  name  “ Hagia  Sophia,”  that  is,  “ Divine  Wisdom.’*

Digitized  by  Caooole

BOOK  I.

47

The  workmanship  of  this  so  far  excels  that  of  all  other
buildings  that  in  all  the  regions  of  the  earth  its  like
cannot  be  found.  This  emperor  in  fact  was  Catholic  in
his  faith,  upright  in  his  deeds,  just  in  his  judgments,
and  therefore,  to  him  all  things  came  together  for
good.  In  his  time  Cassiodorus  was  renowned  in  the
city  of  Rome x for  knowledge  both  human  and  divine.
Among  other  things  which  he  nobly  wrote,  he  ex-
pounded particularly  in  a most  powerful  way  the  ob-
scure parts  of  the  Psalms.  He  was  in  the  first  place  a
consul,  then  a senator,  and  at  last  a monk.  At  this
time  also  Dionisius,  an  abbott  established  in  the  city  of
Rome,  computed  a reckoning  of  Easter  time  by  a won-
derful argumentation.9  Then  also,  at  Constantinople,
Priscian  of  Caesarea  explored  the  depths  of  the  gram-
matical art,  as  I might  say,  and  then  also,  Arator,  a
subdeacon  of  the  Roman  church,  a wonderful  poet,
wrote  the  acts  of  the  apostles  in  hexameter  verses.

Chapter  XXVI.

In  these  days  also  the  most  blessed  father  Benedict,
first  in  a place  called  Sublacus  (Subiaco),  which  is  dis-
tant forty  miles1 *  3 from  the  city  of  Rome,  and  afterwards

1 His  work  was  done  mostly  at  Ravenna  and  Viviers  in  Brut-
tium  (where  he  retired  to  a monastery).  His  fame  was  not  con-
fined to  Rome  but  extended  throughout  Italy,  and  the  entire
Roman  world.

* In  his  Cyclus  Paschalis  he  also  introduced  the  annunciation  of
the  birth  of  Christ  as  the  starting-point  of  chronology.

8 A Roman  mile  is  142  yards  less  than  the  English  statute  mile.

Digitized  by

Google

48

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

in  the  stronghold  of  Cassinum  (Monte  Cassino1),  which
is  called  Arx,  was  renowned  for  his  great  life  and  his
apostolic  virtues.  His  biography,  as  is  known,  the
blessed  Pope  Gregory  composed  in  delightful  language
in  his  Dialogues.  I also,  according  to  my  meager  talent,
have  braided  together  in  the  following  manner  in  honor
of  so  great  a father,  each  of  his  miracles  by  means  of
corresponding  distichs  in  elegiac  meter.9  . . . We  have
woven  also  in  this  manner  a hymn  in  iambic  Archi-
lochian  meter,  containing  each  of  the  miracles  of  the
same  father.3  . . .

I may  here  briefly  relate  a thing  that  the  blessed
pope  Gregory  did  not  at  all  describe  in  his  life  of  this
most  holy  father.  When,  by  divine  admonition,  he  had
come  almost  fifty  miles  from  Sublacus  to  this  place
where  his  body  reposes,  three  ravens,  whom  he  was
accustomed  to  feed,  followed  him,  flying  around  him.
And  at  every  crossway,  while  he  came  hither,  two  angels
appearing  in  the  form  of  young  men,  showed  him  which
way  he  ought  to  take.  And  in  this  place  [Cassinum]
a certain  servant  of  God  then  had  a dwelling,  to  whom  a
voice  from  heaven  said :

Leave  these  sacred  spots,  another  friend  is  at  hand.

1 A famous  monastery,  45  miles  N.  W.  of  Naples,  the  cradle  ot
the  Benedictine  order.

* The  sixty -four  distichs  which  follow  are  found  in  Appendix  III,
as  they  have  no  proper  connection  with  the  history.  They  had
been  written  by  Paul  previously,  and  certain  additions  to  them
contained  in  other  MSS.  are  published  by  Bethmann  (331).

•These  verses  are  also  contained  in  Appendix  III.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  I.

49

And  when  he  had  come  here,  that  is  to  the  citadel  of
Cassinum  he  always  restrained  himself  in  great  absti-
nence, but  especially  at  the  time  of  Lent  he  remained
shut  up  and  removed  from  the  noise  of  the  world.  I
have  taken  all  these  things  from  the  song  of  the  poet
Marcus,  who  coming  hither  to  this  same  father,  com-
posed some  verses  in  his  praise,  but  to  guard  against
too  great  prolixity,  I have  not  described  them  in  these
books.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  this  illustrious  father
came  to  this  fertile  place  overlooking  a rich  valley,
being  called  by  heaven  for  this  purpose,  that  there
should  be  here  a community  of  many  monks,  as  has
actually  occurred  under  God’s  guidance.  These  things,
which  were  not  to  be  omitted,  having  been  briefly  told,
let  us  return  to  the  regular  order  of  our  history.

Chapter  XXVII.

Now  Audoin,  king  of  the  Langobards,  of  whom  we
have  spoken,  had  to  wife  Rodelinda,  who  bore  him
Alboin,  a man  fitted  for  wars  and  energetic  in  all
things.  Then  Audoin  died,1  and  afterwards  Alboin,
the  tenth  king,  entered  upon  the  government  of  his
country  according  to  the  wishes  of  all,  and  since  he
had  everywhere  a name  very  illustrious  and  distinguished
for  power,  Chlothar,  the  king  of  the  Franks,  joined
to  him  in  marriage  his  daughter  Chlotsuinda.  From
her  he  be^ot  one  daughter  only,  Alpsuinda  by  name.
Meanwhile)  Turisind,  king  of  the  Gepidae,  died,  and
Cunimund  succeeded  him  in  the  sovereignty.  And  he,

1 Probably  about  565  (Hodgkin,  V,  137).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

50

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

desiring  to  avenge  the  old  injuries  of  the  Gepidae,
broke  his  treaty  with  the  Langobards  and  chose  war
rather  than  peace.1  But  Alboin  entered  into  a perpetual
treaty  with  the  Avars,  who  were  first  called  Huns,  and
afterwards  Avars,  from  the  name  of  their  own  king.3
Then  he  set  out  for  the  war  prepared  by  the  Gepidae.
When  the  latter  were  hastening  against  him  in  a differ-
ent direction,  the  Avars,  as  they  had  agreed  with
Alboin,  invaded  their  country.  A sad  messenger  com-
ing to  Cunimund,  announced  to  him  that  the  Avars  had
entered  his  territories.  Although  cast  down  in  spirit,
and  put  into  sore  straits  on  both  sides,  still  he  urged  his
people  to  fight  first  with  the  Langobards,  and  that,  if  they
should  be  able  to  overcome  these,  they  should  then
drive  the  army  of  the  Huns  from  their  country.  There-
fore battle  is  joined  and  they  fight  with  all  their  might.
The  Langobards  become  the  victors,  raging  against  the

1 Paul  apparently  confounds  two  wars  in  one.  Alboin  in  the
first  overcomes  Cunimund;  then  the  emperor  Justin  prepares  to
aid  the  Gepidae  and  Alboin  offers  to  make  peace  and  to  marry
Rosemund.  His  offer  is  refused  and  in  the  second  war  Cunimund
is  killed  (Waitz).

3 These  were  a horde  of  Asiatics  who  had  entered  Europe  in  the
closing  years  of  the  reign  of  Justinian,  had  extorted  large  subsi-
dies from  him  and  had  penetrated  westward  as  far  as  Thuringia
(Hodgkin,  V,  137).  Their  chief  bore  the  title  of  cagan  or  khan.
The  treaty  made  by  Alboin  with  the  khan  Baian  shows  that  the
Avars  drove  a hard  bargain  with  the  Langobards.  Baian  con-
sented to  the  alliance  only  on  condition  that  the  Langobards
should  give  the  Avars  a tenth  part  of  their  livestock  and  that  in
the  event  of  victory  the  Avars  should  receive  one-half  of  the  spoils
^nd  the  whole  of  the  lands  of  the  Gepidae  (Schmidt,  63-64).

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  I.

51

Gepidae  in  such  wrath  that  they  reduce  them  to  utter
destruction,  and  out  of  an  abundant  multitude  scarcely
the  messenger  survives.^  i In  this  battle  Alboin  killed
Cunimund,  and  made  out  of  his  head,  which  he  carried
off,  a drinking  goblet.  This  kind  of  a gcblet  is  called
among  them  “scala,” 2 but  in  the  Latin  language
“ patera.’*  J And  he  led  away  as  a captive,3  Cunimund’s
daughter,  Rosemund  by  name,  together  with  a great
multitude  of  both  sexes  and  every  age,  and  because
Chlotsuinda  had  died  he  married  her,  to  his  own  injury*
as  afterwards  appeared.  Then  the  Langobards  secured
such  great  booty  that  they  now  attained  the  most  ample

1The  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Gepidae  occurred  in
566  or  567  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  31).

2 Compare  the  Norse  word  skaal,  skoal , German  Sc  hale.  Hodg-
kin, however,  thinks  it  is  related  rather  to  the  German  Sckadel,
our  skull  (V,  139).

* It  appears  he  first  saw  Rosemund  when  he  went  to  the  court
of  Turisind  to  get  his  arms  (Schmidt,  62).  On  account  of  political
considerations  he  had  to  marry  Chlotsuinda,  daughter  of  the
Frankish  king,  Chlothar  I,  but  when  she  died,  he  sued  for  the  hand
of  Rosemund,  and  when  it  was  refused,  he  forcibly  carried  her
away  into  his  kingdom  (p.  63).  Cunimund  vainly  demanded  the
return  of  his  daughter,  and  was  unwilling  that  she  should  marry
the  hated  Langobard.  War  followed,  in  which  at  first  the  Lango-
bards had  the  better,  but  finally  they  were  defeated  as  the  Gepidae
had  brought  Justin  II,  who  had  succeeded  Justinian,  over  to  their
side.  The  result  waa  that  Rosemund  was  set  free.  Then  Alboin
sought  allies  and  found  them  in  the  Avars  (id.).  When  Cunimund
heard  of  this  he  again  sought  the  aid  of  Justin  and  promised  to
cede  Sirmium  and  other  possessions  to  the  empire  in  return  for
assistance.  Justin  delayed  and  remained  neutral,  but  finally  took
Sirmium  after  the  Gepidae  were  defeated  (Schmidt,  64).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

52

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

riches,  but  the  race  of  the  Gepidae  were  so  diminished
that  from  that  time  on  they  had  no  king.  But  all
who  were  able  to  survive  the  war  were  either  subjected
to  the  Langobards  or  groan  even  up  to  the  present
time  in  bondage  to  a grievous  mastery,  since  the
\ Huns  possess  their  country.  But  the  name  of  Alboin
was  spread  abroad  far  and  wide,  so  illustrious,  that  even
up  to  this  time  his  noble  bearing  and  glory,  the  good
fortune  of  his  wars  and  his  courage  are  celebrated,  not
only  among  the  Bavarians  and  the  Saxons,  but  also
among  other  men  of  the  same  tongue  in  their  songs.
It  is  also  related  by  many  up  to  the  present  time  that  a
special  kind  of  arms  was  made  under  him.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  II.

Chapter  I.

Now  when  the  frequent  victories  of  the  Lango-
bards  were  noised  about  in  every  direction,  Narses,
keeper  of  the  imperial  archives,  who  was  then  ruling
over  Italy  and  preparing  for  war  against  Totila,  king  of
the  Goths,  inasmuch  as  he  long  before  had  the  Lango-
bards  for  allies,  directed  messengers  to  Alboin,  asking
that  he  should  furnish  him  assistance  to  fight  with  the
Goths.  Then  Alboin  sent  a chosen  band  of  his 1 to  give
support  to  the  Romans  against  the  Goths.  They  were
transported  into  Italy  by  a bay*  of  the  Adriatic  sea,
and  having  joined  the  Romans,  began  the  struggle  with
the  Goths,  and  when  these  were  reduced  to  utter  de-
struction, together  with  Totila,  their  king,  the  Lango-
bards  returned  as  victors,  honored  with  many  gifts,  to
their  own  country .3  During  all  the  time  the  Lango-

1 This  actually  occurred  under  Audoin,  not  Alboin  (Procopius,
B.  G.,  IV,  26).  Twenty -five  hundred  Langobards  were  chosen
and  Audoin  sent  with  them  a retinue  of  three  thousand  other
armed  men  (id.).

* The  dwellers  in  the  lagoons  at  the  northern  extremity  of  the
Adriatic  transported  the  army  along  the  shores,  crossing  the
mouths  of  the  rivers  in  small  boats  (id.).

•They  were  sent  to  Italy  A.  D.  554,  returned  A.  D.  552
(Waitz).  Their  disorderly  conduct  and  the  outrages  they  com-
mitted made  them  dangerous  allies,  and  Narses  took  an  early  oc-
casion to  send  them  home  (Procopius,  B.  G.,  IV,  33).

(S3)

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

54

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

bards  held  Pannonia,  they  were  the  allies  of  the  Roman
state  againt  its  rivals.

Chapter  II.

In  these  times  Narses  also  waged  war  against  Duke
Buccellinus,  whom  Theudepert,1  king  of  the  Franks,
when  he  entered  Italy  and  returned  to  Gaul,  had  left
behind  with  Amingus,  another  duke,  to  conquer  the
country.  This  Buccellinus,  after  devastating  nearly  all
Italy  with  rapine,  and  after  bestowing  upon  Theude-

1 Grandson  of  Clovis,  the  founder  of  the  Frankish  monarchy.
Theudepert  had  invaded  Italy  in  the  year  539  (Muratori  Ann.,
Ill,  p.  388;  Hodgkin,  V,  p.  n),  but  the  dysentery  swept  away
a third  of  his  army,  and  the  clamor  of  his  own  subjects,  as  well  as
the  representations  of  Belisarius,  the  general  of  Justinian,  induced
him  to  return  home  (Gibbon,  ch.  41).  When  he  departed  from
Italy  he  did  not  relinquish  all  he  had  won.  The  larger  part  of
Venetia,  a good  deal  of  Liguria  and  the  provinces  of  the  Cottian
Alps  were  retained  (Hodgkin,  V,  1 1).

Theudepert  died  in  548,  leaving  as  his  successor  his  feeble  child
Theudebald  (p.  13).  Five  years  later  (A.  D.  533),  when  the
Goths  in  Italy  were  overthrown  by  Narses,  those  who  still  held
out  in  the  north  besought  the  Frankish  king  for  aid,  and  Buccel-
linus (Butilin)  and  his  brother  Leutharius,  leaders  of  the  barbarous
Alamanni,  ravaged  northern  Italy  (pp.  16-17),  and  then  swept
down  toward  the  south.  The  armies  of  the  two  brothers  kept
together  as  far  as  Samnium,  then  they  divided.  Buccellinus  rav-
aged the  west  coast  and  Leutharius  the  east,  down  to  the  end  of
the  peninsula  (A.  D.  554).  Finally  Leutharius  determined  to  re-
turn with  his  booty,  but  when  he  was  about  to  cross  the  Alps  a
pestilence  broke  out  in  his  army  and  he  perished  (pp.  33-36).
Buccellinus  was  attacked  by  Narses  near  Capua,  his  army  was
destroyed  and  he  was  slain.  This  expedition  of  Buccellinus,
therefore,  occurred  not  under  Theudepert  but  after  his  death.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

is

pert,  his  king,  abundant  gifts  from  the  booty  of  the
country,  was  arranging  to  winter  in  Campania,  but  was
overcome  at  length  in  disastrous  war  by  Narses  at  a
place  whose  name  is  Tannetum,1  and  was  slain.  And
when  Amingus  attempted  to  bring  aid  to  Widin,  a
count  of  the  Goths  rebelling  against  Narses,  both  were
overcome  by  Narses.  Widin  being  captured,  was  ban-
ished to  Constantinople,  but  Amingus,  who  had  offered
him  assistance,  perished  by  the  sword  of  Narses.  Also
a third  duke  of  the  Franks,  by  name  Leutharius,  the
brother  of  Buccellinus,  when  he  desired  to  return  to  his
country  laden  with  great  booty,  died  a natural  death
between  Verona  and  Tridentum  (Trent),  near  Lake
Benacus  (Lago  di  Garda).2

Chapter  III.

Narses  had  also  a struggle  with  Sinduald,  king  of  the
Brenti,3  a surviving  descendant  of  the  stock  of  the
Heroli  whom  Odoacar,  when  he  formerly  came  into
Italy,  had  brought  with  him.  Upon  this  man,  who  at
first  adhered  to  him  faithfully,  Narses  conferred  many
benefits,  but  defeated  him  in  war,  captured  him  and

1 This  battle  occurred  near  Capua,  on  the  banks  of  the  river
Casilinum,  another  name  for  the  Vultumus  (Voltumo)  (Waitz  ;
Hodgkin,  V,  36-44.)  The  name  Tannetum  cannot  be  positively
identified.

1 He  died  of  the  pestilence  which  had  broken  out  in  his  army.
See  previous  note.

# Perhaps  the  same  as  those  called  Breones  or  Briones,  dwelling
in  the  Alps  of  Noricum  or  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  Brenner  in
Tyrol  (Waitz;  Abel;  see  Zeuss,  484).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

56

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

hung  him  from  a lofty  beam,  when  at  last  he  insolently
rebelled  and  sought  to  obtain  the  sovereignty.1  At  this
time  also  Narses,  the  patrician,  by  means  of  Dagisteus,
the  Master  of  Soldiers,  a powerful  and  warlike  man,
got  possession  of  all  the  territories  of  Italy.*  This
Narses  indeed  was  formerly  keeper  of  the  archives,3  and
afterwards  on  account  of  the  value  of  his  high  qualities,
he  earned  the  honor  of  the  patriciate.  For  he  was  a
very  pious  man,  a Catholic  in  religion,  generous  to  the
poor,  very  zealous  in  restoring  churches,4  and  so  much
devoted  to  vigils  and  prayers  that  he  obtained  victory
more  by  the  supplications  which  he  poured  forth  to
God,  than  by  the  arms  of  war.

Chapter  IV.

In  the  times  of  this  man  a very  great  pestilence  broke
out,  particularly  in  the  province  of  Liguria.5  For  sud-

1 A.  D.  565  (Hodgkin,  V,  56).

1 Narses  took  the  city  of  Rome  largely  through  the  agency  of
Dagisteus  (Procopius,  IV,  33),  who  thus  became  the  means  of  the
recovery  of  Italy  (Waitz).  The  title  “Master  of  Soldiers,"  ( mag-
ister  militum,)  was  given  at  the  time  of  Constantine  to  important
ministers  of  state,  and  there  were  then  only  eight  of  these  in  the
whole  empire  (Hodgkin,  VI,  539);  in  the  time  of  Theoderic,  the
king  alone  (Hartmann,  I,  99),  and  later,  Belisarius,  the  general-
in-chief  of  Justinian,  held  this  important  military  office  (id.,  p.
258).  Afterwards  however,  the  title  became  cheapened,  the  num-
ber of  magistri  militum  increased,  and  at  last  the  rank  became
much  the  same  as  that  of  dux  or  duke  (Hodgkin,  VI,  540).

8 Chartularius , see  DuCange.

♦After  their  desecration  by  the  Arian  Goths.

6 Probably  A.  D.  566  (Hodg.,  V,  166,  note  2).

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

BOOK  II.

57

denly  there  appeared  certain  marks  among  the  dwellings,
doors,  utensils,  and  clothes,  which,  if  any  one  wished  to
wash  away,  became  more  and  more  apparent.  After
the  lapse  of  a year  indeed  there  began  to  appear  in  the
groins  of  men  and  in  other  rather  delicate x places,  a
swelling  of  the  glands,  after  the  manner  of  a nut  or  a
date,  presently  followed  by  an  unbearable  fever,  so  that
upon  the  third  day  the  man  died.  But  if  any  one
should  pass  over  the  third  day  he  had  a hope  of  living.
Everywhere  there  was  grief  and  everywhere  tears.
For  as  common  report  had  it  that  those  who  fled  would
avoid  the  plague,  the  dwellings  were  left  deserted  by
their  inhabitants,  and  the  dogs  only  kept  house.  The
flocks  remained  alone  in  the  pastures  with  no  shepherd
at  hand.  You  might  see  villas  or  fortified  places  lately
filled  with  crowds  of  men,  and  on  the  next  day,  all  had
departed  and  everything  was  in  utter  silence.  Sons
fled,  leaving  the  corpses  of  their  parents  unburied;
parents  forgetful  of  their  duty  abandoned  their  children
in  raging  fever.  If  by  chance  long-standing  affection
constrained  any  one  to  bury  his  near  relative,  he  re-
mained himself  unburied,  and  while  he  was  perform-
ing the  funeral  rites  he  perished;  while  he  offered
obsequies  to  the  dead,  his  own  corpse  remained  without
obsequies.  You  might  see  the  world  brought  back  to
its  ancient  silence : no  voice  in  the  field ; no  whistling
of  shepherds ; no  lying  in  wait  of  wild  beasts  among  the
cattle;  no  harm  to  domestic  fowls.  The  crops,  out-
living the  time  of  the  harvest,  awaited  the  reaper  un-

1 Read  delicatioribus  in  place  of  deligatioribus .

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

5 8 HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

touched ; the  vineyard  with  its  fallen  leaves  and  its
shining  grapes  remained  undisturbed  while  winter  came
on;  a trumpet  as  of  warriors  resounded  through  the
hours  of  the  night  and  day ; something  like  the  murmur
of  an  army  was  heard  by  many ; there  were  no  foot-
steps of  passers  by,  no  murderer  was  seen,  yet  the
corpses  of  the  dead  were  more  than  the  eyes  could  dis-
cern ; pastoral  places  had  been  turned  into  a sepulchre
for  men,  and  human  habitations  had  become  places  of
refuge  for  wild  beasts.  And  these  evils  happened  to
the  Romans  only  and  within  Italy  alone,  up  to  the
boundaries  of  the  nations  of  the  Alamanni  and  the
Bavarians.  Meanwhile,  the  emperor  Justinian  departed
from  life  and  Justin  the  younger  undertook  the  rule  of
the  state  at  Constantinople.  In  these  times  also  Narses
the  patrician,  whose  care  was  watching  everything,  at
length  seized  Vitalis,  bishop  of  the  city  of  Altinum
(Altino),  who  had  fled  many  years  before  to  the  king-
dom of  the  Franks — that  is,  to  the  city  of  Aguntum
(Innichen)1 — and  condemned  him  to  exile  in  Sicily.

Chapter  V.

Now  the  whole  nation  of  the  Goths  having  been
destroyed  or  overthrown,  as  has  been  said,  and  those
also  of  whom  we  have  spoken a having  been  in  like  man-
ner conquered,  Narses,  after  he  had  acquired  much
gold  and  silver  and  riches  of  other  kinds,  incurred  the
great  envy  of  the  Romans  although  he  had  labored  much

1 At  the  headwaters  of  the  Drave  in  Tyrol  (Waitz).

* In  ch.  2 and  3 supra.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

59

for  them  against  their  enemies,  and  they  made  insinua-
tions against  him  to  the  emperor  Justin1  and  his  wife
Sophia,  in  these  words,  saying,  “It  would  be  advantageous
for  the  Romans  to  serve  the  Goths  rather  than  the  Greeks
wherever  the  eunuch  Narses  rules  and  oppresses  us
with  bondage,  and  of  these  things  our  most  devout
emperor  is  ignorant : Either  free  us  from  his  hand  or
surely  we  will  betray  the  city  of  Rome  and  ourselves  to
the  heathens.”  2 * When  Narses  heard  this  he  answered
briefly  these  words : “ If  I have  acted  badly  with  the
Romans  it  will  go  hard  with  me.”  Then  the  emperor
was  so  greatly  moved  with  anger  against  Narses  that  he
straightway  sent  the  prefect  Longinus  into  Italy  to  take
Narses*  place.  But  Narses,  when  he  knew  these  things,
feared  greatly,  and  so  much  was  he  alarmed,  especially
by  the  same  empress  Sophia,  that  he  did  not  dare  to
return  again  to  Constantinople.  Among  other  things,
because  he  was  a eunuch,  she  is  said  to  have  sent  him
this  message,  that  she  would  make  him  portion  out  to
the  girls  in  the  women’s  chamber  the  daily  tasks  of
wool.3  To  these  words  Narses  is  said  to  have  given
this  answer,  that  he  would  begin  to  weave  her  such  a
web  as  she  could  not  lay  down  as  long  as  she  lived.4

1 Read  Justino  for  Justiniano.  It  was  Justin  II  who  was  the
husband  of  Sophia  and  to  whom  this  complaint  was  made.

* The  Arian  Goths  were  so  considered.

* In  Fredegarius  (Epitome,  iii,  65)  it  is  said  that  the  empress  sent
him  a golden  instrument  used  by  women  with  which  he  might
spin  and  told  him  that  henceforth  he  might  rule  over  wool-workers,
not  over  nations.

4 Or,  as  Fredegarius  has  it  (id.):  “,1  will  spin  a thread  of  which

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

6o

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Therefore,  greatly  racked  by  hate  and  fear,  he  withdrew
to  Neapolis  (Naples),  a city  of  Campania,  and  soon
sent  messengers  to  the  nation  of  the  Langobards,  urging
them  to  abandon  the  barren  fields  of  Pannonia  and  come
and  take  possession  of  Italy,  teeming  with  every  sort  of
riches.  At  the  same  time  he  sends  many  kinds  of  fruits
and  samples  of  other  things  with  which  Italy  is  well  sup-
plied, whereby  to  attract  their  minds  to  come.*  The

neither  the  emperor  Justin  nor  the  empress  shall  be  able  to  find
the  end”  (Hodgkin,  V,  62).

1 The  charge  that  Narses  in  revenge  for  his  recall  (A.  D.  566  or
567)  invited  the  Langobards  into  Italy  is  subject  to  grave  doubt.
Paul’s  statement  that  he  sent  them  the  fruits  and  products  of  that
country  contains  an  obvious  improbability,  since  their  troops  had
served  in  Italy  fifteen  years  before  and  they  needed  no  informa-
tion on  that  subject  (Hodgkin,  V,  62).  Paul  followed  the  pop-
ular tradition,  and  tracing  this  back,  we  find  that  the  account
occurs  in  the  so-called  Fredegarius  (A.  D.  642  to  658),  but  with-
out the  statement  concerning  the  fruits  and  other  products  of  Italy.
Bishop  Isidore  of  Seville,  whose  chronicle  came  down  to  61 5,  tells
us  that  Narses,  terrified  by  the  threats  of  Sophia,  invited  the
Langobards  from  Pannonia  and  introduced  them  into  Italy.  The
Copenhagen  continued  of  Prosper  (about  625)  copies  from  Isidore.
The  Liber  Pontificalis  (Life  of  John  III,  A.  D.  579-590)  says
that  Narses  went  to  Campania  and  wrote  to  the  Langobards  to
come  and  take  possession  of  Italy  (Hodgkin,  V,  60,  61).  This
book  was  nearly  contemporary  and  shows  a popular  belief  that
Narses  was  disloyal  to  the  empire.  Neither  of  the  two  best  con-
temporary authors,  Marius  of  Avenches  or  Gregory  of  Tours,  who
died  about  594,  speak  of  Narses’  invitation  to  the  Langobards,
though  the  former  mentions  his  recall  and  both  speak  of  the  in-
vasion of  Alboin.  The  Annals  of  Ravenna  are  equally  silent.
While  Narses’  recall  was  probably  due  to  the  empress  and  fur-
nished the  Langobards  with  their  opportunity,  the  statement  that

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

61

Langobards  receive  joyfully  the  glad  tidings  which  they
themselves  had  also  been  desiring,  and  they  form  high
expectations  of  future  advantages.  In  Italy  terrible
signs  were  continually  seen  at  night,  that  is,  fiely  swords
appeared  in  heaven  gleaming  with  that  blood  which  was
afterwards  shed.

Chapter  VI.

But  Alboin,  being  about  to  set  out  for  Italy  with  the
Langobards,  asked  aid  from  his  old  friends,  the  Saxons,
that  he  might  enter  and  take  possession  of  so  spa-
cious a land  with  a larger  number  of  followers.  The
Saxons  came  to  him,  more  than  20,000  men,  together
with  their  wives  and  children,  to  proceed  with  him  to
Italy  according  to  his  desire.  Hearing  these  things,
Chlothar  and  Sigisbert,  kings  of  the  Franks,  put  the
Suavi  and  other  nations  into  the  places  from  which
these  Saxons  had  come.1

he  invited  them  is  hardly  sustained  by  sufficient  evidence  to
establish  the  treason  of  that  eminent  commander,  though  it  shows
that  after  the  invasion  his  agency  was  suspected  (Hodgkin,  V,
64,  65).  Certain  it  is  that  when  his  body  was  brought  to  Con-
stantinople, the  emperor  whom  he  is  said  to  have  betrayed,  carried
his  bier  and  paid  the  last  honors  to  his  memory  (Hartmann  II,

i»  24).

1 Hodgkin  believes  (V,  1 56  note)  that  the  fact  that  the  Suavi,
whom  he  considers  the  same  as  the  Alamanni,  occupied  the  homes
of  these  Saxons,  indicates  that  they  were  located  in  southern
Germany.

Digitized  by

Google

62

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  VII.

Then  Alboin  bestowed  his  own  abode,  that  is,  Pan-
nonia, upon  his  friends  the  Huns1  on  this  condition:
that  if  at  any  time  it  should  be  necessary  for  the
Langobards  to  return 9 they  should  take  back  their  own
fields.  Then  ‘ the  Langobards,  having  left  Pannonia,
hastened  to  take  possession  of  Italy  with  their  wives  and
children  and  all  their  goods.  They  dwelt  in  Pannonia
forty-two  years.*  They  came  out  of  it  in  the  month  of
April  in  the  first  indiction  4 on  the  day  after  holy  Easter,

1 That  is  the  Avars  (Waitz).  See  supra  1,27.

* ‘ 4 At  any  time  within  two  hundred  years,  ’ ’ adds  the  Chronicon
Gothanum  (M.  G.  Leges  IV,  644),  and  it  was  also  provided  in
the  agreement  that  the  Avars  should  aid  the  Langobards  in  Italy.

* This  period  is  impossible  since  the  Langobards  entered  Pan-
nonia not  far  from  546,  and  left  it  in  568.  Probably  22  should  be
substituted  for  42  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  30).

4 The  word  4 ‘ indiction  ’ * originally  meant  the  declaration  of  the
imposition  of  a tax.  When  Constantine  the  Great  reorganized  the
Roman  Empire  he  established  a fiscal  period  of  fifteen  years  for
this  imposition,  beginning  A.  D.  313.  Hence  the  word  in  chro-
nology means  the  number  attached  to  the  year  showing  its  place
in  a cycle  of  fifteen  years,  beginning  A.  D.  313.  There  were
three  kinds  of  indiction.  The  original  Greek  or  Constantinopolitan
indiction  (here  referred  to)  is  reckoned  from  September  1st  of
what  we  consider  the  previous  year.  To  find  the  indiction,  add
three  to  the  number  of  the  year  in  the  vulgar  era  and  divide  it  by
15,  the  remainder  is  the  indiction.  If  nothing  is  left  over,  it  is  the
15th  indiction.  The  year  when  Alboin  left  Pannonia  was  A.  D.
568.  Adding  3 and  dividing  by  1 5 we  have  1 remaining,  and  as
the  indiction  began  in  September,  567,  April  of  the  year  568  was
in  the  1st  indiction,  and  the  2d  indiction  began  in  September  of
that  year.

It  will  be  observed  that  this  date  is  given  by  Paul  for  Alboin* s

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.  63

whose  festival  that  year,  according  to  the  method  of

departure  from  Pannonia,  not  for  his  actual  entrance  into  Italy.
Paul  apparently  takes  this  from  the  Origo  (see  Appendix  II):
“ And  Alboin,  king  of  the  Langobards,  moved  out  of  Pannonia  in
the  month  of  April  after  Easter,  in  the  first  indiction.  In  the  sec-
ond indiction  indeed  (September,  568,  to  September,  569),  they
began  to  plunder  in  Italy,  but  in  the  third  indiction  he  became
master  of  Italy.”  A question  has  arisen  whether  the  actual  inva-
sion of  Italy  occurred  in  568  or  569.  The  edict  of  Rothari,  of
Nov.,  643,  states  that  it  was  published  (M.  G.,  LL.,  IV,  p.  1)  in
the  76th  year  after  the  arrival  of  the  Langobards  in  the  province
of  Italy.  This  indicates  that  the  invasion  must  have  occurred
before  Nov.,  568.  But  a fragment  of  Secundus  of  June,  580,
speaks  of  the  Langobards  as  * * remaining  in  Italy  1 2 years  since
they  entered  it  in  the  month  of  May  in  the  second  indiction.”  In
these  12  years,  according  to  a common  method  of  computation
at  that  time,  the  1 2th  year  may  not  have  been  completed  and
Secundus’  date  for  the  invasion  is  clearly  May,  569  (see  M.  G.,
Script.  Rerum  Lang,  et  Ital.,  p.  25,  n.  3 a).  Marius  of  Avenches
says  that  in  569  Alboin  “ occupied  ” Italy,  which  Muratori  thinks
(Annuls,  A.  D.  568)  must  have  been  a mistake  in  the  copyist.
The  Annals  of  Ravenna  (Agnello,  a.  c.  94)  says  that  in  the  2d  in-
diction (Sept.  1,  568,  to  Sept.  1,  569)  Venetia  was  invaded  and
occupied  by  the  Langobards.  Pope  Gregory  I wrote  June,  595
(Indie.  13,  lib.  V,  21)  that  the  Romans  had  been  threatened  by
the  Langobards  for  27  years,  and  in  July,  603  (Indie.  6,  lib.  XIII,
38),  for  35  years,  but  in  computing  this  time  the  final  year  is  not
complete,  so  that  the  probable  date  of  the  invasion  would  be  569
(see  Roviglio,  infra,  p.  12).  Cipolla  (Atti  del  R.  Istituto  Veneto,
x,  1889-90,  series  7,  t.  1,  pp.  686-688)  and  Roviglio  (Sopra  Al-
cuni  Dati  Cronologici,  Reggio-Emilia,  1899  contend  for  569;
Crivellucci  (Studii  Storici,  I,  478-497)  and  Hodgkin  (V,  1 58)  for
568.  The  authorities  are  very  equally  divided.  Secundus,  a
contemporary  and  considered  reliable,  would  perhaps  be  entitled
to  the  greatest  weight,  were  it  not  that  the  official  statement  in  the
Edict  supports  the  year  given  by  Paul.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

64

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

calculation,  fell  upon  the  calends  (the  first)  of  April,
when  five  hundred  and  sixty-eight  years  had  already
elapsed  from  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord.

Chapter  VIII.

Therefore,  when  king  Alboin  with  his  whole  army
and  a multitude  of  people  of  all  kinds  1 had  come  to  the
limits  of  Italy,  he  ascended  a mountain  which  stands
forth  in  those  places,  and  from  there  as  far  as  he  could
see,  he  gazed  upon  a portion  of  Italy.  Therefore  this
mountain  it  is  said,  was  called  from  that  time  on  “ King’s
Mountain.” 8 They  say  wild  oxen  graze  upon  it,  and  no
wonder,  since  at  this  point  it  touches  Pannonia,  which
is  productive  of  these  animals.  In  fine,  a certain  very
truthful  old  man  related  to  me  that  he  had  seen  the  hide
of  a wild  ox  killed  on  this  mountain  of  such  size  that  in
it  fifteen  men,  as  he  said,  could  lie  one  against  the  other.

Chapter  IX.

When  Alboin  without  any  hindrance  had  thence

1 Including  no  doubt  inhabitants  of  Noricum  and  Pannonia,
Slavs  from  the  East,  a strong  contingent  of  Saxons,  and  many
others  belonging  to  different  German  races  (Hartmann,  II,  i,  p.
19).

1 Rudolf  Virchow  said  at  the  meeting  of  the  German  Anthropo-
logical Society,  Sept.  5,  1899  (see  Correspondenz-blatt  of  that
Society  for  1898-99,  p.  180)  that  he  had  taken  a special  journey
to  follow  the  course  of  the  Langobards  into  Italy  and  was  con-
vinced that  their  irruption  was  by  the  road  over  the  Predil  pass,
thence  into  the  valley  of  the  Isonzo,  and  that  Monte  Maggiore
(north  of  Cividale)  is  the  * ' King’ s Mountain  ’ ' of  Paul.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

65

entered  the  territories  of  Venetia^  (which  is  the  first  /
province  of  Italy — -that  is,  the  limits  of  the  city  or  rather
of  the  fortress  of  Forum  Julii  (Cividale)1 * — he  began
to  consider  to  whom  he  should  especially  commit
the  first  of  the  provinces  that  he  had  taken.  For
indeed  all  Italy  (which  extends  toward  the  south,  or
rather  toward  the  southeast),  is  encompassed  by  the
waves  of  the  Tyrrhenian  and  Adriatic  seas,  yet  from
the  west  and  north  it  is  so  shut  in  by  the  range  of  Alps
that  there  is  no  entrance  to  it  except  through  narrow
passes  and  over  the  lofty  summits  of  the  mountains.
Yet  from  the  eastern  side  by  which  it  is  joined  to  Pan-
nonia  it  has  an  approach  which  lies  open  more  broadly
and  is  quite  level.  When  Albion  therefore,  as  we  have
said,  reflected  whom  he  ought  to  make  duke 3 in  these
places,  he  determined,  as  is  related,  to  put  over  the  city
of  Forum  Julii  and  over  its  whole  district,3  his  nephew

1 See,  however,  Waitz,  who  thinks  Colonia  Julia  Camia,  north
of  Osopus,  is  referred  to.

* As  to  the  meaning  of  the  word  ‘ ‘ duke  ’ ’ at  this  time  see  note
to  II,  32,  infra .

The  district  or  duchy  of  Friuli  which  Gisulf  was  to  rule  can-
not be  definitely  bounded.  It  reached  northward  probably  to
the  Camic  Alps,  eastward  to  the  Julian  Alps,  and  southward  to  a
line  not  far  from  the  coast  which  was  subject  to  the  sea  power  of
the  Eastern  Empire.  Concordia  was  not  won  from  the  empire
until  about  615,  and  Opitergium  in  642.  To  the  west,  Friuli  was
bounded  by  other  Langobard  territory,  especially  by  the  duchy  of
Ceneda  from  which  it  was  separated  by  the  Tagliamento  or
Livenza  (Hodg.,  VI,  43,  44).  The  Bavarians  dwelt  northwest  of
the  duchy,  the  Slavonians  northeast,  and  behind  them  the  Asiatic
Avars  (Hodgkin,  VI,  44).  Cividale  was  made  the  capital  instead

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

66

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Gisulf,1  who  was  his  master  of  horse — whom  they  call
in  their  own  language  “marpahis  ” a — a man  suitable  in
every  way.  This  Gisulf  announced  that  he  would  not
first  undertake  the  government  of  this  city  and  people
unless  Alboin  would  give  him  the  “ faras,”  that  is,  the
families  or  stocks  of  the  Langobards  that  he  himself
wished  to  choose.  And  this  was  done,  and  with  the
approval  of  the  king  he  took  to  dwell  with  him  the  chief
families  of  the  Langobards  he  had  desired.3  And  thus
finally,  he  acquired  the  honor  of  a leader.4  He  asked
also  from  the  king  for  herds  of  high-bred  mares,  and  in
this  also  he  was  heeded  by  the  liberality  of  his  chief.

Chapter  X.

In  these  days  in  which  the  Langobards  invaded  Italy,
the  kingdom  of  the  Franks,  divided  into  four  parts  upon
the  death  of  their  king  Chlotar,  was  ruled  by  his  four
sons.  The  first  among  these,  Aripert  (Charibert)  had

of  Aquileia  which  had  been  the  chief  city  (Hodgkin,  VI,  39).
Friuli  is  the  first  mentioned  of  the  four  great  dukedoms  conspicu-
ous by  their  size  and  power  over  all  others  during  the  period  of  the
Langobards:  Friuli,  Trent,  Spoleto,  and  Benevento.  The  two
last  were  largely  independent  of  the  Langobard  kingdom.  Trent
and  Friuli  never  succeeded  in  achieving  their  independence  al-
though this  was  several  times  attempted  (Hodg.,  VI,  23).

1 Bethmann  believes  that  it  was  Grasulf,  GisulFs  lather  (Waitz).

* From  mar , mare  a horse  and  paizan  to  put  on  the  bit,  accord-
ing to  Grimm  (Abel,  Hodgkin,  VI,  42;  V,  161).

* Indeed  it  was  by  faras  or  clans  that  Italy  in  general  was  first
occupied  by  the  Langobards  (Hartmann  II,  1,  21).

4 Read  ductor  instead  of  doctor ;

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

6/

the  seat  of  his  kingdom  at  Paris ; 1 * the  second  indeed,
Gunthram  held  sway  at  the  city  of  Aureliani  (Orleans)  ;
the  third,  Hilperic  (Chilperic)  had  his  throne  at  Ses-
sionae  (Soissons),  in  the  place  of  Chlotar,  his  father;
the  fourth,  Sigisbert,  ruled  at  the  city  of  Mettis
(Metz).*  At  this  time,  too,  the  most  holy  Benedict  as
pope  governed  the  Roman  Church.3  Also  the  blessed
patriarch  Paul  presided  over  the  city  of  Aquileia  and
its  people  and,  fearing  the  barbarity  of  the  Langobards,
fled  from  Aquileia  to  the  island  of  Grado;4  and  he  car-
ried away  with  him  all  the  treasure  of  his  church.5 6  In
this  year  in  the  early  winter  as  much  snow  fell  in  the
plain  as  is  wont  to  fall  upon  the  summits  of  the  Alps,  and
in  the  following  summer  there  was  such  great  fertility  as
no  other  age  claims  to  remember.  At  this  time  too
when  they  had  learned  of  the  death  of  king  Chlotar,
the  Huns,  who  are  also  called  Avars,  attacked  his  son
Sigisbert  and  the  latter,  coming  up  to  meet  them  in
Turingia,  overcame  them  with  great  force  near  the  river

1 Charibert  in  fact  had  died  in  567,  just  before  the  Langobards
invaded  Italy  (Hodgkin,  V,  199).

* See  infra , III,  10,  note.  The  name  is  there  spelled  Sigispert.

# This  is  erroneous.  It  was  John  III  who  was  pope  from  560  to
573  (Jacobi,  48).  Benedict  was  pope  573-578.  Paul  was  led
into  tliis  error  by  a .statement  in  the  Liber  Pontificalis  from  which
he  took  che  account,  that  at  the  time  of  Benedict,  the  Langobards
invaded  all  Italy  (Ed  L.  Duchesne,  I,  308;  Atti  del  Congresso  in
Cividale,  1899,  p.  118,  note.)

4 An  island  near  Aquileia  and  close  to  the  mainland  but  inac-

cessible to  the  Langobards  who  had  no  boats.

6 It  was  Paulinus,  not  Paul  who  thus  fled  to  Grado  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

68

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Albis  (Elbe)  and  gave  peace  to  them  when  they  sought
it  Brunicheldis,1 *  coming  from  Spain,  is  joined  in  mar-
riage to  this  Sigisbert,  and  from  her  he  had  a son  by
name  Childepert.  The  Avars,  fighting  again  with  Sigis-
bert in  the  same  places  as  before,  crushed  the  army
of  the  Franks  and  obtained  the  victory.

Chapter  XI.

Narses  indeed  returned  from  Campania  to  Rome  and
there  not  long  afterwards,  departed  from  this  life,*  and
his  body,  placed  in  a leaden  casket,  was  carried  with  all
his  riches  to  Constantinople.

Chapter  XII.

When  Alboin  then  came  to  the  river  Plavis  (Piave),
Felix  the  bishop  of  the  church  of  Tarvisium  (Treviso)
came  forth  there  to  meet  him,  and  the  king,  since  he
was  very  generous,3  granted  to  him  at  his  request  all  the
property  of  his  church  and  confirmed  the  things  asked
for  by  a solemn  document.4

Chapter  XIII.

Because  indeed,  we  have  made  mention  of  this  Felix,
we  may  also  relate  a few  things  concerning  the  vener-

1 Or  Brunichildis,  Bninihilde,  as  Paul  variously  spells  it.

•About  573  or  perhaps  a year  or  two  earlier  (Hodg.,  V,  65).

• His  generosity  is  also  extolled  in  the  song  of  Widsith  (Hodg-
kin, V,  176).

4 This  has  been  questioned  since  the  Langobards  were  then
ignorant  of  writing,  but  it  is  not  impossible  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

69

able  and  very  wise  man  Fortunatus,  who  had  declared
that  this  Felix  was  his  colleague.  In  short,  this  Fortu-
natus of  whom  we  speak  was  born  in  a place  which  is
called  Duplabilis,  which  place  lies  not  far  from  the
fortress  of  Ceneta  (Ceneda)  and  the  city  of  Tarvisium
(Treviso).  He  was,  however,  brought  up  and  instructed
at  Ravenna  and  became  very  distinguished  in  the  gram-
matical, the  rhetorical  and  also  the  metrical  art.  And
since  he  suffered  a very  grievous  disease  of  the  eyes,
and  this  Felix  also,  his  colleague,  in  like  manner  suf-
fered in  his  eyes,  they  both  proceeded  to  the  church  of
the  blessed  Paul  and  John,  which  is  situated  within  that
city,  and  in  which  an  altar,  built  in  honor  of  St.  Martin
the  Confessor,  has  a window  near  by  in  which  a lamp
was  set  to  give  light.  With  the  oil  of  this,  these  men,
that  is,  Fortunatus  and  Felix,  presently  touched  their
suffering  eyes.  Instantly  the  disease  was  driven  away,
and  they  obtained  the  health  they  longed  for.  For  this
reason  Fortunatus  adored  the  blessed  Martin  so  much
that  he  abandoned  his  country  a little  before  the  Lango-
bards  invaded  Italy,  and  set  out  for  the  sepulchre  of
that  blessed  man  at  Turones  (Tours),  and  he  relates  that
his  way  of  proceeding  thither,  as  he  tells  it  himself  in
his  songs,  was  by  the  streams  of  Tiliamentum  (Taglia-
mento)  and  Reuna  (Ragogna),  and  by  Osupus
(Osopo)  and  the  Julian  Alps,1  and  by  the  fortress  of
Aguntum  (Innichen)  and  the  rivers  Drave  and  Byrrus
(Rienz),  and  by  Briones  (the  Brenner),  and  the  city  of

1 This  part  of  the  range  is  to-day  called  the  Camic  Alps  (Studii
Storici,  1899,  p.  405).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

70

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Augusta  (Augsburg),  which  the  Virdo  (Wertach)  and
Leclia  (Lech)  water.  And  after  he  had  come  to  Tur-
ones  (Tours),  according  to  his  own  vow,  passing  on
through  Pictavi  (Poitiers),  he  dwelt  there  and  wrote  at
that  place  of  the  doings  of  many  saints,  part  in  prose
and  part  in  metrical  fashion,  and  lastly  in  the  same  city
he  was  ordained,  first  as  a presbyter  and  then  as  a
bishop,  and  in  the  same  place  he  reposes  buried  with
befitting  honor.  Here  he  wrote  the  life  of  St.  Martin
in  four  books  in  heroic  meter,  and  he  composed  many
other  things,  most  of  all  hymns  for  particular  festivals
and  especially  little  verses  to  particular  friends,  being
second  to  none  of  the  poets  in  soft  and  fluent  speech.
At  his  grave,  when  I came  thither  for  the  purpose  of
prayer,1  upon  the  request  of  Aper  the  abbot  of  that
place  I composed  this  epitaph  to  be  inscribed  there :

Here  in  this  soil  Fortunatus  lies  buried,  the  first  among  prophets.
Bom  in  Ausonian  land,  worthy  of  honor  in  deed,

Famous  in  talent,  quick  to  perceive  and  in  speech  ever  gentle.

Many  an  eloquent  page  sings  his  melodious  lay.

Fresh  from  his  holy  lips,  to  show  us  the  way  to  salvation,

Deeds  of  the  saints  we  learn — fathers  of  primitive  times.

Happy  art  thou,  O land  of  Gaul,  with  such  jewels  emblazoned,
Whose  resplendent  fire  scatters  the  shadows  of  night !

Verses  of  commonplace  song,  in  thy  honor,  O saint,  have  I written,
Lest  thy  fame  lie  hid,  lost  in  the  depths  of  the  crowd.

Render  I pray  a return,  and  ask  through  thy  infinite  merits
That  the  Eternal  Judge  mercy  show  also  to  me.

In  a few  words  we  have  touched  upon  these  things

1 Between  the  years  782-786  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

BOOK  II.

71

concerning  so  great  a man,  that  his  fellow  citizens  might
not  be  wholly  ignorant  of  his  life ; now  let  us  return
to  the  thread  of  our  history.

Chapter  XIV.

Then  Alboin  took  Vincentia  (Vicenza)  and  Verona
and  the  remaining  cities  of  Venetia,  except  Patavium
(Padua),  Mons  Silicis  (Monselice)  and  Mantua.*  For
Venetia  is  composed  not  only  of  the  few  islands  which
we  now  call  Venice,  but  its  boundary  stretches  from  the
borders  of  Pannonia  to  the  river  Addua  (Adda).  This
is  proved  in  the  books  of  annals  in  which  Pergamus
(Bergamo)  is  said  to  be  a city  of  Venetia  and  in  his-
tories we  thus  read  of  lake  Benacus  (Lago  di  Garda)  :
“ Benacus,  a lake  of  Venetia  from  which  the  river  Mincius
(Mincio)  flows.”  The  Eneti,  indeed  (though  a letter
is  added  among  the  Latins),  are  called  in  Greek  the
“ praiseworthy.”  Histria  is  also  joined  to  Venetia  and
both  are  considered  one  province.  Histria  is  named  from
the  river  Hister  which,  according  to  Roman  history,  is
said  to  have  been  broader  than  it  is  now.  The  city  of
Aquileia  was  the  capital  of  this  Venetia,  in  place  of  which
is  now  Forum  Julii  (Cividale),  so  called  because  Julius
Caesar  had  established  there  a market  for  business.

Chapter  XV.

I do  not  think  we  are  wandering  from  the  subject  if

1 Paul  is  probably  in  error  in  saying  that  Mantua  was  not  taken
by  Alboin.  It  was  indeed  later  taken  by  Agilulf,  but  this  was
after  it  had  been  recaptured  by  the  Greeks  during  the  reign  of
Authari  (Pabst,  p.  409,  note).

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

72

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

we  also  touch  briefly  upon  other  provinces  of  Italy.*

1 The  second  province  is  called  Liguria  from  gathering,
that  is,  collecting  leguminous  plants  with  which  it  is  well
supplied.  In  this  are  Mediolanum  (Milan)  andTicinum,
which  is  called  by  another  name,  Papia  (Pavia).  It  ex-
tends to  the  boundaries  of  the  Gauls.  Between  it  and
Suavia  (Suabia),  that  is,  the  country  of  the  Alamanni,
which  is  situated  toward  the  north,  two  provinces,
namely,  the  first  Retia  (Rhaetia)  and  the  second  Retia
are  placed  among  the  Alps  in  which,  strictly  speaking,
the  Reti  (Rhaetians)  are  known  to  dwell.

Chapter  XVI.

The  Cottian  Alps  are  called  the  fifth  province,  which
were  thus  named  from  king  Cottius,  who  lived  at  the
time  of  Nero.  This  (province)  extends  from  Liguria
toward  the  southeast9  to  the  Tyrrhenian  sea;  on  the
west  indeed  it  is  joined  to  the  territories  of  the  Gauls.
In  it  are  contained  the  cities  of  Aquis3  (Acqui)  where
there  are  hot  springs,  Dertona  (Tortona),  the  monas-
tery of  Bobium  (Bobbio),  Genua  (Genoa),  and  Saona
(Savona).  The  sixth  province  is  Tuscia  (Tuscany)
which  is  thus  called  from  “ tus  ” (frankincense)  which
its  people  were  wont  to  burn  superstitiously  in  the  sacri-
fices to  their  gods.  This  includes  Aurelia  toward  the
northwest  and  Umbria  on  the  eastern  side.  In  this
province  Rome  was  situated,  which  was  formerly  the

XA  full  account  of  these  provinces  is  found  near  the  end  of
Appendix  II.

* Read  eurum  in  place  of  eorum .

8 Or  Aquae  Statiellae.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

73

capital  of  the  whole  world.  In  Umbria  indeed,  which
is  counted  a portion  of  it,  are  Perusium  (Perugia)  and
lake  Clitorius  (Lago  di  Bolsena)  and  Spoletium
(Spoleto),  and  it  is  called  Umbria  because  it  remained
above  the  furious  rains  (imbres)  when  long  ago  a
watery  scourge  devastated  the  nations.

Chapter  XVII.

Campania,  the  seventh  province,  stretches  from  the
city  of  Rome  to  the  Siler  (Sele),  a river  of  Lucania.
In  it  the  very  rich  cities  of  Capua,  Neapolis  (Naples)
and  Salernus  (Salerno)  are  situated.  It  is  called  Cam-
pania on  account  of  the  very  fertile  plain  (campus)  of
Capua,  but  it  is  for  the  most  part  mountainous.  Next
the  eighth  province,  Lucania,  which  received  its  name
from  a certain  grove  (lucus),  begins  at  the  river  Siler
and  extends  with  Brittia  (Bruttium1),  which  was  thus
called  from  the  name  of  its  former  queen,  along  the
coast  of  the  Tyrrhenian  sea  like  the  two  last  named
provinces,  as  far  as  the  Sicilian  strait,  and  it  embraces
the  right  horn  of  Italy.  In  it  are  placed  the  cities  of
Pestus  (Paestum),  Lainus  (Lao),  Cassianum  (Cassano),
Consentia  (Cosenza),  and  Regium  (Reggio).

Chapter  XVIII.

Then  the  ninth  province  is  reckoned  in  the  Apen-
nine  Alps a which  take  their  origin  from  the  place  where

1 Now  Calabria.

* This  province  described  by  Paul  is  wholly  imaginary.  The
others  are  substantially  accurate.  See  Appendix  II  near  the  end.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

74

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

the  Cottian  Alps  terminate.  These  Apennine  Alps,
stretching  through  the  ^middle  of  Italy,  separate  Tuscia
(Tuscany)  from  Emilia  and  Umbria  from  Flamminia.
Here  are  the  cities  of  Ferronianus  (Frignano)  and
Montembellium  (Monteveglio),  Bobium  (Bobbio)  and
Urbinum  (Urbino),  and  also  the  town  which  is  called
Verona.*  The  Apennine  Alps  were  named  from  the
Carthaginians  (Poeni) — that  is,  from  Hannibal  and  his
army  who  had  a passage  through  them  when  marching
upon  Rome.1 * 3  There  are  some  who  say  that  the  Cottian
and  Apennine  Alps  are  one  province,  but  the  history
of  Victor3  which  called  the  Cottian  Alps  a province  by
itself  refutes  them.  The  tenth  province  Emilia,  begin-
ning from  Liguria  extends  towards  Ravenna  between  the
Apennine  Alps  and  the  waters  of  the  Padus  (Po).  It
is  adorned  with  wealthy  cities,  to  wit,  Placentia  (Pia-
cenza), Parma,  Regium  (Reggio),4  Bononia  (Bologna),
and  the  Forum  of  Cornelius,  the  fortress  of  which  is
called  Imolas  (Imola).  There  were  also  some  who
called  Emilia  and  Valeria  and  Nursia  one  province,  but
the  opinion  of  these  cannot  stand  because  Tuscia  and
Umbria  are  situated  between  Emilia  and  Valeria  and
Nursia.

1 Paul  elsewhere  shows  that  Frignano  and  Monteveglio  were
actually  in  Emilia,  Bobbio  in  the  Cottian  Alps  and  Verona  in
Venetia  (Mommsen,  87).

* It  will  be  observed  that  most  of  Paul’s  derivations,  though
taken  from  earlier  authorities,  are  highly  fanciful.

8 Life  of  Nero  by  Sextus  Aurelius  Victor.

4 This  was  the  ancient  Regium  Lepidi  now  Reggio  d*  Emilia,  to
/ distinguish  it  from  Reggio  in  Calabria.

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  II.

75

Chapter  XIX.

The  eleventh  of  the  provinces  is  Flamminia,  which
lies  between  the  Apennine  Alps  and  the  Adriatic
sea.  In  it  are  situated  Ravenna,  the  most  noble  of
cities,  and  five  other  towns  which  are  called  by  a Greek
name,  the  Pentapolis.1 2  Now  it  is  agreed  that  Aurelia,
Emilia  and  Flamminia  are  called  by  these  names  from
the  paved  roads  which  come  from  the  city  of  Rome  and
from  the  names  of  those  by  whom  they  were  paved.
After  Flamminia  comes  the  twelfth  province,  Picenus,
having  upon  the  south  the  Apennine  mountains  and  on
the  other  side  the  Adriatic  sea.  It  extends  to  the  river
Piscaria.*  In  it  are  the  cities  of  Firmus  (Fermo),  As-
culus  (Ascoli),  Pinnis  (Penne),  and  Hadria,  already
fallen  to  ruin  with  old  age,  which  has  given  its  name  to
the  Adriatic  sea.  When  the  inhabitants  of  this  district
hastened  thither  from  the  Sabines,  a griffin  (picus)  sat
upon  their  banner  and  from  this  cause  it  took  the  name
Picenus.

Chapter  XX.

Valeria,  the  thirteenth  province,  to  which  Nursia  is
attached,  is  situated  between  Umbria  and  Campania  and
Picenus,  and  it  touches  on  the  east  the  region  of  the
Samnites.  Its  western  part,  which  takes  its  beginning
from  the  city  of  Rome,  was  formerly  called  Etruria
from  the  Etruscan  people.  It  contains  the  cities  of

1The  five  cities  are  Rimini,  Ancona,  Fano,  Pesaro  and  Sini-
gaglia.

2 Mommsen  (92)  considers  that  this  boundary  is  incorrect.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

76

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Tibur  (Tivoli),  Carsioli  and  Reate  (Rieti),  Furcona
(Aquila),  Amitemum  (San  Vettorino)  and  the  region
of  the  Marsians  and  their  lake  which  is  called  Fucinus
(Celano).  I think  that  the  territory  of  the  Marsians
should  be  reckoned  within  the  province  of  Valeria,
because  it  is  not  at  all  described  by  the  ancients  in  the
catalogue  of  the  provinces  of  Italy,  but  if  any  one
may  prove  by  correct  reasoning  that  this  is  a pro-
vince by  itself,  his  sensible  opinion  by  all  means  should
be  accepted.  The  fourteenth  province,  Samnium,  be-
ginning from  the  Piscaria,  lies  between  Campania,  the
Adriatic  Sea  and  Apulia.  In  it  are  the  cities  of  Theate
(Chieti),  Aufidena,  Hisernia  and  Samnium,  fallen  to
ruin  by  old  age,  from  which  the  whole  province  is
named,  and  that  most  wealthy  Beneventum  (Benevento)
the  capital  of  these  provinces.  Furthermore,  the  Sam-
nites  received  their  name  formerly  from  the  spears
which  they  were  wont  to  carry  and  which  the  Greeks
called  “ saynia.” x

Chapter  XXI.

The  fifteenth  of  the  provinces  is  Apulia,  and  united
with  it  is  Calabria.1 2  In  it  is  the  Salentine  territory.
This  has  Samnium  and  Lucania  on  the  west  and  south-
west, but  on  the  east  it  is  bounded  by  the  Adriatic  Sea.
It  contains  the  tolerably  rich  cities  of  Luceria  (Lucera),
Sepontum  (Siponto),  Canusium  (Canosa),  Agerentia

1 lawuz,  more  properly  a javelin.

* Not  the  present  Calabria  but  the  southeastern  extremity  of  the
Adriatic  shore  of  Italy.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

77

(Acerenza?),  Brundisium  (Brindisi),  Tarentum  (Tar-
anto) and  in  the  left  horn  of  Italy  which  extends  fifty
miles,  Ydrontum  (Otranto),  well  adapted  to  commerce.1 *
Apulia  is  named  from  “ destruction,” 9 for  more  quickly
there  (than  elsewhere)  does  the  herbage  of  the  land
perish  in  the  heat  of  the  sun.

Chapter  XXII.

The  island  of  Sicily  is  reckoned  the  sixteenth  pro-
vince. This  is  washed  by  the  Tyrrhenian  sea  and  by
the  Ionian,  and  is  so  called  from  the  proper  name  of  the
leader  Siculus.  Corsica  is  put  down  as  the  seventeenth,
Sardinia  as  the  eighteenth  province.  Both  of  these  are
girt  by  the  waves  of  the  Tyrrhenian  sea.  Corsica  is
named  from  the  leader  Corsus;  Sardinia  from  Sardis
(Serdis?)  the  son  of  Hercules.

Chapter  XXIII.

It  is  certain,  moreover,3 *  that  the  old  writers  of  history
called  Liguria  and  part  of  Venetia,  as  well  as  Emilia
and  Flamminia,  Cisalpine  Gaul.  Hence  it  is  that  Don-
atus,  the  grammarian,  in  his  explanation  of  Virgil,  says
that  Mantua  is  in  Gaul.  Hence  it  is  that  we  read  in
Roman  history  that  Ariminum  (Rimini)  is  situated  in
Gaul.  Indeed,  in  the  most  ancient  period,  Brennus,
king  of  the  Gauls,  who  reigned  at  the  city  of  Senonae

1 Mercimoniis . See  DuCange.

* 'knukeui  from  airdXXvfii  to  destroy.

8 Tamen — but  here  used  in  a copulative  and  not  an  adversative

sense.  See  Crivellucci  Studii  Storici,  1899,  p.  259.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

78

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

(Sens),  came  with  300,000  Senonian  Gauls  to  Italy  and
occupied  it  as  far  as  Senogallia  (Sinigaglia),  which  is
named  from  the  Senonian  Gauls.  And  the  reason  why
the  Gauls  came  to  Italy  is  represented  to  have  been  ‘
this:  When  they  tasted  the  wine  brought  from  that
country,  they  were  enticed  by  greed  for  this  wine  and
passed  over  into  Italy.  While  a hundred  thousand  of
these  were  hastening  along  not  far  from  the  island
of  Delphi,  they  were  killed  by  the  swords  of  the  Greeks.
Another  hundred  thousand,  having  entered  Galatia,*
were  first  called  Gallogreci,  but  afterwards  Galatians,
and  these  are  those  to  whom  Paul,  the  teacher  of  the
heathen,  wrote  his  epistle.  Also  a hundred  thousand  of
the  Gauls  who  remained  in  Italy  built  Ticinum  (Pavia),
Mediolanum  (Milan),  Pergamus  (Bergamo)  and  Brixia
(Brescia),  and  gave  to  the  region  the  name  of  Cisalpine
Gaul,  and  they  are  the  Senonian  Gauls  who  formerly  in-
vaded the  city  of  Romulus.  For  as  we  call  what  is
beyond  the  Alps,  Transalpine  Gaul,  so  we  name  what  is
within  the  Alps  on  this  side,  Cisalpine  Gaul.

Chapter  XXIV.

Italy  then,  which  contains  these  provinces  received  its
name  from  Italus,  the  leader  of  the  Siculi,  who  took
possession  of  it  in  ancient  times.  Or  it  is  denominated
Italy  on  this  account,  because  large  oxen,  that  is,  “ itali,”
are  found  in  it;  and  the  name  comes  from  this,. that  by
abbreviation  “vitulus”  (a  calf)  is  “ italus,”  one  letter
being  added  and  another  changed.  Italy  is  also  called

1 In  Asia  Minor,

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

79

Ausonia  from  Ausonus,  son  of  Ulysses.  Originally
indeed,  the  region  of  Beneventum  was  called  by  this
name  but  afterwards  all  Italy  began  to  be  called  so.
Italy  is  also  called  Latium  on  this  account,  because
Saturn  fleeing  from  Jupiter  his  son  found  a hiding  place
(latebra)  within  it.  Since  enough  then  has  been  said
concerning  the  provinces  and  name  of  Italy,  the  events
within  which  we  are  narrating,  let  us  now  return  to  the
regular  order  of  our  history.

Chapter  XXV.

Alboin  then,  carije  into  Liguria  at  the  beginning  of  the
third  indictioir*  "oil  the  third  day  before  the  nonesl *  3 of
September,  and  entered  Mediolanum  during  the  times
of  the  archbishop  Honoratus.  Then  he  took  all  the
cities  of  Liguria  except  those  which  were  situated  upon
the  shores  of  the  sea.  The  archbishop  Honoratus  in-
deed, deserting  Mediolanum,  fled  to  the  city  of  Genoa.
The  patriarch  Paul 3 too,  after  administering  his  priestly
office  for  twelve  years,  departed  from  this  life  and  left
the  church  to  be  managed  by  Probinus.

lA.  D.  569,  see  Bk.  II,  ch.  VII,  note.

* The  nones  was  the  9th  day  before  the  ides,  both  days  being
included,  and  the  ides  fell  upon  the  1 5th  of  March,  May,  July  and
October  and  upon  the  1 3th  of  the  remaining  months.  The  nones
therefore  fell  upon  the  7th  of  March,  May,  July  and  October
and  upon  the  5th  of  other  months.  The  3rd  day  before  the  nones
of  September,  reckoned  backward  from  the  5th  and  including
both  days,  would  therefore  be  the  3rd  of  September,  and  this  is
the  day  given  by  Muratori  in  his  Annals,  Vol.  3,  p.  479.

* Of  Aquileia.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

8o

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXVI.

The  city  of  Ticinum  (Pavia)  at  this  time  held  out
bravely,  withstanding  a siege  more  than  three  years,
while  the  army  of  the  Langobards  remained  close  at
hand  on  the  western  side.  Meanwhile  Alboin,  after
driving  out  the  soldiers,  took  possession  of  every-
thing as  far  as  Tuscany  except  Rome  and  Ravenna  and
some  other  fortified  places  which  were  situated  on  the
shore  of  the  sea.  The  Romans  had  then  no  courage  to
resist  because  the  pestilence  which  occurred  at  the  time
of  Narses  liacf  destroyed  very  many  in  Liguria  and
Venetia,  and  after  the  year  of  plenty  of  which
a great  famine  attacked  and  devastated  all  Italy,
certain  that  Alboin  then  brought  with  him  to  Italy  many
men  from  various  peoples  which  either  other  kings  or
he  himself  had  taken.  Whence,  even  until  to-day,  we
call  the  villages  in  which  they  dwell  Gepidan,  Bulgar-
ian, Sarmatian,  Pannonian,  Suabian,  Norican,  or  by
other  names  of  this  kind.

Chapter  XXVII.

The  city  of  Ticinum  indeed,  after  enduring  the
siege  for  three  years  and  some  months,  at  length  sur-
rendered to  Alboin  and  to  the  Langobards  besieging  it.
When  Alboin  entered  it  through  the  so-called  gate  of
St.  John  from  the  eastern  side  of  the  city,  his  horse  fell
in  the  middle  of  the  gateway,  and  could  not  be  gotten
up,  although  urged  by  kicks  and  afterwards  struck  by
the  blows  of  spears.  Then  one  of  those  Langobards
thus  spoke  to  the  king,  saying:  ‘ Remember  sir  king,
what  vow  you  have  plighted.  Break  so  grievous  a vow

spoke.

It  AS

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

81

and  you  will  enter  the  city,  for  truly  there  is  a Christian
people  in  this  city.”  Alboin  had  vowed  indeed  that  he
would  put  all  the  people  to  the  sword  because  they  had
been  unwilling  to  surrender.  After  he  broke  this  vow
and  promised  mercy  to  the  citizens,  his  horse  straight-
way rose  and  he  entered  the  city  and  remained  stead-
fast in  his  promise,  inflicting  injury  upon  no  one.  Then
all  the  people,  gathering  around  him  in  the  palace  which
king  Theoderic  had  formerly  built,  began  to  feel  re-
lieved in  mind,  and  after  so  many  miseries  were  already
confident  in  hope  for  the  future.

Chapter  XXVIII.

After  this  king  had  ruled  in  Italy  three  years  and  six
months,  he  was  slain  by  the  treachery  of  his  wife,1  and
the  cause  of  his  murder  was  this:  While  he  sat  in
merriment  at  a banquet  at  Verona  longer  than  was
proper,  with  the  cup  which  he  had  made  of  the  head  of
his  father-in-law,  king  Cunimund,  he  ordered  it  to  be
given  to  the  queen  to  drink  wine,  and  he  invited  her  to
drink  merrily  with  her  father.  Lest  this  should  seem
impossible  to  any  one,  I speak  the  truth  in  Christ.  I
saw  king  Ratchis  holding  this  cup  in  his  hand  on  a cer-
tain festal  day  to  show  it  to  his  guests.  Then  Rose-
mund,  when  she  heard  the  thing,  conceived  in  her  heart
deep  anguish  she  could  not  restrain,  and  straightway
she  burned  to  revenge  the  death  of  her  father  by  the

1 Probably  May  25th  or  June  28th,  A.  D.  572,  or  possibly  573
(Hodg.,  V,  168,  1 81;  Roviglio,  Sopra.Alcuni  Dati  Cronologici  di
Storia  Langobardica.  Reggio-Emilia,  1899,  pp.  21  to  27).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

82

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

murder  of  her  husband,  and  presently  she  formed  a plan
with  Helmechis  who  was  the  king’s  squire  (scilpor) —
that  is,  his  armor-bearer — and  his  foster  brother,  to  kill
the  king,  and  he  persuaded  the  queen  that  she  ought  to
admit  to  this  plot  Peredeo,  who  was  a very  strong  man.
As  Peredeo  would  not  give  his  consent  to  the  queen
when  she  advised  so  great  a crime,  she  put  herself  at
night  in  the  bed  of  her  dressing-maid  with  whom
Peredeo  was  accustomed  to  have  intercourse,  and  then
Peredeo,  coming  in  ignorance,  lay  with  the  queen.  And
when  the  wicked  act  was  already  accomplished  and  she
asked  him  whom  he  thought  her  to  be,  and  he  named
the  name  of  his  mistress  that  he  thought  she  was,  the
queen  added : 14  It  is  in  no  way  as  you  think,  but  I am
Rosemund,”  she  says,  “ and  surely  now  you  have  perpe-
trated such  a deed,  Peredeo,  that  either  you  must  kill  Al-
boin  or  he  will  slay  you  with  his  sword.”  Then  he  learned
the  evil  thing  he  had  done,  and  he  who  had  been  un-
willing of  his  own  accord,  assented,  when  forced  in  such
a way,  to  the  murder  of  the  king.  Then  Rosemund,
while  Alboin  had  given  himself  up  to  a noon-day  sleep,
ordered  that  there  should  be  a great  silence  in  the
palace,  and  taking  away  all  other  arms,  she  bound  his
sword  tightly  to  the  head  of  the  bed  so  it  could  not  be
taken  away  or  unsheathed,  and  according  to  the  advice
of  Peredeo,  she,  more  cruel  than  any  beast,  let  in  Hel-
mechis the  murderer.1  Alboin  suddenly  aroused  from

1 This  reading  of  Paul  seems  to  reverse  the  parts,  making  Pere-
deo the  adviser  and  Helmechis  the  actual  murderer,  and  seems  to
indicate  that  Paul  has  misunderstood  his  authorities  or  confused
them.  The  names  are  transposed  in  some  of  the  manuscripts  to

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  II.

83

sleep  perceived  the  evil  which  threatened  and  reached
his  hand  quickly  for  his  sword,  which,  being  tightly
tied,  he  could  not  draw,  yet  he  seized  a foot-stool  and
defended  himself  with  it  for  some  time.  But  unfortun-
ately alas ! this  most  warlike  and  very  brave  man  being
helpless  against  his  enemy,  was  slain  as  if  he  were  one
of  no  account,  and  he  who  was  most  famous  in  war
through  the  overthrow  of  so  many  enemies,  perished
by  the  scheme  of  one  little  woman.  His  body  was
buried  with  the  great  grief  and  lamentations  of  the
Langobards  under  the  steps  of  a certain  flight  of  stairs
which  was  next  to  the  palace.  He  was  tall  in  stature
and  well  fitted  in  his  whole  body  for  waging  wars.  In
our  own  days  Giselpert,  who  had  been  duke  of  Verona,
opened  his  grave  and  took  away  his  sword  and  any
other  of  his  ornaments  found  there.  And  for  this
reason  he  boasted  with  his  accustomed  vanity  among
ignorant  men  that  he  had  seen  Alboin.x

bring  the  sentence  into  harmony  with  what  precedes.  Agnellus
ignores  Peredeo  altogether  and  assigns  the  whole  responsibility  for
the  murder  to  Helmechis,  instigated  by  Rosemund  (Hodgkin,  V,
170).  But  after  deducting  what  is  undoubtedly  legendary  we  have
statements  from  contemporary  sources  essentially  harmonious.
The  Annals  of  Ravenna  (Exc.  Sang.  Agnell.,  ch.  96)  says,  44  Al-
boin  was  killed  by  his  followers  in  his  palace  by  command  of  his
wife  Rosemund.**  John  Biclaro:  “Alboin  is  killed  at  night  at
Verona  by  his  followers  by  the  doing  of  his  wife.  ’ * Marius:  4 4 Al-
boin  was  killed  by  his  followers,  that  is  by  Hilmaegis  with  the  rest,
his  wife  agreeing  to  it.’*  The  Copenhagen  Continuer  of  Prosper:
44  Alboin  was  killed  at  Verona  by  the  treachery  of  his  wife  Rose-
mund, the  daughter  of  king  Conimund,  Elmigisilus  aiding  her”
(Schmidt,  p.  72).

1 Hodgkin  (V,  175)  notices  a reference  to  Alboin  in  the  so-called

Digitized  by

Google

84

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXIX.

Helmechis  then,  upon  the  death  of  Alboin,  attempted
to  usurp  his  kingdom,  but  he  could  not  at  all  do  this,
because  the  Langobards,  grieving  greatly  for  the  king’s
death,  strove  to  make  way  with  him.  And  straightway
Rosemund  sent  word  to  Longinus,  prefect  of  Ravenna,
that  he  should  quickly  send  a ship1  to  fetch  them.
Longinus,  delighted  by  such  a message,  speedily  sent  a
ship  in  which  Helmechis  with  Rosemund  his  wife  em-
barked, fleeing  at  night.  They  took  with  them  Albsu-
inda,  the  daughter  of  the  king,  and  all  the  treasure  of
the  Langobards,  and  came  swiftly  to  Ravenna.*  Then

Traveler’s  song  or  Widsith  which  was  composed  probably  about
the  middle  of  the  sixth  century.  Lines  139  to  147  say,  “So  was
I in  Eatule  with  Ealfwin,  son  of  Eadwin,  who  of  all  mankind  had  to
my  thinking  the  lightest  hand  to  win  love,  the  most  generous  heart
in  the  distribution  of  rings  and  bright  bracelets.  * ’ It  seems  pro-
bable that  Eatule  means  Italy  ; Ealfwin,  Alboin  ; Eadwin,  Audoin.

1 Probably  to  some  point  on  the  Po  not  far  from  Verona  (Hodg. ,
V,  172,  note  1).

*As  to  Rosemund’ s flight  to  Longinus,  the  Ravenna  Annals
(Agnello,  ch.  96)  show  that  Rosemund  with  a multitude  of  Gepidae
and  Langobards  came  to  Ravenna  in  the  month  of  August  with
all  the  royal  treasure  and  was  honorably  received  by  Longinus  the
prefect.  Marius  says  that  Helmegis,  with  his  wife  and  all  the
treasure  and  a part  of  the  army,  surrendered  to  the  republic  at
Ravenna.  John  Biclaro  says:  that  Alboin’ s treasure  with  the
queen  came  into  the  power  of  the  republic  and  the  Langobards
remained  without  king  and  treasure.  The  Copenhagen  Continuer
of  Prosper  (p.  34)  says  she  attempted  to  unite  Helmigis  to  her-
self in  marriage  and  in  the  kingdom,  but  when  she  perceived  that
her  treacherous  usurpation  displeased  the  Langobards,  she  fled
with  the  royal  treasure  and  her  husband  to  Ravenna  (Schmidt,  73).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

85

the  prefect  Longinus  began  to  urge  Rosemund  to  kill
Helmechis  and  to  join  him  in  wedlock.  As  she  was
ready  for  every  kind  of  wickedness  and  as  she  de-
sired to  become  mistress  of  the  people  of  Ravenna,  she
gave  her  consent  to  the  accomplishment  of  this  great
crime,  and  while  Helmechis  was  bathing  himself,  she
offered  him,  as  he  came  out  of  the  bath,  a cup  of  poison
which  she  said  was  for  his  health.  But  when  he  felt
that  he  had  drunk  the  cup  of  death,  he  compelled  Rose-
mund, having  drawn  his  sword  upon  her,  to  drink  what
was  left,  and  thus  these  most  wicked  murderers  perished
at  one  moment  by  the  judgment  of  God  Almighty.

Chapter  XXX.

When  they  had  thus  been  killed,  the  prefect  Longi-
nus sent  Albsuinda  with  the  treasures  of  the  Langobards
to  Constantinople  to  the  emperor.  Some  affirm  that
Peredeo  also  came  to  Ravenna  in  like  manner  with
Helmechis  and  Rosemund,  and  was  thence  sent  with
Albsuinda  to  Constantinople,  and  there  in  a public  show
before  the  emperor  killed  a lion  of  astonishing  size  and,
as  they  say,  by  command  of  the  emperor,  his  eyes  were
torn  out  lest  he  should  attempt  anything  in  the  imperial
city  because  he  was  a strong  man.  After  some  time  he
prepared  for  himself  two  small  knives,  hid  one  in  each
of  his  sleeves,  went  to  the  palace  and  promised  to  say
something  serviceable  to  the  emperor  if  he  were  admit-
ted to  him.  The  emperor  sent  him  two  patricians,
familiars  of  the  palace,  to  receive  his  words.  When
they  came  to  Peredeo,  he  approached  them  quite
closely  as  if  about  to  tell  them  something  unusually

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

86

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

secret,  and  he  wounded  both  of  them  severely  with  the
weapons  he  held  concealed  in  each  hand  so  that  immedi-
ately they  fell  to  the  ground  and  expired.  And  thus
in  no  way  unlike  the  mighty  Sampson,  he  avenged  his
injuries,  and  for  the  loss  of  his  two  eyes  he  killed  two
men  most  useful  to  the  emperor.

Chapter  XXXI.

All  the  Langobards  in  Italy  by  common  consent  in-
stalled as  their  king  in  the  city  of  Ticinum,  Cleph,  a very
noble  man  among  them.1  Of  many  powerful  men  of
the  Romans  some  he  destroyed  by  the  sword  and
others  he  drove  from  Italy.  When  he  had  held  the
sovereignty  with  Masane,  his  wife  one  year  and  six
months,  he  was  slain  with  the  sword  by  a servant  of  his
train.®  v

Chapter  XXXII.

After  his  death  the  Langobards  had  no  king  for  ten
years 3 but  were  under  dukes,4  and  each  one  of  the

1 “ Of  the  race  of  Beleo  ” says  the  Origo.  Marius  of  Avenches
(Chron.,  573,  Roncalli,  p.  413,  see  Pabst,  415,  note  5)  says  he
had  been  one  of  the  dukes.

* The  precise  dates  are  uncertain.  Marius  of  Avenches  says  he
was  elected  in  the  sixth  indiction  and  slain  in  the  seventh,  hence
both  events  took  place  between  Sept.  1st,  572,  and  Sept.  1st,  574
(Roviglio,  Sopra  Alcuni  Dati  Cronologici,  p.  28).

* The  Origo  Gentis  Langobardorum,  the  Chronicon  Gothanum,
Fredegarius  and  the  Copenhagen  Continuer  of  Prosper  all  give
twelve  years  as  the  period  of  this  interregnum.  A computation  of
the  preceding  and  subsequent  reigns  appears  to  sustain  Paul’s
Statement  (Roviglio,  id.,  pp.  29-31)  which,  however,  is  not  free
from  doubt.

4 Duces . It  is  not  certain  what  was  the  Langobard  name  for

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  II.

87

dukes  held  possession  of  his  own  cityj  Zaban  of  Ticinum  /
(Pavia),  Wallari  of  Bergamus  (Bergamo),  Alichis  of
Brexia  (Brescia),  Euin  of  Tridentum  (Trent),1  Gisulf
of  Forum  Julii  (Cividale).3  But  there  were  thirty  other
dukes  besides  these  in  their  own  cities.3  | In  these  v

these  rulers.  Some  suggest  (Hodgkin,  V,  183,  184)  Heretoga
(the  present  German  Herzog ).  The  prefix  and  suffix  art  which
occurs  frequently  in  Langobard  names  (e.  g.,  Aripert,  Arioald,
Rothari)  may  have  some  connection  with  this  dignity.  The  Latin
word  dux  was  appropriately  applied,  as  it  meant  both  a leader  in
the  field  and  a commander  of  frontier  troops  and  of  a frontier  dis-
trict (Hartmann,  II,  1,  40).  Schmidt  (p.  78)  insists  that  the
division  of  Italy  into  dukedoms  was  nothing  else  than  the  ancient
Langobard  division  of  their  territory  into  cantons,  only  these  were
now  connected  with  the  former  city  territories  of  the  Romans.

1 Duke  Euin  (569-595)  followed  by  Gaidoald  in  the  latter  year,
and  Alahis  about  680  and  690,  are  the  only  three  dukes  of  Trent
mentioned  in  Paul’s  history  (Hodg.,  VI,  23).  The  duchy  of
Trent  probably  ascended  by  the  Central  Valley  of  the  Adige  as
far  northward  as  the  Mansio  of  Euna,  the  modern  town  of  Neu-
markt,  and  southward  to  a point  near  the  present  Austro-Italian
frontier  where  the  mountains  begin  to  slope  down  to  the  Lom-
bard plain  (Hodg.,  VI,  26).

*The  dukes  of  Friuli  were  Gisulf  (living  in  575),  Grasulf  II,
Taso,  Cacco,  Ago,  Lupus  (about  662),  Wechtari  (between  662  and
671),  Landari,  Rodoald,  Ansfrit  (between  688  and  700),  Ferdulf,
Corvulus,  Pemmo,  Anselm,  Peter  and  Ratgaud  or  Hrodgaud
(775  to  776)  (Hodg.,  VI,  36).

* Pabst  (437)  gives  the  list  of  probable  cities  referred  to:

Friuli

Parma

Cremona

Ceneda

Piacenza

Como

Treviso

Modena

Lodi

Vicenza

Brescello

Vercelli

Verona

Asti

Tortona

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

88  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

■ t .

days  many  of  the  noble  Romans  were  killed  from

Trent

Ivrea

Alba  Pompeia

Brescia

Turin

Acqui

Bergamo

Mantua

Lucca

Novara

Altino

Chiusi

Milan

Mariana

Perugia

Pavia

Feltre

Benevento

Reggio

Belluno

Spoleto  (see  p.  439).

This  makes

thirty-six  cities  instead  of  the  thirty -five,  and  prob-

ably  Pabst  included  one  or  more  not  yet  occupied  by  the  Lango-
bards  (Hodgkin,  V,  188).  Pabst  also  gives  a very  complete  ac-
count of  this  office  of  duke.  At  first  it  was  not  hereditary  (p.  414-
415)  but  was  held  for  life  (p.  432).  Dukes  were  not  selected  on
account  of  their  noble  birth  (though  nobles  were  frequently  found
among  them),  but  on  account  of  their  military  and  administrative
ability.  The  duke  was  not  chosen  by  the  people  but  appointed
by  the  king  (p.  414).  During  the  interregnum  of  ten  years  when
.the  dukes  governed  different  portions  of  the  country,  there
was  a great  increase  of  the  ducal  power.  It  became  evident,
.however,  that  the  government  could  not  continue  thus  sub-divided.
The  kingly  power  was  restored  but  in  the  meantime  some  of  the
dukedoms,  particularly  Benevento  and  Spoleto,  and  in  a measure
Friuli  had  become  so  powerful  that  they  were  never  again  wholly
subjected  to  the  king.  The  succession  in  Benevento  and  Spoleto
became  hereditary,  and  even  in  Friuli  the  rights  of  the  ruling
family  were  respected  (Paul,  IV,  39;  Pabst,  432).  The  duke’s
jurisdiction  extended,  not  simply  over  a particular  city,  but  over
the  adjoining  district  or  province  (pp.  434-435).  In  determining
the  limits  of  this  district  the  ancient  boundaries  were  generally
observed  (435).  The  first  definite  statement  of  the  powers  of  the
duke  is  found  in  the  laws  of  Rothari  about  the  middle  of  the  7th
century.  He  had  supreme  military,  judicial  and  police  jurisdic-
tion in  his  district  (439,  440).  His  control  of  the  financial  admin-
istration was  not  so  complete  (440).  At  his  side,  at  least  in  the
northern  dukedoms,  stood  the  counts  and  gastaldi  who  were  the
immediate  representatives  of  the  king.  The  counts  are  named

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  II.  89

love  of  gain,  and  the  remainder  were  divided  among

next  after  the  dukes  (441),  though  their  jurisdiction  nowhere  (442)
appears,  and  Pabst  considers  that  the  name  is  a mere  honorary
title  for  a particular  gastaldus  (or  gas taldius).  This  latter  word  is
derived,  in  his  opinion,  from  the  Gothic  gastaldan , to  possess,  ac-
quire. A better  derivation  would  seem  to  be  from  gast  and
aldius , the  “guest  of  the  half-free’ * who  settled  as  a lord  on
the  property  of  the  conquered  Italians,  and  compelled  them  to
serve  him  and  give  him  a portion  of  the  proceeds  of  their  lands.
The  gastaldi  would  then  be  the  lords  or  administrators  of  these
Italian  domains  (Bruckner,  205).  When  the  dukes  re-established
the  kingly  power  (P.  Ill,  16)  they  gave  up  one-half  of  their  for-
tunes for  royal  uses.  Paul  tells  us  that  at  this  time  the  oppressed
people  were  parcelled  out  among  their  Langobard  guests,  and  it  is
probable  that  the  gastaldi  (whose  name  would  appear  to  refer  to
such  apportionment)  were  first  appointed  at  that  time.  In  each
civitas  or  city  with  its  adjacent  territory  there  appears  to  have  been
a gastaldus  whose  duty  it  was  to  look  after  the  royal  inter-
ests, and  especially,  the  royal  domains  (p.  443).  He  received
the  king’s  share  of  inheritances  when  heirs  were  lacking  and
gradually  came  into  possession  of  most  of  the  financial  adminis-
tration (444).  Dukes,  counts,  and  gastaldi , are  all  designated  by
the  common  name  of  “judges”  (447-448),  and  certain  police
authority  is  also  given  them — for  example,  to  remove  lepers  (449),
to  arrest  fugitives,  etc.  A peculiar  provision  of  Rothari’s  Edict
(23).  is,  that  if  a duke  shall  unjustly  injure  his  soldier  th  * gastaldus
shall  aid  the  latter  and  (24),  if  the  gastaldus  shall  unjustly  injure
his  soldier,  the  duke  shall  protect  the  injured  man  (443,  note  3).
Quite  different  is  the  position  of  the  gastaldi  of  Benevento  and
Spoleto  where  the  dukes  were  practically  sovereign  (470).  We
see  at  the  courts  of  these  dukes  the  same  officials  as  at  the  royal
court,  the  cubicularius  or  chamberlain,  the  stolesaz , or  treasurer,
etc.  (472).

We  find  many  royal  expedients  to  limit  the  ducal  power.  Ter-
ritory reconquered  from  the  Greek  empire  or  from  rebellious
dukes  became  the  property  of  the  sovereign  (463),  and  gastaldi

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

90

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

their  “ guests  ” and  made  tributaries,  that  they  should  pay

rather  than  dukes  were  appointed  to  administer  it.  When  Liut-
prand  endeavored  to  strengthen  the  royal  power,  he  took  advan-
tage in  Friuli  of  a contest  between  Bishop  Calixtus  and  Duke
Pemmo  and  deprived  Pemmo  of  the  dukedom,  but  appointed
Pemmo’s  eldest  son  Ratchis  in  his  place  (see  P.,  VI,  51).  Iiut-
prand  also  deposed  and  appointed  dukes  for  Spoleto  and  Bene-
vento,  and  set  aside  for  a time  the  hereditary  succession,  but  he
did  not  permanently  reduce  these  duchies  to  subjection.

In  the  other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  immediately  subject  to  him,
however  (which  were  called  Austria,  Neustria  and  Tuscia),  he  ap-
pointed gastaldi  in  the  cities  where  there  had  been  dukes,  and
greatly  strengthened  his  own  power  by  increasing  the  powers  and
responsibilities  of  the  gastaldi.  In  his  edicts  he  does  not  use  the
word  “duke”  at  all,  but  continually  uses  the  word  “judge”  in
place  of  it,  which  latter  term  includes  both  dukes  and  gastaldi,  and
the  two  are  now  no  longer  found  side  by  side  in  a single  jurisdic-
tion. Pabst  (482-483)  has  given  a list  of  the  cities  which,  under
Liutprand,  were  ruled  by  dukes  and  of  those  which  were  ruled
by  gastaldi . The  list  is  incomplete,  and  perhaps  in  part  incor-
rect, yet  it  shows  in  a general  way  the  extent  of  the  separation  of
the  two  offices.

There  were  also  subordinate  officials.  Among  these  were  the
actores , who  were  the  king’s  agents  in  administering  particular
royal  domains,  and  under  the  judges  the  sculdahis , or  local  magis-
trates, and  the  centenarii  and  locopositi , probably  of  similar
grade  (500,  see  Hartmann,  II,  2,  39).  In  an  ordinary  judi-
cial proceeding  the  complainant  betook  him  in  the  first  place  to
the  sculdahis , the  local  civil  magistrate.  If  the  case  were  so  im-
portant that  the  sculdahis  could  not  decide  it,  he  had  to  send  the
parties  to  the  judge  (i.  e.,  the  duke  or  gastaldus)  (Pabst,  485),  but
if  it  were  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  the  latter,  the  parties  had  to  ap-
pear in  the  king’s  court.  If  the  judge  could  not  act  personally  he
could  appoint  a deputy  (missus)  to  act  for  him  in  individual  cases.
The  party  defeated  in  a legal  proceeding  had  the  right  to  complain
to  a higher  jurisdiction  of  the  decision  or  the  conduct  of  the  magis-

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  It.  91

the  third  part  of  their  products  to  the  Langobards.1  By

trate  who  decided  against  him  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  41),  and  if  it  were
found  that  the  judge  had  failed  in  his  duties  he  was  punished  (at
least  until  the  time  of  king  Ratchis),  not  by  dismissal,  but  by  a
fine  (Pabst,  487).  In  their  powers,  duties  and  responsibilities
dukes  and  gastaldi  at  last  appear  to  be  quite  alike,  and  while  a
larger  domain  generally  appears  annexed  to  the  office  of  duke,
the  gastaldi  usually  have  the  administration  of  the  royal  estates
(489).  Possibly  the  king  could  change  the  gastaldi  more  quickly
than  the  dukes  whose  term  of  office  lasted  for  life,  but  this  appears
to  be  the  only  point  in  which  the  duke  had  the  advantage.  These
arrangements  suffered  little  change  during  the  latter  days  of  the
kingdom.

1 There  is  much  controversy  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  sentence,
Does  the  “remainder  ’ * who  were  divided,  refer  to  all  the  Romans,
or  merely  to  the  nobles  who  were  not  killed  ? Hodgkin  (VI,  581)
believes  it  refers  to  the  rest  of  the  Roman  inhabitants.  Villari
(Le  Invasioni  Barbariche,  II,  32)  insists  that  it  refers  grammat-
ically to  the  nobles  only,  and  asks  how  it  would  have  been  pos-
sible to  render  tributary  all  the  Romans,  thus  obliging  those  who
possessed  nothing  to  pay  one-third  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth  ? It
would  seem  that  it  must  be  limited  at  least  to  the  Roman  landed
proprietors  who  might  well  at  this  time  have  been  roughly  desig-
nated as  nobles  in  this  connection.

The  word  “guest”  ( hospes ) expressed  a relation  that  could
exist  only  between  the  Langobard  and  the  Roman  proprietor.
That  of  “patron”  existed  toward  the  peasants  and  cultivators  of
the  lands  (Villari,  pp.  272,  273).  The  relation  of  “guests”  also
existed  elsewhere  between  Burgundians  and  conquered  Romans.
The  Roman  whose  land  was  assigned  to  a Burgundian  was  called
hospes  and  vice  versa . The  land  thus  assigned  was  called  sors,
and  the  right  to  it  hospitalitas  (Savigny,  Geschichte  des  Romischen
Rechts  im  Mittelalter,  I,  p.  298).

The  whole  free  Roman  population  was  treated  by  the  Lango-
bards quite  differently  from  the  manner  in  which  they  had  been
treated  by  Theodoric  and  the  Ostrogoths,  who  simply  took  one-

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

92

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

these  dukes  of  the  Langobards  in  the  seventh  year  from

third  of  their  land  and  left  them  as  independent  as  before.  The
Langobards  took  one-third,  not  of  the  land,  but  of  its  products,
and  there  is  much  dispute  as  to  the  status  in  which  they  held  the
Roman  population.  Although  Villari  (Le  Invasioni  Barbariche,
pp.  265,  266,  271-272)  and  others  deny  that  this  population  was
reduced  to  slavery,  the  better  opinion  seems  to  be  that  during  the
wars  of  conquest  and  the  earlier  period  of  Langobard  domination,
the  Romans  were  regarded  as  conquered  enemies  destitute  of  all
rights  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  2 ; see,  also,  Hegel,  St&dteverfassung
von  Italien,  ch.  Ill,  p.  355,  and  authorities  there  cited,)  and
that  they  very  generally  became  aldii  or  serfs  of  the  Lango-
bards just  as  other  subject-peoples  had  been  during  the
previous  wanderings  of  that  nation.  Aldius  first  meant
“man,”  then  “common  man,”  then  the  “half  free”  man,
bound  to  the  soil  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  8).  Rothari’s  Edict,  though
it  scarcely  mentions  the  Romans  as  such,  contains  many  enact-
ments concerning  the  aldius , who  apparently  did  not  differ  greatly
from  the  Roman  colonus  who  cultivated  the  ground  for  his  master
and  could  not  change  his  condition  or  his  home,  but  could  not
have  his  rent  raised  arbitrarily,  nor  be  sold  as  a slave  apart
from  the  land.  We  are  not  expressly  told  in  the  Edict  that
the  Romans  were  aldii  but  this  seems  implied.  The  fine  for  kill-
ing or  crippling  an  aldius  was  payable  to  his  master,  probably  to
indemnify  him  for  the  loss  of  a valuable  farm  laborer.  The  con-
dition of  the  workmen  in  the  cities  however  is  more  doubtful  and
also  the  condition  of  the  Romans  of  the  higher  class,  if  any,  who
survived  (Hodgkin,  VI,  586-592).

The  third  exacted  by  the  Langobards  may  have  been  one-third  of
the  gross  product  of  the  land,  which  would  be  more  than  half  the
net  product  and  would  leave  a slender  margin  for  the  cultivator
and  his  family  (Hodgkin,  VI,  582).  This  was  the  view  originally
taken  by  Savigny  (Geschichte  des  Romischen  Rechts,  I,  ch.  V,
p.  400),  but  he  afterwards  changed  his  opinion  and  considered
that  the  tribute  was  one-third  of  the  net  produce  of  the  land  (see
Hegel,  Stadteverfassung  von  Italien,  I,  ch.  3,  p.  356,  note).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  II.

93

the  coming  of  Alboin  1 and  of  his  whole  people,  the
churches  were  despoiled,  the  priests  killed,  the  cities
overthrown,  the  people  who  had  grown  up  like  crops
annihilated,  and  besides  those  regions  which  Alboin  had
taken,  the  greater  part  of  Italy  was  seized  and  subju-
gated by  the  Langobards.  /

The  Langobards  were  thus  exempted  from  agricultural  labor  and
as  absentee  landlords,  could  live  in  the  cities  or  at  the  court  on
the  tribute  thus  paid  by  their  1 1 hosts.  * * This  idleness  on  the  one
side  and  servitude  upon  the  other  exercised  a demoralizing  influ-
ence, and  the  Langobard  system  was  much  more  injurious  than
the  actual  division  of  land  under  Theodoric  and  Odoacar  where
the  substantial  liberty  of  the  Romans  might  still  be  preserved.

Hartmann  (II,  i,  41,  42)  believes  that  the  payment  of  one-
third  the  produce  of  the  land  was  a mere  temporary  arrangement
while  Alboin  and  the  Langobards  were  acquiring  possession  of  the
country,  and  that  afterwards,  when  they  were  permanently  settled
in  the  country,  the  Langobards  took  the  places  of  the  former  pro-
prietors and  received  all  the  profits  of  their  estates.  There  seems
no  good  reason  to  think,  however,  that  such  complete  expropria-
tion was  universal.

1 Paul  scarcely  means  that  all  this  occurred  in  the  seventh  year
alone  but  during  the  seven  years  of  Langobard  occupation.  This
was  the  statement  of  Gregory  of  Tours  whom  Paul  followed
(IV,  41),  see  Jacobi,  34.

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

BOOK  III.

Chapter  I.

Some  of  the  dukes  of  the  Langobards  then,  with  a
strong  army  invaded  Gaul.1  Hospitius,  a man  of  God,
who  had  been  cloistered  at  Nicea  (Nice),  foresaw  their
invasion  a long  while  beforehand,  by  revelation  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  and  predicted  to  the  citizens  of  that  city  what
calamities  were  impending.  For  he  was  a man  of  the
greatest  abstinence  and  of  praiseworthy  life,  who,  bound
by  iron  chains  upon  his  flesh  and  clad  with  goat’s  hair,
used  bread  alone  and  a few  dates  for  his  food.  But  in  the
days  of  Lent  he  was  nourished  by  the  roots  of  Egyptian
herbs  which  hermits  use,  the  gift  of  some  merchants.
The  Lord  deemed  it  fitting  that  great  and  excellent
things  should  be  accomplished  by  him,  which  are  written
in  the  books  of  the  reverend  man  Gregory,  bishop  of
Tours.  This  holy  man  then,  predicted  the  coming  of
the  Langobards  into  Gaul  in  this  manner : “ The  Lango-
bards,” he  says,  “will  come  into  Gaul  and  will  lay
waste  seven  cities  because  their  wickedness  has  waxed
great  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  for  all  the  people  are  ad-
dicted to  perjuries,  guilty  of  thefts,  intent  upon  plunder,

1 An  invasion  of  Gaul,  probably  a mere  foray,  is  mentioned  by
Marius  of  Avenches  as  having  occurred  in  569,  immediately  after
Alboin’s  invasion  of  Italy.  It  was  evidently  a failure,  for  it  was
stated  that  many  Langobard  captives  were  sold  into  slavery
(Pabst,  410,  note  2).  The  particular  invasion  mentioned  in  the
text  occurred  not  earlier  than  570  (Hodgkin,  V,  216).

(94)

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  III.

95

ready  for  murders ; the  fruit  of  justice  is  not  in  them,
tithes  are  not  given,  the  poor  man  is  not  fed,  the  naked
is  not  clothed,  the  stranger  is  not  received  in  hospitality.
Therefore  is  this  blow  about  to  come  upon  that  peo-
ple.” Also  advising  his  monks,  he  said : “ Depart  also
from  this  place,  taking  away  with  you  what  you  have,
for  behold,  the  nation  I foretold  is  approaching.”  And
when  they  said,  “ We  will  not  abandon  thee,  most  holy
Father,”  he  replied,  “ Fear  not  for  me,  it  will  come  to
pass  that  they  will  inflict  injuries  upon  me,  but  they  will
not  harm  me  to  my  death.”

Chapter  II.

And  when  the  monks  had  departed,  the  army  of  the
Langobards  drew  near.  And  while  it  was  destroying  all
it  found,  it  came  to  the  place  where  the  holy  man  was
cloistered.  He  showed  himself  to  them  through  the  win-
dow of  a tower.  But  when  they,  going  around  the  tower,
sought  an  entrance  through  which  they  could  pass  in  to
him,  and  found  none  at  all,  two  of  them  climbed
upon  the  roof  and  uncovered  it.  And  seeing  him  bound
with  chains  and  clad  in  goat’s  skin,  they  said : “ He  is  a
malefactor  and  has  committed  murder,  therefore  he  is
held  bound  in  these  fetters,”  and  when  they  had  called
an  interpreter  they  inquired  from  him  what  evil  deed
he  had  committed  that  he  was  bound  in  such  pun-
ishment, and  he  declared  that  he  was  a murderer  and
guilty  of  all  crimes.  Then  one  of  them  drew  his  sword
to  cut  off  his  head,  but  straightway  his  right  hand  stiff-
ened while  suspended  in  the  act  of  striking,  nor  could
he  draw  it  back.  So  he  let  go  of  the  sword  $md

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

9 6

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

dropped  it  upon  the  ground.  His  companions  seeing
these  things  raised  a cry  to  heaven  entreating  the  saint
that  he  would  graciously  make  known  what  they  should
do.  And  he  indeed,  having  made  the  sign  of  salva-
tion, restored  the  withered  arm  to  health.  And  the
Langobard  who  had  been  healed  was  converted  to  the
faith  of  Christ  and  was  straightway  made  a priest  and
then  a monk,  and  remained  in  that  same  place  up  to  the
end  of  his  life  in  the  service  of  God.  But  when  the
blessed  Hospitius  had  spoken  the  word  of  God  to  the
Langobards,  two  dukes  who  heard  him  reverently,  re-
turned safe  and  sound  to  their  own  country,  but  cer-
tain ones  who  had  despised  his  words  perished  miser-
ably in  that  same  Provincial

Chapter  III.

Then  while  the  Langobards  were  devastating  Gaul,
Amatus,  the  patrician  of  Provincia,  a subject  of  Gun-
thram,  king  of  the  Franks,  led  an  army  against  them,
and  when  the  battle  began,  he  fled  and  was  there
killed.  And  the  Langobards  made  so  great  a slaughter
of  the  Burgundians  that  the  number  of  the  slain  could
not  be  reckoned,  and  enriched  with  incalculable  booty
they  returned  to  Italy.

Chapter  IV.

When  they  had  departed,  Eunius,  who  was  also  called
Mummulus,  being  summoned  by  the  king,  acquired  the

1 Provence,  a district  on  the  Mediterranean  at  the  mouth  of  the
Rhone,  the  first  part  of  Gaul  to  become,  and  the  last  to  remain  a
Roman  province  (Hodgkin,  V,  200).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

97

honor  of  the  patriciate,  and  when  the  Langobards  again
invaded  Gaul1 *  and  came  as  far  as  Mustiascalmes  (Mou-
tiers),3  which  place  lies  near  the  city  of  Ebredunum
(Embrun),  Mummulus  moved  his  army  and  set  out
thither  with  the  Burgundians.  And  when  the  Lango-
bards were  surrounded  by  his  army  and  trees  were
felled  in  their  ways  among  the  winding  paths  of  the
woods,  he  rushed  upon  them  and  killed  many  of  them
and  captured  some  and  sent  them  to  Gunthram  his
king.4  And  the  Langobards,  when  these  things  were
done,  returned  to  Italy.

Chapter  V.

Afterwards  the  Saxons  who  had  come  with  the  Lan-
gobards into  Italy,  broke  into  Gaul  and  established  their
camp  within  the  territory  of  Regia,  that  is,  at  the  villa
Stablo  (Establon),5 6  dispersing  themselves  among  the
villas  of  the  neighboring  cities,  seizing  booty,  taking  off
captives  and  laying  all  things  waste.  When  Mummulus
learned  this,  he  attacked  them  with  his  army  and  killed
many  of  them,  and  did  not  cease  slaying  them  until
night  made  an  end,  for  he  found  men  ignorant  and
understanding  nothing  of  what  had  come  upon  them.
But  when  morning  came,  the  Saxons  put  their  army  in

1 By  way  of  the  Col  de  Genevre  (Hodgkin,  V,  217).

* In  the  department  of  the  Basses  Alpes.

xFactis  concisis — See  Du  Cange,  concisa.

4 In  this  battle,  Salonius,  bishop  of  Embrun,  and  Sagittarius,
bishop  of  Gap,  two  brothers,  fought  and  slew  many  (Hodg.,  V,

217).

6 Near  Moutiers  (Abel).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

98

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

order,  preparing  themselves  bravely  for  war.  but  by
means  of  messengers  they  made  peace,  presents  were
given  to  Mummulus,  the  captives  and  all  the  booty  were
abandoned,  and  they  returned  to  Italy.

Chapter  VI.

After  the  Saxons  had  returned  to  Italy  and  had
taken  with  them  their  wives  and  children  and  all  their
household  goods,  they  planned  to  go  back  again  to
Gaul,  in  order  that  they  might  be  received  by  king
Sigispert  and  by  his  aid  might  return  to  their  own
country.  For  it  is  certain  that  these  Saxons  had  come
to  Italy  with  their  wives  and  children  that  they  might
dwell  in  it,  yet  as  far  as  can  be  understood  they  were
unwilling  to  be  subject  to  the  commands  of  the  Lango-
bards.  But  it  was  not  permitted  to  them  by  the  Lango-
bards  to  live  according  to  their  own  laws,1  and  there-
fore they  determined  to  go  back  to  their  own  country.
When  they  were  about  to  enter  Gaul  they  formed  them-
selves into  two  troops,  and  one  troop  indeed  entered
through  the  city  of  Nicea  (Nice),  but  the  other,
through  Ebredunum  (Embrun),  returning  the  same
way  they  had  gone  the  year  before.  Because  it  was  the
time  of  the  harvests  they  collected  and  threshed  grain

1 This  statement,  which  is  accepted  without  question  by  most  of
the  commentators,  is  discredited  by  Hartmann  (II,  i,  80),  who  re-
marks that  it  is  an  addition  made  by  Paul  himself  to  the  account
of  Gregory  of  Tours  from  whom  he  takes  this  part  of  his  history,
and  that  it  comes  from  Paul’s  knowledge  of  the  Langobard  state  in
the  eighth  century  which  is  quite  unreliable  for  events  occurring
two  centuries  earlier.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  III.

99

and  ate  it  and  gave  it  to  their  animals  to  eat.  They
plundered  flocks,  nor  did  they  abstain  from  burnings,
and  when  they  had  come  to  the  river  Rodanus  (Rhone),
which  they  had  to  cross  to  reach  the  kingdom  of  Sigis-
pert,  Mummulus  met  them  with  a powerful  multitude.
Then  seeing  him  they  feared  greatly,  and  giving  him
many  coins  of  gold  for  their  release,  they  were  per-
mitted to  cross  the  Rodanus.  While  they  were  pro-
ceeding to  king  Sigispert  they  deceived  many  on  the
way  in  their  dealing,  selling  bars  of  brass  which  were
so  colored,  I know  not  how,  that  they  imitated  the  ap-
pearance of  proved  and  tested  gold,1  whence  many  were
deceived  by  this  fraud  and  giving  gold  and  receiving
brass,  were  made  paupers.  When  they  came  at  length
to  king  Sigispert,  they  were  allowed  to  go  back  to  the
place  from  which  they  had  first  come.

Chapter  VII.

And  when  they  had  come  to  their  own  country  they
found  it  was  held  by  Suavi  (Suabians)  and  other  peo-
ples, as  we  have  before  related.2  Bestirring  themselves
against  these,  they  attempted  to  drive  them  out  and  de-
stroy them.  The  Suavi  however  offered  them  a third

1 Gregory  of  Tours  (IV,  42)  places  this  event  at  Arvemi  (Cler-
mont), which  seems  out  of  the  way  for  an  army  proceeding  to
Sigispert  in  Austrasia,  whose  capital  was  Metz,  and  Gregory  says
it  was  then  spring-time,  which  is  hard  to  reconcile  with  the  state-
ments about  the  threshed  grain,  unless  indeed  the  Saxons  wan-
dered through  Gaul  until  the  following  spring  (Hodgkin,  V,  192,
note  1).

* Book  II,  chapter  6.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

IOO

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

part  of  the  region,  saying:  “We  can  live  together  and
dwell  in  common  without  strife/*  and  when  they  in  no
way  acquiesced,  the  Suavi  offered  them  a half  and  after-
wards two  parts,  reserving  only  a third  for  themselves.
And  when  they  were  unwilling,  the  Suavi  offered  with
the  land  also  all  the  flocks  if  only  they  would  cease
from  war,  but  the  Saxons,  not  content  with  this,  sought
a contest,  and  they  had  a strife  among  themselves  be-
forehand in  what  way  they  should  divide  the  wives  of
the  Suavi.  But  it  did  not  turn  out  with  them  as  they
thought,  for  when  battle  was  joined  20,000  of  them
were  killed,  but  of  the  Suavi  four  hundred  and  eighty
fell,  and  the  rest  obtained  a victory.  And  six  thousand
of  the  Saxons  who  survived  the  war  made  a vow  that
they  would  cut  neither  beard  nor  hair  until  they
avenged  themselves  upon  their  Suabian  enemies.  And
again  going  into  battle,  they  were  grievously  wasted  and
so  they  ceased  from  war.

Chapter  VIII.

After  these  things  three  dukes  of  the  Langobards,
that  is,  Amo,  Zaban,  and  Rodanus,  invaded  Gaul/  and
Amo  indeed,  taking  the  way  of  Ebredunum  (Embrun),
approached  as  far  as  Machoavilla  (Manosque)2  which
Mummulus  had  acquired  by  gift  of  the  king,  and  there
he  fixed  his  tents.  Zaban  however,  going  down  by  way

JA.  D.  575.  Zaban  had  invaded  the  Swiss  dominions  of  Gun-
thram  the  year  before  but  had  been  defeated  and  escaped  to  Italy
(Hodgkin,  V,  219).

aOn  the  river  Druentia  (Durance),  (Abel)  near  Avignon  (Hodg-
kin, V,  221 ).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

Map  to  illustrate
the  campaigns  of  the

lombard  dukes

IN  GAUL

Digitized  by  Google

[f.  p.  ioo]

Digitized  by

BOOK  III.

IOI

of  the  city  of  Dea  (Die),1  came  to  Valentia2  (Valence),
while  Rodanus  approached  the  city  of  Gratianopolis
(Grenoble).  Amo  indeed  subdued  the  province  of
Arelate  (Arles)  with  the  cities  which  lie  around,  and
coming  up  to  Stony  Field  itself,  which  lies  by  the  city
of  Massilia  (Marseilles),  he  laid  waste  everything  he
could  find,  and  laying  seige  to  Aquae  (Aix)3  he  re-
ceived twenty-two  pounds  of  silver4  and  departed  from
that  place.  Rodanus  also  and  Zaban  in  like  manner
destroyed  by  fire  and  rapine  the  places  to  which  they
had  come.  When  these  things  were  reported  to  Mum-
mulus  the  patrician,  he  came  with  a strong  band  and
fought  first  with  Rodanus  who  was  besieging  Gratiano-
polis and  killed  many  of  his  army,  and  compelled  Roda-
nus himself,  wounded  by  a lance,  to  flee  to  the  tops  of
the  mountains,  from  whence,  dashing  through  the  wind-
ing ways  of  the  woods  with  five  hundred  men  who  had
remained  to  him,  he  came  to  Zaban,  who  was  then  be-
seiging  the  city  of  Valentia  (Valence),  and  reported  to
him  all  the  things  that  had  been  done.  And  when  they
had  come  to  the  city  of  Ebredunum,  in  like  manner
plundering  everything,  Mummulus  came  to  meet  them
with  a countless  army,  and  when  battle  was  joined  he
overcame  them.  Then  Zaban  and  Rodanus  making
their  way  again  to  Italy  came  to  Secusium  (Susa),  which
city  Sisinnius,  then  master  of  soldiers,  was  holding  on

1 In  the  department  of  Drome  (Abel),  on  the  Drome.

*On  the  Rhone  at  the  confluence  of  Is&re  (Hodgkin,  V,  221).

•Aquae  Sextiae  near  Marseilles.

•Only  £ 66  sterling,  a small  ransom  (Hodgkin,  V,  221,  note  2).

Digitized  by  kaOOQle

102

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

behalf  of  the  emperor.  The  servant  of  Mummulus,
coming  to  him,  handed  him  a letter  sent  by  Mummulus
and  said  that  the  latter  was  quickly  approaching.  When
they  learned  this,  Zaban  and  Rodanus  at  once  departed
thence  to  their  own  homes.  When  Amo  heard  these
things,  having  collected  all  his  booty,  he  set  out  to  re-
turn to  Italy,  but  being  hindered  by  the  snows,  he
abandoned  the  greater  part  of  his  booty  and  was  able
with  difficulty  to  break  through  the  Alpine  path  with
his  followers,  and  thus  he  came  to  his  own  country.1

Chapter  IX.

In  these  days  upon  the  approach  of  the  Franks  the
fortress  of  Anagnis  (Nano),2  which  was  situated  above
Tridentum  (Trent)  within  the  boundary  of  Italy,  sur-
rendered to  them.  For  this  reason  the  count3  of  the
Langobards  from  Lagaris  (Lagerthal),  Ragilo  by  name,
came  and  plundered  Anagnis.  While  he  was  returning
with  his  booty  he  was  slain  with  many  of  his  followers
in  the  field  of  Rotalian 4 by  Chramnichis,  the  leader  of

1 These  incursions  seem  to  have  been  followed  by  an  extension
of  the  territory  of  king  Gunthram  to  the  Italian  side  of  the  Alps,
including  both  Susa  and  Aosta.  The  Langobard  invasions  of
Gaul  were  not  renewed  (Hodg.,  V,  223,  4).  Mummulus  after-
wards rebelled  against  Gunthram  and  was  slain  (id.,  224).

* In  the  Val.  di  Non.  A.  D.  577,  see  Muratori  Annals,  Vol.  Ill,
p.  498.  Hartmann  (II,  1,81)  believes  that  this  was  a Byzantine
(not  Langobard)  fortress  when  surrendered.

* As  to  the  rank,  powers,  etc.,  of  a count  of  the  Langobards,
see  note  to  Book  II,  ch.  32.

4 The  date  of  this  invasion  of  the  Franks  is  placed  by  Hodgkin
at  575-584  (VI,  27;  V,  227).  The  chronology  is  very  doubtful,

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  III.

103

the  Franks,  who  went  to  meet  him.  And  this  Chram-
nichis  shortly  afterwards  came  and  devastated  Tri-
dentum.1  And  Euin,  duke  of  Tridentum,  followed  and
killed  him  with  his  companions  in  the  place  which  is
called  Salurnis  (Salurn),  and  shook  out  of  him  all  the
booty  he  had  taken,  and  when  the  Franks  had  been
driven  out  he  took  again  the  whole  territory  of  Tri-
dentum.

Chapter  X.

At  this  time  Sigispert,  king  of  the  Franks,  was  killed
by  the  treachery  of  Hilperic,  his  brother,  with  whom  he
had  waged  war,  and  Childepert  his  son,  still  a little
boy,  with  Brunihilde  his  mother,  took  up  the  man-
agement of  his  kingdom.2  Euin,  also,  duke  of  the

but  it  preceded  the  elevation  of  Authari  to  the  throne  (Hartmann,
II,  1,  81).  The  Rotalian  field  is  the  meadow  plain  at  the  conflu-
ence of  the  Noce  and  the  Adige.

1 That  is  the  land  around  Trent.  It  is  not  likely  the  city  was
taken  (Hodgkin,  VI,  28).

1 See  supra , II,  10.  The  Frankish  kingdom  was,  after  the  death
of  Theudepert  in  548  (see  note  to  II,  2,  supra),  of  his  child  Theu-
debald  in  555,  and  of  Childepert  in  558,  again  united  under  one
monarch,  Chlotochar  I (Lothair),  who  ruled  for  three  years  over
the  whole  kingdom  and  died  in  561,  whereupon  it  was  divided
among  his  four  sons,  one  of  whom,  Charibert,  died  in  567,  and  the
number  of  sovereigns  was  reduced  to  three.

There  were,  four  great  divisions  of  the  monarchy  :

(1)  Austrasia,  assigned  to  Sigispert,  which  extended  from
Rheims  across  the  Rhine  an  unknown  distance  into  Germany.

(2)  Neustria,  the  portion  of  Chilperic  or  Hilperic,  comprising
the  Netherlands,  Picardy,  Normandy  and  Maine.

(3)  Burgundy,  the  domain  of  Gunthram,  embracing  the  region

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

104

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

people  of  Tridentum,  of  whom  we  have  spoken,  took

watered  by  the  RJione  (except  Provence),  also  Switzerland  and
some  land  in  the  center  of  Gaul.

(4)  Aquitaine,  stretching  from  the  Loire  to  the  Pyrenees,  which
was  split  up  and  contended  for  by  all  (Hodgkin,  V,  199,  203).

Sigispert,  the  youngest  and  best  of  the  three  brothers,  deter-
mined to  wed  a princess  of  his  own  rank  and  married,  in  566,
Brunihilde,  daughter  of  Athanagild,  the  Visigothic  king  of  Spain,
whom  he  seems  to  have  loved  with  genuine  affection.  Chilperic,
cruel,  lustful,  avaricious,  “the  Nero  and  Herod  of  the  time,”
took  to  himself  many  mistresses,  but  at  last  determined  to  follow
his  brother’s  example  and  sought  the  hand  of  Galswintha,  another
daughter  of  Athanagild,  who  reluctantly  came  from  Spain  to
become  his  bride,  and  received  as  her  * * morning  gift  ’ * Bordeaux
and  four  other  cities  in  southwestern  Gaul.  But  Fredegundis,  one
of  Childperic’s  former  concubines,  a fiend  incarnate,  but  incom-
parable in  her  powers  of  fascination,  recovered  the  king’s  affec-
tions. Galswintha  was  strangled,  and  Chilperic  married  her  rival.
His  brothers  endeavored  to  cast  out  so  wicked  an  offender,  and  it
was  determined  that  the  ‘ * morning  gift  * ’ of  the  murdered  queen
should  be  given  to  her  sister  Brunihilde  in  atonement  for  the  crime
(Hodgkin,  V,  204-208).  Chilperic  refused,  and  Sigispert  and  Gun-
thram  sought  to  dethrone  him.  He  was  shut  up  in  Toumay,  and
a large  portion  of  his  subjects  determined  to  acclaim  as  their  sov-
ereign, Sigispert,  who  was  raised  on  a shield  and  hailed  as  king
by  the  army,  but  almost  in  the  moment  of  his  triumph,  two  serving-
men  rushed  upon  him  and  dealt  him  a mortal  wound.  The
weapon,  it  was  said,  had  been  poisoned  by  Fredegundis.  Sigis-
pert’s son  Childepert,  a child  of  five  years,  was  carried  back  to
Metz,  the  capital  of  Austrasia,  was  accepted  as  his  father’s  suc-
cessor, and  reigned  for  twenty-one  years  under  the  tutelage  of  the
Austrasian  nobles  and  of  his  mother  Brunihilde,  who  now  lived
to  avenge  her  husband’s  death.  She  sought  to  accomplish  this
by  a marriage  with  Merovech,  the  son  of  Chilperic  by  a former
wife.  Merovech  was  afterwards  suspected  of  conspiring  against
his  father,  and  died,  some  say  at  his  own  desire,  and  others  that

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.  105

as  his  wife  the  daughter  of  Garibald,  king  of  the
Bavarians.

it  was  by  order  of  Fredegundis.  Chilperic’s  rule  became  detest-
able, and  in  584  he  too  was  murdered  by  an  unknown  assassin,
leaving  a child  three  years  old,  Chlotochar,  destined  at  a later
time  to  reunite  the  Frankish  dominions  (Hodgkin,  208-214).

The  Langobard  invasion  of  Italy  (A.  D.  568)  occurred  just  after
the  murder  of  Galswintha  (A.  D.  567),  and  the  subsequent  forays
into  Gaul  were  made  possible  by  the  dissensions  among  the  Frank-
ish sovereigns.  These  invasions  appear  to  be  mere  robber  raids.
Most  of  them  occurred  during  the  ten  years’  interregnum  while  the
dukes  were  ruling  the  cities  of  Italy  without  a king,  and  the  feud
between  the  Franks  and  the  Langobards  which  thus  began,  ripened
into  an  indelible  national  instinct  and  prepared  the  way,  after  the
lapse  of  two  centuries,  for  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  the
Langobards  by  Charlemagne  (Hodgkin,  V,  198,  199).

An  interesting  question  arises  whether  there  is  any  connection
between  the  characters  and  scenes  in  this  Frankish  drama  of
intrigue  and  revenge,  and  the  legend  of  Siegfried  as  developed  in
the  Elder  Edda,  the  Saga  of  the  Volsungs  and  the  Niebelungen
Lied.  The  resemblance  of  some  of  the  names  of  the  heroes  is
very  striking;  that  of  Sigispert,  for  instance,  to  Siegfried  or  Sigurd,
Gunthram  to  Gunther,  Brunihilde  to  Brunhild.  Gunther  in  the
legend,  as  well  as  in  the  history,  is  king  of  Burgundy;  Siegfried
is  treacherously  slain;  there  is  a bitter  jealousy  and  feud  between
two  rival  queens,  and  in  the  Niebelungen  Lied  the  character  of
Siegfried's  widow  becomes  transformed  by  his  death,  and  she  de-
votes her  life  to  avenge  his  assassination,  and  marries  a foreign
prince  for  the  purpose.  It  is  well  known  that  certain  historical
characters  were  actually  introduced  into  the  legend.  Etzel  or
Atli  was  Attila  the  Hun,  and  the  Dietrich  of  Berne  of  the  Niebel-
ungen, was  Theoderic  the  Great.  Moreover,  the  setting  of  the
legend  recalls  the  times  not  only  of  the  migration  of  the  nations,
but  of  the  Merovingians,  and  it  is  this  latter  period  which  exer-
cised the  best  influence  upon  the  story.  The  kings  are  like  the

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

io 6

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

- Chapter  XI.

During  these  times,  as  was  stated  above,1  Justin  the
younger  ruled  at  Constantinople,  a man  given  to  every
kind  of  avarice,  a dcspiser  of  the  poor,  a despoiler  of
senators.  So  great  was  the  madness  of  his  cupidity  that
he  ordered  iron  chests  made  in  which  to  collect  those
talents  of  gold  which  he  seized.  They  also  say  that  he

Merovingians,  and  their  management  of  the  state  resembles  that
of  the  times  of  Gunthram  and  Sigispert  (Scherer,  Hist.  German
Lit.,  ch.  5).  On  the  other  hand,  the  parts  are  differently  assigned.
In  the  poem,  Siegfried  marries  Kriemhild,  not  Brunhild,  though
according  to  the  Icelandic  version,  it  is  the  latter  to  whom  his  love
, was  first  pledged.  The  stories  vary  from  the  history  in  nearly  all
their  details,  and  there  may  be  reason  for  the  belief  that  the  Sieg-
fried legend  in  some  form  was  of  earlier  origin  than  the  time  of
Sigispert.  Still  it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  much  of  the  color-
ing, if  not  the  principal  incidents  of  the  story,  came  from  this  dark
period  in  the  history  of  the  Frankish  monarchy,  and  there  seems
quite  as  much  reason  to  identify  Siegfried  and  Brunhild  with  the
sovereigns  of  Austrasia  as  to  consider  them,  as  many  do,  the  mere
personifications  of  natural  phenomena,  the  development  of  the
season  myth!

Referring  to  the  legend  of  buried  treasure  discovered  by  Gunth-
ram (see  chap.  34  infra ),  Hodgkin  (V,  202)  remarks:  “Treasures
buried  in  long  departed  days  by  kings  of  old,  mysterious  caves,
reptile  guides  or  reptile  guardians — are  we  not  transported  by  this
strange  legend  into  the  very  atmosphere  of  the  Niebelungen  Lied  ?
And  if  the  good  king  Gunthram  passed  for  the  fortunate  finder  of
the  Dragon-hoard,  his  brothers  and  their  queens,  by  their  wars,
their  reconciliations  and  their  terrible  avengings,  must  surely  have
suggested  the  main  argument  of  that  most  tragical  epic,  the  very
name  of  one  of  whose  heroines,  Brunichildis,  is  identical  with  the
name  of  the  queen  of  Austrasia.  * *

^ee  Book  II,  Chap.  5.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

107

fell  into  the  Pelagian  heresy.*  When  he  turned  away
the  ear  of  his  heart  from  the  Divine  commands  he  be-
came mad,  having  lost  the  faculty  of  reason  by  the  just
judgment  of  God.  Ke  took  Tiberius  as  his  Caesar  to
govern  his  palace  and  his  different  provinces,  a man  just,
useful,  energetic,  wise,  benevolent,  equitable  in  his
judgments,  brilliant  in  his  victories,  and  what  was  more
important  than  all  these  things,  a most  true  Christian.
From  the  treasures  which  Justin  had  collected  he
brought  out  many  things  for  the  use  of  the  poor,  and  the
empress  Sophia  often  upbraided  him  that  he  would  re-
duce the  state  to  poverty,  saying,  “ What  I have  been
collecting  through  many  years  you  are  scattering  prodi-
gally in  a short  time.”  But  he  said : " I trust  to  the
Lord  that  money  will  not  be  lacking  in  our  treasury
so  long  as  the  poor  receive  charity  and  captives  are
ransomed.  For  this  is  the  great  treasure,  since  the  Lord
says,  ‘ Lay  up  for  yourselves  treasures  in  heaven  where
neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt  and  where  thieves
do  not  break  through  nor  steal/  Therefore  of  these
things  which  God  has  furnished  us  let  us  gather  treasures
in  heaven,  and  God  will  deign  to  give  us  increase  in  this
world.”  Then  when  Justin  had  reigned  eleven  years,8  he
ended  at  last  the  madness  he  had  fallen  into  together
with  his  life.  During 'his  time  indeed  were  waged  the
wars  which,  as  we  before  said  in  advance,  were  carried

1That  there  was  no  original  sin  and  that  God’s  grace  was  not
indispensable.  So  called  from  the  monk  Pelagius,  by  whom  it  was
taught,  who  died  about  A.  D.  420.

•Almost  thirteen  years  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

108  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

on  by  Narses  the  patrician  against  the  Goths  and  the
Franks.1 *  In  fine  also,  when  Rome  at  the  time  of  pope
Benedict  was  suffering  the  privation  of  hunger,  while
the  Langobards  were  destroying  everything  on  every
side,  he 3 sent  many  thousand  bushels  of  grain  in  ships
straight  from  Egypt  and  relieved  it  by  the  effort  of  his
benevolence.

Chapter  XII.

When  Justin  was  dead3  Tiberius  Constantine,  the
fiftieth  of  the  Roman  emperors,  assumed  the  sover-
eignty. While  he  was  still  Caesar  under  Justin  as  we
said  above,  and  was  managing  the  palace  and  perform-
ing many  acts  of  charity  every  day,  God  furnished  him
a great  abundance  of  gold.  For  while  walking  through
the  palace  he  saw  on  the  pavement  of  the  house  a
marble  slab  on  which  the  cross  of  our  Lord  was  carved,
and  he  said:  “We  ought  to  adorn  our  forehead  and
our  breast  with  our  Lord’s  cross  and  behold  we  trample
it  under  our  feet,”  and  this  said,  he  quickly  ordered  the
slab  to  be  lifted  up.  And  underneath  the  slab  when  it
was  dug  out  and  set  up,  they  found  another  having  the
same  device.  And  he  ordered  this  also  to  be  raised,
and  when  it  was  moved  they  found  also  a third,  and  when
this  too  was  taken  away  by  his  command,  they  found  a
great  treasure,  containing  more  than  a thousand  cente-

1 Incorrect;  these  wars  were  waged  under  Justinian  (II,  i et  seq.
supra;  Waitz),  although  it  was  to  Justin  that  the  complaints  were
afterwards  made  of  Narses’  administration.

‘That  is,  Justin  (see  Muratori  Annals,  A.  D.  578,  vol.  3,  p.  501).

•He  died  October  5,  578  (Hodgkin,  V,  197).

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  III.

109

naria 1 of  gold,  and  the  gold  was  carried  away  and  distrib-
uted among  the  poor  yet  more  abundantly  than  had  been
customary.  Also  Narses  the  patrician  of  Italy,  since  he
had  a great  dwelling  in  a certain  city  of  Italy,  came  to
the  above-mentioned  city  with  many  treasures,  and  there
in  his  dwelling  he  secretly  dug  a great  cistern  in  which
he  deposited  many  thousand  centenaria  of  gold  and
silver.  And  when  all  who  knew  of  the  matter  had  been
killed,  he  entrusted  these  to  the  care  of  one  old  man
only,  exacting  from  him  an  oath.  And  when  Narses
had  died,  the  above-mentioned  old  man,  coming  to
Caesar  Tiberius,  said,  “ If  it  profit  me  anything,  I will
tell  you,  Caesar,  an  important  thing.”  The  latter  said
to  him,  “ Say  what  you  will.  It  will  be  of  advantage
to  you  if  you  shall  tell  anything  which  will  profit  us.”
“ I have,”  he  said,  “ the  treasure  of  Narses  hidden  away,
which  I,  being  near  the  end  of  my  life,  cannot  longer
conceal.”  Then  Caesar  Tiberius  was  delighted  and  sent
his  servants  up  to  the  place,  and  the  old  man  went  ahead 2
and  they  followed  in  astonishment,  and  coming  to  the  cis-
tern, when  it  was  opened  they  entered  it.  So  much  gold
and  silver  was  found  in  it  that  it  could  with  difficulty  be
emptied  in  many  days  by  those  carrying  its  contents.
Almost  all  of  this  he  bestowed  upon  the  needy  in  bounti-
ful distribution  according  to  his  custom.  When  he  was
about  to  accept  the  imperial  crown,  and  the  people  were

IrThe  centenarium  is  a hundred  pounds  weight  (Du  Cange).
According  to  Hodgkin  (V,  196)  this  thousand  centenaria  would
equal  four  million  pounds  sterling,  an  incredible  sum.

•Literally  “withdrawing.**

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

no

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

expecting  him  at  the  spectacle  in  the  circus  according
to  usage,  and  were  preparing  an  ambuscade  for  him
that  they  might  raise  Justinian,  the  nephew  of  Justin,  to
the  imperial  dignity,  he  first  proceeded  through  the
consecrated  places,  then  he  called  to  him  the  pontiff  of
the  city  and  entered  the  palace  with  the  consuls  and
prefects,  and  clad  in  the  purple,  crowned  with  the  dia-
dem and  placed  upon  the  imperial  throne,  he  was  con-
firmed with  immense  applause  in  the  honor  of  the
sovereignty.  His  adversaries  hearing  this,  and  not  be-
ing able  in  any  way  to  injure  him  who  had  placed  his
hope  in  God,  were  covered  with  great  shame  and  con-
fusion. And  after  a few  days  had  elapsed,  Justinian
came  and  cast  himself  at  the  foot  of  the  emperor  bring-
ing him  fifteen  centenaria  of  gold  for  the  sake  of
pardon.  Tiberius,  raising  him  up  in  his  patient  way,
commanded  him  to  place  himself  in  the  palace  at  his
side.  But  the  empress  Sophia,  unmindful  of  the  prom-
ise she  had  previously  made  to  Tiberius,  attempted  to
carry  on  a plot  against  him.  And  when  he  proceeded
to  his  villa  according  to  imperial  custom,  to  enjoy  for
thirty  days  the  pleasures  of  the  vintage,  she  secretly
called  Justinian  and  wished  to  raise  him  to  the  sover-
eignty. When  this  was  discovered,  Tiberius  returned
in  great  haste  to  Constantinople,  arrested  the  empress
and  despoiled  her  of  all  her  treasures,  leaving  her  only
the  nourishment  of  her  daily  food.  And  when  he  had
separated  her  servants  from  her  he  put  others  at  her  ser-
vice of  those  devoted  to  himself,  commanding  absolutely
that  none  of  the  former  ones  should  have  access  to  her.
But  Justinian,  whom  he  punished  only  by  words,  he

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

Ill

afterwards  cherished  with  so  great  a love  that  he  prom-
ised his  own  daughter  to  his  son,  and  on  the  other  hand
asked  Justinian’s  daughter  for  his  own  son.  But  this
thing,  from  what  cause  I know  not,  did  not  at  all  come
to  pass.  The  army  sent  by  him  completely  subdued
the  Persians,  and  returning  victorious,  brought,  together
with  twenty  elephants,  so  great  a quantity  of  booty  as
would  be  thought  enough  to  satisfy  human  cupidity.

Chapter  XIII.

When  Hilperic,  king  of  the  Franks,  sent  messengers
to  this  sovereign,  he  received  from  him  many  trinkets,
and  gold  pieces  too,  of  a pound  each,  having  on  the  one
side  the  image  of  the  emperor  and  the  words  written  in  a
circle,  “Of  Tiberius  Constantine  Universal  Emperor/*  and
having  on  the  other  side  a quadriga  with  a driver1 *  and
containing  the  inscription  “ The  glory  of  the  Romans/*
In  his  days  while  the  blessed  Gregory,  the  deacon  who
afterwards  became  Pope,  was  papal  delegate  at  the  same
imperial  city,  he  composed  books  of  Morals9  and
vanquished  in  debate  in  the  presence  of  the  emperor  him-
self, Euthicius,3  a bishop  of  that  city  who  fell  into
error  regarding  the  resurrection.4 * *  Also  at  this  time

1 Ascensor,  literally,  one  who  went  up  in  it.

1 The  object  of  this  treatise  was  to  show  that  the  book  of  Job
comprehended  all  natural  theology  and  morals.

1 Not  the  same  as  Eutyches,  leader  of  the  Eutychian  heresy,
who  lived  in  the  preceding  century.

4 Euthicius  maintained  that  the  resurrection  body  of  the  saints

will  be  more  subtile  than  ether  and  too  rare  to  be  perceived  by  the

senses,  a view  which  Gregory  contested  (Hodgkin,  V,  293).

Digitized  by

Google

1 12

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Faroald,  first  duke  of  the  Spoletans,  invaded  Classis 1
with  an  army  of  Langobards  and  left  the  rich  city
stripped,  plundered  of  all  its  wealth.*

Chapter  XIV.

The  patriarch  Probinus,  having  died  at  Aquileia  after
he  had  ruled  the  church  one  year,  the  priest  Helias
(Elias)  was  set  over  that  church.

1 The  harbor  of  Ravenna.

* While  Paul  has  been  narrating  many  events  which  took  place
in  Gaul  or  at  Constantinople,  he  has  been  neglecting  the  trans-
actions in  Italy,  to  which  he  now  for  a moment  returns.  Among
the  events  of  the  interregnum,  while  the  dukes  held  sway  over  the
Langobards,  and  Longinus,  the  prefect,  governed  the  Roman  por-
tion of  Italy,  was  the  first  serious  resistance  offered  to  the  Lango-
bard  invasion.  Alboin  had  encountered  little  opposition,  for
the  inhabitants  of  the  open  country  fled  to  .the  cities  which  held
out  for  a shorter  or  longer  period,  the  Romans  hoping,  no
doubt,  that  this  invasion,  like  others  which  had  preceded  it,
would  soon  be  over  and  that  the  barbarians  would  retire.  But  in
575  or  5 76,  Baduarius,  the  son-in-law  of  the  emperor  Justin  II,
assembled  in  Ravenna  a considerable  body  of  troops,  and  went
forth  and  gave  battle  to  the  invaders.  He  was  overthrown  and
died.  It  is  not  known  what  part  of  the  forces  of  the  various
Langobard  dukedoms  were  his  antagonists.  Probably  it  was  those
who  were  advancing  towards  the  south  and  who,  not  far  from  this
time,  established  the  important  dukedoms  of  Spoleto  and  Bene-
vento  under  dukes  Faroald  and  Zotto  respectively  (Hartmann,  II,
I,  47).  The  taking  of  Classis  by  Faroald  mentioned  in  the  text
probably  occurred  about  579,  while  Longinus  was  still  prefect
(Hodgkin,  V,  197;  VI,  90,  91,  note).  The  city  was  afterwards
retaken  from  the  Langobards  by  Droctulft  (III,  19,  infra).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

113

Chapter  XV.

After  Tiberius  Constantine  had  ruled  the  empire
seven  years,  he  felt  the  day  of  his  death  impending  and
with  the  approval  of  the  empress  Sophia,  he  chose
Maurice,  a Cappadocian  by  race,  an  energetic  man,  for
the  sovereignty,  and  gave  him  his  daughter  adorned
with  the  royal  decorations,  saying,  “ Let  my  sovereignty
be  delivered  to  thee  with  this  girl.  Be  happy  in  the
use  of  it,  mindful  always  to  love  equity  and  justice.”
After  he  had  said  these  things  he  departed  from  this
life  to  his  eternal  home,  leaving  great  grief  to  the  nation
on  account  of  his  death.1  For  he  was  of  the  greatest
goodness,  ready  in  giving  alms,  just  in  his  decisions,
most  careful  in  judging,  despising  no  one,  but  including
all  in  his  good  will ; loving  all,  he  was  also  beloved  by
all.  When  he  was  dead,  Maurice,  clad  in  the  purple  and
encircled  with  the  diadem,  proceeded  to  the  circus,  and
his  praises  having  been  acclaimed,  gifts  were  bestowed
upon  the  people,  and  he,  as  the  first  (emperor)  of  the
race  of  the  Greeks,  was  confirmed  in  the  imperial  power.

Chapter  XVI.

But  the  Langobards  indeed,  when  they  had  been
under  the  power  of  dukes  for  ten  years,  determined  at
length  by  common  consent  that  Authari,  the  son  of
their  sovereign  Cleph,  above  mentioned,  should  be  their
king.  And  they  called  him  also  Flavius 3 on  account  of

*A.  D.  582  (Hodgkin,  V,  227).

* A title  borrowed  from  the  family  name  of  Vespasian  and  Titus,
afterwards  used  by  a number  of  their  successors  and  by  the  em-

Digitized  by  Caooole

1 14

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

his  high  office.  All  those  who  were  afterwards  kings
of  the  Langobards  auspiciously  used  this  name.  In  his
days  on  account  of  the  re-establishment  of  the  king-
dom, those  who  were  then  dukes  gave  up  half  of  their
possessions  for  royal  uses  that  there  might  be  the  means
from  which  the  king  himself  and  those  who  should  at-
tend him  and  those  devoted  to  his  service  throughout
the  various  offices  might  be  supported.1  The  oppressed
people,  however,  were  parcelled  out  among  their  Lango-
bard  guests.*  There  was  indeed  this  admirable  thing  in

perors  of  the  East  and  thence  transferred  to  other  sovereigns,
for  example,  to  Odoacar  (Hodgkin,  V,  234)  and  to  the  Visigothic
kings  of  Spain  after  Recared  (Abel,  p.  60).  It  was  used  to
signify  that  the  Langobard  king  had  succeeded  to  the  imperial
dignity.

1 The  powers  of  the  king  are  nowhere  clearly  defined.  It  should
be  noted  that  he  was  king  of  the  Langobard  people  (not  king  of
Italy),  and  that  the  Romans,  who  were  not  free  subjects,  were  not
taken  into  consideration  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  30).  It  would  seem
(Hodgkin,  VI,  568)  that  the  laws  were  devised  by  him  after  con-
sultation with  the  principal  men  and  nobles,  and  then  accepted
by  the  army,  which  formed  the  assembly  of  the  people.  The  king
was  the  supreme  judge,  but  was  assisted  by  jurors  in  coming  to
his  conclusions.  The  highest  criminal  jurisdiction  was  exercised
by  him,  sometimes  immediately  in  cases  of  great  importance,  but
more  frequently  by  means  of  his  officers.  He  had  the  highest
police  jurisdiction.  Without  his  permission  no  free  man  accom-
panied by  his  clan  (Jara ) might  change  his  residence.  Churches
and  convents  were  under  his  protection.  He  represented  a woman
as  against  her  guardian  and  a retainer  as  against  his  lord.

* 1 'Populi  tamen  adgravatiper  Langobardos  hospites partiuntur.  * *
This  is  one  of  the  most  important  passages  in  Paul’s  history,  as  it
furnishes  almost  the  only  existing  statement  of  the  condition  of
the  Roman  population  under  the  early  Langobard  kings.  It  has

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.  1 15

the  kingdom  of  the  Langobards.  There  was  no  vio-

been  considered  very  obscure,  and  various  interpretations  have
been  given.  Giansvero  renders  it:  “ And  the  people,  oppressed
by  their  Langobard  guests,  are  divided.  ’ * Abel  translates  nearly
as  in  the  text.  Hodgkin  (V,  232)  renders  it  thus:  “(In  this
division)  the  subject  populations  who  had  been  assigned  to  their
several  guests  were  included.”  This  departs  widely  from  the
Latin  text,  though  it  may  well  be  the  actual  meaning.  Capponi
(Sui  Langobardi  in  Italia  18,  see  Scritti  Editi  e Inediti,  75,  77)  be-
lieves that  the  sentence  means  that  the  tributary  populations
remained  divided  among  the  Langobard  guests,  and  that  the
property  only  was  ceded  to  the  king.  But  Hodgkin  asks  (VI,
585)  why  the  lands  should  be  given  to  the  king  stripped  of  the
Roman  aldii  to  cultivate  them,  and  what  the  dukes  who  surren-
dered part  of  their  land  would  do  with  the  increased  population
now  thrown  wholly  upon  the  remainder.  Villari  insists  (Le
Invasioni  Barbariche  in  Italia,  pp.  265,  266)  that  the  property
which  the  Langobard  dukes  divided  with  the  king  was  that  which
they  had  taken  from  the  Roman  nobles  they  had  killed  (II,  32
supra),  or  which  they  had  confiscated  in  other  ways,  and  that
there  still  remained  to  these  dukes  the  third  of  the  products  of  the
lands  possessed  by  the  Romans,  and  he  adds  (p.  273)  that  the
“oppressed  people  ” were  the  same  as  those  who  had  been  made
tributaries  before  (II,  32  supra),  and  who,  therefore,  had  been
and  still  remained  divided  among  the  Langobard  proprietors  who
surrendered  to  the  king  half  of  the  lands  which  were  their  free
and  full  property.  Savigny  says  (Geschichte  des  Romischen
Rechts,  I,  chap.  5,  p.  401):  “ The  king  was  endowed  by  the  nobles.
The  Romans  were  in  the  meantime  divided  among  the  individual
Langobards  as  their  hospites  and  the  old  relation  between  them
remained  unchanged.”  Hegel  says:  “There  was  no  change  in
the  general  condition  of  the  conquered  Romans.  They  remained
divided  among  their  hospites.  * * Troya  (Storia  d’ltalia,  I,  5 ccccx)
contends  that  the  true  reading  is  patiuntur  for  partiuntur . “ The

dukes  gave  one-half  of  their  property  to  the  king,  nevertheless
the  populations  oppressed  by  the  Langobard  guests  suffered  for  it,”

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

ii  6

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

lence,  no  ambuscades  were  laid,  no  one  constrained  an-
other unjustly,  no  one  took  spoils,  there  were  no  thefts,

The  dukes  made  up  for  their  patriotic  surrender  by  screwing  a
larger  tribute  out  of  the  oppressed  Romans.  But  Hodgkin  re-
marks (VI,  586,  note)  that  this  does  not  agree  with  the  sentence
that  follows  about  the  golden  age.  Since  Paul  no  longer  speaks
of  the  products  of  the  land,  some  think  (see  Villari,  pp.  265,  266,
273)  that  the  third  of  the  rents  was  changed  into  a third  of  the
lands,  and  believe  that  since  the  Langobards  had  made  new
acquisitions  of  territory,  a division  was  made  of  the  new  lands
for  the  benefit  of  those  who  had  to  give  the  king  part  of  their  own
possessions.

It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  the  above  passage  is  as  difficult  as
it  has  been  considered.  In  the  parcelling  out  of  the  people  among
their  Langobard  guests,  the  king,  through  his  representative  (his
actor , or  perhaps  his  gastaldus ),  may  well  have  been  one  of  these
“ guests,”  a word  which,  as  we  have  seen,  was  the  euphemistic
name  assumed  by  the  Langobards  who  settled  upon  the  lands  of
the  Romans  and  took  a share  of  the  products.  In  that  case  the
literal  translation  given  in  the  text  would  be  entirely  appropriate,
and  yet  there  would  be  no  shifting  of  the  population  nor  any
change  in  the  system  of  dividing  the  products  of  the  land.

One  great  difficulty  with  the  passage  has  been  to  explain  the
use  of  the  word  tamen  (however),  the  usual  meaning  of  which  is
adversative.  Crivellucci  (Studii  Storici,  1899,  255)  shows  that  out
of  forty-eight  instances  in  which  this  conjunction  is  used  by  Paul
in  this  history,  there  are  six  places  where  it  might  properly  be
given  a copulative  meaning  equivalent  to  “and”  or  “also,”
and  one  place  where  such  a meaning  is  required,  viz.,  at  the  be-
ginning of  chapter  23,  book  II.  It  is  certain  that  this  conjunction
as  well  as  nikilominus , its  equivalent,  was  often  used  by  Paul,
either  with  a variable  meaning  or  else  most  inexpressively,  and
that  its  use  here  ought  not  to  interfere  with  a translation  of  this
passage,  which  is  in  other  respects  both  reasonable  and  literal.

As  to  the  condition  of  this  subject  Roman  population  see  note
to  II,  32,  supra.

. Digitized  by  kjOOQle

BOOK  III.  1 17

no  robberies,  every  one  proceeded  whither  he  pleased,
safe  and  without  fear.1

Chapter  XVII.

At  this  time  the  emperor  Maurice  sent  by  his
ambassadors  to  Childepert,  king  of  the  Franks,  50,000
solidi 9 to  make  an  attack  with  his  army  upon  the  Lan-
gobards  and  drive  them  from  Italy,  and  Childepert
suddenly  entered  Italy  with  a countless  multitude  of
Franks.3  The  Langobards  indeed  intrenched  them-
selves in  their  towns  and  when  messengers  had  passed
between  the  parties  and  gifts  had  been  offered  they
made  peace  with  Childepert;*  j When  he  had  returned

1 This  description  of  the  golden  age  is  not  borne  out  by  the  facts
(Pabst,  425,  note  2).

* The  value  of  the  gold  solidus  (here  referred  to)  differed  at  dif-
ferent times.  Hodgkin  places  it  at  twelve  shillings,  so  that  this
50,000  solidi  was  equal  to  ^30,000  (V,  228).  He  also  (VI,  413,
414)  gives  a table  of  the  purchasing  power  of  the  solidus  about  the
time  of  Liutprand,  which  was  more  than  a century  later  than  the
period  in  question.  The  average  value  of  a slave  varied  from
sixty  solidi  to  sixteen ; a new  olive  garden  sold  for  eight  solidi ;
half  a house  in  Pisa  for  nine;  a garden  in  Lucca  for  fifteen;  a bed,
tunic  and  mantle  for  ten  solidi  each;  a horse  with  trappings  for
one  hundred  solidi,  etc.  Personalty  seems  to  have  had  a high
value  in  comparison  with  real  estate.

8 Paul  erroneously  places  the  elevation  of  Authari  to  the  throne
before  the  arrangement  made  by  the  emperor  Maurice  with  Child-
pert  II,  A.  D.  582,  for  a common  enterprise  against  the  Lango-
bards. In  fact,  it  was  the  threatened  danger  of  foreign  invasion
which  induced  the  dukes  to  strengthen  their  military  power  by
the  creation  of  a king  (Jacobi,  35).

4 Gregory  of  Tours,  from  whom  Paul  took  this  statement,  says

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

Il8  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

to  Gaul,  the  emperor  Maurice,  having  learned  that  he
had  made  a treaty  with  the  Langobards,  asked  for  the
return  of  the  solidi  he  had  given  in  consideration  of  the
overthrow  of  the  Langobards.  But  Childepert,  relying
upon  the  strength  of  his  resources,  would  not  give  an
answer  in  this  matter.

Chapter  XVIII.

When  these  things  had  been  done  in  this  way,
king  Authari  approached  the  city  of  Brexillus  (Bres-
cello),  situated  on  the  bank  of  the  Po,1  to  capture  it.
Thither  duke  Droctulft  had  fled  from  the  Langobards
and  surrendering  to  the  emperor’s  party,  and  being
joined  by  his  soldiers,  resisted  bravely  the  army  of
the  Langobards.  This  man  was  descended  from  the
race  of  Suavi  (Suabians),  that  is,  of  the  Alamanni,  and
had  grown  up  among  the  Langobards,  and  because  he
was  of  an  excellent  figure,  had  acquired  the  honor  of  a
dukedom,  but  when  he  found  an  occasion  of  avenging  his
captivity*  he  suddenly  rose  against  the  arms  of  the
Langobards.  The  Langobards  waged  grievous  wars
against  him  and  at  length  overcame  him  together  with
the  soldiers  he  was  aiding,  and  compelled  him  to  with-
draw to  Ravenna.  Brexillus  was  taken  and  its  walls  were

the  Langobards  submitted  to  Childepert’ s dominion  (H.  F.,  6,  42).
Probably  these  gifts  were  considered  as  tribute.

1 Twelve  miles  from  Parma  and  on  the  Aemilian  way  (Hodgkin,
V,  243).

* He  had  apparently  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  Imperial  troops,
and  resented  his  lack  of  support  by  the  other  Langobard  dukes,
to  whom  he  considered  he  owed  his  captivity  (Hodgkin,  V,  242).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

levelled  to  the  ground.  After  these  things  king  Authari
made  peace  for  three  years  with  the  patrician  Smarag-
dus,*  who  was  then  in  authority  at  Ravenna.

Chapter  XIX.

With  the  support  of  this  Droctulft,  of  whom  we
have  spoken,  the  soldiers  of  the  Ravenna  people  often
fought  against  the  Langobards,  and  after  a fleet  was
built,  they  drove  out  with  his  aid  the  Langobards  who
were  holding  the  city  of  Classis.9  And  when  he  had
filled  the  limit  of  life,  they  gave  him  an  honorable  sepul-
cher in  front  of  the  church  of  the  holy  martyr  Vitalis,1 * 3
and  set  forth  his  praises  in  the  following  epitaph :

Drocton  lies  buried  within  this  tomb,  but  only  in  body.

For  in  his  merits  he  lives,  over  the  orb  of  the  world.

First  with  the  Langobards  he  dwelt,  for  by  race  and  by  nature

Sprung  from  Suavian  stock,  suave  to  all  people  was  he.

1Smaragdus  had  been  appointed  in  585  to  succeed  the  incap-
able Longinus  (Hodgkin,  V,  242).  This  treaty  was  made  very
shortly  afterwards  (Waitz).

*The  port  of  Ravenna.  The  dates  conjectured  for  this  event
vary  from  A.  D.  584  to  588  (Hodgkin,  VI,  91,  92).

• This  church,  an  octagonal  building  in  the  Byzantine  style,  was
completed  in  the  year  547,  with  the  aid  of  contributions  made  by
the  emperor  Justinian  and  the  empress  Theodora.  Its  walls  were
adorned  with  exquisite  mosaics  which  are  still  in  an  excellent
state  of  preservation.  St.  Vitalis  was  the  patron  saint  of  Ravenna.
He  came  to  that  city  from  Milan  during  the  persecution  under
Nero,  A.  D.  62,  at  a time  when  St.  Ursicinus  was  about  to  suffer
martyrdom.  He  sustained  and  encouraged  Ursicinus,  who  was
terrified  at  the  torments  he  was  compelled  to  undergo,  and  after
his  death  Vitalis  buried  him,  and  was  thereupon  arrested,  tor-
tured, and  buried  alive  (Larousse).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

120

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Terrible  to  be  seen  was  his  face,  though  in  heart  he  was  kindly.
Long  was  the  beard  that  grew  down  on  his  vigorous  breast.

| Loving  the  standards  of  Rome  and  the  emblems  of  the  republic.
Aid  unto  them  he  brought,  crushing  the  power  of  his  race.

Love  unto  us  ho  bore,  despising  the  claims  of  his  kindred.
Deeming  Ravenna  his  own  fatherland,  dear  to  his  heart.

First  of  his  valiant  deeds  was  the  glory  of  captured  Brexillus.

There  for  a time  he  remained,  dreadful  to  all  of  his  foes.

Later  when  here  his  power  brought  aid  to  the  Roman  standards
First  within  his  hands  rested  the  banner  of  Christ.

Afterwards  when  Faroald  withheld  by  treachery  Classis,

1 * Fleet-town  * * 1 in  hope  to  avenge,  arms  for  the  fleet  he  prepares.
Struggles  in  tiny  ships  on  the  flowing  stream  of  Badrinus.  *
Conquers  and  overcomes  numberless  Langobard  8 bands.
Vanquishes  also  in  lands  of  the  East  the  impetuous  Avar,

Seeking  to  win  for  his  lords  victory’ s sovereign  palm.

Often  to  them  as  a conq’  ror,  sustained  by  the  aid  of  Vitalis,
Martyr  and  holy  saint,  honored  with  triumphs  he  came.

And  in  the  fane  of  Vitalis  he  sought  the  repose  of  his  body,

Pleased  that  this  place  should  hold,  after  his  death,  his  remains
When  he  died,  he  implored  these  things  of  the  priest  Joannes,4
By  whose  pious  love  he  had  returned  to  these  lands.6

1 Classis , **  a fleet " being  the  name  of  the  town.

* Padoreno,  say  some,  (Waitz)  but  this  was  one  of  the  mouths  of
the  Po  more  than  thirty  miles  distant  (Hodg.,  V,  247  note).

8 In  the  original  the  Langobards  are  called  Bardi , a name  which
recalls  the  Bardengau  and  Bardowick  of  the  Elbe  region.

4 Johannes  III,  bishop  of  Ravenna,  578-595  (Hodgkin  V,  248
note  2).

6 A somewhat  freer  translation  in  rhyme  is  given  in  Hodgkin
(V,  247).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

121

Chapter  XX.

Finally,  after  pope  Benedict,  Pelagius*  was  ordained
pontiff  of  the  Roman  church  without  the  authority  of
the  emperor,  because  the  Langobards  had  besieged  and
surrounded  Rome,  and  no  one  could  leave  the  city.  This
Pelagius  sent  to  Helias  (Elias),  bishop  of  Aquileia,  who
was  unwilling  to  respect  the  Three  Chapters2  of  the

1 The  second  of  that  name.  This  election  of  Pelagius  actually
occurred  in  578-579  (Hodgkin,  V,  195),  and  is  placed  by  Paul
at  too  late  a period,  after  the  elevation  of  Authari  to  the  throne
(Jacobi,  48,  49).

* Paul  is  mistaken  in  calling  them  the  1 ‘ Three  Chapters  of  the
Synod  of  Chalcedon.”  The  Three  Chapters  were  the  doctrines
of  three  bishops,  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  Theodoret  of  Cyrrhus
and  Ibas  of  Edessa,  which  were  condemned  by  the  Synod  of  Con-
stantinople in  532  (Waitz,  P.  Ill,  26,  note).  It  was,  however,
considered  by  many  that  this  condemnation  affected  the  validity
of  the  decrees  of  the  previous  Council  of  Chalcedon.  Paul  is  also
in  error  in  saying  that  Elias  was  unwilling  to  respect  the  Three
Chapters.  It  was  Elias  who  supported  these  doctrines  and  it  was
Pope  Pelagius  who  condemned  them.

The  controversy  regarding  the  Three  Chapters  which  agitated
the  church  from  the  time  of  Justinian  (543)  to  that  of  Cunincpert
(698),  had  its  origin  in  still  older  disputes  concerning  the  incarna-
tion of  the  Messiah.  Apollinaris,  bishop  of  Laodicea,  taught  that
there  was  one  incarnate  nature  of  Christ ; that  the  God-head  was
united  to  the  body  of  a man,  and  the  Logos , the  Eternal  Wisdom,
supplied  in  him  the  place  of  a human  soul.  These  teachings
were  condemned  as  heresy,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  cen-
tury the  combination  of  two  natures  was  the  prevailing  doctrine  of
the  church,  yet  the  mode  of  the  co-existence  of  these  natures  could
not  be  represented  by  our  ideas  nor  expressed  by  our  language,
and  contention  began  between  those  who  most  dreaded  to  con-
found, and  those  who  most  feared  to  separate  the  divinity  and  the

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

122

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Synod  of  Chalcedon,  a very  salutary  letter  which  the

humanity  of  Christ.  Cyril,  patriarch  of  Alexandria,  was  at  the
head  of  one  faction  and  Nestorius,  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  at
the  head  of  the  other.  Both  were  fanatical  and  intolerant.  Nes-
torius abhorred  the  confusion  of  the  two  natures  and  repudiated
the  doctrine  that  the  Virgin  was  the  mother  of  God.  Cyril  es-
poused the  side  of  a greater  unity  in  Christ’s  nature.  Pope  Celes-
tine  approved  his  creed  and  condemned  the  doctrine  of  Nestorius.
The  first  Council  of  Ephesus  was  called,  and  amid  much  tumult
and  violence  Cyril  was  upheld  and  Nestorius  pronounced  a her-
etic. Cyril,  however,  softened  to  some  extent  his  previous  ana-
themas, and  confessed  with  some  ambiguity  the  union  of  a two-
fold nature  in  Christ.  Eutyches,  an  abbot  of  Constantinople,
was  the  head  of  a sect  that  was  so  extreme  in  its  opposition  to
the  doctrine  of  Nestorius  that  it  incurred  itself  the  reproach
of  heresy.  Flavian,  bishop  of  Constantinople,  condemned  the
doctrine  of  Eutyches.  A second  council  was  summoned  at
Ephesus,  but  it  was  dominated  like  the  first  by  the  patriarch  of
Alexandria  and  it  accepted  his  doctrine.  A furious  multitude  of
monks  and  soldiers  broke  into  the  church.  Flavian  was  buffeted
and  kicked  and  trampled  until  he  expired  from  his  wounds,  and
the  Council  of  Ephesus  has  passed  into  history  as  “The  Robber
Synod."  Pope  Leo  the  Great  was  not  in  accord  with  the  doctrine
of  Eutyches.  His  famous  Tome  or  epistle  on  the  mystery  of  the
Incarnation  had  been  disregarded  at  the  last  Council  of  Ephesus,
but  upon  the  death  of  the  emperor  Theodosius,  the  decrees  of  that
council  were  overthrown,  the  Tome  of  Leo  was  subscribed  by  the
Oriental  bishops,  and  a new  council  was  summoned  at  Chalcedon,
near  Constantinople.  (Gibbon,  ch.  47.)  In  this  council  (Hodg-
son, Early  History  of  Venice,  pp.  44  and  45)  Leo’s  letter
was  accepted  as  the  orthodox  doctrine  and  as  a refutation  of
Eutyches,  and  it  was  declared  that  the  two  natures  of  Christ  ex-
isted without  any  “confusion,  conversion,  division  or  separation."
At  the  same  time  certain  letters  ot  Cyril  were  accepted  as  a refu-
tation of  Nestorius,  and  the  controversy  was  now  regarded  as
settled.  This  council  was  held  in  the  year  45 1 . Nearly  a century

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.  123

blessed  Gregory  composed  while  he  was  still  a deacon.

afterwards  when  Justinian  came  to  the  throne,  he  and  his  wife
Theodora  re-opened  the  question  by  issuing  an  edict  against  cer-
tain writings  of  three  men  long  dead — Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,
whose  orthodoxy  had  always  been  doubtful,  Theodoret  of  Cyrrhus,
who  had  been  condemned  by  the  Robber  Synod  and  reinstated
by  the  Council  of  Chalcedony  and  a bishop  of  Edessa  named  Ibas.
The  emperor’s  edict  set  forth  certain  passages  from  the  writings
of  these  men  and  anathematized  them  as  infected  with  Nestori-
anism.  The  condemned  doctrines  were  known  as  “ The  Three
Chapters.  ’ * The  papacy  was  then  held  by  the  weak  and  irresolute
Vigilius,  a creature  of  Theodora,  whose  election  to  office  had  been
tainted  with  simony.  When  the  imperial  decree  was  promulgated
against  the  Three  Chapters,  the  Western  church  which  had  sup-
ported the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  naturally  opposed  it,  and  Vigilius
came  to  Constantinople  in  547  pledged  against  the  emperor's
edict.  But  when  he  had  been  in  that  city  a little  more  than  a
year,  he  was  induced  by  flattery  and  promises  to  issue  his  Judi -
c a turn , which  assented  to  the  emperor’s  doctrine,  “saving,  how-
ever, the  Council  of  Chalcedon.”  The  remonstrances  of  the
western  bishops  led  him  again  to  reconsider  his  position.  In  550,
the  Judicatum  was  withdrawn;  in  551,  the  pope  pronounced  a
solemn  condemnation  of  Justinian’s  advisers  in  the  matter.  The
emperor  now  resorted  to  violence,  Vigilius  was  roughly  handled,
a general  council  was  summoned  at  Constantinople  which  was  at-
tended almost  exclusively  by  eastern  bishops.  The  pope  took
no  part  except  to  send  to  that  body  a Constitutum  in  which  he
asserted  his  right  to  guide  the  opinions  of  all  churchmen  and  an-
nul all  decrees  inconsistent  with  his  teachings.  He  did  not  de-
fend the  orthodoxy  of  Theodore,  but  in  regard  to  Ibas  and  Theo-
doret, he  adhered  to  the  approval  given  them  at  Chalcedon.  But
after  the  Council  of  Constantinople  had  disregarded  his  authority
and  anathematized  the  Three  Chapters,  and  the  emperor  was  pro-
ceeding to  banish  him  for  contumacy,  he  retracted,  finding  that
the  decrees  of  this  council  were  not  irreconcilable  with  those  of
Chalcedon  (Hodgson,  46,  47),  and  after  his  death  Pelagius  I,  his

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

124

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXI.

Meanwhile  Childepert,  king  of  the  Franks,  waged  war

successor,  ratified  the  condemnation  of  the  Three  Chapters.  After
the  papacy  had  thus  committed  itself  to  the  views  of  Justinian,  it
became  very  earnest  in  its  advocacy  of  these  views,  although  the
churches  of  Spain  and  Gaul  refused  to  condemn  the  Three  Chap-
ters, while  Milan,  Aquileia  and  the  churches  of  Istria  went  further
and  refused  communion  with  all  who  held  with  the  Council  of
Constantinople  (Hodgson,  48,  49).

Paulinus,  who  was  bishop  of  Aquileia  from  about  558  to  570,
assembled  a synod  in  which  Pelagius,  Justinian  and  Narses  were
all  excommunicated  (Filiasi,  V,  255).  John  III,  the  successor  of
Pelagius,  tried  to  convert  the  schismatics,  but  failed,  whereupon
Narses  proceeded  by  command  of  Justinian  against  the  rebellious
bishops.  After  two  years  of  turmoil  Justinian  died,  whereupon
the  tumult  partly  subsided,  and  Narses  sought  to  quiet  it  rather
by  skill  than  by  violence  (Hodgson,  48,  49).  After  the  invasion
of  the  Langobards  In  568  Paulinus  moved  the  See  of  Aquileia
from  that  city  to  Grado,  and  soon  afterwards  died  (P.  II,  10).
Probinus,  who  followed  him,  was  also  a schismatic,  as  well  as
Elias,  his  successor,  who  held  a synod  in  Grado,  which  sent
legates  to  Constantinople,  and  prevailed  upon  the  emperor  to
leave  the  schismatics  in  peace  (Hodgson,  48,  49).  John  III  was
succeeded  by  Benedict,  and  he  by  Pelagius  II  (Hodgkin,  V,  460),
who  wrote  to  Elias  exhorting  the  Istrians  to  abandon  the  schism,
and  inviting  them  to  send  bishops  and  presbyters  to  Rome  to  re-
ceive satisfaction  on  all  the  points  upon  which  they  were  in  doubt
(Hodgkin,  V,  462,  3).  The  messengers  were  sent,  but  evidently
not  to  receive  the  promised  explanation,  for  they  brought  with
them  a sharp  definition  of  the  views  of  the  schismatics,  demand-
ing in  effect  that  the  pope  himself  should  give  way.  Pelagius  in
a second  letter  argued  the  question  with  them  and  demanded  that
they  should  send  instructed  persons  able  to  give  and  receive  a
reason  in  debate.  The  Istrian  bishops  sent  another  letter  announc-
ing their  own  authoritative  decision,  and  it  was  to  this  second  let-

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

125

against  the  Spaniards  and  overcame  them  in  battle.1
And  this  was  the  cause  of  the  struggle : King  Childe-
pert  had  given  Ingundis  his  sister  in  marriage  to  Her-
minigild,  son  of  Levigild,  king  of  the  Spaniards.  And
this  Herminigild,  by  the  preaching  of  Leander,  bishop
of  Hispalis  (Seville),  and  by  the  exhortation  of  his  wife,
had  been  converted  from  the  Arian  heresy,  in  which  his
father  was  languishing,  to  the  Catholic  faith,  and  his
impious  father  had  caused  him  put  to  death  by  the  axe
upon  the  very  holiday  of  Easter.2  Ingundis  indeed
fled  from  the  Spaniards  after  the  death  of  her  husband
and  martyr,3  and  when  she  sought  to  return  to  Gaul,  she

ter  that  Pelagius  sent  as  his  answer  the  ‘ ‘ useful  epistle  ’ ’ composed
by  Gregory,  and  referred  to  in  the  text  (Hodgkin,  V,  465).  The
argument  insists  that  Pope  Leo  had  not  confirmed  all  the  decrees
of  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  but  had  rather  reserved  private  and
personal  matters;  that  the  acts  of  the  three  Syrian  bishops  might
be  considered  as  included  in  this  reservation;  that  the  Council  had
impliedly  condemned  these  bishops  since  it  had  approved  of  Cyril
and  the  Council  of  Ephesus  which  they  opposed;  that  there  was
good  authority  for  anathematizing  heretics  even  after  their  death,
and  that  the  long  reluctance  by  Vigilius  and  the  Western  bishops
to  accept  the  decrees  of  the  Council  of  Constantinople,  arose  from
their  ignorance  of  Greek  and  gave  all  the  more  value  to  their  final
conclusions.  The  letter  however,  did  not  convert  the  schismatics,
and  more  violent  measures  were  soon  taken  (Hodgkin  V,  565 —
567)  as  we  shall  see  hereafter  (Book  III,  ch.  26  and  note).

1 Paul  is  in  error  regarding  this  war.  It  was  conducted  not  by
Childepert,  but  by  Gunthram,  and  was  unsuccessful  (Jacobi,  36).

*This  fact  is  doubtful  (Hodgkin,  V,  255).  He  was  probably  as-
sassinated, although  he  seems  to  have  raised  the  standard  of  re-
bellion against  his  father  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  66).

* He  was  not  regarded  as  a martyr  by  Gregory  of  Tours  (VI,
43),  but  as  a rebel  against  his  father.

Digitized  by

Google

126

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

fell  into  the  hands  of  the  soldiers  who  were  stationed
on  the  boundary  opposite  the  Spanish  Goths,  and  was
taken  with  her  little  son  and  brought  to  Sicily  and  there
ended  her  days.1 * * *  But  her  son  was  sent  to  Constanti-
nople to  the  emperor  Maurice.

Chapter  XXII.

The  emperor  Maurice  on  the  other  hand  dispatched
ambassadors  to  Childepert  and  persuaded  him  to  send
his  army  into  Italy  against  the  Langobards.9  Childe-
pert, thinking  that  his  sister  was  still  living  at  Constanti-
nople, gave  his  assent  to  the  ambassadors  of  Maurice  and
again  sent  the  army  of  the  Franks  to  Italy  against  the
Langobards  so  that  he  could  get  his  sister.  And  when
the  army  of  the  Langobards  hastened  against  them,  the
Franks  and  Alamanni,  having  a quarrel  among  them-
selves, returned  to  their  own  country  without  securing
any  advantage.

Chapter  XXIII.

At  this  time  ^ there  was  a deluge  of  water  in  the  terri-
tories of  Venetia  and  Liguria,  and  in  other  regions  of
Italy  such  as  is  believed  not  to  have  existed  since  the
time  of  Noah.  Ruins  were  made  of  estates  and  coun-
try seats,  and  at  the  same  time  a great  destruction  of
men  and  , animals.  The  paths  were  obliterated,  the
highways  demolished,  and  the  river  Athesis  (Adige)

1 The  soldiers  into  whose  hands  Ingundis  fell  were  Greeks.  She

probably  died  at  Carthage  in  Africa  (Hodgkin,  V,  256),  not  in

Sicily.

* About  587  (Hodgkin,  V,  258).  *589  (Hodgkin,  V,  261).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

127

then  rose  so  high  that  around  the  church  of  the  blessed
martyr  Zeno,  which  is  situated  outside  the  walls  of  the
city  of  Verona,  the  water  reached  the  upper  windows,
although  as  St.  Gregory,  afterwards  pope,  also  wrote,  the
water  did  not  at  all  enter  into  that  church.  Likewise
the  walls  of  the  city  of  Verona  itself  were  partly  de-
molished by  the  same  inundation.  And  this  inundation
occurred  on  the  16th  of  the  calends  of  November
(Oct.  17th),  yet  there  were  so  many  flashes  of  light-
ning and  peals  of  thunder  as  are  hardly  wont  to  occur
even  in  the  summer  time.  Also  after  two  months  this
city  of  Verona  was  in  great  part  consumed  by  fire.

Chapter  XXIV.

In  this  outpouring  of  the  flood  the  river  Tiber  at
the  city  of  Rome  rose  so  much  that  its  waters  flowed
in  over  the  walls  of  the  city  and  filled  great  regions  in
it.  Then  through  the  bed  of  the  same  stream  a great
multitude  of  serpents,  and  a dragon  also  of  astonishing
size  passed  by  the  city  and  descended  to  the  sea.
Straightway  a very  grievous  pestilence  called  inguinal x
followed  this  inundation,  and  it  wasted  the  people  with
such  great  destruction  of  life  that  out  of  a countless
multitude  barely  a few  remained.  First  it  struck  Pope
Pelagius,  a venerable  man,  and  quickly  killed  him.  Then
when  their  pastor  was  taken  away  it  spread  among  the
people.  In  this  great  tribulation  the  most  blessed
Gregory,  who  was  then  a deacon,1  2 was  elected  Pope  by

1 Of  the  groin.

* Levita.  See  DuCange,

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

128

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

the  common  consent  of  all.  He  ordained  that  a seven-
fold litany  should  be  offered,  but  while  they  were
imploring  God,  eighty  of  them  within  the  space  of  one
hour  fell  suddenly  to  the  earth  and  gave  up  the  ghost.
The  seven-fold  litany  was  thus  called  because  all  the
people  of  the  city  were  divided  by  the  blessed  Gregory
into  seven  parts  to  intercede  with  the  Lord.  In  the  first
troop  indeed  was  all  the  clergy ; in  the  second,  all  the
abbots  with  their  monks ; in  the  third,  all  the  abbesses
with  their  companies ; in  the  fourth,  all  the  children ;
in  the  fifth,  all  the  laymen ; in  the  sixth,  all  the  widows ;
in  the  seventh,  all  the  married  women.  And  we  omit
to  say  anything  more  concerning  the  blessed  Gregory
because  some  years  ago  with  the  help  of  God  we  com-
posed his  life  in  which,  according  to  our  slender  ability,
we  sketched  in  writing  what  was  to  be  told.1

1 Gregory  the  Great,  the  descendant  of  a noble  Roman  family,
was  bom  about  the  year  540.  In  573  he  became  prefect  of  the
city,  but  two  years  afterwards  he  laid  down  this  office,  founded
six  Benedictine  convents  in  Sicily  and  converted  his  ancestral
palace  on  the  Coelian  hill  at  Rome  into  a monastery  dedicated  to
St.  Andrew,  in  which  he  himself  became  a monk.  It  was  at  this
time  that  walking  through  the  Forum  he  saw  exposed  for  sale  the
fair-haired  boys  from  Britain  of  whom  he  said  that  they  were  not
Angles  but  angels,  and  he  obtained  from  Pope  Benedict  I,  leave  to
undertake  a mission  to  that  island  for  the  conversion  of  its  people.
He  was  recalled,  however,  while  upon  the  way  and  was  appointed
deacon  to  the  Pope.  When  Benedict  died,  his  successor,  Pela-
gius  II,  sent  Gregory  as  his  nuncio  or  apocrisatius  to  the  Imperial
Court  at  Constantinople,  where,  as  Paul  states  (III,  13),  he  com-
posed his  book  of  Morals.  With  the  emperor  Maurice  his  rela-
tions were  not  always  cordial,  although  the  emperor  asked  him  to
stand  sponsor  for  his  son,  the  infant  Theodosius.  After  remain-

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  III.

129

Chapter  XXV.

At  this  time  the  same  blessed  Gregory  sent  Augustine

ing  some  six  years  in  Constantinople  he  returned  (A.  D.  585  or
586)  to  Rome  and  became  the  head  of  the  monastery  of  St.  An-
drew which  he  had  established  (Hodgkin,  V,  287  to  296).  He
now  placed  his  pen  at  the  service  of  the  Pope  in  the  controversy
between  that  pontiff  and  the  bishops  of  I stria  concerning  the  con-
demnation of  the  Three  Chapters  (See  III,  20,  supra , and  note).
In  589  the  inundation  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter
occurred,  and  in  590  the  plague  ravaged  Italy.  On  the  8th  of
February  of  the  latter  year  Pope  Pelagius  II  died  and  Gregory
was  chosen  to  succeed  him.  The  seven-fold  litany  described  by
Paul  occurred  after  Gregory  was  elected,  but  before  he  was  con-
firmed in  the  papal  dignity.  A fuller  account  of  this  litany  is
given  in  Hodgkin  (V,  298-302).

Gregory’s  Epistles,  composed  during  his  pontificate,  form  a rich
mine  for  the  investigator  of  the  history  of  that  period.  They  treat
of  the  care  of  the  vast  patrimony  of  St.  Peter  which  included  the
largest  and  richest  domains  in  Sicily  as  well  as  considerable  es-
tates in  Rome,  in  the  Sabine  country,  in  the  neighborhood  of
Ravenna,  in  Campania,  Apulia,  Bruttium,  Gaul,  Illyricum,  Sar-
dinia and  Corsica,  embracing  property  some  1 800  square  miles  in
extent.  Gregory’s  letters  show  a conscientious  regard  for  the  just
and  careful  management  of  these  estates,  as  well  as  for  the  useful
expenditure  of  the  papal  revenues  and  the  efficient  administration
of  the  church,  not  only  in  these  regions,  but  in  Africa,  Spain  and
elsewhere.  It  was  in  596  that  he  sent  St.  Augustine,  abbot  of  his
own  monastery  of  St.  Andrew,  to  Britain  on  the  mission  mentioned
in  the  following  chapter,  which  resulted  in  the  conversion  of  Ethel-
bert  and  a great  part  of  his  nobles  and  people  to  Christianity,  and
in  601  the  second  mission  under  Mellitus  was  dispatched  to  re-
enforce Augustine  and  his  co -laborers.  Gregory  reformed  the
music  of  the  church  and  remodeled  the  Roman  liturgy,  giving  the
service  of  the  mass  nearly  the  form  which  it  bears  at  the  present
day  (Hodgkin,  307-329).  He  also  took  an  important  part  in  the

Digitiz  -by  CaOOQle

130

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

and  Mellitus  and  John  with  many  other  monks  who

political  affairs  of  Italy  and  in  the  defense  of  Naples,  Rome  and
other  cities  of  the  empire  against  “the  unspeakable  Langobards.”
He  made  a separate  treaty  with  duke  Ariulf  of  Spoleto  (id.,  p.
363),  and  was,  as  w e shall  see  hereafter,  the  efficient  agent  in  pro-
curing the  peace  between  Agilulf  and  the  empire  which  relieved
Italy  from  the  devastations  of  a protracted  war.

He  made  an  earnest  and  even  daring  remonstrance  to  the  em-
peror Maurice  against  the  decree  forbidding  the  servants  of  the
state  to  enter  monasteries  (pp.  374-376);  he  reproached  the  em-
peror for  preventing  the  peace  for  which  he  had  long  been  striving
(pp.  382-387),  and  he  bitterly  resented  the  claim  of  the  patriarch
John  of  Constantinople  to  be  called  the  Ecumenical  or  Universal
Bishop  (pp.  390-400).  While  the  contest  over  the  title  was  at
its  height,  John  died.  He  was  succeeded  by  Cyriacus,  a man  of
gentler  nature,  who,  while  he  did  not  renounce,  would  not  obtrude
a title  which  Gregory  had  declared  to  be  “ the  precursor  of  Anti-
christ,” but  which  the  patriarchs  of  Constantinople  continued  to
use  until  the  Roman  pontiffs  nearly  a century  afterwards  began  to
adopt  it  for  themselves  (pp.  401-403).  In  602  Maurice  was  over-
thrown by  Phocas,  and  with  his  four  youngest  children  was  put  to
death  ; later  the  same  fate  befell  his  eldest  son  Theodosius,  and
three  years  afterwards  it  overtook  his  widowed  empress  Constan-
tina  and  her  daughters.  Phocas  proved  to  be  a tyrant,  imbecile
and  brutal,  a monster  of  lust  and  cruelty.  In  April  603  he  was
formally  proclaimed  emperor  in  Rome,  and  Gregory,  unmindful
of  the  horrors  incident  to  his  accession  to  the  throne,  addressed  to
the  usurper  a paean  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  that  has  cast  a
stain  upon  the  memory  of  this  great  pope  (pp.  434-447).  But  the
judgment  of  his  critics  is  perhaps  too  severe.  He  was  slowly
dying  of  the  gout,  from  which  he  had  suffered  many  years.
Maurice  had  appeared  to  him  as  the  oppressor  of  the  church  and
the  enemy  of  the  true  religion.  The  detestable  character  of
Phocas  was  probably  not  yet  manifest  to  Gregory,  his  responsi-
bility for  the  assassination  of  the  children  of  Maurice  may  well
have  been  unknown  or  disbelieved.  Within  a year  Gregory  died.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

131

feared  God  into  Britain  and  he  converted  the  Angles  to
Christ  by  their  preaching.

Chapter  XXVI.

In  these  days  when  Helias  (Elias),  patriarch  of  Aqui-
leia,  had  died  after  holding  his  holy  office  fifteen
years,  Severus  succeeded  him  and  undertook  the  man-
agement of  the  church.  Smaragdus  the  patrician,  com-
ing from  Ravenna  to  Gradus  (Grado),  personally
dragged  him  out  of  the  church,  and  brought  him  with
insults  to  Ravenna  together  with  three  other  bishops
from  Istria,  that  is,  John  of  Parentium  (Parenzo),
Severus 1 and  Vendemius 2 and  also  Antony, 3 now  an  old

and  although  Hodgkin  considers  (V,  452)  that  it  is  safer  to  judge
him  as  a great  Roman  than  as  a great  saint,  it  seems  just  to  his
memory  that  the  splendid  qualities  he  exhibited  throughout  a life
of  intense  activity  should  not  be  too  greatly  dimmed  by  a single
mistake  at  its  close.  As  Hodgkin  rightly  says,  his  generosity,  his
justice,  his  courage,  entitle  him  to  a high  place  among  the  noblest
names  of  his  imperial  race.  The  secular  power  he  wielded  over
the  vast  property  owned  by  the  church,  as  well  as  his  political  in-
fluence in  Italy,  his  negotiations  and  treaties  with  the  Langobards,
his  administration  of  the  affairs  of  Rome  and  the  surrounding  ter-
ritories at  a time  when  the  empire,  weakened  and  beset  by  num-
erous enemies,  could  give  no  protection  to  its  subjects — all  these
things  tended  to  change  the  character  of  the  Holy  See,  to  make
Gregory  the  true  founder  of  the  mediaeval  papacy  and  to  pave  the
way  for  the  subsequent  establishment- under  Charlemagne  of  the
temporal  power  of  the  popes.

1 Of  Tergeste  (Trieste)  (Waitz).

* Of  Cissa  (Pago)  (Waitz).

8 Of  Grado  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

132

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

man  and  trustee1  of  the  church.  Threatening  them
with  exile  and  inflicting  violence,  he  compelled  them  to
hold  communion  with  John,  the  bishop  of  Ravenna,  a
condemner  of  the  Three  Chapters,  who  had  separated
from  the  communion  of  the  Roman  church  at  the  time
of  Pope  Vigilius  or  Pelagius.*  After  the  expiration  of
a year  3 they  returned  from  Ravenna  to  Grado.  And  the
people  were  not  willing  to  hold  communion  with  them
nor  did  the  other  bishops  receive  them.  The  patrician
Smaragdus  became  not  unjustly  possessed  of  a devil,
and  being  succeeded  by  the  patrician  Romanus,  returned
to  Constantinople. 4 After  these  things  a synod  of  ten

1 Defensor  ecclesiae , a functionary  often  mentioned  in  the  church
annals,  nominated  by  the  emperor  on  presentation  of  the  bishop
to  protect  the  temporal  interests  of  a particular  church.

’Vigilius,  A.  D.  538— 555 ; Pelagius,  555-559  or  560  (Muratori
Ann.  Ill,  455).  It  was  at  the  time  of  Vigilius,  in  553,  that  the
second  Council  of  Constantinople  was  held.  The  words  of  Paul
appear  to  be  written  from  the  standpoint  of  the  schismatics.  In
point  of  fact  the  Roman  church  was  now  supporting  the  con-
demnation of  the  Three  Chapters.  Paul  seems  to  have  believed
that  orthodoxy  lay  upon  the  other  side  (see  Cipolla,  Atti  del  Con-
gresso  in  Cividale,  1899,  p.  144).

Cipolla  believes  (p.  145)  that  the  reference  to  Vigilius  was  taken
by  Paul  from  a petition  of  the  schismatic  bishops  of  the  synod  of
Marano  to  the  emperor  Maurice  in  which  they  declared  that  their
predecessors  held  firmly  to  the  instruction  they  had  received  from
Pope  Vigilius  and  the  Council  of  Chalcedon,  and  kept  themselves
faithful  to  the  Three  Chapters.  This  would  explain  his  distorted
view  of  the  controversy.  If  Paul  took  this  statement  from
Secundus,  the  latter  may  well  have  derived  it  from  the  petition  of
the  schismatic  bishops.

* A.  D.  588  or  589  (Waitz).  4 A.  D.  590  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  III.

133

bishops  was  held  in  Marianum  (Marano)  x where  they
took  back  Severus,  the  patriarch  of  Aquileia,  upon  his
giving  a written  confession  of  his  error  in  taking  com-
munion at  Ravenna  with  those  who  had  condemned  the
Three  Chapters. 2 The  names  of  the  bishops  who  had
withheld  themselves  from  this  schism  are  these : Peter
of  Altinum  ( Altino)  ; Clarissimus ; 3 Ingenuinus  of
Sabione  (Seben);4  Agnellus  of  Tridentum  (Trent);
Junior  of  Verona;  Horontius  of  Vicentia  (Vicenza);
Rusticus  of  Tarvisium  (Treviso)  ; Fonteius  of  Feltria
(Feltre)  ; Agnellus  of  Acilum  (Asolo)  ; Laurentius  of
Bellunum  (Belluno)  ; Maxentius  of  Julium  (Zuglio)  ; s
and  Adrian  of  Pola. 6 But  the  following  bishops  held
communion  with  the  patriarch ; Severus,  John  of  Paren-
tium  (Parenzo),  Patricius,  Vendemius  and  John.7

1 About  twelve  miles  west  of  Aquileia.  The  council  was  held
about  589  (Hodgkin,  V,  468,  470).

•This  part  of  Paul’s  narrative  is  taken  in  all  probability  from
the  lost  work  of  Secundus,  bishop  of  Trent,  who  was  himself  a
schismatic  and  defender  of  the  Three  Chapters,  and  it  may  be  due
to  this  that  Paul’s  narrative  is  colored  in  their  favor  (Hodgkin,  V,
468,  note).

•Of  Concordia  (Waitz).

4 Near  Brixen  (Waitz).

•On  the  Tagliamento  above  Tolmezzo  (Abel).

•These  bishops  came  largely  from  places  under  Langobard  pro-
tection and  could  well  afford  to  defy  the  pope  and  the  exarch

(Hodgkin,  V,  469).

•This  Severus  was  bishop  of  Tergeste  (Trieste);  Patricius,  of
£mona  (Laybach);  Vendemius,  of  Cissa  (Pago),  and  John,  of
Celeia  (Cilli)  (Waitz).  It  is  not  clear  whether  they  held  com-

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

134

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

....  Chapter  XXVII.

At  this  time  king  Authari  sent  an  army  to  Istria,

munion  with  the  patriarch  before  or  after  his  recantation  (Hodg-
kin, V,  469,  470,  note  2),  probably  before.

Paul  does  not  tell  the  rest  of  the  story.  In  the  following  year
Gregory  the  Great  became  pope  and  wrote  a letter  summoning
the  patriarch  and  his  followers  to  Rome  to  be  judged  by  a synod
as  to  the  matters  in  controversy  (Hodgkin,  V,  470).  Upon  re-
ceipt of  this  letter  two  councils  were  assembled,  one  composed  of
the  bishops  of  the  territory  occupied  by  the  Langobards,  and  the
other  of  the  bishops  in  the  coast  cities  subject  to  the  empire.
Each  of  these  councils  sent  a letter  to  the  emperor,  and  Severus
the  patriarch  sent  a third.  One  of  these  letters,  that  of  the  Lango-
bard  bishops,  has  been  preserved.  They  congratulated  Maurice
upon  his  victories  in  Italy,  and  predicted  that  the  day  would  soon
come  when  the  41  Gentiles  ” would  be  overthrown  and  they  would
again  become  subjects  of  the  empire.  Then  they  would  gladly
present  themselves  before  a synod  in  Constantinople,  but  they
asked  that  they  should  not  be  compelled  to  appear  before  Gre-
gory, who  was  a party  to  the  cause,  and  whose  communion  they
had  renounced.  If  their  enemies  were  allowed  to  persecute  them
the  result  would  be  that  their  churches  would  be  alienated  from
the  imperial  authority  (p.  471).  This  was  an  unpleasant  prospect
for  the  emperor,  so  Maurice  ordered  the  Pope  not  to  molest  them
(p.  472).  Gregory,  thus  restrained,  had  now  to  confine  himself
to  argument.

When  Callinicus  became  exarch,  about  579,  the  schismatic
bishops  found  it  harder  to  preserve  their  independence,  and  we
hear  of  certain  secessions  from  their  ranks  (pp.  474,  477).

The  schism  had  extended  beyond  the  confines  of  Venetia  and
Istria.  Constantius,  bishop  of  Milan  and  a friend  of  Gregory,
was  urged  to  declare  that  he  had  never  condemned  the  Three
Chapters  and  when  he  refused,  three  of  his  suffragans  renounced
his  communion  and  induced  Theudelinda,  the  Langobard  queen,
a Catholic  and  the  friend  of  Pope  Gregory  to  do  the  same.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

135

which  army  Euin,  duke  of  Tridentum  (Trent),  com-
manded. 1 And  they,  after  plunderings  and  burnings,
when  peace  had  been  made  for  one  year,  brought  back
a great  sum  of  money  to  the  king.  Other  Langobards
too,  besieged  in  the  island  of  Comacina,51  Francio,

* ‘ Here,  indeed,  was  a blow  for  the  Catholic  cause,  if  the  royal  in-
fluence which  had  been  won  with  difficulty  after  the  contest  with
Arianism  was  to  be  lost  again  over  the  souls  of  the  three  Syrians  * *
(Hodgkin,  V,  479).  Upon  the  entreaties  of  the  Pope,  the  breach
seems  to  have  been  healed  and  the  queen’s  relations  with  Gregory
remained  friendly,  although  she  probably  sympathized  with  the
schismatics.  In  December,  603,  shortly  before  his  death,  he
wrote  congratulating  her  upon  the  birth  and  Catholic  baptism  of
her  son  Adaloald,  and  said  that  sickness  prevented  him  from
answering  “his  dearest  son,  the  abbot  Secundus,”  who  appears
to  have  also  been  on  the  side  of  heresy  (p.  480).

At  the  time  of  Gregory’s  death  the  schism  had  assumed  a geo-
graphical character.  In  Istria,  at  Grado,  and  among  the  lagoons
of  Venice,  “in  fact,  wherever  the  galleys  of  Constantinople  could
penetrate,  churchmen  were  desirous  to  return  into  unity  with  the
Emperor  and  the  Pope,  and  were  willing  to  admit  that  Theodoret,
Theodore  and  Ibas  were  suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire.
On  the  mainland  . . . wherever  the  swords  of  the  Lombards
flashed,  men  took  a more  hopeful  view  of  the  spiritual  prospects
of  the  three  Syrians  ” (p.  481).  On  the  death  of  Severus  two  sets
of  patriarchs  were  appointed,  one  for  each  section  (IV,  33.  infra).
The  schism  continued  until  the  end  of  the  7th  century,  when  king
Cunincpert  summoned  a council  at  Pavia  in  which  the  schismatics
“ with  shouts  of  triumph”  renounced  their  heresy  and  asked  to
be  restored  to  the  church  (Hodgkin,  V,  483;  VI,  14,  infra,  see
note).

1 Probably  587  (Hodgkin,  V,  244).

* Read  Comacina  instead  of  Amacina  (Waitz).  Comacina  was
a small  island  in  lake  Como,  a little  Roman  stronghold  amid
Langobard  surroundings.

Digitized  by

Google

136  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

master  of  soldiers,  who  had  been  hitherto  of  the  party
of  Narses  and  had  already  maintained  himself  for  twenty
years.  This  Francio,  after  he  had  been  besieged  six
months,  surrendered  that  island  to  the  Langobards  but
he  himself  was  released  by  the  king,  as  he  had  desired,
and  hastened  with  his  wife  and  his  household  goods  to
Ravenna.  In  this  island  many  riches  were  found  which
had  been  deposited  there  by  particular  cities.

Chapter  XXVIII.

The  king  Flavius  Authari  sent  an  embassy  to  Chil-
depert  asking  that  the  sister  of  the  latter  should  be
united  to  him  in  marriage.  But  while  Childepert  ac-
cepted gifts  from  the  ambassadors  of  the  Langobards,
and  promised  to  give  his  sister  to  their  king,  yet  when
ambassadors  of  the  Goths  came  from  Spain  he  prom-
ised this  same  sister  over  again,  because  he  had  learned
that  that  nation  had  been  converted  to  the  Catholic
faith.*

Chapter  XXIX.

In  the  meantime  he  dispatched  an  embassy  to  the
emperor  Maurice  sending  him  word  that  he  would  now
undertake  the  war  against  the  nation  of  the  Langobards,
which  he  had  not  done  before,  and  in  concert  with  the
emperor,  he  would  drive  them  out  of  Italy.  And  with-
out delay  he  dispatched  his  army  into  Italy  for  the  sub-

1 This  was  probably  due  to  the  intrigues  of  the  queen  mother
Brunihilde,  who,  after  suppressing  an  insurrection  of  the  nobles  of
Austrasia,  pursued  a policy  of  alliance  with  the  empire  and  the
church  rather  than  with  the  Langobards  (Hartmann,  II,  I,  67,  68).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

137

jugation  of  the  Langobards.1  King  Authari  and  the
troops  of  the  Langobards  quickly  went  forth  to  meet
him  and  fought  bravely  for  their  freedom.  In  that
fight  the  Langobards  won  the  victory;  the  Franks  were
vanquished  by  main  force,  many  were  captured,  very
many  also  escaped  by  flight  and  returned  with  difficulty
to  their  own  country.  So  great  a slaughter  was  there
made  of  the  army  of  the  Franks  as  is  not  related  any-
where else.  And  it  is  truly  astonishing  why  Secundus,
who  wrote  a number  of  things  concerning  the  doings  of
the  Langobards,  should  pass  over  so  great  a victory  of
theirs  as  this,  since  these  things  of  which  we  have
spoken  concerning  the  destruction  of  the  Franks  may
be  read  in  their  own  history,  described  in  almost  these
very  words.9

Chapter  XXX.

But  after  these  events  king  Flavius  Authari  sent  am-
bassadors to  Bavaria  to  ask  for  him  in  marriage  the
daughter  of  Garibald  3 their  king.4  The  latter  received
them  kindly  and  promised  that  he  would  give  his

'Probably  in  588  (Hodgkin,  V,  260,  261).

* Hartmann  (II,  I,  83)  suggests  that  the  silence  of  Secundus  is
due  to  the  fact  that  the  latter  narrates  principally  the  events  that
occurred  m his  own  immediate  neighborhood  (in  the  valley  of  the
Adige)  and  that  the  Franks  probably  crossed  the  Alps  by  some
other  route.

8 From  this  name  comes  Garibaldi.

4 That  is,  king  of  the  Bavarians.  He  was  more  probably  duke
as  he  owed  some  sort  of  allegiance  to  Childepert,  the  Frankish
king  of  Austrasia  (Hodgkin,  V,  236,  note  3).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

13*8  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

daughter  Theudelinda1  to  Authari.  And  when  the
ambassadors  on  their  return  announced  these  things  to
Authari,  he  desired  to  see  his  betrothed  for  himself  and
bringing  with  him  a few  but  active  men  out  of  the
Langobards,  and  also  taking  along  with  him,  as  their
chief,*  one  who  was  most  faithful  to  him,  he  set  forth
without  delay  for  Bavaria.  And  when  they  had  been
introduced  into  the  presence  of  king  Garibald  according
to  the  custom  of  ambassadors,  and  he  who  had  come
with  Authari  as  their  chief  had  made  the  usual  speech
after  salutation,  Authari,  since  he  was  known  to  none  of
that  nation,  came  nearer  to  king  Garibald  and  said :
“ My  master,  king  Authari  has  sent  me  especially  on
this  account,  that  I should  look  upon  your  daughter,
his  betrothed,  who  is  to  be  our  mistress,  so  that  I may
be  able  to  tell  my  lord  more  surely  what  is  her  appear-
ance.”  And  when  the  king,  hearing  these  things,  had
commanded  his  daughter  to  come,  and  Authari  had
gazed  upon  her  with  silent  approval,  since  she  was  of  a
very  beautiful  figure  and  pleased  him  much  in  every
way,  he  said  to  the  king:  “ Since  we  see  that  the  per-
son of  your  daughter  is  such  that  we  may  properly  wish
her  to  become  our  queen,  we  would  like  if  it  please  your
mightiness,  to  take  a cup  of  wine  from  her  hand,  as  she
will  offer  it  to  us  hereafter.”  And  when  the  king  had
assented  to  this  that  it  should  be  done,  she  took  the  cup

1 Theudelinda  had  been  betrothed  to  Childepert  (id.),  and  her
sister  was  the  wife  of  the  Langobard  duke  Euin  of  Trent  (III,  10,
supra).

* Senior , see  DuCange.

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  III.

139

of  wine  and  gave  it  first  to  him  who  appeared  to  be  the
chief.  Then  when  she  offered  it  to  Authari,  whom  she
did  not  know  was  her  affianced  bridegroom,  he,  after
drinking  and  returning  the  cup,  touched  her  hand  with
his  finger  when  no  one  noticed,  and  drew  his  right  hand
from  his  forehead  along  his  nose  and  face.1  Covered
with  blushes,  she  told  this  to  her  nurse,  and  her  nurse
said  to  her:  “ Unless  this  man  were  the  king  himself
and  thy  promised  bridegroom,  he  would  not  dare  by
any  means  to  touch  thee.  But  meanwhile,  lest  this  be-
come known  to  thy  father,  let  us  be  silent,  for  in  truth
the  man  is  a worthy  person  who  deserves  to  have  a
kingdom  and  be  united  with  thee  in  wedlock.”  For
Authari  indeed  was  then  in  the  bloom  of  his  youth,  of
becoming  stature,  covered  with  yellow  hair  and  very
comely  in  appearance.  Having  received  an  escort  from
the  king,  they  presently  took  their  way  to  return  to
their  own  country,  and  they  speedily  departed  from  the
territories  of  the  Noricans.  The  province  of  the  Nori-
cans  indeed,  which  the  Bavarian  people  inhabits,  has  on
the  east  Pannonia,  on  the  west  Suavia  (Swabia),  on  the
south  Italy  and  on  the  northern  side  the  stream  of  the
Danube.  Then  Authari,  when  he  had  now  come  near
the  boundaries  of  Italy  and  had  with  him  the  Bavarians
who  up  to  this  time  were  conducting  him,  raised  him-
self as  much  as  he  could  upon  the  horse  he  was  manag-
ing, and  with  all  his  strength  he  drove  into  a tree  that

1 Hodgkin  translates  more  freely  (V,  238):  “Secretly  inter-
twined her  fingers  with  his,  and  bending  low,  guided  them  over
the  profile  of  his  face  from  the  forehead  to  the  chin.”.  According
to  Abel’s  version  he  stroked  her  face.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

140

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

stood  near  by,  a hatchet  which  he  carried  in  his  hand
and  left  it  fixed  there,  adding  moreover  these  words :
“ Authari  is  wont  to  strike  such  a blow/*  And  when  he
had  said  these  things,  then  the  Bavarians  who  accom-
panied him  understood  that  he  was  himself  king
Authari.*  Then  after  some  time,  when  trouble  had  come
to  king  Garibald  on  account  of  an  invasion  by  the
Franks,  Theudelinda  his  daughter  with  her  brother,
Gundoald  by  name,  fled  to  Italy  and  announced  to
Authari,  her  promised  bridegroom,  that  she  was  coming.
And  he  straightway  went  forth  to  meet  her  with  a great
train  to  celebrate  the  nuptials  in  the  field  of  Sardis*
which  is  above  Verona,  and  received  her  in  marriage
amid  the  rejoicing  of  all  on  the  ides  (15th)  of  May.

1 In  spite  of  this  romantic  legend  it  is  probable  that  political
considerations  played  no  small  part  in  the  wooing  of  Authari,
Theudelinda  was,  on  her  mother’ s side,  the  granddaughter  of  the
former  Langobard  king  Waccho,  of  the  race  of  the  Lethingi,  with
which  Authari,  who  sprang  from  the  later  stock  of  Beleos,  desired
an  alliance  to  give  an  additional  sanction  of  legitimacy  to  his
royal  title.  The  relations  of  the  Langobards  to  their  northern
neighbors  the  Bavarians  had  long  been  friendly,  and  after  Authari
had  been  compelled  to  renounce  his  intended  alliance  with  the
Franks  by  a marriage  with  Chlotsuinda,  the  sister  of  Childepert,
he  may  well  have  desired  to  retain  the  friendship  of  the  Bavarians,
who  although  nominally  subject  to  Childepert,  had  control  of  the
passes  over  the  eastern  Alps,  and  could  offer  no  slight  obstacle  to
an  invasion  of  Italy  by  the  Franks.  The  powerful  Duke  of  Trent
had  married  a sister  of  Theudelinda,  and  his  hearty  support  in  re-
sisting the  Franks  was  also  necessary  to  the  king  (Hartmann,  II,

1,  68).

1 This  name  cannot  be  identified.  The  place  must  have  been
near  Lago  di  Garda  (Hodgkin,  V,  239,  note  2).

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  III.

141

Among  other  dukes  of  the  Langobards,  Agilulf,  Duke
of  the  city  of  Taurini  (Turin)  was  then  present.  A
certain  tree  in  this  place  which  was  situated  in  the
royal  inclosures  was  hit  during  a violent  gale  by  a stroke
of  lightning  with  great  crash  of  thunder,  and  Agilulf  had
then  as  a soothsayer  a certain  servant  of  his  who  by
diabolical  art  understood  what  future  happenings  strokes
of  lightning  portended.  When  Agilulf  was  sitting  down
to  the  requirements  of  nature  the  man  secretly  said  to
him:  “This  woman  who  has  just  been  wedded  to  our
king  is  to  be  your  wife  before  very  long.”  When  he
heard  this  he  threatened  to  cut  off  the  man’s  head  if  he
said  anything  further  about  the  matter,  but  the  man  an-
swered him : “ I may  be  killed,  indeed,  but  assuredly
that  woman  has  come  into  the  country  to  this  destiny,
that  she  should  be  joined  with  you  in  marriage.”  And
it  afterwards  so  happened.  At  this  time,  from  what
cause  is  doubtful,  Ansul,  a blood  kinsman  of  king
Authari  was  killed  at  Verona.

Chapter  XXXI.

At  this  time  also  when  Grippo,  the  ambassador  of
Childepert  king  of  the  Franks,  returned  from  Constanti-
nople and  announced  to  his  king  how  he  had  been
honorably  received  by  the  emperor  Maurice  and  that
the  emperor  at  the  desire  of  king  Childepert  promised
that  the  insults  he  had  endured  at  Carthage  would  be
atoned  for,1  Childepert  without  delay  sent  again  into

1 This  occurred  in  590.  Grippo  had  been  sent  some  time  before
on  an  embassy  to  Constantinople  with  two  noblemen,  Bodigisil  and

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

142

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Italy  an  army  of  Franks  with  twenty  dukes  to  subjugate
the  nation  of  the  Langobards.  Of  these  dukes  Auduald,
Olo  and  Cedinus  were  quite  distinguished.  But  when
Olo  had  imprudently  attacked  the  fortress  of  Bilitio
(Bellinzona),  he  fell  wounded  under  his  nipple  by  a dart
and  died.  When  the  rest  of  the  Franks  had  gone  out
to  take  booty  they  were  destroyed  by  the  Langobards
who  fell  upon  them  while  they  were  scattered  in  various
places.  But  Auduald  indeed  and  six  dukes  of  the
Franks  came  to  the  city  of  Mediolanum  (Milan)  and  set

Evantius.  On  their  way  they  stopped  at  Carthage,  where  a ser-
vant of  Evantius  seized  in  the  market  place  some  object  which
struck  his  fancy,  whereupon  the  owner  clamorously  demanded  its
return,  and  one  day,  meeting  the^servant  in  the  street,  laid  hold
of  him  and  said  : “I  will  not  let  you  go  until  you  have  returned
what  you  stole  from  me,  * * whereat  the  serv  ant  drew  his  sword  and
slew  the  man  and  returned  to  the  inn  where  the  ambassadors  were
staying  but  said  nothing  of  the  matter.  The  chief  magistrate  of
the  city  collected  an  armed  troop,  went  to  the  inn,  and  summoned
the  ambassadors  to  come  out  and  assist  in  investigating  the  mur-
der. Meanwhile  a mob  began  to  rush  into  the  house.  Bodigisil
and  Evantius  were  slain  at  the  inn  door,  whereupon  Grippo  at  the
head  of  his  retainers  went  forth  fully  armed,  denounced  the  mur-
derers of  his  colleagues,  and  said  there  would  now  never  be  peace
between  the  Franks  and  Romans.  The  prefect  endeavored  to
placate  him  and  when  Grippo  reached  Constantinople  he  was
promised  satisfaction  by  the  emperor  and  reported  this  promise  to
his  king,  as  appears  in  the  text.  The  satisfaction  afterwards
given  was  that  twelve  men  were  sent  bound  to  Childepert  who
was  told  that  he  might  put  them  to  death,  or  redeem  their  lives  at
the  rate  of  300  aurei  (180  pounds  sterling)  each.  Childepert,
greatly  dissatisfied,  said  there  was  no  proof  that  the  men  sent  to
him  had  anything  to  do  with  the  murder  and  he  let  them  go
(Hodgkin,  264,  267).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

MAP  OF  THE  DUCHY  OF  TRIDENTUM

[f.  P-  *433

1

Digitized  by  Google

BOOK  III.

143

up  their  camp  there  some  distance  away  on  the  plains.
In  this  place  the  messengers  of  the  emperor  came  to
them  announcing  that  his  army  was  at  hand  to  aid  them
and  saying : “ After  three  days  we  will  come  with  them,
and  this  shall  be  the  signal  to  you ; when  you  shall  see
the  houses  of  this  country-seat  which  stands  upon  the
mountain  burning  with  fire,  and  the  smoke  of  the  confla-
gration rising  to  heaven,  you  will  know  we  are  approach-
ing with  the  army  we  promise.”  But  the  dukes  of  the
Franks  watched  for  six  days,  according  to  the  agree-
ment, and  saw  that  no  one  came  of  those  whom  the
messengers  of  the  emperor  had  promised.  Cedinus
indeed  with  thirteen  dukes  having  invaded  the  left  side 1
of  Italy  took  five  fortresses  from  which  he  exacted  oaths
(of  fidelity).  Also  the  army  of  the  Franks  advanced
as  far  as  Verona  and  after  giving  oaths  (of  protection),
demolished  without  resistance  many  fortified  places
which  had  trusted  them  suspecting  no  treachery  from
them.  And  the  names  of  the  fortified  places  they  de-
stroyed in  the  territory  of  Tridentum  (Trent)  are  these :
Tesana  (Tiseno),  Maletum  (Male),  Sermiana  (Sir-
mian),  Appianum  (Hoch  Eppan),  Fagitana  (Faedo),
Cimbra  (Cembra),  Vitianum  (Vezzano),  Bremtonicum
(Brentonico),  Volaenes  (Volano),  Ennemase  (Neu-
markt)  2 and  two  in  Alsuca  (Val  Sugana)  and  one  in

1 The  eastern  side.

* Hodgkin  (VI,  30)  identifies  these  places  : Tesana  and  Sermi-
ana on  the  Adige,  ten  or  twelve  miles  south  of  Meran;  Maletum,
in  the  Val  di  Sole  ; Appianum,  opposite  Botzen  ; Fagitana,  be-
tween the  Adige  and  the  Avisio,  overlooking  the  Rotalian  plain ;
Cimbra,  in  the  Val  di  Cembra  on  the  lower  Avisio;  Vitianum,  west

Digitized  by

Google

144

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Verona.  When  all  these  fortified  places  were  destroyed
by  the  Franks,  all  the  citizens  were  led  away  from  them
as  captives.  But  ransom  was  given  for  the  fortified  place
of  Ferrugis  (Verruca),1  upon  the  intercession  of  the
bishops  Ingenuinus  of  Savio  (Seben)fl  and  Agnellus  of
Tridentum  (Trent),  one  solidus  per  head  for  each  man
up  to  six  hundred  solidi.3  Meanwhile,  since  it  was  sum-
mer time,  the  disease  of  dysentery  began  seriously  to
harass  the  army  of  the  Franks  on  account  of  their  being
unused  to  the  climate  and  by  this  disease  very  many  of
them  died.  Why  say  more  ? While  the  army  of  the
Franks  was  wandering  through  Italy  for  three  months
and  gaining  no  advantage — it  could  neither  avenge  itself
upon  its  enemies,  for  the  reason  that  they  betook  them-

of  Trent ; Bremtonicum,  between  the  Adige  and  the  head  of  Lago
di  Garda  ; Volaenes,  a little  north  of  Roveredo ; Ennemase,  not
far  south  of  Botzen.

1 Close  to  Trent  (Hodgkin,  VI,  32).

* Not  far  below  Brixen  on  the  Eisach  (Hodgkin,  VI,  32,  note  2).

* This  chapter  is  a specimen  of  Paul’ s way  of  dovetailing  his
authorities  together.  The  campaign  of  the  three  dukes  is  given
in  the  main  in  the  words  of  Gregory  of  Tours.  Then  comes  a
passage  from  the  history  of  Secundus  not  agreeing  with  what  had
gone  before,  as  it  enumerates  thirteen  fortified  places  instead  of
five,  and  then,  after  telling  of  the  ransom,  Paul  here  resumes  his
text  from  Gregory  (Hodgkin,  VI,  31,  note  1).

Hodgkin  gives  the  price  of  ransom  at  twelve  shillings  a head,
or  for  all,  three  hundred  and  sixty  pounds  sterling.  The  language
seems  to  indicate  that  the  garrison  were  six  hundred  in  number
or  it  might  mean  that  the  ransom  varied  from  one  solidus  for  a
common  soldier  to  six  hundred  for  a chieftain  (Hodgkin,  VI,  32,
note  4).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III.

145

selves  to  very  strong  places,  nor  could  it  reach  the  king
from  whom  it  might  obtain  retribution,  since  he  had  for-
tified himself  within  the  city  of  Ticinum  (Pavia) — the
army,  as  we  have  said,  having  become  ill  from  the  un-
healthiness of  the  climate  and  grievously  oppressed  with
hunger,  determined  to  go  back  home.  And  while  they
were  returning  to  their  own  country  they  endured  such
stress  of  famine  that  they  offered  first  their  own  clothes
and  afterwards  also  their  arms  to  buy  food  before  they
reached  their  native  soil. x

Chapter  XXXII.

It  is  believed  that  what  is  related  of  king  Authari  oc-
curred about  this  time.  For  the  report  is  that  that  king
then  came  through  Spoletium  (Spoleto)  to  Beneventum
(Benevento)  and  took  possession  of  that  region  and
passed  on  as  far  even  as  Regium  (Reggio),  the  last  city
of  Italy  next  to  Sicily,  and  since  it  is  said  that  a certain
column  is  placed  there  among  the  waves  of  the  sea,  that
he  went  up  to  it  sitting  upon  his  horse  and  touched  it
with  the  point  of  his  spear  saying : “ The  territories  of
the  Langobards  will  be  up  to  this  place.”  The  column

1 The  Byzantine  account  of  this  campaign  of  the  year  590  is
given  in  two  letters  written  by  the  exarch  Romanus  to  Childepert,
stating  that  before  the  arrival  of  the  Franks,  the  Romans  had
taken  Modena,  Altino  and  Mantua,  that  when  Cedinus  was  en-
camped near  Verona  they  were  upon  the  point  of  joining  him  and
supporting  him  by  their  light  vessels  on  the  river,  intending  with
him  to  besiege  Pavia  and  capture  king  Authari,  and  that  they
were  amazed  to  learn  that  Cedinus  had  made  a ten  months’  truce
with  the  Langobards  and  had  marched  out  of  the  country  (Hodg-
kin, V,  271-274).

Digitized  by

Google

146

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

is  said  to  be  there  down  to  the  present  time  and  to  be
called  the  Column  of  Authari. 1

Chapter  XXXIII.

But  the  first  duke  of  the  Langobards  in  Beneventum*
was  named  Zotto,  and  he  ruled  in  it  for  the  space  of
twenty  years. 3

1 Chapter  XXXII  is  not  believed  to  be  historical  but  to  belong
to  the  domain  of  saga  and  perhaps  of  epic  song  (Bruckner,  p.  18,
note  3 ; and  Pabst,  453,  note  1 ; see  Hodgkin,  V,  235  and  236,
note  1).  Beneventum  was  established  before  Authari’ s time
(Pabst,  453  and  note  1).

* Benevento  stands  in  an  amphitheater  of  hills  overlooking  the
two  rivers  Calore  and  Sabato,  which  afterwards  unite  and  form
the  Voltorno.  It  was  a city  of  the  Samnites,  possibly  once  inhab-
ited by  Etruscans.  At  the  time  of  the  third  Samnite  war,  B.  C.
298  to  290,  it  passed  under  the  dominion  of  Rome.  It  was  situ-
ated on  the  great  Appian  Way  from  Rome  to  Brundisium  and
upon  the  great  road  afterwards  built  by  Trajan,  also  on  a branch
of  the  Latin  Way,  a road  connecting  it  with  the  north-east  of
Latium,  and  it  was  a place  of  the  utmost  importance  as  a military
position,  commanding  the  southern  portion  of  Italy  (Hodgkin,  VI,
63-68).

* No  passage  in  Paul  has  given  a harder  task  to  investigators
than  this  chapter.  Five  different  opinions  (Waitz)  have  arisen
from  it  as  to  the  origin  of  the  important  duchy  of  Benevento.  The
twenty  years  attributed  to  Zotto’ s reign  are  reckoned,  as  Hart-
mann thinks  (II,  1,  54),  from  the  year  569,  which  was  regarded
as  the  commencement  of  Langobard  domination  in  Italy,  and  was
thus  transferred  to  Benevento,  and  he  does  not  believe  that  this
duchy  was  established  at  so  early  a period.  Hodgkin  (VI,  71,
note  1,  and  73)  argues  that  Zotto’ s reign  began  probably  about
571,  and  ended  about  591  (see  Hirsch,  History  of  the  Duchy  of
Beneventum,  Chap.  I).

The  duchy  of  Benevento  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  duchy  of  the

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  III*

147

Chapter  XXXIV.

Meanwhile  king  Authari  dispatched  an  embassy  with
words  of  peace  to  Gunthram,  king  of  the  Franks,1  the
uncle  of  king  Childepert.  The  ambassadors  were  re-
ceived pleasantly  by  him  but  were  directed  to  Childe-
pert who  was  a nephew  on  his  brother’s  side,  so  that  by
his  assent8  peace  should  be  confirmed  with  the  nation
of  the  Langobards.  This  Gunthram  indeed  of  whom
we  have  spoken  was  a peaceful  king  and  eminent  in
every  good  quality.  Of  him  we  may  briefly  insert  in
this  history  of  ours  one  very  remarkable  occurrence,
especially  since  we  know  that  it  is  not  at  all  contained
in  the  history  of  the  Franks.  When  he  went  once  upon
a time  into  the  woods  to  hunt,  and,  as  often  happens,
his  companions  scattered  hither  and  thither,  and  he  re-
mained with  only  one,  a very  faithful  friend  of  his,  he
was  oppressed  with  heavy  slumber  and  laying  his  head
upon  the  knees  of  this  same  faithful  companion,  he  fell
asleep.  From  his  mouth  a little  animal  in  the  shape  of
a reptile  came  forth  and  began  to  bustle  about  seeking
to  cross  a slender  brook  which  flowed  near  by.  Then
he  in  whose  lap  (the  king)  was  resting  laid  his  sword,
which  he  had  drawn  from  its  scabbard,  over  this  brook
and  upon  it  that  reptile  of  which  we  have  spoken  passed
over  to  the  other  side.  And  when  it  had  entered  into  a
certain  hole  in  the  mountain  not  far  off,  and  having  re-

Samnites  (IV,  44,  46;  VI,  2,  29,  infra).  It  lasted  until  the  latter
part  of  the  eleventh  century  (Hodgkin,  VI,  69).

1 More  properly,  king  of  Burgundy  (Hodgkin,  V,  275).

* Read  nutum  instead  of  no  turn.

Digitized  by  Caooole

148  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

turned  after  a little  time,  had  crossed  the  aforesaid  brook
upon  the  same  sword,  it  again  went  into  the  mouth  of
Gunthram  from  which  it  had  come  forth.  When  Gunth-
ram  was  afterwards  awakened  from  sleep  he  said  he  had
seen  a wonderful  vision.  For  he  related  that  it  had
seemed  to  him  in  his  slumbers  that  he  had  passed  over
a certain  river  by  an  iron  bridge  and  had  gone  in  under  a
certain  mountain  where  he  had  gazed  upon  a great  mass
of  gold.  The  man  however,  on  whose  lap  he  had  held  his
head  while  he  was  sleeping,  related  to  him  in  order  what
he  had  seen  of  it.  Why  say  more?  That  place  was
dug  up  and  countless  treasures  were  discovered  which
had  been  put  there  of  old. 1 Of  this  gold  the  king  him-
self afterwards  made  a solid  canopy2  of  wonderful  size
and  great  weight  and  wished  to  send  it,  adorned  with
many  precious  gems,  to  Jerusalem  to  the  sepulcher  of
our  Lord.  But  when  he  could  not  at  all  do  this  he
caused  it  to  be  placed  over  the  body  of  St.  Marcellus
the  martyr  who  was  buried  in  the  city  of  Cabillonum3
(Chalon-Sur-Saone)  where  the  capital  of  his  kingdom
was,  and  it  is  there  down  to  the  present  day.  Nor  is
there  anywhere  any  work  made  of  gold  which  may  be
compared  to  it.  But  having  touched  briefly  upon  these
things,  which  were  worthy  of  the  telling,  let  us  come
back  to  our  history.

Chapter  XXXV.

In  the  meantime,  while  king  Authari’s  messengers

1 See  Chap.  X,  supra , note  at  the  end.

* Ciborium . Italian,  baldacchino  (Hodgkin,  V,  202).

* Founded  by  Gunthram  (Giansevero).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

book  m.

149

were  stopping  in  France,  king  Authari,  after  he  had
reigned  six  years, x died  at  Ticinum  (Pavia)  on  the  Nones
(5th)  of  September2  from  poison  he  had  taken,  as  they
relate.  And  straightway  an  embassy  was  sent  by  the
Langobards  to  Childepert,  king  of  the  Franks  to  an-
nounce to  him  the  death  of  king  Authari  and  to  ask  for
peace  from  him.  And  when  he  heard  this,  he  received
the  messengers  indeed  but  promised  that  he  would  give
peace  at  a future  time.  After  some  days,  however,  he
dismissed  the  aforesaid  messengers  with  the  promise  of
peace.  But  because  queen  Theudelinda  pleased  the
Langobards  greatly,  they  allowed  her  to  remain  in  her
royal  dignity,  advising  her  to  choose  for  herself  whomso-
ever she  might  wish  from  all  the  Langobards;  such  a
one,  namely,  as  could  profitably  manage  the  kingdom.
And  she,  taking  counsel  with  the  prudent,  chose  Agilulf ,
duke  of  the  people  of  Turin  as  her  husband  and  king  of
the  nation  of  the  Langobards,  for  he  was  a man  ener-
getic and  warlike  and  fitted  as  well  in  body  as  in  mind
for  the  government  of  the  kingdom.  The  queen
straightway  sent  word  to  him  to  come  to  her  and  she
hastened  to  meet  him  at  the  town  of  Laumellum  (Lu-
mello).3  And  when  he  had  come  to  her,  she,  after
some  speech  with  him,  caused  wine  to  be  brought,
and  when  she  had  first  quaffed  it,  she  handed  the  rest

1 Seven  years,  says  the  Origo — six  years  and  six  months,  says  the
Continuer  of  Prosper  (Waitz).

* A.  D.  590,  a date  which  is  well  established  (Hodgkin,  V,  275,
note  3).

*A  little  north  of  the  Po,  about  twenty  miles  west  of  Pavia
(Hodgkin,  V,  283,  note  2).

Digitized  by  v^ooole

iso

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

to  Agilulf  to  drink.  And  when  he  had  taken  the  cup
and  had  reverently  kissed  her  hand,  the  queen  said  smil-
ing with  a blush,  that  he  should  not  kiss  her  hand  who
ought  to  imprint  a kiss  upon  her  lips.  And  straightway
raising  him  up  to  kiss  her,  she  unfolded  to  him  the  sub-
ject of  their  marriage  and  of  the  sovereign  dignity.
Why  say  more?  The  nuptials  were  celebrated  with
great  rejoicing  and  Agilulf,  who  was  a kinsman  of  king
Authari  on  the  mother’s  side, 1 assumed  the  royal  dignity
at  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  November. 9 Later
however,  in  the  month  of  May  when  the  Langobards
had  met  together  in  one  place,  he  was  raised  to  the  sov-
ereignty by  all  at  Mediolanum.

1 Hartmann  (II,  i,  121)  doubts  this  relationship.

a Waitz  doubts  this  legend  and  believes  that  Agilulf  obtained
the  crown  by  violence,  citing  the  Origo  and  the  Continuer  of
Prosper,  but  in  these  there  is  no  actual  contradiction  of  the  text,
as  they  simply  say  that  Agilulf  married  Theudelinda  and  became
king  (Hodgkin,  V,  283,  note  4,  284).  The  fact,  however,  that
the  occurrences  related  must  have  taken  place,  if  at  all,  within
two  months  of  the  death  of  her  first  husband,  detracts  much  from
the  charm  of  this  otherwise  delightful  saga  and  adds  something  to
its  improbability  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  98,  99).  Most  likely  Agilulf
seized  the  crown  and  married  Theudelinda,  the  granddaughter  of
king  Waccho,  to  acquire  for  his  royal  title  some  claim  to  legitimacy.

Agilulf,  one  of  the  great  kings  of  the  Langobards,  was  said  to
be  of  Thuringian  extraction,  though  it  is  possible  this  statement  is
due  to  a misunderstanding  of  his  title  as  duke  of  Turin  (Hartmann,
II,  1,  1 21).  Theudelinda  was  descended  on  her  father’s  side
from  the  Bavarians,  the  former  Marcomanni,  who  after  a long
sojourn  to  Bohemia,  were  settled  in  the  region  now  known  as
Bavaria.  Theudelinda  virtually  established  a new  dynasty  in
Italy  and  her  descendants  reigned  down  to  the  fifth  generation
(Hodgkin,  V,  285,  286).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

Chapter  I.

When  therefore  Agilulf,  who  was  also  called  Ago,
had  been  confirmed  in  the  royal  dignity1  he  sent
Agnellus,8  Bishop  of  Tridentum  (Trent)  to  France  for
the  sake  of  those  who  had  been  led  captive  by  the
Franks  from  the  fortified  places  of  Tridentum.  And
Agnellus,  on  his  return  thence,  brought  back  with  him
a number  of  captives  whom  Brunihilde,3  the  queen  of
the  Franks  had  ransomed  with  her  own  money.  Also
Euin,  duke  of  the  people  of  Trent,  proceeded  to  Gaul
to  obtain  peace  and  when  he  had  procured  it  he  re-
turned.

Chapter  II.

In  this  year  there  was  a very  severe  drought  from  the
month  of  January  to  the  month  of  September  and  there
occurred  a dreadful  famine.  There  came  also  into  the
territory  of  Tridentum  a great  quantity  of  locusts  which
were  larger  than  other  locusts,  and,  wonderful  to  relate,
fed  upon  grasses  and  marsh  seeds,  but  hardly  touched

1 May,  591  (Waitz).

* Hartmann  (II,  i,  84)  believes  that  the  statement  that  Agnellus
was  acting  on  behalf  of  the  Langobards  in  this  matter  was  a mis-
take due  to  the  fact  that  Paul  considered  that  the  Catholic  bishop
of  Trent  was  in  Langobard  territory.

•Cf.  Ill,  10  supra.

OsO

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

152

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

the  crops  of  the  fields.  And  they  appeared  also  in  like
manner  the  following  year.

Chapter  III.

In  these  days  king  Agilulf  put  to  death  Mimulf,  duke
of  the  island  of  St.  Julian,1 *  because  he  had  on  a pre-
vious occasion  treasonably  surrendered  to  the  dukes  of
the  Franks.  Gaidulf  indeed,  the  Bergamascan  duke,
rebelled  in  his  city  of  Pergamus  (Bergamo)  and  forti-
fied himself  against  the  king,  but  afterwards  gave  host-
ages and  made  peace  with  his  sovereign.  Again
Gaidulf  shut  himself  up  in  the  island  of  Comacina.3
But  king  Agilulf  invaded  this  island  and  drove  Gaidulf’s
men  out  of  it  and  carried  away  to  Ticinum  (Pavia)  the
treasure  he  had  found  placed  there  by  the  Romans.3
But  Gaidulf  again  fled  to  Pergamus  (Bergamo)  and  was
there  taken  by  king  Agilulf  and  again  received  into
favor.  Also  duke  Ulfari  rebelled  against  king  Ago  at
Tarvisium  (Treviso),  and  was  beseiged  and  captured  by
him.

Chapter  IV.

In  this  year  the  inguinal  plague  was  again  at  Ravenna,
Gradus  (Grado)  and  Istria,  and  was  very  grievous  as  it
had  also  been  thirty  years  before.  At  this  time  too
king  Agilulf  made  peace  with  the  Avars.  Childepert

1 A small  island  in  the  Lago  d’  Orta  (Giansevero),  west  of  lake
Maggiore.

a In  lake  Como.

•Cf.  Ill,  27  supra .

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

153

also  waged  with  his  cousin1 * *  the  son  of  Hilperic,*  a war
in  which  as  many  as  thirty  thousand  men  fell  in  battle.
The  winter  was  then  very  cold,  so  that  hardly  anyone
recalled  its  like  before.  Also  in  the  region  of  the
Briones  (Brenner)  blood  flowed  from  the  clouds,  and
among  the  waters  of  the  river  Renus^  (Reno)  a rivulet
of  blood  arose.

Chapter  V.

In  these  days4  the  most  wise  and  holy  Pope  Gregory,
of  the  city  of  Rome,  after  he  had  written  many  other
things  for  the  service  of  the  holy  church,  also  composed
four  books  of  the  Life  of  the  Saints.  This  writing  he
called  a dialogue,  that  is,  the  conversation  of  two  per-
sons, because  he  had  produced  it  talking  with  his  deacon
Peter.  The  aforesaid  pope  then  sent  these  books  to
queen  Theudelinda,  whom  he  knew  to  be  undoubtedly
devoted  to  the  faith  of  Christ  and  conspicuous  in  good
works.

Chapter  VI.

By  means  of  this  queen  too,  the  church  of  God  ob-
tained much  that  was  serviceable.  For  the  Langobards,
when  they  were  still  held  in  the  error  of  heathenism,
seized  nearly  all  the  property  of  the  churches,  but  the
king,  moved  by  her  wholesome  supplication,  not  only

1 On  the  mother’s  side.

* Chlotar  II.

* Between  Ferrara  and  Bologna.  Or  was  this  Rhenus  the  Rhine  ?

4 A.  D.  593  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

154

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBAKDS.

held  the  Catholic  faith,1 *  but  also  bestowed  many  posses-
sions upon  the  church  of  Christ  and  restored  to  the
honor  of  their  wonted  dignity  bishops  who  were  in  a
reduced  and  abject  condition.

Chapter  VII.

In  these  days  Tassilo  was  ordained  king*  among  the
Bavarians  by  Childepert,  king  of  the  Franks.  And  he
presently  entered  with  his  army  into  the  province  of  the
Sclabi  (Slavs),  and  when  he  had  obtained  the  victory,
he  returned  to  his  own  land  with  very  great  booty.

Chapter  VIII.

Also  at  this  time,  Romanus,  the  patrician  and  exarch
of  Ravenna,  proceeded  to  Rome.  On  his  return  to
Ravenna  he  re-occupied  the  cities  that  were  held  by  the
Langobards,  of  which  the  names  are  as  follows : Sutrium
(Sutri),  Polimartium  (Bomarzo),  Hortas  (Orte),Tuder
(Todi),  Ameria  (Amelia),  Perusia  (Perugia),  Luceolis3
(Cantiano),  and  some  other  cities.  When  this  fact
was  announced  to  king  Agilulf,  he  straightway  marched
out  of  Ticinum  with  a strong  army  and  attacked  the

1 Paul  is  probably  mistaken  in  this.  Theudelinda  the  queen  was
a Catholic,  but  Agilulf,  although  tolerant,  and  allowing  his  son  to
be  baptized  as  a Catholic,  appears  from  the  letters  of  St.  Gregory
and  St.  Columban  not  to  have  become  one  himself  (Hodgkin,  VI,
140  to  144).

*A.  D.  595  (Giansevero).

•All  these  were  later  in  the  States  of  the  Church.  Three  of
them  were  important  stages  on  the  Via  Flamminia  connecting
Rome  with  Ravenna  (Hodgkin,  V,  367).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

155

city  of  Perusia,  and  there  for  some  days  he  besieged
Maurisio,  the  duke  of  the  Langobards,  who  had  gone
over  to  the  side  of  the  Romans,  and  without  delay  took
him  and  deprived  him  of  life.  The  blessed  Pope  Gre-
gory was  so  much  alarmed  at  the  approach  of  this  king
that  he  desisted  from  his  commentary  upon  the  temple
mentioned  in  Ezekiel,  as  he  himself  also  relates  in  his
homilies.1  King  Agilulf  then,  when  matters  were  ar-
ranged, returned  to  Ticinum  (Pavia),  and  not  long
afterwards,  upon  the  special  suggestion  of  his  wife,
Queen  Theudelinda — since  the  blessed  Pope  Gregory
had  often  thus  admonished  her  in  his  letters — he  con-
cluded a firm  peace2  with  the  same  most  holy  man
Pope  Gregory  and  with  the  Romans,3  and  that  venerable

1See  Book  II  on  Ezekiel.  The  passage  is  given  in  full  in
Waitz’s  note.  See  Homily  XXII.

*Paul  is  in  error  here  in  his  chronology,  Agilulfs  expedition
against  Perugia  and  Rome  was  in  594,  or  according  to  Hodgkin
(V.  369)  in  593.  The  peace  was  concluded  in  the  latter  part  of
598  (Jacobi,  27)  or  more  probably  in  599  (Hodgkin,  V,  415).

* In  this  chapter  Paul  gives  a very  short  and  insufficient  account
of  a period  filled  with  important  events.  In  the  year  592,  duke
Ariulf  of  Spoleto,  a town  on  the  way  from  Ravenna  to  Rome,
'‘ontinually  threatened  the  communication  between  these  two
cities  and  captured  a number  of  other  places  belonging  to  the
empire,  and  Arichis  duke  of  Benevento,  co-operating  with  Ariulf,
pressed  hard  upon  Naples.  About  the  end  of  July  (Hodgkin,
V,  p.  363)  Pope  Gregory  concluded  a separate  peace  with  Ariulf
which  aroused  great  indignation  at  Ravenna  and  Constantinople
because  it  was  beyond  the  authority  of  the  Pope  to  make  such
peace  with  an  independent  power.  It  would  seem  that  it  was  this
action  which  stirred  the  exarch  Romanus  to  his  campaign  in  which
he  recovered  the  cities  mentioned  by  Paul,  that  had  probably

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

156

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

prelate  sent  to  this  queen  the  following  letter  in  expres-
sion of  his  thanks :

Chapter  IX.

“ Gregory  to  Theudelinda,  queen  of  the  Langobards.
We  have  learned  from  the  report  of  our  son,  the  abbot
Probus,  that  your  Excellency  has  devoted  yourself,  as
you  are  wont,  zealously  and  benevolently,  to  making
peace.  Nor  was  it  to  be  expected  otherwise  from  your
Christianity  but  that  you  would  show  to  all  your  labor
and  your  goodness  in  the  cause  of  peace.  Wherefore
we  render  thanks  to  Almighty  God,  who  so  rules  your
heart  by  His  affection,  that  He  has  not  only  given  you
the  true  faith,  but  He  also  grants  that  you  devote  your-
self always  to  the  things  that  are  pleasing  to  Him.  For
think  not,  most  excellent  daughter,  that  you  have  ob-
tained but  little  reward  for  staying  the  blood  which

fallen  into  AriulFs  possession.  Now  Agilulf  took  the  field  and
after  capturing  Perugia  marched  on  Rome,  and  Pope  Gregory,
from  the  battlements  of  the  city,  saw  the  captive  Romans  driven
from  the  Campagna,  roped  together  with  halters  around  their
necks  on  their  way  to  slavery.  The  Pope  made  vigorous  prepar-
ations for  the  defense  of  the  city  but  no  assault  was  made.  One
of  the  early  chroniclers  known  as  the  Copenhagen  Continuer  of
Prosper,  says  Agilulf  relinquished  the  siege  because  he  was
melted  by  the  prayers  of  Gregory.  This  statement  has  been
doubted  (Hodgkin,  V,  372)  and  perhaps  other  causes,  fever,  dis-
affection, the  impregnability  of  the  place  or  the  rebellion  of  the
Langobard  dukes  may  have  led  to  his  return.  But  the  Pope  be-
gan at  once  to  work  for  peace  between  Agilulf  and  the  empire.
The  emperor  Maurice  and  the  exarch  Romanus  laid  many  ob-
stacles in  the  way,  and  it  was  not  until  the  death  of  Romanus  and
the  succession  of  Callinicus  that  peace  was  concluded.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

157

would  otherwise  have  been  poured  out  upon  both  sides.
On  account  of  this  thing  we  return  thanks  for  your  good
will  and  invoke  the  mercy  of  our  God  that  He  may
weigh  out  to  you  a requital  of  good  things  in  body  and
soul,  here  and  hereafter.  Saluting  you,  moreover,  with
fatherly  love,  we  exhort  you  that  you  so  proceed  with
your  most  excellent  husband  that  he  may  not  reject  the
alliance  of  our  Christian  Republic.  For,  as  we  think
you  also  know,  it  is  expedient  in  many  ways  that  he
should  be  willing  to  betake  himself  to  its  friendship.
Do  you,  therefore,  according  to  your  custom,  ever  busy
yourself  with  the  things  that  relate  to  the  welfare  of  the
parties  and  take  pains  to  commend  your  good  deeds
more  fully  in  the  eyes  of  Almighty  God,  where  an
opportunity  may  be  given  to  win  His  reward.”

Likewise  his  letter  to  king  Agilulf : 44  Gregory  to
Agilulf,  king  of  the  Langobards.  We  render  thanks  to
your  Excellency  that,  hearing  our  petition,  you  have
declared  peace  (as  we  had  faith  you  would),  which  will
be  of  advantage  to  both  parties.  Wherefore  we  strongly
praise  the  prudence  and  goodness  of  your  Excellency,
because  in  loving  peace  you  show  that  you  love  God
who  is  its  author.  If  it  had  not  been  made,  which  God
forbid ! what  could  have  happened  but  that  the  blood
of  the  wretched  peasants,  whose  labor  helps  us  both,
would  be  shed  to  the  sin  and  ruin  of  both  parties?  But
that  we  may  feel  the  advantage  of  this  same  peace  as  it
has  been  made  by  you,  we  pray,  saluting  you  with
fatherly  love,  that  as  often  as  occasion  shall  be  given,
you  may  by  your  letters  admonish  your  dukes  in  var-
ious places  and  especially  those  stationed  in  these  parts,

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

15*

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

that  they  keep  this  peace  inviolably,  as  has  been  prom-
ised, and  that  they  do  not  seek  for  themselves  opportu-
nities from  which  may  spring  any  strife  or  dissatisfaction,
so  that  we  may  be  able  to  render  thanks  for  your  good
will.  We  have  received  indeed  the  bearers  of  these
present  letters,  as  being  in  fact  your  servants,  in  the  af-
fection which  was  due,  because  it  was  just  that  we  should
receive  and  dismiss  with  Christian  love  wise  men  who
announced  a peace  made  with  God's  approval.”  *

Chapter  X.

Meanwhile,  in  the  following  month  of  January,  a
comet  appeared  morning  and  evening  through  the  whole
month.  And  in  this  month  also  John,  archbishop  of
Ravenna,  died  and  Marianus,  a Roman  citizen,  was  sub-
stituted in  his  place.  Also  Euin,  the  duke  of  Trent,
being  dead,  duke  Gaidoald,  a good  man  and  a Catholic
in  religion,  was  assigned  to  that  place.  And  in  these
same  days,  while  the  Bavarians,  to  the  number  of  thirty
thousand  men,  attacked  the  Slavs,  the  Cagan 9 fell  upon
them  and  all  were  killed.  Then  for  the  first  time  wild

‘This  letter  is  said  to  have  been  written  Dec.,  598  (Hodgkin,
V,  419,  note),  though  this  was  before  the  peace  was  finally  con-
cluded. Probably  the  preliminary  negotiations  had  been  then
completed.

*Thus  the  king  of  the  Avars  or  Huns  was  called  (Giansevero),
and  this  is  the  probable  meaning  of  the  title  in  this  place,  but  the
term  is  also  applied  to  the  chiefs  of  the  Russians  or  Muscovites
(see  DuCange),  hence  perhaps  here  to  the  chief  of  the  Slavs.  It
was  a generic  name  like  “Caesar,”  “Augustus,”  “Flavius”
among  the  Romans.  The  word  “Khan”  is  evidently  derived
from  it  (Giansevero,  p.  140).

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

159

horses  and  buffaloes 1 were  brought  into  Italy,  and  were
objects  of  wonder  to  the  people  of  that  country.

Chapter  XI.

Also  at  this  time  Childepert,  king  of  the  Franks,  in
the  twenty-fifth  year  of  his  age,  was  murdered,  as  is
said,  together  with  his  wife,  by  poison.9  The  Huns,
too,  who  are  also  called  Avars,  entered  Thuringia  from
Pannonia  and  waged  desperate  wars  with  the  Franks.
Queen  Brunihilde,  with  her  grandsons  Theudepert  and
Theuderic  who  were  still  little  boys,  was  then  reigning
over  Gaul  and  the  Huns  took  money  from  them  and
returned  home.  Also  Gunthram,  king  of  the  Franks,
died,  and  queen  Brunihilde,  with  her  grandsons,  the
sons  of  Childepert,  who  were  still  little  children,'  as-
sumed his  royal  authority.

Chapter  XII.

At  the  same  time  the  Cagan,  king  of  the  Huns,  send-
ing messengers  to  Mediolanum  (Milan)  to  Agilulf,  made
peace  with  him.3  Also  the  patrician  Romanus  died  4 and
Gallicinus  5 succeeded  him  and  entered  into  a treaty  of
peace  with  king  Agilulf.6

1 Bubalus  is  probably  povpaXog  1 1 buffalo,  ’ ' or  possibly  (3ovpaXtgf
an  African  deer  or  antelope.

* A.  D.  593  (Hodgkin,  V,  345).

* Some  time  between  593  and  600  (Hodgkin,  V,  422,  note  3).

4 A.  D.  596  or  597  (Hodgkin,  V,  409).

•His  proper  name  was  Callinicus  (Hodgkin,  V,  410).

* This  was  the  peace  in  regard  to  which  Gregory  wrote  the  pre-
ceding letters  to  Theudelinda  and  Agilulf.  It  was  only  a peace
for  two  years  (Hodgkin,  V,  418,  420.  428).

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

160  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XIII.

At  this  time  also  Agilulf  made  perpetual  peace  with
Theuderic,  king  of  the  Franks.  Afterwards  king  Ago
put  to  death  Zangrulf,  duke  of  Verona,  who  rebelled
against  him.  He  also  slew  Gaidulf,  duke  of  Pergamus
(Bergamo),  whom  he  had  already  spared  twice.  Also
in  like  manner  he  put  to  death  Warnecautius  at  Ticinum
(Pavia).

Chapter  XIV.

At  a subsequent  time  a very  severe  plague  again  de-
vastated Ravenna  and  those  places  which  were  around
the  shores  of  the  sea.  Also  in  the  following  year  a
great  mortality  wasted  the  people  of  Verona.

Chapter  XV.

Then  also  a bloody  sign  was  seen  appearing  in  heaven,
and  as  it  were,  bloody  lances  and  a very  brilliant  light
through  the  whole  night.  Theudepert  king  of  the
Franks  at  that  time  waged  war  with  his  cousin  Clothar
and  violently  overthrew  his  army.

Chapter  XVI.

In  the  following  year  duke  Ariulf  who  had  succeeded
Faruald1  at  Spoletium  (Spoleto)  died.  This  Ariulf,
when  he  had  waged  war  against  the  Romans  at  Cameri-
num  (Camerino)  8 and  had  gotten  the  victory, 3 began

faruald  died  about  591  (Waitz).  The  name  is  also  spelled
Faroald,  see  infra.

* A city  of  Picenum  on  the  east  side  of  the  Apennines  near  the
boundaries  of  Umbria.

* The  campaign  of  Ariulf,  including  probably  a siege  of  Rome,

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

161

to  inquire  of  his  men  who  that  man  was  whom  he  had
seen  fighting  so  vigorously  in  the  war  he  had  waged.
And  when  his  men  answered  that  they  had  not  seen
anyone  there  acting  more  bravely  than  the  duke  him-
self, he  said : “ Surely  I saw  another  man  there  much
and  in  every  way  better  than  I,  and  as  often  as  any  one
of  the  opposite  side  attempted  to  strike  me,  that  active
man  always  protected  me  with  his  shield.”  And  when
the  duke  himself  had  come  near  Spoletium  (Spoleto)
where  stands  the  church  of  the  blessed  martyr,  the  bishop
Savinus,  * in  which  his  venerable  body  reposes,  Ariulf
asked  to  whom  belonged  this  spacious  abode.  It  was
answered  him  by  devout  men  that  the  martyr  Savinus
reposed  there  whom  Christians  were  wont  to  invoke  in
their  aid  as  often  as  they  went  to  war  against  their
enemies.  And  Ariulf,  since  up  to  this  time  he  was  a
heathen,  thus  answered : “ And  can  it  be  that  a dead
man  can  give  any  aid  to  one  living?”  And  when  he
had  said  this,  he  leaped  down  from  his  horse  and  went
into  the  church  to  look  at  it.  And  then  while  the  others
were  praying  he  began  to  admire  the  pictures  of  that

had  taken  place  some  time  before  this  in  592,  and  had  ended  in
a partial  peace  concluded  by  Pope  Gregory  with  the  Langobard
duke,  due  to  the  veneration  aroused  in  the  heart  of  Ariulf  by  a
personal  interview  with  the  pontiff.  This  was  the  peace  that  ex-
posed the  pope  to  bitter  reproaches  at  Constantinople  (Hodgkin,
VI,  93)  and  was  possibly  the  occasion  of  the  campaign  of  Ronianus
against  the  cities  that  had  been  taken  by  the  Langobards  (IV,  8
supra).

1 Hodgkin  suggests  (V,  365,  note  3)  that  this  may  be  a mistake
as  Savinus  (or  Sabinus)  was  patron  saint,  not  of  Spoleto  but  Cam*
eriao.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

162

church.  And  when  he  had  beheld  the  painted  figure  of
the  blessed  martyr  Savinus  he  straightway  said  and  de-
clared with  an  oath  that  that  man  who  had  protected
him  in  battle  had  in  every  way  such  a form  and  bearing.
Then  it  was  understood  that  the  blessed  martyr  Savinus
had  brought  him  help  in  battle.  Upon  the  death  of
Ariulf,  after  two  sons  of  Faroald  the  former  duke  had
contended  between  themselves  for  the  dukedom,  one  of
them,  Teudelapius  by  name,  was  crowned  with  victory
and  received  the  dukedom. 1

Chapter  XVII.

About  this  time  the  monastery  of  the  blessed  father
Benedict  which  was  situated  in  the  stronghold  of  Cas-
inum  (Monte  Cassino)  was  attacked  at  night  by  the
Langobards, 9 and  although  they  plundered  everything,
they  could  not  get  hold  of  one  of  the  monks.  This  was
in  fulfilment  of  a prophecy  of  the  venerable  father  Bene-
dict, which  he  had  made  long  before,  in  which  he  said :
“ I have  been  able  with  difficulty  to  obtain  from  God
that  the  souls  from  this  place  should  be  yielded  to  me.”  3

1 Ariulf  died  in  601 , about  ten  years  after  his  accession  and  king
Agilulf  appears  to  have  had  little  hand  in  regulating  the  succes-
sion, since  this  was  decided  by  battle  between  the  two  sons  of
Faruald.  Teudelapius  kept  the  dukedom  of  Spoleto  for  more  than
half  a century  (601  to  653),  during  which  time  there  were  four
kings  at  Pavia  (Hodgkin,  VI,  95,  96).

•This  attack  actually  occurred  A.  D.  589,  not  601,  the  date  of
Ariulf  s death  (Jacobi,  25,  26).  Some  historians  indeed  place  it
as  early  as  582  (Giansevero).

•The  whole  prophecy  was  (see  Dialogues  Gregory  the  Great,  II,
chap.  17),  “All  this  monastery  that  I built  and  all  things  that  I

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

163

The  monks  fled  from  this  place  and  made  their  way  to
Rome  carrying  with  them  the  manuscript  of  the  Holy
Rule  (of  the  order)  which  the  aforesaid  father  had  com-
posed, and  certain  other  writings  and  also  a pound  of
bread  and  a measure  of  wine,  and  whatever  of  their
household  goods  they  had  been  able  to  snatch  away.
Subsequently  to  the  blessed  Benedict  indeed,  Constan-
tine governed  that  fraternity;  after  him  Simplicius;
after  him  Vitalis ; finally  Bonitus  under  whom  this  de-
struction occurred.

Chapter  XVIII.

On  the  death  of  Zotto,  duke  of  Beneventum  (Bene-
vento),1  Arigis  (or  Arichis),  sent  by  king  Agilulf,  suc-
ceeded to  his  place.  He  had  come  originally  from
Forum  Julii  (Cividale)  and  had  educated  the  sons  of
Gisulf,*  duke  of  Forum  Julii  (Friuli),  and  was  a blood

prepared  for  the  brothers,  have  been  delivered  to  the  heathen  by
the  judgment  of  God  Almighty.  I have  been  able  with  difficulty,
etc**

lA.  D.  591.  He  had  pushed  his  ravages  far  into  Apulia
Lucania  and  Calabria,  apparently  acting  independently  of  the
Langobard  kingdom  in  the  north  of  Italy  (Hodgkin,  VI,  73).

•Arichis  was  duke  in  591,  as  appears  from  a letter  of  Gregory
the  Great  (Epist.,  II,  46).  How  then  could  Grimoald,  the  son  of
Gisulf,  who  was  a little  boy  during  the  Avar  invasion  of  610  (IV,  37
itifrc£)%  have  been  one  of  his  pupils  before  591  ? Even  Grimoald* s
elder  brothers  Taso  and  Cacco  were  young  enough  for  the  eldest
to  be  adopted  by  the  exarch  after  his  father’s  death  about  612,
and  could  hardly  have  been  bom  before  585,  six  years  before
Arichis  became  duke  of  Beneventum.  Hodgkin  believes  (VI,  74,
note)  that  it  was  the  children  of  an  earlier  generation  whom

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

164

relation  of  that  same  Gisulf.  There  exists  a letter  of
the  blessed  Pope  Gregory  to  this  Arigis  drawn  up  in
the  following  terms :

Chapter  XIX.

“ Gregory  to  Duke  Arogis :

“ Since  we  trust  in  your  Highness  as  indeed  in  our  own
son,  we  are  moved  to  make  a request  of  you  in  a way
confidentially,  thinking  that  you  will  not  at  all  suffer  us
to  be  disappointed,  especially  in  a matter  from  which
your  soul  may  be  greatly  benefitted.  We  inform  you
then  that  a considerable  number  of  wooden  beams  are
needful  to  us  for  the  churches  of  the  blessed  Peter  and
Paul,  and  therefore  we  have  enjoined  our  sub-deacon
Savinus  to  cut  a number  in  the  region  of  Brittii  (Cala-
bria) and  to  bring  them  to  a suitable  place  by  the
sea.  And  because  he  needs  assistance  in  this  thing,
we  ask,  saluting  your  Highness  with  paternal  love,  that
you  should  charge  your  managers2  who  are  in  that  place
*

Arichis  instructed,  perhaps  the  children  of  Grasulf  I,  and  that
afterwards,  when  Arichis  received  the  two  young  princes  Radoald
and  Grimoald  at  his  court  (IV,  39  mfrc£)%  it  was  the  sons  of  one  of
his  old  pupils  that  he  welcomed  to  Beneventum.  Other  com-
mentators believe  that  Paul  was  altogether  wrong.

Arichis  practically  acted  as  an  independent  sovereign,  making
war  with  Naples  and  Rome,  and  king  Agilulf  could  not  conclude
a peace  with  the  empire  till  Arichis  assented.  When  Arichis  died
the  king  of  the  Langobards  does  not  seem  to  have  been  consulted
in  the  appointment  of  his  successor  (Hodgkin,  VI,  75).

1 Spelled  thus  in  the  oldest  manuscripts  and  also  in  the  letters
of  Gregory.

% Actionarii.  These  were  subordinate  officials  of  the  king

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

165

to  send  the  men  who  are  under  them  with  their  oxen  to
his  assistance,  so  that  with  your  aid  he  can  the  better
perform  what  we  have  enjoined  upon  him.  And  we
promise  that  when  the  thing  is  finished,  we  will  send  to
you  a worthy  gift  which  will  not  be  displeasing,  for  we
know  how  to  regard  and  to  recompense  our  sons  who
show  us  good  will.  Whence  we  ask  again,  illustrious
son,  that  you  should  so  act  that  we  can  be  debtors  to
you  for  the  favor  shown  and  that  you  may  have  a re-
ward for  (your  services  to)  the  churches  of  the  saints.”

Chapter  XX.

In  these  days  the  daughter  of  king  Agilulf  was  taken
from  the  city  of  Parma,  together  with  her  husband
named  Gudescalc  (Gottschalk),  by  the  army  of  the
patrician  Gallicinus  (Callinicus),  and  they  were  brought
to  the  city  of  Ravenna.  At  this  time  also  king  Agilulf
sent  to  the  Cagan,  the  king  of  the  Avars,  workmen  for
the  making  of  ships  with  which  that  Cagan  afterwards
conquered  a certain  island  in  Thrace.  *

who  stood  in  rank  under  the  gas  t aid t,  and  appear  to  have  had
charge  of  particular  domains  of  the  king,  or  (in  Benevento  and
Spoleto)  of  the  duke  (Pabst,  493).

1 Although  these  shipwrights  were  probably  Romans,  the  inci-
dent shows  the  general  acceptance  by  the  Langobards  of  the  in-
dustrial arts  of  the  people  they  had  conquered.  The  history  of
these  changes  is  given  in  Hartmann,  II,  2,  chap.  I,  in  detail,  see
pp.  19-22.  See  also  chap.  22,  infrat  where  their  change  in
dress  is  noted.

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

1 66

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXL

At  the  same  time  queen  Theudelinda  dedicated  the
church  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  which  she  had  built  in
Modicia  (Monza),  a place  which  is  twelve  miles  above
Mediolanum  (Milan).  And  she  decorated  it  with  many
ornaments  of  gold  and  silver  and  endowed  it  amply
with  estates.  In  this  place  also  Theuderic,  the  former
king  of  the  Goths,  had  constructed  his  palace,  because
the  place,  since  it  is  near  the  Alps,  is  temperate  and
healthful  in  summer  time.

Chapter  XXII.

There  also  the  aforesaid  queen  built  herself  a palace,
in  which  she  caused  to  be  painted  something  of  the
achievements  of  the  Langobards.  In  this  painting  it  is
clearly  shown  in  what  way  the  Langobards  at  that  time
cut  their  hair,  and  what  was  their  dress  and  what  their
appearance.  They  shaved  the  neck,  and  left  it  bare  up
to  the  back  of  the  head,  having  their  hair  hanging  down
on  the  face  as  far  as  the  mouth  and  parting  it  on  either
side  by  a part  in  the  forehead.  Their  garments  were
loose  and  mostly  linen,  such  as  the  Anglo-Saxons  are
wont  to  wear,1  ornamented  with  broad  borders  woven  in
various  colors.  Their  shoes,  indeed,  were  open  almost
up  to  the  tip  of  the  great  toe,  and  were  held  on  by  shoe
latchets  interlacing  alternately.  But  later  they  began
to  wear  trousers,2  over  which  they  put  leggins  of  shaggy

1 This  is  said  to  be  the  first  appearance  in  literature  of  the  word
“Anglo-Saxon”  (Hodgkin,  V,  154,  note  4).

* The  monk  of  Salerno  says  that  king  Adaloald  (A.  D.  616-626)
was  the  first  who  wore  trousers  (Abel,  note).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.  167

woolen  cloth1  when  they  rode.  But  they  had  taken
that  from  a custom  of  the  Romans.

Chapter  XXIII.

Up  to  this  time  the  city  of  Patavium  .(Padua)  had
rebelled  against  the  Langobards,  the  soldiers  resisting
very  bravely.  But  at  last  when  fire  was  thrown  into  it,
it  was  all  consumed  by  the  devouring  flames  and  was
razed  to  the  ground  by  command  of  king  Agilulf.  The
soldiers,  however,  who  were  in  it  were  allowed  to  return
to  Ravenna.

Chapter  XXIV.

At  this  time  the  ambassadors  of  Agilulf  who  returned
from  the  Cagan  announced  a perpetual  peace  made  with
the  Avars.  Also  an  ambassador  of  the  Cagan  came
with  them  and  proceeded  to  Gaul,  demanding  of  the
kings  of  the  Franks  that  they  should  keep  peace  with
the  Langobards  the  same  as  with  the  Avars.  Mean-
while (tjhe i Langobards  invaded  the  territories  of  the
Istrians  aA  witn  the  Avars  and  the  Slavs,  and  laid  waste
everything  with  burnings  and  plunderings.

* Tubrugos  birreos.  Hodgkin  considers  (V,  154,  155)  that  the
explanation  quoted  in  Waitz’s  note *  **  Byrrus  vestis  est  amphimallus
villosus  **  (having  the  nap  on  both  sides),  according  to  which  the
birrus  was  a sort  of  waterproof  cape  thrown  over  other  garments
when  it  rained,  seems  to  throw  most  light  on  this  passage.  (See
DuCange).

* Istria  still  remained  under  Byzantine  dominion  up  to  the  year
751  (Abel).  This  raid  was  probably  about  601  (Hodgkin,  V,
430,  note  1).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

1 68

Chapter  XXV.

There  was  then  born  to  Agilulf  the  king,  by  his  queen
Theudelinda,  in  the  palace  of  Modicia  (Monza),  a son
who  was  called  Adaloald.  At  a subsequent  time  the
Langobards  attacked  the  fortress  of  Mons  Silicis  (Mon-
selice).1 *  During  the  same  period,  at  Ravenna,  after
Gallicinus  (Callinicus)  had  been  driven  away,  Smarag-
dus,  who  had  before  been  patrician  of  Ravenna,  re-
turned.3

Chapter  XXVI.

Then  the  emperor  Maurice,  after  he  had  ruled  the
empire  twenty-one  years,  was  killed,  together  with  his
sons  Theodosius  and  Tiberius  and  Constantine,  by  Focas
(Phocas)  who  was  the  master  of  horse  of  Priscus  the
patrician.  But  he  had  been  very  useful  to  the  state,  for
he  had  often  obtained  victory  when  contending  against
the  enemy.  The  Huns  too,  who  are  also' called  Avars,
were  subjugated  by  his  prowess.3

1 A little  south  of  Padua  (Abel).

*A.  D.  602  (Hodgkin,  V,  431).

• During  the  reign  of  Maurice  a radical  change  began  to  take
place  in  the  permanent  government  of  those  parts  of  Italy  which
remained  subject  to  Byzantium.  The  invasion  of  the  Langobards,
which  was  at  first  believed  to  be  a mere  temporary  incursion,  had
been  followed  by  their  settlement  in  the  country,  and  although
Maurice  would  not  abandon  the  hope  of  expelling  them,  it  was
found  more  and  more  necessary  to  accept  their  presence  as  a per-
manent condition.  The  continual  wars  had  given  rise  to  special
military  jurisdiction  conferred  upon  the  chief  officers  of  the  empire,
which  was  temporary  at  first,  then  often  renewed,  and  at  last  per-
manent. The  exarch  remained  the  personal  representative  of  the

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

169

Chapter  XXVII.

Gaidoald  duke  of  Tridentum  (Trent)  and  Gisulf  of

emperor,  with  full  powers,  including  the  right  to  conclude  a tem-
porary truce  with  the  Langobards,  though  not  a lasting  peace  and
alliance  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  125).  The  frontier  towns  were  forti-
fied and  permanent  garrisons  were  established  in  them  which
were  recruited  from  the  neighborhood;  the  civil  municipalities  be-
came transformed  into  military  governments;  each  of  the  larger
fortified  places  had  a tribune  as  a special  commandant  of  the  city,
and  the  tribunes  were  under  the  authority  of  a magister  militum
or  of  a duke  who  commanded  the  frontier  district  and  who  was
named  by  the  exarch.  These  officers  gradually  took  the  place  of
the  former  provincial  civil  governors,  and  a military  corporation,
the  numerus , succeeded  the  municipality  (id.,  pp.  126  to  135).
The  military  officials  began  to  acquire  extensive  landed  interests,
the  remnant  of  small  land-owners  became  more  completely  sub-
ject to  the  large  proprietors,  and  the  foundations  of  something
which  afterwards  resembled  a feudal  tenure  began  to  be  laid
(p.  136).  Under  Phocas  the  relations  between  Italy  and  Con-
stantinople became  greatly  relaxed  and  there  was  a decided  weak-
ening of  the  imperial  power.  Commerce  suffered  in  the  general
disorganization  of  the  empire,  and  the  means  of  communication
were  neglected.  On  the  other  hand  there  was  a growing  disposi-
tion to  come  to  terms  with  the  Langobards,  although  as  yet  an
armistice  for  a limited  time,  but  often  renewed,  was  all  the  con-
cession that  could  be  made,  as  the  emperor  was  apparently  still
unwilling  to  recognize  the  permanency  of  Langobard  domination
(id.,  198,  199).  The  exarch  Smaragdus,  whom  Phocas  had  sent
to  Italy,  co-operated  more  heartily  than  his  predecessors  with  the
pope  (id.,  200),  and  the  new  emperor  issued  a decree  upholding
the  authority  and  primacy  of  the  Roman  See  (Paul,  IV,  36,  infra).
Active  proceedings  were  renewed  against  the  schismatics  of  Istria
and  Venetia,  whose  bishops  now  betook  themselves  to  the  protec-
tion of  duke  Gisulf  of  Friuli  and  of  king  Agilulf.  The  schismatic
bishop  John  was  consecrated  as  their  patriarch  in  Cividale  and  the

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

170

Forum  Julii  (Friuli),  who  were  previously  separated  by
strife  from  the  companionship  of  king  Agilulf,  were
taken  back  by  him  this  year  in  peace.*  Then  also  was
the  above-named  boy  Adaloald,  the  son  of  king  Agilulf,
baptized  in  St.  John  in  Modicia  (Monza)*  and  was  re-
ceived from  the  fonts  by  Secundus  of  Trent,  a servant
of  Christ  of  whom  we  have  often  made  mention.4  The
day  of  the  Easter  festival  was  at  that  time  on  the  seventh
day  before  the  ides  of  April  (April  7).

Chapter  XXVIII.

In  these  days  the  Langobards  still  had  a quarrel  with
the  Romans  on  account  of  the  captivity  of  the  king’s
daughter.5  For  this  reason  king  Agilulf  departed  from
Mediolanum  (Milan)  in  the  month  of  July,  besieged
the  city  of  Cremona  with  the  Slavs  whom  the  Cagan,
king  of  the  Avars,  had  sent  to  his  assistance  and  took  it

empire  lost  their  support  (IV,  33,  infra , Hartmann,  II,  1,  201).
We  even  find  some  of  them  afterwards  taking  part  on  the  side  of
the  Arian  king  Arioald  against  the  Catholic  Adaloald  in  the  con-
test for  the  Langobard  crown  (id.,  p.  208).

1 If  this  year  refers  to  the  death  of  Maurice,  it  is  602;  if  it  be
connected  with  the  baptism  of  Adaloald,  that  occurred  in  603
(Hodgkin,  VI,  34,  note  1).

* Probably  April  7,  603  (Hodgkin,  V,  430,  note  3).

* As  his  godson.

4 Only  once  (III,  29,  supra)  and  once  afterwards  (IV,  40,  infra),
but  a great  part  of  this  book  seems  to  be  taken  from  his  work:
This  baptism  was  a triumph  for  the  Catholic  faith  over  Arianism.
Agilulf  s predecessor  Authari  had  forbidden  the  Langobard  nobles
to  have  their  children  baptized  by  Catholics  (Hodgkin,  V,  430).

•See  chapter  20,  supra .

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

171

on  the  twelfth^day^  before  the  calends  of  September
(August  2ist)rana  razed  it  to  the  ground.  In  like
manner  he  also  assaulted  Mantua,  and  having  broken
through  its  walls  with  battering-rams  he  entered  it  on
the  ides  (13th)  of  September,9  and  granted  the  soldiers
who  were  in  it  the  privilege  of  returning  to  Ravenna.
Then  also  the  fortress  which  is  called  Vulturina  (Val-
doria) 3 surrendered  to  the  Langobards ; the  soldiers
indeed  fled,  setting  fire  to  the  town  of  Brexillus  (Bres-
cello).4  When  these  things  were  accomplished,  the
daughter  of  the  king  was  restored  by  Smaragdus  the
patrician  with  her  husband  and  children  and  all  her
property.  In  the  ninth  month  peace  was  made  up  to _
the  calends  (first)  of  April  of  the  eighth  indiction.i^
The  daughter  of  the  king,  indeed,  presently  returned
from  Ravenna  to  Parma ; but  she  died  immediately  in
the  perils  of  a difficult  child-birth.  In  this  year6  Teu-
depert  and  Theuderic,  kings  of  the  Franks,  fought  with
their  paternal  uncle  Clothar,  and  in  this  struggle  many
thousands  fell  on  both  sides.

!A.  D.  603  (Hodgkin,  V,  432).  *A.  D.  603  (id).

* Hodgkin  (V,  432)  places  it  on  the  northern  bank  of  the  Po  not
far  from  Parma,  which  is  probably  correct.  Thus  Waitz.  Gians-
evero,  p.  134,  believes  that  a castle  named  Vulturena  at  the  upper
end  of  lake  Como  at  the  entrance  of  the  Valtellina  is  intended.

4 Or  as  Waitz  calls  it,  Bersello,  and  adds  that  it  is  not  far  from
Reggio  (d*  Emilia).  It  was  a town  on  the  Po  about  ten  miles  from
Parma  (Hodgkin,  V,  432  ; see  III  ,18  supra).

* April  1st,  605.  This  indigtion  began  with  the  first  of  Sep-
tember, 604.

•A.  D.  605  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

172

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXIX.

Then  also  in  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  Focas
(Phocas) , during  the  eighth  indiction,  the  blessed  Pope
Gregory  journeyed  to  Christ. x In  his  place  Savinianus
was  appointed  to  the  office  of  the  papacy. 9 There  was
then  a very  cold  winter  and  the  vines  died  in  nearly
every  place.  Also  the  crops  failed,  partly  destroyed  by
mice  and  partly  smitten  by  the  blight.  And  indeed  the
world  was  then  bound  to  suffer  from  famine  and  drouth
when,  upon  the  departure  of  so  great  a leader,  a lack  of
spiritual  nourishment  and  the  dryness  of  thirst  attacked
the  souls  of  men.  I may  well  put  a few  things  in  this
little  work  from  a certain  letter  of  this  same  blessed
Pope  Gregory  that  it  may  more  clearly  be  known  how
humble  this  man  was  and  of  how  great  innocence  and
holiness.  When  then  he  had  been  accused  by  the
emperor  Maurice  and  his  sons  3 of  killing  in  prison  for
money  a certain  bishop  Malchus,  he  wrote  a letter  on
this  subject  to  Savinianus  his  legate,  who  was  at  Con-
stantinople, and  said  to  him  among  other  things  the  fol-
lowing : “ There  is  one  thing  you  may  briefly  suggest
to  our  Most  Serene  Lords,  that  if  I,  their  servant,  had
chosen  to  mix  myself  up  with  the  death  even  of  Lango-
bards,  the  people  of  the  Langobards  would  to-day  have
neither  king  nor  dukes  nor  counts  and  would  be  split

lPaul,  following  Bede  as  his  authority,  errs  as  to  this  date.
Gregory  died  March,  604,  in  the  seventh  indiction — Phocas  be-
gan to  reign  near  the  end  of  602  in  the  sixth  indiction  (Waitz).

* Apostolicatus  (see  DuCange,  tit.  Apostolicus).

• I read  filios  for  filio .

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

173

up  in  the  utmost  confusion.  But  because  I fear  God
I dread  to  take  part  in  the  death  of  any  man.  This
bishop  Malchus  indeed  was  neither  in  prison  nor  in  any
suffering  but  on  the  day  on  which  he  pleaded  his  cause
and  was  adjudged,  he  was  taken  without  my  knowledge,
by  Boniface,  a notary,  to  his  home  to  dine  there  and
was  honorably  treated  by  him  and  at  night  he  suddenly
died.”  Look ! how  great  was  the  humility  of  this  man
who  called  himself  a servant  when  he  was  the  supreme
pontiff ! how  great  was  his  innocence,  when  he  was  un-
willing to  take  part  in  the  death  of  Langobards  who  in-
deed were  unbelievers  and  were  plundering  everything !

Chapter  XXX.

In  the  following  summer  then,1 *  in  the  month  of  July,
Adaloald  was  raised  as  a king  over  the  Langobards,  in
the  circus  at  Mediolanum  (Milan)  in  the  presence  of  his
father,  king  Agilulf,  and  while  the  ambassadors  of  Teu-
depert,  king  of  the  Franks3  were  standing  by;  and  the
daughter  of  king  Teudepert  was  betrothed  to  the  same
royal  youth  and  perpetual  peace  was  established  with
the  Franks.3

1 A.  D.  604.  Paul  must  have  been  mistaken  in  this  date  since
Pope  Gregory  in  Dec.,  603,  had  written  to  Theudelinda  sending
certain  gifts  to  “Adaloald  the  king”  (Hodgkin,  V,  447).

* Teudepert  II,  king  of  Austrasia  (Hodgkin,  VI,  108).

•A  few  years  later  (A.  D.  607)  Agilulf  joined  Teudepert  as  well
as  Clothar  of  Neustria,  and  Witterich,  king  of  the  Visigoths  in  an
alliance  against  Theuderic  II,  of  Burgundy,  who  had  repudiated
and  divorced  the  daughter  of  Witterich.  There  is  no  record  of
the  result  of  this  alliance  and  in  612  war  broke  out  again.  Theu-

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

174

Chapter  XXXI.

At  the  same  time  the  Franks  fought  with  the  Saxons
and  there  was  a great  slaughter  on  both  sides.  At
Ticinum  (Pavia)  also,  in  the  church  of  St.  Peter  the
Apostle,  Peter  the  director  of  the  choir 1 was  struck  by
lightning.

Chapter  XXXII.

Afterwards,  on  the  following  month  of  November,
king  Agilulf  made  peace  with  Smaragdus  the  patrician
for  one  year,  receiving  from  the  Romans*  twelve  thou-
sand solidi.3  Cities  of  Tuscany  too,  that  is,  Balneus
Regis4  (Bagnarea)  and  Urbs  Vetus5  (Orvieto)  were

deric  overcame  Teudepert  and  put  him  to  death,  but  what  became
of  his  daughter,  the  affianced  bride  of  Adaloald,  we  are  not  in-
formed. Theuderic  then  turned  against  Clothar,  but  suddenly
died,  leaving  four  illegitimate  children.  The  eldest  of  these  was
Sigibert  and  in  his  name,  his  great  grandmother,  the  old  queen
Brunihilde  aspired  to  rule  over  Burgundy  and  Austrasia,  but
Amulf,  bishop  of  Metz,  and  Pepin,  a great  noble,  went  over  to  the
side  of  Clothar,  and  in  613  Brunihilde  and  her  great-grandchild
were  captured.  She  was  tied  to  a vicious  horse  and  trampled  to
death  (Hodgkin,  VI,  10 8-1 10).

1 Cantor  who  instructed  the  choristers  and  younger  clerics  in
music  and  directed  the  singing  of  the  service.  Sometimes  this
office  was  of  considerable  dignity  and  had  a prebend  attached  to
it.  See  DuCange.

•That  is,  the  Greeks  (Waitz).

•See  III,  17,  note  2,  supra , as  to  the  value  of  the  solidus.

4 1 * The  King*  s Bath.  * *

6 ‘‘Old  City.’*  Both  these  places  were  afterwards  in  the
States  of  the  Church.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

*75

seized  by  the  Langobards. 1 Then  also  in  the  month  of
April  and  May  there  appeared  in  the  heavens  a star
which  they  call  a comet.  Afterwards  king  Agilulf  again
made  peace  with  the  Romans  for  three  years. 9

Chapter  XXXIII.

In  these  days  after  the  death  of  the  patriarch  Severus,
the  abbot  John  was  ordained  in  his  placed  as  patriarch
in  old  Aquileia  with  the  consent  of  the  king  and  of  duke
Gisulf.  In  Gradus  (Grado)  also  Candidianus  was  or-
dained bishop  by  the  Romans. 4 Again  in  the  months
of  November  and  December  a comet  appeared.  When
Candidianus  also  died,  Epiphanius,  who  had  been  chief
of  the  secretaries, 5 was  ordained  patriarch  at  Gradus  by
the  bishops  who  were  under  the  Romans.  And  from
that  time  there  began  to  be  two  patriarchs. 6

1 The  seizure  of  these  cities  seems  to  have  been  in  April,  605,
before  the  commencement  of  the  year  of  truce  just  mentioned
(see  Hartmann,  II,  1,  197)  which  began  in  November  of  that
year.

*607  to  610  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  197.

3 In  the  Chronicle  of  the  Patriarchs  of  New  Aquileia  (see  Monti-
colo’s  ed.,  1890,  p.  9),  Mardanus  is  placed  between  Severus  and
John,  and  it  is  stated  that  he  held  the  office  3 years,  1 month  and
5 days.  Otherwise  the  list  corresponds  with  that  of  Paul  (Cipolla
in  Atti  del  Congresso  in  Cividale,  1899,  p.  136).

4 Antistes , a name  given,  not  only  to  bishops  and  abbots,  but
also  to  priors  and  then  to  parish  priests.  Andrea  Dandolo,  a
doge  and  chronicler  of  Venice  in  the  14th  century,  says  that  Mar-
cianus  preceded  Candidianus  (see  Dandolo’ s Chronicle,  Bk.  VI,

Ch.  3).

3 Primicerius  notariorum,  Abel  translates  “ Papal  chief  notary."

•The  division  in  the  patriarchate  was  due  to  the  schism  in

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

176

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXXIV.

At  this  time  John  of  Consia1  (Conza)  took  posses-
sion of  Naples,  but  not  many  days  afterwards  Eleuth-
erius,  the  patrician,  drove  him  from  that  city  and  killed
him.  After  these  things  that  same  patrician  Eleu-
therius,  a eunuch,  assumed  the  rights  of  sovereignty.
While  h^^ras  proceeding  from  Ravenna  to  Rome  he  was
killecrf  irT  the  fortress  of  Luceoli  3 by  the  soldiers  and
his  head  was  brought  to  the  emperor  at  Constantinople.4

regard  to  the  Three  Chapters  (III,  20  and  26,  supra).  The  effect
of  the  division  was  to  throw  the  schismatics  into  the  arms  of  the
Langobards.  The  patriarch  John,  mentioned  in  the  text,  com-
plained to  Agilulf  of  the  persecutions  of  the  Greeks  and  said  that
three  Istrian  bishops  had  been  dragged  away  by  imperial  soldiers
and  forced  to  hold  communion  with  Candidianus  at  Grado,  and
he  asked  the  king,  now  that  that  worthless  man  had  gone  to
eternal  torment,  to  prevent  a new  patriarch  from  being  ordained
at  Grado.  This,  however,  was  not  done.  Some  time  later,  one
Fortunatus  was  made  patriarch  there,  and  being  at  heart  a schis-
matic, he  seized  the  treasure  of  the  church  and  fled  to  the  main-
land, where  he  was  made  patriarch  of  Aquileia  and  the  Lango-
bards were  asked  in  vain  to  give  back  the  treasure.  Finally  the
emperor  Heraclius  sent  a large  sum  of  money  to  Grado  to  make
up  for  the  loss  (Hodgkin,  V,  482,  483).

iOr  “ Compsa,”  a city  in  ancient  Sammum  on  the  Aufidus.

* Paul  places  the  death  of  John  of  Consia  and  Eleutherius  10  or
12  years  too  early.  According  to  the  Liber  Pontificalis,  Eleuther-
ius was  killed  A.  D.  619  (Jacobi,  53),  after  Agilulf  s death.  See
Hodgkin,  VI,  156.

8 Or  “ Luciuolo,**  which  is  believed  to  be  located  between  Gubbio
and  Cagli,  hence  north  of  Perugia  and  south  of  Urbino  (Muratori
Ann.,  4,  40).

4 The  usurpation  of  Eleutherius  was  one  of  a series  of  efforts  to

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

1 77

Chapter  XXXV.

Also  at  this  time  king  Agilulf  sent  his  secretary  Sta-
blicianus  to  Constantinople  to  the  emperor  Focas,  and
when  he  returned  with  the  ambassadors  of  the  emperor,
peace  was  made  for  a year,  and  the  ambassadors  pre-
sented to  king  Agilulf  imperial  gifts.*

Chapter  XXXVI.

Focas  then,  as  has  been  already  set  forth,  usurped
the  sovereignty  of  the  Romans  after  the  death  of
Maurice  and  his  sons,  and  reigned  during  the  course  of
eight  years.  Because  the  church  of  Constantinople  was
calling  itself  in  writing  the  first  of  all  churches,  he  or-
dained, at  the  request  of  Pope  Boniface,2  that  the  See  of

separate  Italy  from  the  East,  occasioned  by  the  growing  weakness
of  the  empire.  The  exarch  John,  the  immediate  successor  of
Smaragdus  had  been  killed  with  a number  of  other  officers,  and
Eleutherius  his  successor  had  punished  those  who  had  been  guilty
of  the  crime,  and  had  then  become  involved  in  an  unsuccessful
war  with  the  Langobards  with  whom  he  had  concluded  an  armis-
tice in  consideration  of  an  annual  tribute  of  500  pounds  of  gold.
Now  he  raised  the  standard  of  revolt  with  the  design  of  establish-
ing a new  Western  empire  with  Rome  as  its  capital.  He  assumed
the  purple  in  Ravenna,  and  intended  to  be  crowned  in  that  city,
but  changed  his  purpose  and  was  proceeding  to  Rome  for  his
coronation  when  he  was  killed  (see  Hartmann,  II,  1,  202,  203).

!This  is  the  first  instance  of  direct  negotiations  between  the
Langobards  and  Constantinople.  Prior  to  this  a truce  had  been
made  on  several  occasions  with  the  exarch.  These  “imperial
gifts’*  were  probably  in  the  nature  of  a tribute  (Hartmann,  II,  1,
198).

•Boniface  III,  A.  D.  606,  607  (Abel).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

178

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

the  Roman  and  Apostolic  Church  should  be  the  head  of
* all.  I He  commanded,  at  the  request  of  another  pope
Boniface,1  that  the  Church  of  the  Ever-blessed  Virgin
Mary  and  of  all  the  Martyrs  should  be  established  in  the
old  temple  which  was  called  the  Pantheon,  after  all  the
uncleannesses  of  idolatry  had  been  removed,  so  that
where  formerly  the  worship,  not  of  all  the  gods,  but  of
all  the  devils  was  performed,  there  at  last  there  should
\ be  a memorial  of  all  the  saints,  j At  this  time  the  Pra-
sini  and  the  Veneti 2 carried  on  a civil  war  throughout

1 Boniface  IV,  A.  D.  607-615  (Abel).

* So  called  from  the  colors  of  the  contestants  in  the  circus.  At
first  a chariot  race  was  a contest  of  two  chariots  with  drivers  in
white  and  red  liveries.  Two  additional  colors,  a light  green
(prasinus)  and  a cerulean  blue  (venetus=caeruleust  “the  sky  re-
flected in  the  sea  ’ ’ ) were  afterwards  introduced.  The  four  factions
soon  acquired  a legal  establishment  and  their  fanciful  colors
typified  the  various  appearances  of  nature  in  the  four  seasons,  or
according  to  another  interpretation,  the  struggle  of  the  green  and
blue  represented  the  conflict  of  the  earth  and  sea.  These  contests
disturbed  the  spectacles  in  the  circus  of  imperial  Rome  and  later,
raged  with  redoubled  fury  in  the  hippodrome  of  Constantinople.
Under  Anastasius  the  Greens  massacred  at  a solemn  festival  three
thousand  of  the  opposite  faction.  The  Blues,  favored  by  Justin-
ian I,  were  the  authors  of  widespread  disorders  and  outrages  at
the  capital,  and  in  532  a sedition  called  that  of  Nika  was  excited
by  the  mutual  hatred  and  momentary  reconciliation  of  these  fac-
tions, in  which  many  of  the  most  important  buildings  of  the  city
were  consumed,  some  thirty  thousand  persons  slain,  and  the  reign
of  Justinian  himself  was  brought  to  the  brink  of  destruction.  The
hippodrome  closed  for  a time,  but  when  it  was  opened  again  the
disorders  were  renewed,  (Gibbon,  ch.  40,)  and  the  text  shows  how
widespread  were  the  disturbances  some  three-quarters  of  a century
later.

A

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

179

the  East  and  Egypt  and  destroyed  each  other  with
mutual  slaughter.  The  Persians  also  waged  a very
severe  war  against  the  empire,  took  away  many  pro-
vinces of  the  Romans,  including  Jerusalem  itself,*  and
destroying  churches  and  profaning  holy  things  they
carried  off  among  the  ornaments  of  places  sacred  and
secular,  even  the  banner  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  Hera-
clian,  who  was  governing  Africa,  rebelled  against  this
Focas  and  coming  with  his  army,  deprived  him  of  his
sovereignty  and  his  life,  and  Heraclius,  the  son  of  Hera-
clian,  undertook  the  government  of  the  Roman  state.  *

Chapter  XXXVII.

About  these  times  the  king  of  the  Avars,  whom  they
call  Cagan  in  their  language,  came  with  a jcpuntless
multitude  and  invaded  the  territories  of  Veneti&. / (jisulf
the  duke  of  Forum  Julii  (Friuli)  boldly  came  to  meet
him  with  all  the  Langobards  he  could  get,  but  although

lThis  actually  occurred  later  (A.  D.  614)  under  Heraclius
(Giansevero).

*A.  D.  610  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  200).

•The  date  usually  assigned  to  the  Avar  invasion  is  61 1,  though
some  place  it  as  early  as  602.  Phocas  reigned  from  602  to  610.
If  the  death  of  Severus,  patriarch  of  Aquileia,  occurred  in  60 6,
the  Avar  invasion  took  place  after  that  date,  since  Gisulf  concurred
in  the  nomination  of  his  successor  (Hodgkin,  VI,  51,  note).  The
previous  relations  between  the  Langobards  and  Avars  had  been  of
the  most  friendly  character.  There  had  been  treaties  of  alliance,
joint  invasions  of  Istria,  injunctions  sent  by  the  Avars  to  the  Franks
to  keep  peace  with  the  Langobards  and  Agilulf  had  furnished
the  Cagan  with  shipwrights  for  a naval  expedition  against  the
Eastern  empire  (IV,  24,  20,  supra;  Hodgkin,  VI,  £0,  51).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

180  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

he  waged  war  with  a few  against  an  immense  multitude
with  indomitable  courage,  nevertheless,  he  was  sur-
rounded on  every  side,  and  killed  with  nearly  all  his  fol-
lowers. The  wife  of  this  Gisulf,  by  name  Romilda,
together  with  the  Langobards  who  had  escaped  and
with  the  wives  and  children  of  those  who  had  perished
in  war,  fortified  herself1 *  within  the  enclosures  of  the  walls
\ of  the  fortress  of  Forum  Julii  (Cividale).  ' She  had  two
sons,  Taso  and  Cacco,  who  were  already  growing  youths,
and  Raduald  and  Grimuald,  who  were  still  in  the  age  of
boyhood.  And  she  had  also  four  daughters,  of  whom
one  was  called  Appa  and  another  Gaila,  but  of  two  we
do  not  preserve  the  names.  The  Langobards  had  also
fortified  themselves  in  other  fortresses  which  were  near
these,  that  is,  in  Cormones  (Cormons),  Nemas  (Nimis),
Osopus  (Ossopo),9  Artenia  (Artegna),3 4 * *  Reunia  (Ra-
gogna),  Glemona  (Gemona),*  and  also  in  Ibligis  (Iplis)3
whose  position  was  in  every  way  impregnable.  Also  in
the  same  way  they  fortified  themselves  in  the  remaining
castles,  so  that  they  should  not  become  the  prey  of  the
Huns,  that  is,  of  the  Avars.  But  the  Avars,  roaming
through  all  the  territories  of  Forum  Julii,  devastating
everything  with  burnings  and  plunderings,  shut  up  by
siege  the  town  of  Forum  Julii  and  strove  with  all  their

1 1 insert  se  after  muniit.

* On  the  river  Tagliamento  (Waitz).

* In  Carnia  (Waitz).

4 In  Friuli  (Waitz).

* Near  Cividale  on  the  way  to  Cormons  (Waitz).  According  to

others,  Invilino  (Abel).

Digitized  by  v^ooole

BOOK  tv.

181

might  to  capture  it.  ) While  their  king,  that  is  the  ^
Cagan,  was  ranging  around  the  walls  in  full  armor  with
a great  company  of  horsemen  to  find  out  from  what  side
he  might  more  easily  capture  the  city,  Romilda  gazed
upon  him  from  the  walls,  and  when  she  beheld  him  in
the  bloom  of  his  youth,  the  abominable  harlot  was
seized  with  desire  for  him  and  straightway  sent  word  to
him  by  a messenger  that  if  he  would  take  her  in  mar-
riage she  would  deliver  to  him  the  city  with  all  who
were  in  it.  The  barbarian  king,  hearing  this,  promised
her  with  wicked  cunning  that  he  would  do  what  she  had
enjoined  and  vowed  to  take  her  in  marriage.  She  then
without  delay  opened  the  gates  of  the  fortress  of  Forum
Julii  and  let  in  the  enemy  to  her  own  ruin  and  that  of
all  who  were  there.  ) The  Avars  indeed  with  their  /
king,  having  entered  Forum  Julii,  laid  waste  with  their
plunderings  everything  they  could  discover,  consumed
in  flames  the  city  itself,  and  carried  away  as  captives
everybody  they  found,  falsely  promising  them,  however,
to  settle  them  in  the  territories  of  Pannonia,  from  which
they  had  come.  When  on  their  return  to  their  country
they  had  come  to  the  plain  they  called  Sacred,1  they  de-
creed that  all  the  Langobards  who  had  attained  full  age
should  perish  by  the  sword,  and  they  divided  the  women
and  children  in  the  lot  of  captivity.  But  Taso  and
Cacco  and  Raduald,  the  sons  of  Gisulf  and  Romilda,
when  they  knew  the  evil  intention  of  the  Avars,  straight-
way mounted  their  horses  and  took  flight.  One  of  them

1 The  Sacred  Plain  has  not  been  identified  (Hodgkin,  VI,  53,
note  2).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

1$2

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

when  he  thought  that  his  brother  Grimoald,  a little  boy,
could  not  keep  himself  upon  a running  horse,  since  he
was  so  small,  considered  it  better  that  he  should  perish
by  the  sword  than  bear  the  yoke  of  captivity,  and  wanted
to  kill  him.  When  therefore,  he  lifted  his  lance  to
pierce  him  through,  the  boy  wept  and  cried  out,  saying :
“ Do  not  strike  me  for  I can  keep  on  a horse.”  And
his  brother,  seizing  him  by  the  arm,  put  him  upon  the
bare  back  of  a horse  and  urged  him  to  stay  there  if  he
could ; and  the  boy,  taking  the  rein  of  the  horse  in  his
hand,  followed  his  fleeing  brothers.  The  Avars,  when
they  learned  this,  mounted  their  horses  and  followed
them,  but  although  the  others  escaped  by  swift  flight,
the  little  boy  Grimoald  was  taken  by  one  of  those  who
had  run  up  most  swiftly.  His  captor,  however,  did  not
deign  to  strike  him  with  the  sword  on  account  of  his
slender  age,  but  rather  kept  him  to  be  his  servant.  And
returning  to  the  camp,  he  took  hold  of  the  bridle  of  the
horse  and  led  the  boy  away,  and  exulted  over  so  noble
a booty — for  he  was  a little  fellow  of  elegant  form  with
gleaming  eyes  and  covered  with  long  blonde  hair — and
when  the  boy  grieved  that  he  was  carried  away  as  a cap-
tive,

Pondering  mighty  thoughts  within  his  diminutive  bosom,1

he  took  out  of  the  scabbard  a sword,  such  as  he  was
able  to  carry  at  that  age,  and  struck  the  Avar  who  was
leading  him,  with  what  little  strength  he  could,  on  the

1 Virgil,  Georgies,  IV,  83,  where  it  is  applied  to  the  soldier  bees.
In  Paul’s  quotation  versant  is  changed  to  versons .

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

183

top  of  the  head.  Straightway  the  blow  passed  through
to  the  skull  and  the  enemy  was  thrown  from  his  horse.
And.  the  boy  Grimoald  turned  his  own  horse  around  and
took  flight,  greatly  rejoicing,  and  at  last  joined  his
brothers  and  gave  them  incalculable  joy  by  his  escape
and  by  announcing,  moreover,  the  destruction  of  his
enemy.  The  Avars  now  killed  by  the  sword  all  the
Langobards  who  were  already  of  the  age  of  manhood,
but  the  women  and  children  they  consigned  to  the  yoke
of  captivity.  Romilda  indeed,  who  had  been  the  head
of  all  this  evil-doing,  the  king  of  the  Avars,  on  account
of  his  oath,  kept  for  one  night  as  if  in  marriage  as  he
had  promised  her,  but  upon  the  next  he  turned  her  over
to  twelve  Avars,  who  abused  her  through  the  whole
night  with  their  lust,  succeeding  each  other  by  turns.
Afterwards  too,  ordering  a stake  to  be  fixed  in  the
midst  of  a field,  he  commanded  her  to  be  impaled  upon
the  point  of  it,  uttering  these  words,  moreover,  in  re-
proach : “ It  is  fit  you  should  have  such  a husband.”
Therefore  the  detestable  betrayer  of  her  country  who
looked  out  for  her  own  lust  more  than  for  the  preserva-
tion of  her  fellow  citizens  and  kindred,  perished  by  such
a death.  Her  daughters,  indeed,  did  not  follow  the  sen-
sual inclination  of  their  mother,  but  striving  from  love
of  chastity  not  to  be  contaminated  by  the  barbarians,
they  put  the  flesh  of  raw  chickens  under  the  band
between  their  breasts,  and  this,  when  putrified  by  the
heat,  gave  out  an  evil  smell.  And  the  Avars,  when  they
wanted  to  touch  them,  could  not  endure  the  stench  that
they  thought  was  natural  to  them,  but  moved  far  away
from  them  with  cursing,  saying  that  all  the  Langobard

Digitized  by  v^ooole

1 84  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

women  had  a bad  smell.  By  this  stratagem  then  the
noble  girls,  escaping  from  the  lust  of  the  Avars,  not
only  kept  themselves  chaste,  but  handed  down  a useful
example  for  preserving  chastity  if  any  such  thing
should  happen  to  women  hereafter.  And  they  were
afterwards  sold  throughout  various  regions  and  secured
worthy  marriages  on  account  of  their  noble  birth ; for
one  of  them  is  said  to  have  wedded  a king  of  the  Ala-
manni,  and  another,  a prince  of  the  Bavarians.

The  topic  now  requires  me  to  postpone  my  general
history  and  relate  also  a few  matters  of  a private
character  concerning  the  genealogy  of  myself  who  write
these  things,  and  because  the  case  so  demands,  I must
go  back  a little  earlier  in  the  order  of  my  narrative.  At
the  time  when  the  nation  of  the  Langobards  came  from
Pannonia  to  Italy,  my  great-great-grandfather  Leupchis
of  the  same  nation  of  Langobards  came  with  them  in
like  manner.  When  he  ended  his  last  day  after  he  had
lived  some  years  in  Italy,  he  left  five  sons  begotten  by
him  who  were  still  little  boys.  That  misfortune  of  cap-
tivity of  which  we  have  spoken  included  these,  and  they
were  all  carried  away  as  exiles  from  the  fortress  of
Forum  Julii  into  the  country  of  the  Avars.  After  they
had  borne  in  that  region  for  many  years  the  misery  of
bondage,  and  had  already  come  to  the  age  of  manhood,
although  the  four  others,  whose  names  we  do  not  retain,
remained  in  the  constraint  of  captivity,  the  fifth  brother,
Lopichis  by  name,  who  was  afterwards  our  great-grand-
father, determined  (at  the  inspiration  as  we  believe  of
the  Author  of  Mercy)  to  cast  off  the  yoke  of  bondage,
and  to  direct  his  course  to  Italy,  where  he  had  remem-

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

I85

bered  that  the  race  of  the  Langobards  was  settled,  and
he  made  an  effort  to  regain  the  rights  of  freedom.
When  he  had  gone  and  betaken  himself  to  flight,  carry-
ing only  a quiver  and  bow  and  a little  food  for  the  jour-
ney, and  did  not  at  all  know  whither  he  was  proceed-
ing, a wolf  came  to  him  and  became  the  companion  of
his  journey  and  his  guide.  Seeing  that  it  proceeded
before  him,  and  often  looked  behind  and  stood  with
him  when  he  stood,  and  went  ahead  when  he  advanced,
he  understood  that  it  had  been  given  to  him  from
heaven  to  show  to  him  the  way,  of  which  he  was  ignor-
ant. When  they  had  proceeded  in  this  manner  for
some  days  through  the  solitudes  of  the  mountains,  the
bread,  of  which  the  traveler  had  had  very  little,  wholly
failed  him.  While  he  went  on  his  way  fasting,  and  had
already  become  faint  with  exhaustion  from  hunger,  he
drew,  his  bow  and  attempted  to  kill  with  his  arrow  this
same  wolf  so  that  he  could  use  it  for  food.  But  the
wolf,  avoiding  the  stroke  that  he  cast,  slipped  away  from
his  sight.  And  he,  not  knowing  whither  to  proceed,
when  this  wolf  had  gone  away,  and  made  very  weak
moreover  by  the  privation  of  hunger,  now  despaired  of
his  life,  and  throwing  himself  upon  the  earth,  he  went  to
sleep.  And  he  saw  in  his  dreams  a certain  man  saying
to  him  the  following  words : “ Arise ! why  are  you
sleeping?  Take  your  way  in  that  direction  opposite  to
which  your  feet  are  turned,  for  there  is  Italy  which  you
are  seeking.”  And  straightway  rising  he  began  to  pro-
ceed in  that  direction  Which  he  had  heard  in  his  dreams,
and  without  delay  he  came  to  a dwelling  place  of  men ;
for  there  was  a settlement  of  Slavs  in  those  places.

Digitized  by

Google

1 86  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

And  when  an  elderly  woman  now  saw  him,  she  straight-
way understood  that  he  was  a fugitive  and  suffering
from  the  privation  of  hunger.  And  taking  pity  upon
him,  she  hid  him  in  her  dwelling  and  secretly  furnished
him  food,  a little  at  a time,  lest  she  should  put  an  end
to  his  life  altogether  if  she  should  give  him  nourishment
to  repletion.  In  fine,  she  thus  supplied  him  skillfully
with  food  until  he  was  restored  and  got  his  strength.
And  when  she  saw  that  he  was  now  able  to  pursue  his
journey,  she  gave  him  provisions  and  told  him  in  what
direction  he  ought  to  go.  After  some  days  he  entered
Italy  and  came  to  the  house  in  which  he  had  been  born,
which  was  so  deserted  that  not  only  did  it  have  no  roof
but  it  was  full  of  brambles  and  thorns.  And  when  he
had  cut  them  down  he  found  within  the  walls  a large
ash-tree,  and  hung  his  quiver  upon  it.  He  was  after-
wards provided  with  gifts  by  his  relatives  and  friends,
and  rebuilt  his  house  and  took  a wife.  But  he  could
obtain  nothing  of  the  property  his  father  had  had,  being
now  excluded  by  those  who  had  appropriated  it  through
long  and  continuous  possession.  This  man,  as  I already
said  before,  was  my  great-grandfather,  and  he  begot  my
grandfather  Arichis,1  alid  Arichis,  my  father  Warnefrit,
and  Warnefrit,  from  Theudelinda  his  wife,  begot  me,
Paul,  and  my  brother  Arichis  who  was  named  after
my  grandfather.*  These  few  things  having  been  con-

1 Henry.

* Paul  has  probably  omitted  some  links  in  his  family  genealogy.
Four  generations  are  very  few  for  the  period  between  Leupchis
who  came  into  Italy  with  Alboin,  568,  and  Paul,  who  was  bom
between  720  and  730.  It  is  remarkable  too  that  Leupchis,  a

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

187

sidered  concerning  the  chain  of  my  own  genealogy,
now  let  us  return  to  the  thread  of  the  general  history.

Chapter  XXXVIII.

After  the  death,  as  we  said,  of  Gisulf,  duke  of  Forum
Julii,  his  sons  Taso  and  Cacco  undertook  the  govern-
ment of  this  dukedom.  They  possessed  in  their  time
the  territory  of  the  Slavs  which  is  named  Zellia
(Gail-thal),1  up  to  the  place  which  is  called  Medaria
(Windisch  Matrei),  hence,  those  same  Slavs,  up  to  the
time  of  duke  Ratchis,  paid  tribute  to  the  dukes  of  Forum
Julii.  Gregory  the  patrician  of  the  Romans  killed  these
two  brothers  in  the  city  of  Opitergium  (Oderzo)  by
crafty  treachery.  For  he  promised  Taso  that  he  would
cut  his  beard,2  as  is  the  custom,  and  make  him  his  son,
and  this  Taso,  with  Cacco  his  brother,  and  some  chosen
youths  came  to  Gregory  fearing  no  harm.  When  pres-
ently he  had  entered  Opitergium  with  his  followers,
straightway  the  patrician  ordered  the  gates  of  the  city
to  be  closed  and  sent  armed  soldiers  against  Taso  and
his  companions.  Taso  with  his  followers  perceiving
this,  boldly  prepared  for  a fight,  and  when  a moment
of  quiet  was  given,  they  bade  each  other  a last  fare-

grown  man  in  568,  should  leave  five  little  children  at  the  time  of
the  Avar  invasion  in  610  (Hodgkin,  VI,  58,  note  1).

1 Hodgkin,  VI,  59,  note,  and  Hartmann,  II,  1,  236.  The
valley  of  the  Gail  in  Carinthia  and  eastern  Tyrol.

•A  ceremony  indicating  that  he  whose  beard  is  shaved  and
whose  hair  is  cut  has  arrived  at  the  state  of  manhood.  Thus
king  Liutprand  performed  a similar  ceremony  for  the  son  of
Charles  Martel  (Book  VI,  Chap.  53,  infra).

Digitized  by

Google

1 88

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

well,  and  scattered  hither  and  thither  through  the
different  streets  of  the  city,  killing  whomsoever  they
could  find  in  their  way,  and  while  they  made  a great
slaughter  of  the  Romans,  they  also  were  slain  at  last.
But  Gregory  the  patrician,  on  account  of  the  oath  he
had  given,  ordered  the  head  of  Taso  to  be  brought  to
him,  and,  perjured  though  he  was,  cut  off  his  beard  as
he  had  promised. 1

Chapter  XXXIX.

When  they  were  thus  killed,  Grasulf,  the  brother  of
Gisulf,  was  made  duke  of  Forum  Julii.2  But  Radoald  and
Grimoald,  as  they  were  now  close  to  the  age  of  man-
hood, held  it  in  contempt  to  live  under  the  power  of
their  uncle  Grasulf,  and  they  embarked  in  a little  boat
and  came  rowing  to  the  territories  of  Beneventum.

1 Fredegarius  (IV,  69)  tells  a story  (which  is  considered  by  some
to  be  a variation  of  this)  as  to  the  murder  of  Taso,  duke  of  Tus-
cany, by  the  patrician  Isaac.  King  Arioald  offered  Isaac  to  re-
mit one  of  the  three  hundredweights  of  gold  which  the  empire
paid  yearly  to  the  Langobards  if  he  would  kill  Taso,  who  was  a
rebel  (see  chap.  49).  Isaac  invited  Taso  to  Ravenna  with  a troop
of  warriors  who  were  prevailed  upon  to  leave  their  arms  outside
the  walls,  and  when  they  entered  the  city  they  were  assassinated.
The  tribute  was  accordingly  reduced.  Soon  afterwards  Arioald
died.  As  Arioald  reigned  from  626  to  636  and  Isaac  did  not  be-
come exarch  until  630,  this  story  can  not  be  reconciled  with  Paul's
account  of  an  event  which  must  have  happened  many  years
earlier.  Either  Fredegarius  got  hold  of  an  inaccurate  version,  or
the  coincidence  of  name  is  accidental  and  the  story  relates  to  some
different  event  (Hodgkin,  VI,  59,  60,  note  2;  Pabst,  429).

*De  Rubeis  (Appendix,  p.  63)  says  this  occurred  A.  D.  616.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

189

Then  hastening  to  Arichis,  duke  of  the  Beneventines,
their  former  preceptor,  they  were  received  by  him  most
kindly  and  treated  by  him  in  the  place  of  sons.  In
these  times,  upon  the  death  of  Tassilo,  duke  of  the  Ba-
varians, his  son  Garibald  was  conquered  by  the  Slavs  at
Aguntum  (Innichen),  and  the  territories  of  the  Bavar-
ians were  plundered.  The  Bavarians,  however,  having
recovered  their  strength,  took  away  the  booty  from  their
foes  and  drove  their  enemies  from  their  territories.

Chapter  XL.

King  Agilulf,  indeed,  made  peace  with  the  emperor
for  one  year,  and  again  for  another,  and  also  renewed  a
second  time  the  bond  of  peace  with  the  Franks.  In
this  year,  nevertheless,  the  Slavs  grievously  devastated
Istria  after  killing  the  soldiers  who  defended  it.  Also
in  the  following  month  of  March,  Secundus,  a servant
of  Christ  of  whom  we  have  already  often  spoken,  died
at  Tridentum  (Trent).  He  composed  a brief  history  of
the  deeds  of  the  Langobards  up  to  his  time.1  At  that
time  king  Agilulf  again  made  peace  with  the  emperor.
In  those  days  Theudepert,  king  of  the  Franks,  was  also
killed,  and  a very  severe  battle  occurred  among  them.
Gunduald  too,  the  brother  of  queen  Theudelinda,  who
was  duke  in  the  city  of  Asta  (Asti),  died  at  this  time,
struck  by  an  arrow,  but  no  one  knew  the  author  of  his
death.

1 After  the  death  of  Secundus  in  612  Paul’s  source  for  the  his-
tory of  Trent  becomes  exhausted  and  we  hear  little  more  about
that  duchy.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

190

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XLI.

Then  king  Agilulf,  who  was  called  Ago,  after  he  had
reigned  twenty-five  years,  ended  his  last  day,1  and  his
son  Adaloald,  who  was  still  a boy,  was  left  in  the  sover-
eignty with  Theudelinda  his  mother.  Under  them  the
churches  were  restored  and  many  gifts  were  bestowed
upon  the  holy  places.  But  when  Adaloald,  after  he  had
reigned  with  his  mother  ten  years,  lost  his  reason  and
became  insane,  he  was  cast  out  of  the  sovereignty,2  and

'Probably  615  or  616  (Waitz;  Hodgkin,  VI,  147,  note  1).

*Fredegarius  (Chron.  49)  tells  the  story  thus:  that  Adaloald,
upon  the  advice  of  one  Eusebius,  anointed  himself  in  the  bath
with  some  sort  of  ointment,  and  afterwards  could  do  nothing  ex-
cept what  he  was  told  by  Eusebius;  that  he  was  thus  persuaded  to
order  all  the  chief  persons  and  nobles  of  the  Langobards  to  be
killed,  and  upon  their  death  to  surrender,  with  all  his  people  to
the  empire;  that  when  he  had  put  twelve  to  death  without  their
fault,  the  rest  conspired  to  raise  Arioald,  duke  of  Turin,  who  had
married  Gundiperga,  the  sister  of  Adaloald,  to  the  throne;  that
Adaloald  took  poison  and  died  and  Arioald  straightway  took  pos-
session of  the  kingdom.

Possibly  the  zeal  of  Theudelinda  and  Adaloald  for  the  Catholic
faith  may  have  provoked  a reaction  among  the  Langobards,  who
had  been  Arians,  and  they  may  have  become  dissatisfied  with  the
conciliatory  policy  toward  the  empire  which  was  characteristic  of
the  Bavarian  line  of  sovereigns  descended  from  Theudelinda.  The
legend  of  Eusebius  was  perhaps  an  expression  of  this  dissatisfac-
tion. Adaloald’ s successor  was  certainly  an  Arian.  We  have
already  seen  (ch.  34,  note,  supra ) that  during  Adaloald’ s time
Eleutherius  the  exarch  defeated  John  of  Compsa  who  had  re-
volted and  taken  possession  of  Naples,  and  put  him  to  death.
After  this  revolt  the  war  with  the  Langobards  was  renewed  and
Sundrar  the  Langobard  general  repeatedly  defeated  the  exarch,
who  finally  obtained  peace  upon  payment  of  a yearly  tribute  of

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  IV.

IQI

Arioald  was  substituted  by  the  Langobards  in  his  place.*
Concerning  the  acts  of  this  king  hardly  anything  has
come  to  our  knowledge.9  About  these  times  the  holy

five  hundredweight  of  gold  (Hodgkin,  VI,  154,  155).  We  have
also  seen  that  Eleutherius  afterwards  aspired  to  independent  sov-
ereignty and  was  killed  (IV,  34,  supra)  t though  Paul  incorrectly
places  these  occurrences  during  the  reign  of  Agilulf.  In  625  Pope
Honorius  I addressed  a letter  to  Isaac  the  new  exarch  saying  that
some  bishops  beyond  the  Po  had  urged  one  Peter,  who  seems  to
have  been  a layman  high  in  office,  not  to  follow  the  Catholic
Adaloald,  but  the  tyrant  Ariopalt  (Arioald)  (Hodgkin,  VI,  158)  ;
since  the  crime  of  the  bishops  was  odious,  the  pope  asked  the
exarch  to  send  them  to  Rome  for  punishment  as  soon  as  Adaloald
was  restored  to  his  kingdom.  This  contest  between  Adaloald
and  his  successor  probably  occurred  between  624  and  626  (Hodg-
kin, VI,  160),  and  it  would  seem  that  Adaloald  had  taken  refuge
with  the  exarch  in  Ravenna  from  which  Wiese  (p.  284)  infers  that
his  death  may  have  been  by  order  of  Isaac  to  avoid  complications
with  the  Langobards.  We  do  not  learn  what  part  Theudelinda
took  in  this  contest.  She  died  February  22nd,  628,  shortly  after
the  death  of  Adaloald  (Hodgkin  VI,  160).

1 Probably  A.  D.  626  (Hodgkin,  VI,  161).

•Fredegarius  (IV,  51)  tells  us  that  Gundiperga  (wife  of  Arioald
and  daughter  of  Agilulf  and  Theudelinda)  said  one  day  that  Ada-
lulf,  a nobleman  in  the  king’s  service,  was  a man  of  goodly
stature,  and  Adalulf  hearing  this,  proposed  to  her  that  she  should
be  unfaithful  to  her  marriage  vow.  She  scorned  his  proposal
whereupon  he  charged  that  she  had  granted  a secret  interview  to
Taso  duke  of  Tuscany  and  had  promised  to  poison  the  king  and
raise  Taso  to  the  throne.  Upon  this  Arioald  imprisoned  her  in  a
fortress.  Two  years  afterwards  Clothar  II,  king  of  the  Franks,
sent  ambassadors  to  Arioald  asking  why  she  had  been  imprisoned
and  when  the  reason  was  given,  one  of  the  ambassadors  suggested
a trial  by  battle  to  ascertain  her  guilt  or  innocence.  The  duel  ac-
cordingly took  place,  Adalulf  was  slain  by  the  queen’s  champion
and  she  was  restored  to  her  royal  dignity  (Hodgkin,  VI,  161-163).

Digitized  by  UaOOQle

192

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Columban,  sprung  from  the  race  of  Scots,  after  he  had
built  a monastery  in  Gaul  in  the  place  called  Luxovium
(Luxeuil),  came  into  Italy,1  and  was  kindly  received  by
the  king  of  the  Langobards,  and  built  a convent  in  the
Cottian  Alps  which  is  called  Bobium  (Bobbio)  and  is
forty  miles  distant  from  the  city  of  Ticinum.2  In  this

1 Probably  before  this  time  and  about  A.  D.  612  (Giansevero).

* St.  Columban  was  bom,  not  in  Scotland  but  in  Ireland  about
543  and  entered  a monastery  at  Bangor  at  a period  when  the  Irish
monasteries  were  centers  of  culture.  After  some  years  he  set  forth
to  preach  the  gospel,  first  in  Britain  and  then  in  Gaul.  Sigispert,
king  of  Austrasia,  the  husband  of  Brunihilde  gave  him  a ruined
village  named  Anagratis  where  he  established  a monastery,  but
after  a while  he  retired  -to  a cave,  and  was  so  famed  for  miracles
that  he  drew  around  him  many  disciples  and  found  it  necessary  to
establish  another  monastery  at  Luxovium  in  the  domains  of  Gun-
thram  of  Burgundy,  now  the  Vosges.  A third  was  established
near  by  at  Ad  Fontanas  (Hodgkin  VI,  no,  113).  Afterwards  he
incurred  the  enmity  of  Brunihilde  and  her  grandson  Theuderic  of
Burgundy  (pp.  1 21-123)  an(l  was  expelled  from  that  king-
dom. Under  the  protection  of  Theudepert  of  Austrasia  he  found
a retreat  at  Bregenz  on  the  Lake  of  Constance  (p.  126)  where  he
put  an  end  to  the  worship  of  heathen  gods,  which  had  been  prac-
ticed in  the  neighborhood.  Upon  Theudepert’s  death,  which  the
saint  had  foretold,  he  betook  himself  to  Italy  where  he  was  received
with  honor  by  Agilulf  and  Theudelinda  (p.  131).  He  remained
some  months  at  Milan  at  the  royal  court  and  argued  there  with
Arian  ecclesiastics,  until  a certain  Jocundus  came  to  king  Agilulf
and  spoke  of  the  advantages  for  a monastic  life  offered  by  the  vil-
lage of  Bobium  on  the  Trebia  among  the  Apennines  (p.  132).
Columban  retired  thither  and  there  built  the  monastery  which  be-
came an  important  instrument  in  converting  the  Langobards  from
Arianism,  and  in  the  spread  of  Roman  culture  among  that  people
(Hartmann  II,  2,  25).  He  was  a man  of  great  learning.  He
aided  Theudelinda  in  her  conflicts  with  Arianism,  but  he  also  be-

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

193

place  also  many  possessions  were  bestowed  by  particu-
lar princes  and  Langobards,  and  there  was  established
there  a great  community  of  monks.

Chapter  XLII.

Then  Arioald,  after  he  had  held  the  sovereignty
over  the  Langobards  twelve  years,  departed  this  life,
and  Rothari,1  of  the  race  of  Arodus,  received  the  king-
dom of  the  Langobards.2  And  he  was  brave  and  strong,

came  an  adherent  of  the  schismatics  in  the  controversy  of  the
Three  Chapters,  and  Theudelinda  used  him  in  defending  their
cause,  which  he  did  in  a long  letter  to  Pope  Boniface  IV,  the  third
successor  of  Gregory  the  Great.  Agilulf  desired  to  heal  the  schism
and  Columban  states  in  his  letter  that  the  king  was  reported  to
have  said  that  he  too  would  believe  the  Catholic  faith  if  he  could
know  the  certainty  of  the  matter!  Columban  died  in  615,  the
same  year  as  Agilulf  (Hodgkin,  VI,  138-147).

Hartmann  (II,  1,  235)  considers  that  in  this  reckoning,  the
time  is  probably  included  in  which  Arioald  was  in  insurrection
against  Adaloald.  Rothari  ascended  the  throne  in  636  (Waitz).

2 Fredegarius  relates  that  after  the  death  of  Arioald  his  widow
Gundiperga  was  asked,  as  Theudelinda  had  been,  to  choose  his
successor;  that  her  choice  fell  upon  Rothari,  whom  she  invited  to
put  away  his  wife  and  marry  her,  which  he  did,  but  afterwards
confined  her  in  one  little  room  in  the  palace,  while  he  lived  with
his  concubines;  that  after  five  years’  seclusion  the  Frankish  king
Clovis  II  interceded  and  she  was  restored  to  her  queenly  digni-
ties (Hodgkin,  VI,  165,  166).  This  story  sounds  like  a repetition
of  the  account  of  Gundiperga’ s disgrace  during  the  reign  of  her
first  husband.  It  would  seem  that  Rothari’ s marriage  to  Gundi-
perga, like  that  of  Agilulf  to  Theudelinda  was  to  add  a certain
claim  of  legitimacy  to  his  pretensions  to  the  throne  and  perhaps
the  fact  that  he  was  an  Arian  and  his  wife  a Catholic  led  to  the
story  above  related  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  239,  240),

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

194

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

and  followed  the  path  of  justice;1  he  did  not,  however,
hold  the  right  line  of  Christian  belief,  but  was  stained
by  the  infidelity  of  the  Arian  heresy.9  The  Arians,
indeed,  say  to  their  own  ruin  that  the  Son  is  less  than
the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  also  is  less  than  the
Father  and  the  Son.  But  we  Catholics  confess  that  the
Father  and  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  are  one  and  the  true
God  in  three  persons,  equal  in  power  and  the  same  in
glory.  In  this  time  there  were  two  bishops  throughout
almost  all  the  cities 3 of  the  kingdom,  one  a Catholic
and  the  other  an  Arian.  In  the  city  of  Ticinum  too
there  is  shown,  down  to  the  present  time,  the  place

1Fredegarius  relates  (Chron.  71)  that  at  the  beginning  of  his
reign  he  put  to  death  many  insubordinate  nobles  and  that  in  his
efforts  for  peace  he  maintained  very  strict  discipline  (Pabst,  430,
note  3).

* With  the  exception  of  Adaloald,  all  the  kings  of  the  Lango-
bards  up  to  this  time  had  been  Arians  though  their  religious  con-
victions were  not  strong,  and  they  were  not  generally  intolerant
(Hodgkin  VI,  144,  145).  The  beliefs  of  the  invaders  under
Alboin  were  somewhat  heterogeneous.  Some  of  his  followers  were
probably  still  tinctured  with  the  remnants  of  heathenism,  most  of
them  were  Arians,  while  the  Noricans  and  Pannonians  who  accom-
panied him  to  Italy  (II,  26  supra)  were  Catholics  (Hegel,  Stadte-
verfassung  von  Italien  I,  Ch.  3,  p.  364).  The  conversion  of  the
Langobards  to  the  Catholic  faith  was  promoted  by  their  intermar-
riage with  Roman  wives.  Theudelinda,  who  was  a Catholic,  had
done  much  to  further  it.  Even  as  early  as  the  time  of  Gregory
the  Great  there  were  Catholic  bishops  under  the  Langobards
(id.,  p.  363).

8 This  is  doubtful.  Paul  knew  of  some  Arian  bishops  and  doubt-
less he  presumed,  erroneously,  the  presence  of  Catholic  bishops
in  the  same  places  (Hartmann  II,  1,  278).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

195

where  the  Arian  bishop,  who  had  his  seat  at  the  church
of  St.  Eusebius,  had  a baptistery,  while  another  bishop
sat  in  the  Catholic  church.  Yet  this  Arian  bishop,  who
was  in  the  same  city,  Anastasius  by  name,  became  con-
verted to  the  Catholic  faith  and  afterwards  governed  the
church  of  Christ.  This  king  Rothari  collected,  in  a
series  of  writings,  the  laws  of  the  Langobards  which
they  were  keeping  in  memory  only  and  custom,1  and  he

1 Compare  this  with  the  Chronicon  Gothanum,  (M.  G.,  LLIV,  p.
641)  “ Rothari  reigned  sixteen  years  and  by  him  law  and  justice
began  with  the  Langobards  and  the  judges  first  went  through  them
in  writing.  For  previously  lawsuits  were  decided  by  custom,
(cadarfada)  discretion  and  usage. ' ’ Rothari’ s Edict  was  published
Nov.  22d,  643.  It  was  composed  of  388  chapters.  Although
written  in  Latin,  the  greater  part  of  this  Edict  was  of  purely  Lango-
bard  origin.  By  this  code  the  man  who  conspired  against  the  king
or  deserted  his  comrades  in  battle  must  suffer  death,  but  those
accused  of  a capital  offense  might  appeal  to  the  wager  of  battle.
If  freemen  conspired  and  accomplished  the  death  of  another  they
were  to  compound  for  the  murder  according  to  the  rank  of  the
person  slain  (Hodgkin,  VI,  175  to  179).  If  any  one  should
“ place  himself  in  the  way  " of  a free  woman  or  girl  or  injure  her
he  must  pay  nine  hundred  solidi  (540  pounds  sterling).  If  any
one  should  “ place  himself  in  the  way  " of  a free  man  he  must  pay
him  twenty  solidi,  if  he  had  not  done  him  any  bodily  injury.
These  provisions  indicated  the  high  estimation  in  which  the  free
women  were  held.  If  any  one  should  * * place  himself  in  the  way  * *
of  another  man’s  slave  or  hand-maid  or  aldius  (half-free)  he  must
pay  twenty  solidi  to  his  lord . Bodily  injuries  were  all  catalogued,
each  of  the  teeth,  fingers  and  toes  being  specially  named  and  the
price  fixed  for  each.  Many  laws  dealt  specially  with  injuries  to  an
aldius  or  to  a household  slave.  These  were  not  equivalent  terms
and  it  is  generally  believed  that  the  vanquished  Roman  population
were  included  in  the  first.  A still  lower  class  were  the  plantation

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

I96  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

directed  this  code  to  be  called  the  Edict.  It  was  now

slaves  (Hodgkin,  VI,  180-189).  die  laws. of  succession,  pro-
vision was  made  for  illegitimate  as  well  as  legitimate  children,
though  less  in  amount.  No  father  could  disinherit  his  son  except
for  certain  grievous  crimes.  Donations  of  property  were  made  in
the  presence  of  the  thing , an  assembly  of  at  least  a few  freemen,
a survival  of  the  folk-thing  of  the  ancient  Germans,  from  which
cqmes  the  Latinized  word  thingare , to  grant  or  donate,  and  one  of
the  laws  of  Rothari  provides  that,  if  a man  shall  wish  to  **  thing
away  * ’ his  property  to  another,  he  must  make  the  gairethinx  (spear
donation),  not  secretly,  but  before  freemen.  The  Langobard
women  always  remained  under  some  form  of  guardianship  (pp.
193-197)*  If  a man  should  commit  an  immorality  with  a female
slave  “ belonging  to  the  nations**  he  must  pay  her  lord  twenty
solidi,  if  with  a Roman,  twelve  solidi,  the  Roman  bond-woman
being  of  less  value  than  the  slave  of  Teutonic  or  other  origin.
This  is  the  only  reference  to  Romans  as  such  in  Rothari’ s laws.
If  a slave  or  aldins  married  a free  Langobard  woman,  her  relatives
had  a right  to  slay  her  or  sell  her  and  divide  her  substance.  No
slave  or  aldius  could  sell  property  without  the  consent  of  his  master
or  patron.  Slaves  might  be  emancipated  in  various  ways,  but  there
were  severe  laws  for  the  pursuit  and  restoration  of  fugitives  (pp.
204-2 1 1).  Injudicial  procedure,  a system  of  compurgation  pre-
vailed as  well  as  the  wager  of  battle  (pp.  224-230).

Rothari’ s code  was  rude  and  barbarous  to  the  last  degree  as
compared  with  the  elaborate  system  of  Roman  jurisprudence  em-
bodied in  the  laws  of  Justinian,  under  which  the  population  of  Italy
had  been  living  prior  to  the  Langobard  conquest.  In  Rothari*  s
laws,  although  the  rights  of  the  clan,  so  important  during  the  mi-
gration of  the  Langobards,  became  more  and  more  subordinated
to  the  rights  of  the  state  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  11),  the  authority  of
the  family  still  continued  to  be  recognized  as  an  important  feature.
The  general  assembly  of  freemen  continued  to  add  solemnity  to
important  popular  acts,  such  as  the  enactment  of  new  laws  or  the
selection  of  a king,  although  it  was  now  manifestly  impossible  that

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

197

indeed  the  seventy-seventh  year  from  the  time  when  the
Langobards  had  come  into  Italy,  as  that  king  bore  wit-

such  an  assembly  should  consist,  as  in  earlier  times,  of  all  those
capable  of  bearing  arms  (id.,  pp.  12-13).

Villari  (Le  Invasioni  Barbariche  in  Italia,  p.  310)  insists  that  the
indirect  action  of  Roman  jurisprudence  appears  in  Rothari’s  laws,
not  only  in  the  Latin  language  in  which  they  were  written,  in  some
Justinian-like  phrases,  and  in  an  arrangement  to  some  extent
systematical,  but  also  in  certain  provisions  which  he  thinks  cannot
be  of  Germanic  origin.  He  adds  (p.  31 1)  that  it  cannot  be  Con-
ceived how  the  Langobards  could  have  destroyed  a system  of
jurisprudence  established  for  centuries  which  had  created  among
the  conquered  Italians  a number  of  legal  relations  unknown  to
their  conquerors  so  that  the  laws  of  the  latter  could  not  provide
for  them,  nor  how  Roman  law  could  be  destroyed  and  afterwards
reappear  in  Langobard  Italy,  without  any  account  of  its  disap-
pearance and  reappearance  in  documents  or  chronicles.  He  con-
cludes that  although  not  officially  recognized,  it  was  allowed  to  live
under  the  form  of  custom,  in  many  of  the  private  relations  that
existed  among  the  conquered  Italians.  This  view  is  confirmed  by
the  204th  law  of  Rothari  which,  speaking  of  * * any  free  woman
living  according  to  the  law  of  the  Langobards , * * would  indicate
that  there  were  others  not  living  according  to  that  law.  Moreover
it  was  declared  (Hodgkin,  VI,  231)  that  foreigners  who  came  to
settle  in  the  land  ought  to  live  according  to  the  laws  of  the  Lango-
bards unless  they  obtained  from  the  king  the  right  to  live  accord-
ing to  some  other  law.  Villari  also  sees  (p.  312)  evidences  of  the
persistency  of  Roman  law  in  the  subsequent  legislation  of  Liut-
prand  providing  that  if  a Langobard,  after  having  children,  should
become  a churchman,  they  should  continue  to  live  subject  to  the
law  under  which  he  had  lived  before  becoming  a churchman.
This  would  indicate  that  after  becoming  a churchman,  the  father
lived  under  another  law,  which  must  have  been  the  Roman  law.
Villari  (p.  329)  also  sees  elsewhere  in  Liutprand’s  legislation  evi-
dences of  canonical  law.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

I98  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

ness  in  a prologue  to  his  Edict.1  To  this  king,  Arichis,
the  duke  of  Beneventum  sent  his  son  Aio.  And  when
the  latter  had  come  to  Ravenna  on  his  way  to  Ticinum,
such  a drink  was  there  given  him  by  the  malice  of  the
Romans  that  it  made  him  lose  his  reason,  and  from  that
time  he  was  never  of  full  and  sound  mind.*

Chapter  XLIII.

Therefore  when  duke  Arichis,  the  father  of  him  of
whom  we  have  spoken,  was  now  ripe  in  years  and  near-
ing his  last  day,  knowing  that  his  son  Aio  was  not  of
right  mind,  he  commended  Radoald  and  Grimoald,4  now
in  the  flower  of  their  youth,  as  if  they  were  his  own
sons,  to  the  Langobards  who  were  present,  and  said  to
them  that  these  two  could  rule  them  better  than  could
Aio  his  son.

Chapter  XLIV.

Then  on  the  death  of  Arichis,  who  had  held  the
dukedom  fifty  years,  Aio,  his  son,  was  made  leader  of
the  Samnites, 3 and  still  Radoald  and  Grimoald  4 obeyed
him  in  all  things  as  their  elder  brother  and  lord.  When

'Rothari  says  the  seventy-sixth  year  (Edicti  Codices  M.  G.
LL.,  IV,  p.  1.)  As  to  this,  see  note  to  I,  21,  note  3,  pp.  39,
40,  supra;  as  to  the  so-called  prologue,  see  Appendix,  II,  A.  1.

* His  intercourse  with  the  Romans,  as  in  the  case  of  Adaloald,
seems  to  have  led  to  insanity.  Was  this  the  Langobard  idea  of
the  effect  of  contact  with  Roman  luxury  and  civilization  upon  the
princes  of  their  race  ?

8 That  is  the  Beneventines.  This  occurred  A.  D.  641  (Waitz).

4 1 follow  here  and  in  other  places  the  spelling  of  Waitz*  s text
which  is  not  uniform.

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  IV.

199

this  Aio  had  already  governed  the  dukedom  of  Bene-
ventum  a year  and  five  months,  the  Slavs  came  with  a
great  number  of  ships  and  set  up  their  camp  not  far
from  the  city  of  Sipontum  (Siponto).  They  made
hidden  pit-falls  around  their  camp  and  when  Aio  came
upon  them  in  the  absence  of  Raduald  and  Grimoald  and
attempted  to  conquer  them,  his  horse  fell  into  one  of
these  pit-falls,  the  Slavs  rushed  upon  him  and  he  was
killed  with  a number  of  others.  When  this  was  an-
nounced to  Raduald  he  came  quickly  and  talked  famili-
arly with  these  Slavs  in  their  own  language,1  and  when
in  this  way  he  had  lulled  them  into  greater  indolence
for  war,  he  presently  fell  upon  them,  overthrew  them
with  great  slaughter,  revenged  the  death  of  Aio  and
compelled  those  of  his  enemies  who  had  survived  to
seek  flight  from  these  territories.2

Chapter  XLV.

King  Rothari  then  captured  all  the  cities  of  the
Romans  which  were  situated  upon  the  shore  of  the  sea
from  the  city  of  Luna  (Luni)  in  Tuscany  up  to  the
boundaries  of  the  Franks.3  Also  he  captured  and  de-

1 Raduald  and  Grimoald  had  been  neighbors  to  the  Slavs  in  the
dukedom  of  Fruili  from  which  they  had  come  to  Beneventum
(Waitz).

*A.  D.  642  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  244).

‘Rothari  was  a representative  of  the  national,  anti-Roman,
Arian  feeling  among  the  Langobards;  so  the  peace  with  the  empire
was  broken  and  war  renewed.  He  thus  rounded  out  his  possessions
in  the  northern  part  of  the  kingdom,  and  Neu stria,  the  western
portion  of  these  dominions,  began  to  be  distinguished  from  Austria,
east  of  the  Adda,  which  was  more  immediately  subject  to  the
dukes  of  Trent  and  Friuli  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  243).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

200

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

stroyed  Opitergium  (Oderzo)1 *  a city  placed  between
Tarvisium  (Treviso)  and  Forum  Julii  (Cividale).  He
waged  war  with  the  Romans  of  Ravenna*  near  the  river
of  Emilia  which  is  called  the  Scultenna  (Panaro).  In
this  war  eight  thousand  fell  on  the  side  of  the  Romans
and  the  remainder  took  to  flight.  At  this  time  a great
earthquake  occurred  at  Rome  and  there  was  then  a
great  inundation  of  the  waters.  After  these  things
there  was  a scab  disease  of  such  a kind  that  no  one
could  recognize  his  own  dead  on  account  of  the  great
swelling  and  inflammation.3

Chapter  XLVI.

But  when  duke  Raduald,  who  had  managed  the  duke-
dom five  years,  died  at  Beneventum,  Grimuald  his
brother  became  duke  and  governed  the  dukedom  of  the
Samnites  five  and  twenty  years.  From  a captive  girl,
but  one  of  high  birth,  however,  whose  name  was  Ita,  he
begot  a son  Romuald  and  two  daughters.  And  since  he
was  a very  warlike  man  and  distinguished  everywhere,
when  the  Greeks  at  that  time  came  to  plunder  the
sanctuary  of  the  holy  arch-angel 4 situated  upon  Mount
Garganus  (Gargano),  Grimuald,  coming  upon  them  with
his  army,  overthrew  them  with  the  utmost  slaughter.

1 This  destruction  was  not  complete,  but  twenty -five  years  later
under  Grimoald,  the  place  was  entirely  annihilated  (V,  28,  infra).

8 Who  were  under  the  exarch  Isaac  (Hodgkin,  VI,  169).

8 The  earthquake  and  plague  are  placed  by  the  Liber  Pontificalis
in  the  sixth  indiction  (617-618),  and  incorrectly  placed  by  Paul
during  the  reign  of  Rothari  (636-652)  (Jacobi,  54).

* Michael.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  IV.

201

Chapter  XLVII.

But  king  Rothari  indeed,  after  he  had  held  the  sov-
ereignty sixteen  years  and  four  months,  departed  from
life x and  left  the  kingdom  of  the  Langobards  to  his  son
Rodoald.  When  he  had  been  buried  near  the  church
of  St.  John  the  Baptist,*  after  some  time,  a certain  man
inflamed  by  wicked  cupidity  opened  his  sepulcher  at
night  and  took  away  whatever  he  found  among  the  or-
naments of  his  body.  St.  John  appearing  to  him  in  a
vision  frightened  him  dreadfully  and  said  to  him,  “Why
did  you  dare  to  touch  the  body  of  that  man?  Although
he  may  not  have  been  of  the  true  faith  yet  he  has  com-
mended himself  to  me.  Because  therefore  you  have
presumed  to  do  this  thing  you  will  never  hereafter  have
admission  into  my  church.”  And  so  it  occurred ; for
as  often  soever  as  he  wished  to  enter  the  sanctuary  of
St.  John,  straightway  his  throat  would  be  hit  as  if  by  a
very  powerful  boxer  and  thus  stricken,  he  suddenly  fell
down  backwards.  I speak  the  truth  in  Christ ; he  who
saw  with  his  own  eyes  that  very  thing  done  related  this
to  me.  ’ Rodoald  then  received  the  kingdom  of  the
Langobards  after  the  death  of  his  father,  and  united
with  himself  in  marriage  Gundiperga  the  daughter  of
Agilulf  and  Theudelinda.3  ! This  Gundiperga  in  imita-
tion of  her  mother,  just  as  the  latter  had  done  in  Modicia

*A.  D.  652  (Hodgkin,  VI,  241).

* In  Modicia  (Monza)  or  possibly  in  Ticinum  (Waitz).

•If  Fredegarius  (Chapters  50,  51,  70)  be  correct  Paul  must  be
mistaken,  since  Gundiperga  was  the  wife  of  king  Arioald  and  after
his  death,  of  Rothari,  and  was  now  over  fifty  years  old  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

202

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

(Monza),  so  the  former  within  the  city  of  Ticinum
(Pavia)  built  a church  in  honor  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,
which  she  decorated  wonderfully  with  gold  and  silver
and  draperies  and  enriched  bountifully  with  particular
articles,  and  in  it  her  body  lies  buried.  / And  when  she
had  been  accused  to  her  husband  of  the  crime  of
adultery,  her  own  slave,  Carellus  by  name,  besought  the
king  that  he  might  fight  in  single  combat  for  the  honor
of  his  mistress,  with  him  who  had  imputed  the  crime  to
the  queen.  And  when  he  had  gone  into  single  combat
with  that  accuser  he  overcame  him  in  the  presence  of
the  whole  people.  The  queen  indeed  after  this  was
done,  returned  to  her  former  dignity. 1

Chapter  XLVIII.

Rodoald  after  he  had  reigned  five  years2  and  seven
days  was  killed  as  is  said  by  a certain  Langobard  whose
wife  he  had  defiled,  and  Aripert,  son  of  Gundoald,  who
had  been  the  brother  of  queen  Theudelinda,  followed
him  in  the  government  of  the  kingdom.3  He  estab-

1 Hartmann  (II,  i,  274)  believes  that  Paul  relates  here  the  story
of  the  first  imprisonment  of  Gundiperga  given  by  Fredegarius  but
has  transposed  it  to  a period  two  decades  later  (seeCh.  41,  note,
supra).

* Paul  should  have  written  here  five  months  instead  of  five  years
(Waitz).  He  probably  died  about  March,  653  (Hartmann,  II,  1,
275)-

* There  is  no  record  of  the  events  which  led  to  the  succession  of
Aripert,  a Catholic  of  the  Bavarian  house  and  friendly  to  the
Romans,  in  place . of  the  Arian,  anti-Roman  dynasty  of  Rothari
(Hartmann,  II,  1,  244).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

203

lished  at  Ticinum  a sanctuary  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour,
which  lay  outside  the  western  gate  that  is  called  Marenca
and  he  decorated  it  with  various  ornaments  and  enriched
it  sufficiently  with  possessions.

Chapter  XLIX.

In  these  days  when  the  emperor  Heraclius  had  died
at  Constantinople, x his  son  Heraclones  with  his  mother
Martina  received  the  rights  of  sovereignty  and  ruled  the
empire  for  two  years.  And  when  he  departed  from  life
his  brother  Constantine,  another  son  of  Heraclius,  fol-
lowed in  his  place  and  reigned  six  months.  When  he
also  died  his  son  Constantine  rose  to  the  dignity  of  the
sovereignty  and  held  the  imperial  power  for  eight  and
twenty  years.

Chapter  L.

About  these  times  the  wife  of  the  king  of  the  Persians,
Cesara  by  name,  on  account  of  her  love  of  the  Christian
faith,  departed  out  of  Persia  in  private  dress  with  a few
of  her  faithful  followers,  and  came  to  Constantinople.
She  was  honorably  received  by  the  emperor  and  after
some  days  obtained  baptism  as  she  desired  and  was
raised  from  the  sacred  font  by  the  empress. a When  her
husband  the  king  of  the  Persians  heard  this,  he  sent
ambassadors  to  Constantinople  to  the  emperor  in  order

‘The  death  of  Heraclius  (A.  D.  641)  is  erroneously  placed  by
Paul  after  the  death  of  Rodoald  653  (Waitz)  and  after  the  taking
of  Oderzo  by  Rothari  (IV,  45,  supra).  See  Simonsfeld’s  article
on  Dandolo  (Archivio  Veneto,  14,  p.  141).

9 That  is  the  empress  became  her  god-mother  (Abel).

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

204

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

that  the  latter  should  restore  to  him  his  wife.  When
they  came  to  the  emperor  they  reported  the  words  of
the  king  of  the  Persians  who  demanded  his  queen.  The
emperor  hearing  these  things  and  being  altogether
ignorant  of  the  affair,  returned  them  an  answer  saying:
41  We  confess  that  we  know  nothing  concerning  the  queen
you  seek  except  that  a woman  came  to  us  here  in
the  dress  of  a private  person.”  But  the  ambassadors
answered  saying:  44  If  it  please  your  Imperial  Presence
we  would  like  to  see  this  woman  you  speak  of,”  and
when  she  had  come  by  command  of  the  emperor,  pre-
sently the  ambassadors  looked  upon  her  attentively,
prostrated  themselves  at  her  feet  and  suggested  to  her
with  reverence  that  her  husband  wanted  her.  She  re-
plied to  them : 44  Go,  take  back  the  answer  to  your  king
and  lord  that  unless  he  also  shall  so  believe  in  Christ  as
I have  already  believed,  he  can  now  no  more  have  me
as  the  partner  of  his  bed.”  Why  say  more?  The  am-
bassadors returned  to  their  country  and  reported  again
to  their  king  all  they  had  heard.  And  he  without  any
delay  came  peaceably  with  sixty  thousand  men  to  Con-
stantinople to  the  emperor  by  whom  he  was  joyfully  re-
ceived and  in  a very  suitable  manner.  And  he,  with  the
whole  of  them,  believing  in  Christ  our  Lord,  was  in  like
manner  with  all  the  rest  sprinkled  1 with  the  water  of
holy  baptism  and  was  raised  by  the  emperor  from  the
font  and  confirmed  in  the  Catholic  faith ; and  having
been  honored  by  the  emperor  with  many  gifts,  he  took

1 Perfusus  (see  DuCange)  seems  to  indicate  sprinkling  rather
than  immersion,  though  the  latter  was  at  this  time  the  more  usual
form  except  in  the  case  of  those  about  to  die.

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  IV.

205

his  wife  and  returned  happy  and  rejoicing  to  his  own
country. 1 * * 4 About  these  times  upon  the  death  of  duke
Grasulf  at  Cividale,  Ago  undertook  the  government
of  the  dukedom  of  Forum  Julii.  At  Spoletium  (Spoleto)
also  upon  the  death  of  Theudelaupus,  Atto  was  made
commander  of  that  city. a

Chapter  LI.

Aripert  then,  after  he  had  ruled  at  Ticinum  for  nine
years,  died, 3 leaving  the  kingdom  to  be  governed  by  his
two  sons,  Perctarit  and  Godepert  who  were  still  of  youth-
ful age.*  And  Godepert,  indeed,  had  the  seat  of  his
kingdom  at  Ticinum,  but  Perctarit,  at  the  city  of  Medio-
lanum. Between  these  brothers,  at  the  instigation  of
evil  men,  quarrels  and  the  kindling  of  hatreds  arose  to
such  a degree  that  each  attempted  to  usurp  the  royal
power  of  the  other.  Wherefore  Godepert  sent  Garipald,
duke  of  Turin,  to  Grimuald,  who  was  then  the  enter-
prising leader  of  the  people  of  Beneventum,  inviting
him  to  come  as  soon  as  possible  and  bring  aid  to  him
against  his  brother  Perctarit,  and  promising  to  give  him
his  sister,  the  daughter  of  the  king.  But  the  ambassador,
acting  treacherously  against  his  master,  exhorted  Grim-

1 This  account  is  wholly  fictitious.  Chosroes  II,  although  well
disposed  toward  the  Christian  faith  did  not  abjure  his  own  (Waitz).

* A.  D.  653-663  (Hodgkin,  VI,  96).

*A.  D.  661  (Hodgkin,  VI,  241).

4 This  is  the  first  instance  of  a divided  inheritance  of  the  king-
dom, if  indeed  we  can  speak  of  inheritance  at  all  of  a kingdom
where  the  succession  varied  so  greatly  as  in  that  of  the  Lango-
bards.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

206

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

uald  to  come  and  himself  seize  the  kingdom  of  the
Langobards  which  the  two  youthful  brothers  were  dis-
sipating, since  he  was  ripe  in  age,  prudent  in  counsel
and  strong  in  resources.  When  Grimuald  heard  these
things  he  presently  set  his  mind  upon  obtaining  the
kingdom  of  the  Langobards,  and  having  established  his
son  Romuald  as  duke  of  Beneventum,  he  took  his  way
with  a chosen  band  to  proceed  to  Ticinum,  and  in  all
the  cities  through  which  his  route  lay  he  drew  to  him-
self friends  and  auxiliaries  for  getting  the  kingdom.  He
dispatched,  indeed,  Count  Transemund,  of  Capua,
through  Spoletium  (Spoleto)  and  Tuscia  (Tuscany)  to
attach  the  Langobards  of  those  regions  to  an  alliance
with  him.  Transemund  carried  out  his  orders  ener-
getically, and  met  him  on  the  way  in  Emilia  with  many
auxiliaries.  Therefore  when  Grimuald  had  come  near
Placentia  (Piacenza)  with  a strong  body  of  men,  he
dispatched  ahead  to  Ticinum  Garipald,  who  had  been
sent  as  a messenger  to  him  by  Godepert,  so  as  to  an-
nounce his  coming  to  this  same  Godepert.  And  when
Garipald  came  to  Godepert  he  said  that  Grimuald  was
quickly  approaching.  When  Godepert  asked  him  in  what
place  he  ought  to  prepare  entertainment  for  this  Grimu-
ald, Garipald  answered  as  follows : That  it  was  fitting
that  Grimuald,  who  had  come  for  his  sake  and  was  going
to  take  his  sister  in  marriage,  should  have  his  place  of
entertainment  within  the  palace.  And  this  also  was  so
done,  for  when  Grimuald  came,  he  received  his  lodging
within  the  palace.  But  this  same  Garipald,  the  sower
of  the  whole  wickedness,  persuaded  Godepert  to  come
and  speak  with  Grimuald  only  after  putting  on  a cuirass

*

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

BOOK  IV.

207

under  his  clothing,  saying  that  Grimuald  wanted  to  kill
him.  Again  this  same  artist  in  deceit  came  to  Grim-
uald and  said  that  unless  he  equipped  himself  stoutly
Godepert  would  kill  him  with  his  sword,  declaring  that
Godepert  was  wearing  a cuirass  under  his  clothing  when
he  came  to  confer  with  him.  Why  say  more?  When,
upon  the  following  day,  they  had  come  to  conference
and  Grimuald,  after  salutation,  had  embraced  Godepert
he  immediately  perceived  that  he  was  wearing  a cuirass
under  his  clothing,  and  without  delay,  he  unsheathed
his  sword  and  deprived  him  of  life, 1 and  usurping  his
kingdom  and  all  his  power,  he  subjugated  it  to  his
dominion.  But  Godepert  then  had  a son,  a little  boy,
Raginpert  by  name,  who  was  carried  away  by  the  faith-
ful followers  of  his  father  and  brought  up  secretly ; nor
did  Grimuald  care  to  pursue  him  since  he  was  still  a
little  child.  When  Perctarit,  who  was  ruling  at  Medio-
lanum, heard  that  his  brother  was  killed,  he  took  flight
with  what  speed  he  could  and  came  to  the  Cagan,  king
of  the  Avars,  leaving  behind  his  wife  Rodelinda  and  a
little  son  named  Cunincpert,  both  of  whom  Grimuald
sent  in  exile  to  Beneventum.  When  these  things  had
been  thus  brought  to  pass,  Garipald,  by  whose  instiga-
tion and  effort  they  had  been  accomplished — and  not
only  had  he  done  these  acts,  but  he  had  also  committed
a fraud  in  his  embassy,  since  he  had  not  transmitted
whole  and  entire  the  gifts  he  ought  to  have  brought  to
Beneventum — the  performer  of  such  deeds  then  did  not
long  rejoice.  There  was,  indeed,  in  the  household  of

1 A.  D.  662  (Hodgkin,  VI,  243;  Hartmann,  II,  1,  275).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

208

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Godepert  a little  dwarf  who  came  from  the  city  of  Turin.
When  he  knew  that  duke  Garipald,  upon  the  very  holy
day  of  Easter  would  come  to  pray  in  the  church  of  St.
John,  he  got  up  cn  the  sacred  font  of  the  baptistery
and  held  himself  by  his  left  hand  to  a little  column  sup-
porting the  canopy x where  Garipald  was  about  to  pass,
and  having  drawn  his  sword  he  held  it  under  his  cloth-
ing, and  when  Garipald  had  come  near  him  to  pass
through,  he  lifted  his  garment  and  struck  him  on  the
neck  with  his  sword  with  all  his  might  and  cut  off  his
head  upon  the  spot.  Those  who  had  come  with  Gari-
pald fell  upon  him,  killing  him  with  wounds  from  many
blows,  but  although  he  died,  he  still  signally  avenged
the  wrong  done  to  his  master  Godepert.

1 Tugurium , a place  shut  off  and  covered  from  above.  See
DuCange.  The  font  itself  had  a roof  or  cover  supported  by  small
columns.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  V.

Chapter  I.

When  therefore  Grimuald  had  been  confirmed  in  the
sovereignty1  at  Ticinum,  he  married  not  long  afterward
king  Aripert’s  daughter  who  had  already  been  betrothed
to  him  and  whose  brother  Godepert  he  had  killed.  He
sent  back  indeed  to  their  own  homes,  supplied  with  many
gifts,  the  army  of  Beneventines  by  whose  aid  he  had
acquired  the  sovereignty.  He  kept  however  quite  a
number  of  them  to  dwell  with  him,  bestowing  upon  them
very  extensive  possessions.

Chapter  II.

When  he  afterwards  learned  that  Perctarit  had  gone
to  Scythia  as  an  exile  and  was  living  with  the  Cagan,  he
sent  word  to  this  Cagan,  king  of  the  Avars,  by  ambassa-
dors that  if  he  kept  Perctarit  in  his  kingdom  he  could
not  thereafter  have  peace,  as  he  had  had  hitherto,  with
the  Langobards  and  with  himself.  When  the  king  of
the  Avars  heard  this,  Perctarit  was  brought  into  his  pres-
ence and  he  said  to  him  that  he  might  go  in  what  direc-
tion he  would,  so  that  the  Avars  should  not  incur  enmity
with  the  Langobards  on  his  account. a When  Perctarit

XA.  D.  662  (Waitz).  Grimuald,  whose  brothers,  Taso  and
Cacco,  had  been  treacherously  murdered  by  the  exarch  in  Oderzo,
represented  the  national,  anti-Roman  sentiment  of  his  people  and
was  continually  engaged  in  wars  against  the  empire.

•According  to  another  account  Perctarit  testified  to  the  good

(209)

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

210

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

heard  these  things  he  went  back  to  Italy  to  return  to
Grimuald  for  he  had  heard  that  he  was  very  merciful.
Then  when  he  had  come  to  the  city  of  Lauda1  (Lodi
Vecchio)  he  sent  ahead  of  him  to  king  Grimuald,  Unulf,
a man  most  faithful  to  him  to  announce  that  Perctarit
was  approaching  trusting  to  his  protection.  When  the
king  heard  this  he  promised  faithfully  that  since
Perctarit  came  trusting  him  he  should  suffer  no  harm.
Meanwhile  Perctarit  arrived  and  went  forward  to  Grimu-
ald, and  when  he  attempted  to  fall  down  at  his  feet,  the
king  graciously  held  him  back  and  raised  him  up  to
receive  his  kiss.  Perctarit  said  to  him:  “I  am  your
servant.  Knowing  you  to  be  most  Christian  and  pious,
although  I can  live  among  the  heathen,  yet  relying
upon  your  mercy  I have  come  to  your  feet.”  And
the  king  with  an  oath,  as  he  was  wont,  promised  him
again  saying:  “By  Him  who  caused  me  to  be  born,
since  you  have  come  to  me  trusting  me,  you  will  suffer
nothing  evil  in  any  way  but  I will  so  provide  for  you
that  you  can  live  becomingly.”  Then  offering  him  a
lodging  in  a spacious  house,  he  bade  him  have  a rest
after  the  toil  of  the  journey,  ordering  that  food  and
whatever  things  were  necessary  should  be  supplied  to
him  bountifully  at  public  expense.  But  when  Perctarit
had  come  to  the  dwelling  prepared  for  him  by  the  king,
presently  throngs  of  the  citizens  of  Ticinum  began  to

faith  of  the  Cagan  who  had  refused  a whole  ntodius  full  of  gold
solidi  for  his  betrayal  (Waitz).

'The  ancient  Roman  colony  Laus  Pompeia,  a short  distance
southeast  of  Milan  and  northeast  of

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

21 1

gather  around  him  to  see  him  and  salute  him  as  an  old
acquaintance.  But  what  cannot  an  evil  tongue  inter-
rupt? For  presently  certain  wicked  flatterers  coming  to
the  king  declared  to  him  that  unless  he  quickly  deprived
Perctarit  of  life,  he  would  himself  at  once  lose  his  king-
dom with  his  life,  asserting  that  the  whole  city  had
gathered  around  Perctarit  for  this  purpose.  When  he
heard  these  things,  Grimuald  became  too  credulous  and
forgetting  what  he  had  promised,  he  was  straightway  in-
cited to  the  murder  of  the  innocent  Perctarit  and  took
counsel  in  what  way  he  might  deprive  him  of  life  on
the  following  day,  since  now  the  hour  was  very  late.
Finally  in  the  evening  he  sent  to  him  divers  dishes,  also
special  wines  and  various  kinds  of  drinks  so  that  he
could  intoxicate  him,  to  the  end  that  relaxed  by  much
drinking  during  the  night  and  buried  in  wine,  he  could
think  nothing  of  his  safety.  Then  one  who  had  been
of  his  father’s  train,  when  he  brought  a dish  from  the
king  to  this  Perctarit,  put  his  head  under  the  table  as  if
to  salute  him  and  announced  to  him  secretly  that  the
king  was  arranging  to  kill  him.  And  Perctarit  straight-
way directed  his  cup-bearer  that  he  should  give  him  to
drink  in  a silver  drinking  vessel  nothing  but  a little
water.  And  when  those  who  brought  him  drinks  of
different  kinds  from  the  king  asked  him  upon  the  com-
mand of  the  king  to  drink  the  whole  cup,  he  promised
to  drink  it  all  in  honor  of  the  king,  and  took  a little
water  from  the  silver  cup.  When  the  servants  an-
nounced to  the  king  that  he  was  drinking  insatiably,  the
king  merrily  answered : “Let  that  drunkard  drink;  but
to-morrow  he  will  spill  out  the  same  wines  mixed  with

Digitized  by  v^ooole

2I2T

PISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

blood/*  And  Perctarit  quickly  called  Unulf  to  him  and
announced  to  him  the  design  of  the  king  concerning  his
death.  And  Unulf  straightway  sent  a servant  to  his
house  to  bring  him  bed  clothing 1 and  ordered  his  couch
to  be  put  next  to  the  couch  of  Perctarit.  Without  de-
lay king  Grimuald  directed  his  attendants  that  they
should  guard  the  house  in  which  Perctarit  was  reposing
so  that  he  could  not  escape  in  any  way.  And  when
supper  was  finished  and  all  had  departed  and  Perctarit
only  had  remained  with  Unulf  and  Perctarit’s  valet,®
who  in  any  case  were  entirely  faithful  to  him,  they  dis-
closed their  plan  to  him  and  begged  him  to  flee
while  the  valet  would  pretend  as  long  as  possible  that
his  master  was  sleeping  within  that  bed  chamber.  And
when  he  had  promised  to  do  this,  Unulf  put  his  own
bed  clothes  and  a mattress  and  a bear’s  skin  upon  the
back  and  neck  of  Perctarit  and  began  to  drive  him  out
of  the  door  according  to  the  plan,  as  if  he  were  a slave
from  the  country,  offering  him  many  insults,  and  did
not  cease  moreover  to  strike  him  with  a cudgel  from
above  and  urge  him  on,  so  that  driven  and  struck  he
often  fell  to  the  ground.  And  when  the  attendants  of
the  king  who  had  been  put  on  guard  asked  that  same
Unulf  why  this  was,  “ That  worthless  slave,”  he  says,
44  has  put  my  bed  in  the  chamber  of  that  drunken  Perc-
tarit who  is  so  full  of  wine  that  he  lies  there  as  if  he
were  dead.  But  it  is  enough  that  I have  followed  his

'According  to  DuCange  lectislemia  means  the  trappings  of
a bed,  cushions,  bolster,  etc.

* Vestiarius , he  who  has  charge  of  one’s  clothing  (DuCange).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  V.

213

madness  up  to  the  present  time.  From  now  on,  during
the  life  of  our  lord  the  king,  I will  stay  in  my  own
house.”  When  they  heard  these  things  and  believed
what  they  heard  to  be  true,  they  were  delighted,  and
making  way  for  the  two,  they  let  pass  both  him  and  Perc-
tarit,  whom  they  thought  was  a slave  and  who  had  his
head  covered  that  he  should  not  be  recognized.  And
while  they  were  going  away,  that  most  faithful  valet
bolted  the  door  carefully  and  remained  inside  alone.
Unulf  indeed  let  Perctarit  down  by  a rope  from  the  wall
at  a corner  which  is  on  the  side  of  the  river  Ticinum
(Ticino)  and  collected  what  companions  he  could,  and
they,  having  seized  some  horses  they  had  found  in  a
pasture,  proceeded  that  same  night  to  the  city  of  Asta
(Asti)  in  which  the  friends  of  Perctarit  were  staying,
and  those  who  were  still  rebels  against  Grimuald.
Thence  Perctarit  made  his  way  as  quickly  as  possible
to  the  city  of  Turin,  and  afterwards  passed  across  the
boundaries  of  Italy  and  came  to  the  country  of  the
Franks.  Thus  God  Almighty  by  His  merciful  arrange-
ment delivered  an  innocent  man  from  death  and  kept
from  offense  a king  who  desired  in  his  heart  to  do  good.

Chapter  III.

But  king  Grimuald,  indeed,  since  he  thought  that
Perctarit  was  sleeping  in  his  lodging,  caused  a line  of
men  to  stand  by  on  either  side  from  this  place  of  en-
tertainment up  to  his  palace,  so  that  Perctarit  might  be
led  through  the  midst  of  them  in  order  that  he  could
not  at  all  escape.  And  when  those  sent  by  the  king
had  come  and  called  Perctarit  to  the  palace,  and

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

214  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

knocked  at  the  door  where  they  thought  he  was  sleep-
ing, the  valet  who  was  inside  begged  them  saying:
“ Have  pity  with  him  and  let  him  sleep  a little  because
he  is  still  wearied  by  his  journey  and  oppressed  by  very
heavy  slumber.”  And  when  they  had  acquiesced,  they
announced  this  thing  to  the  king,  that  Perctarit  was
sleeping  up  to  this  time  in  a heavy  slumber.  Then  the
king  said : “ Last  evening  he  so  filled  himself  with  wine
that  now  he  cannot  waken.”  He  ordered  them,  how-
ever, to  arouse  him  at  once  and  bring  him  to  the  palace.
And  when  they  came  to  the  door  of  the  bed-room  in
which  they  believed  that  Perctarit  was  sleeping,  they
began  to  knock  more  sharply.  Then  the  valet  began
to  beg  them  again  that  they  would  let  this  Perctarit
still,  as  it  were,  sleep  a little.  And  they  cried  out  in
rage  that  that  drunken  man  had  already  slept  enough.
Straightway  they  broke  open  the  door  of  the  bed-
chamber with  their  heels,  entered,  and  looked  for  Perc-
tarit in  the  bed.  And  when  they  did  not  find  him,  they
supposed  he  was  sitting  down  to  the  requirements  of
nature,  and  when  they  did  not  find  him  there,  they
asked  that  valet  what  had  become  of  Perctarit.  And  he
answered  them  that  he  had  fled.  Furious  with  rage  they
beat  him,  and  seized  him  by  the  hair  and  straightway
dragged  him  to  the  palace.  And  conducting  him  into
the  presence  of  the  king  they  said  that  he  was  privy  to
the  flight  of  Perctarit  and  therefore  most  deserving  of
death.  The  king  directed  him  to  be  released  and  asked
him  in  due  order  in  what  way  Perctarit  had  escaped  and
he  related  to  the  king  all  the  occurrences  as  they  had
taken  place.  Then  the  king  asked  those  who  were

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  V.

215

Standing  around  and  said : “ What  do  you  think  of  this
man  who  has  committed  such  things ?”  Then  all
answered  with  one  voice  that  he  deserved  to  die,  racked
with  many  torments,  but  the  king  said : “ By  Him  who
caused  me  to  be  bom  this  man  deserves  to  be  treated 1
well,  who  for  the  sake  of  fidelity  to  his  master  did  not
refuse  to  give  himself  up  to  death.”  And  presently,  he
ordered  that  he  should  be  among  his  own  valets  enjoin-
ing him  to  observe  toward  himself  the  same  fidelity  he
had  kept  to  Perctarit  and  promising  to  bestow  upon  him
many  advantages.  And  when  the  king  asked  what  had
become  of  Unulf,*  it  was  announced  to  him  that  he  had
taken  refuge  in  the  church  of  the  Blessed  Archangel
Michael.  And  he  presently  sent  to  him  voluntarily
promising  that  he  should  suffer  no  harm  if  he  would
only  come  and  trust  him.  Unulf  indeed,  hearing  this
promise  of  the  king,  presently  came  to  the  palace  and
having  fallen  at  the  king’s  feet,  was  asked  by  him  how
and  in  what  way  Perctarit  had  been  able  to  escape.  But
when  he  had  told  him  everything  in  order,  the  king,
praising  his  fidelity  and  prudence,  graciously  conceded
to  him  all  his  * means  and  whatever  he  had  been  able  to
possess.

Chapter  IV.

And  when  after  some  time  the  king  asked  Unulf
whether  he  would  then  like  to  be  with  Perctarit,  he
answered  with  an  oath  that  he  would  rather  die  with

1 Read  haberi  for  habere .

%Ejus  facultates . There  is  doubt  whether  this  refers  to  the
property  of  Unulf  or  of  Perctarit  (Hodgkin,  VI,  251,  note  1).

Digitized  by

Google

21 6

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Perctarit  than  live  anywhere  else  in  the  greatest  enjoy-
ment. Then  the  king  also  called  for  that  valet,  asking
him  whether  he  would  prefer  to  stay  with  him  in  the
palace  or  to  spend  his  life  wandering  with  Perctarit,  and
when  he  had  given  a like  answer  with  Unulf,  the  king
took  their  words  kindly,  praised  their  fidelity  and
directed  Unulf  to  take  from  his  house  whatever  he
wanted,  namely,  his  servants  and  his  horses  and  furni-
ture of  all  kinds  and  to  proceed  without  harm  to  Perc-
tarit. And  in  like  manner  also  he  dismissed  that  valet,
and  they,  taking  away  all  their  goods,  as  much  as  they
needed,  according  to  the  kindness  of  the  king,  set  out
with  the  help  of  the  king  himself  into  the  country  of  the
Franks  to  their  beloved  Perctarit.

Chapter  V.

At  this  time  an  army  of  the  Franks,  coming  forth  from
Provincia  (Provence),  entered  into  Italy.  Grimuald
advanced  against  them  with  the  Langobards  and  de-
ceived them  by  this  stratagem : he  pretended  indeed  to
flee  from  their  attack  and  left  his  camp  with  his  tents
quite  clear  of  men  but  filled  with  divers  good  things
and  especially  with  an  abundance  of  excellent  wine.
When  the  troops  of  the  Franks  had  come  thither,  think-
ing that  Grimuald  with  the  Langobards  had  been  terri-
fied by  fear  and  had  abandoned  their  whole  camp,  they
straightway  became  merry  and  eagerly  took  possession
of  everything  and  prepared  a very  bountiful  supper.
And  while  they  reposed,  weighed  down  with  the  various
dishes  and  with  much  wine  and  sleep,  Grimuald  rushed
upon  them  after  midnight  and  overthrew  them  with  so

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

217

great  a slaughter  that  only  a few  of  them  escaped  and  were
able  with  difficulty  to  regain  their  native  country.  The
place  where  this  battle  was  fought  is  called  up  to  this
time  the  Brook  of  the  Franks  x (Rivoli)  * and  it  is  not
far  distant  from  the  walls  of  the  little  city  of  Asta  (Asti) .

Chapter  VI.

In  these  days  the  emperor  Constantine  who  was  also
called  Constans, 3 desiring  to  pluck  Italy  out  of  the  hand

1 Rivus  Franc orum .

* Not  the  same  as  the  scene  of  Napoleon’s  victory.

* Constans  II,  or  more  correctly  Constantine  IV,  was  bom  A.  D.
631,  and  became  emperor  in  642,  when  only  eleven  years  old,
on  the  death  of  his  father  Constantine  III.  During  his  reign  the
Saracens  conquered  Armenia  (Hodgkin,  VI,  253)  and  seized
Cyprus  and  Rhodes.  He  fought  in  person  a naval  battle  with
them  off  the  coast  of  Lycia  in  655  and  was  defeated.  In  his  reign
the  doctrine  of  the  Monotheletes  or  those  who  maintained  that  there
was  only  one  will  in  the  nature  of  the  Saviour,  agitated  the  empire,
and  popes  and  patriarchs  wrangled  bitterly  upon  the  subject.  His
grandfather  Heraclius  had  declared  in  favor  of  the  Monothelete
heresy,  even  pope  Honorius  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  217)  at  one  time
acquiesced  in  it  though  he  deprecated  the  strife  and  desired  the
church  to  abide  by  its  ancient  formulas.  Finally,  Constans  in  648
when  only  seventeen  years  of  age  issued  his  Type , forbidding  con-
troversy upon  both  sides.  Pope  Martin  I,  whose  appointment
lacked  the  confirmation  of  the  emperor  and  who  w as  regarded  by
the  latter  as  a usurper,  convened  in  649,  a council  in  the
Lateran  palace  and  anathematized  the  Type  and  its  defenders
(Hodgkin,  VI,  255,  256).  Constans  regarded  these  proceedings
as  acts  of  rebellion  and  sent  his  chamberlain  Olympius  as  exarch
to  Italy  in  649  with  directions  to  secure  the  acceptance  of  the  Type
and  if  possible  to  bring  pope  Martin  a prisoner  to  Constantinople  ;
but  the  exarch  found  public  opinion  and  the  disposition  of  the

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

21$

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

of  the  Langobards,  left  Constantinople x and  taking  his
way  along  the  coast,  came  to  Athens,  and  from  there,
having  crossed  the  sea,  he  landed  at  Tarentum.  * Pre-
viously, however,  he  went  to  a certain  hermit  who  was
said  to  have  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and  sought  eagerly
to  know  from  him  whether  he  could  overcome  and
conquer  the  nation  of  the  Langobards  which  was  dwell-
ing in  Italy.  The  servant  of  God  had  asked  him  for  the
space  of  one  night  that  he  might  supplicate  the  Lord  for
this  thing,  and  when  morning  came  he  thus  answered

army  so  adverse  that  he  was  compelled  to  renounce  the  project,
and  soon  afterwards  became  the  ally  of  the  Pope  and  the  Italians
(Hartmann,  II,  i,  227),  and  with  their  support  assumed  independ-
ent authority  and  led  an  army  in  Sicily  against  the  Saracens  where
he  died  in  652  (id.,  p.  228).  These  acts  were  naturally  regarded
as  an  insurrection  against  the  empire,  and  upon  his  death  Con-
stans  sent  Calliopas  to  Italy  as  exarch,  who  in  June,  653,  coming
to  Rome  with  the  army  from  Ravenna,  seized  the  Pope,  who  had
taken  refuge  in  the  Lateran  basilica,  declared  his  deposition  and
sent  him  as  a prisoner  to  Constantinople,  where  he  arrived  after
long  delays,  was  tried  for  treason,  insulted,  forced  to  stand  as  a
public  spectacle  in  the  Hippodrome,  was  loaded  with  irons,
immured  in  a dungeon  and  sentenced  to  death,  but  this  was
commuted  to  banishment  in  the  Crimea.  There  he  languished
and  died  in  655  (Hodgkin,  VI,  259-268).  He  was  succeeded
by  Eugenius  (A.  D.  657)  who  was  chosen  Pope  while  Martin
was  still  alive  and  Eugenius  was  followed  by  Vitalian  (A.  D.
657-672),  who  lived  on  terms  of  accommodation  with  the  em-
peror, although  there  is  no  evidence  that  he  abjured  the  doctrines
of  his  predecessors  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  232,  233).  It  was  under
Vitalian  that  Constans*  visit  to  Italy  described  in  this  chapter
occurred.

» A.  D.  662  (Hodgkin,  VI,  270).

* A.  D.  663  (Hodgkin,  VI,  271).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

219

the  emperor:  “The  people  of  the  Langobards  cannot
be  overcome  in  any  way,  because  a certain  queen  com-
ing from  another  province  has  built  the  church  of  St.
John  the  Baptist  in  the  territories  of  the  Langobards,  and
for  this  reason  St.  John  himself  continually  intercedes
for  the  nation  of  the  Langobards.  But  a time  shall
come  when  this  sanctuary  will  be  held  in  contempt  and
then  the  nation  itself  shall  perish.”  We  have  proved
that  this  has  so  occurred,  since  we  have  seen  that  before
the  fall  of  the  Langobards,  this  same  church  of  St..  John
which  was  established  in  the  place  called  Modicia
(Monza)  was  managed  by  vile  persons  so  that  this  holy
spot  was  bestowed  upon  the  unworthy  and  adulterous,
not  for  the  merit  of  their  lives,  but  in  the  giving  of  spoils.

Chapter  VII.

Therefore  after  the  emperor  Constans,  as  we  said,  had
come  to  -Tarentum,  he  departed  therefrom  and  invaded
the  territories  of  the  Beneventines  and  took  almost
all  the  cities  of  the  Langobards  through  which  he
passed.  He  also  attacked  bravely  and  took  by  storm
Luceria,  a rich  city  of  Apulia,,  destroyed  it  and  leveled
it  to  the  ground.  Agerentia1  (Acerenza),  however,  he
could  not  at  all  take  on  account  of  the  highly  fortified
position  of  the  place.  Thereupon  he  surrounded  Bene-
ventum  with  all  his  army  and  began  to  reduce  it  ener-
getically. At  that  time  Romuald,  the  son  of  Grimuald,
still  a young  man,  held  the  dukedom  there  and  as  soon

1 A fortress  on  one  of  the  outlying  buttresses  of  Monte  Vulture
(Hodgkin,  VI,  273).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

220

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

as  he  learned  of  the  approach  of  the  emperor,  he  sent
his  tutor,  Sesuald  by  name,  to  his  father  Grimuald  on
the  other  side  of  the  Padus  (Po)  begging  him  to  come
as  soon  as  possible  and  strongly  reinforce  his  son  and  the
Beneventines  whom  he  himself  had  reared.  When  king
Grimuald  heard  this  he  straightway  started  to  go  with
an  army  to  Beneventum  to  bring  aid  to  his  son.  Many
of  the  Langobards  left  him  on  the  way  and  returned
home  saying  that  he  had  despoiled  the  palace  and  was
now  going  back  to  Beneventum  not  to  return.  Mean-
while the  army  of  the  emperor  was  assaulting  Beneven-
tum vigorously  with  various  machines  of  war  and  on  the
other  hand  Romuald  with  his  Langobards  was  resisting
bravely,  and  although  he  did  not  dare  to  engage  hand  to
hand  with  so  great  a multitude  on  account  of  the  small-
ness of  his  army,  yet  frequently  dashing  into  the  camp
of  the  enemy  with  young  men  sent  out  for  that  purpose,
he  inflicted  upon  them  great  slaughter  upon  every  side.
And  while  Grimuald  his  father  was  now  hastening  on,  he
sent  to  his  son  to  announce  his  approach,  that  same  tu-
tor of  his  of  whom  we  have  spoken.  And  when  the
latter  had  come  near  Beneventum  he  was  captured  by
the  Greeks  and  brought  to  the  emperor,  who  asked  of
him  whence  he  had  come,  and  he  said  he  had  come
from  King  Grimuald  and  he  announced  the  speedy
approach  of  that  king.  Straightway  the  emperor,
greatly  alarmed,  took  counsel  with  his  followers  in  what
way  he  could  make  a treaty  with  Romuald  so  as  to
return  to  Naples.

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  V.

221

Chapter  VIII.

After  he  had  taken  as  a hostage  the  sister  of  Romu-
ald whose  name  was  Gisa,  he  made  peace  with  him.
He  ordered  the  tutor  Sesuald  indeed  to  be  led  to  the
walls,  threatening  death  to  him  if  he  should  announce
anything  to  Romuald  or  the  people  of  the  city  concern-
ing the  approach  of  Grimuald,  and  (demanding)  that
he  should  rather  declare  that  the  king  could  not  come.
He  promised  that  he  would  do  this,  as  was  enjoined
upon  him,  but  when  he  had  come  near  the  walls  he  said
he  wanted  to  see  Romuald.  And  when  Romuald  had
quickly  come  thither  he  thus  spoke  to  him : “ Be  stead-
fast, master  Romuald,  have  confidence  and  do  not  be
disturbed  since  your  father  will  quickly  come  to  give
you  aid.  For  know  that  he  is  stopping  this  night  near
the  river  Sangrus  (Sangro)1  with  a strong  army.  Only
I beseech  you  to  have  pity  on  my  wife  and  children
since  this  faithless  race  will  not  suffer  me  to  live.”
When  he  had  said  this,  his  head  was  cut  off  by  command
of  the  emperor  and  thrown  into  the  city  by  an  instrument
of  war  which  they  call  a stone-thrower.*  This  head
Romuald  ordered  brought  to  him  and  kissed  it  weeping
and  commanded  that  it  should  be  buried  in  a suitable
casket.3

1 In  the  present  province  of  Abruzzi  (Waitz),  about  fifty  miles
from  Benevento.

* Petraria .

■ All  this  as  well  as  the  two  following  chapters,  seems  inconsist-
ent with  the  peace  with  Romuald  mentioned  in  the  first  sentence
of  this  chapter.  Waitz  suggests  that  possibly  the  peace  was  made
after  the  incidents  concerning  Sesuald. — Possibly  Paul  combined
in  his  history  accounts  taken  from  two  contradictory  sources.

Digitized  by

Google

222

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  IX.

Then  the  emperor,  fearing  the  sudden  approach  of
king  Grimuald,  broke  up  the  siege  of  Beneventum  and
set  out  for  Neapolis  (Naples).  Mitola,  however,  the
Count  of  Capua,  forcibly  defeated  his  army  near  the
river  Calor  (Calore),  in  the  place  which  up  to  the
present  time  is  called  Pugna  (the  fight).1

Chapter  X.

After  the  emperor  came  to  Naples  it  is  said  that
one  of  his  chief  men,  whose  name  was  Saburrus,  asked
for  twenty  thousand  soldiers  from  his  sovereign,  and
pledged  himself  to  fight  against  Romuald,  and  win  the
victory.  And  when  he  had  received  the  troops  and
had  come  to  a place  whose  name  is  Forinus  (Forino)*
and  had  set  up  his  camp  there,  Grimuald,  who  had
already  come  to  Beneventum,  when  he  heard  these
things,  wanted  to  set  out  against  him.  His  son  Romu-
ald said  to  him : “ There  is  no  need,  but  do  you  turn
over  to  me  only  a part  of  your  army.  With  God's  favor
I will  fight  with  him,  and  when  I shall  have  conquered
him  a greater  glory,  indeed,  will  be  ascribed  of  your
power."  It  was  done,  and  when  he  had  received  some
part  of  his  father's  army,  he  set  out  with  his  own
men  likewise  against  Saburrus.  Before  he  began  the

1 The  Calore  flows  a little  east  of  Benevento.  Camillus  Pere-
grinius  believes  that  the  river  Sabatus  (Sabato)  is  intended,  which
flows  close  to  Beneventum,  and  near  which  Peter  the  Deacon
recognizes  this  place  called  Pugna  (Waitz).

* Between  Avellino  and  Nocera  (Waitz),  about  twenty-five  mile?
east  of  Naples.

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  V.

223

battle  with  him  he  ordered  the  trumpets  to  sound  on
four  sides,  and  immediately  he  rushed  daringly  upon
them.  And  while  both  lines  were  fighting  with  great
obstinacy,  a man  from  the  king’s  army  named  Ama-
long,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  carry  the  royal  pike,
taking  this  pike  in  both  hands  struck  violently  with  it  a
certain  little  Greek  and  lifted  him  from  the  saddle  on
which  he  was  riding  and  raised  him  in  the  air  over  his
head.  When  the  army  of  the  Greeks  saw  this,  it  was
terrified  by  boundless  fear  and  at  once  betook  itself
to  flight,  and  overwhelmed  with  the  utmost  disaster,  in
fleeing  it  brought  death  upon  itself  and  victory  to
Romuald  and  the  Langobards.  Thus  Saburrus,  who
had  promised  that  he  would  achieve  for  his  emperor
a trophy  of  victory  from  the  Langobards,  returned  to
him  with  a few  men  only  and  came  off  with  disgrace ;
but  Romuald,  when  the  victory  was  obtained  from  the
enemy,  returned  in  triumph  to  Beneventum  and  brought
joy  to  his  father  and  safety  to  all,  now  that  the  fear  of
the  enemy  was  taken  away.

Chapter  XI.

But  the  emperor  Constans,  when  he  found  that  he
could  accomplish  nothing  against  the  Langobards,
directed  all  the  threats  of  his  cruelty  against  his  own
followers,  that  is,  the  Romans.  He  left  Naples  and  pro-
ceeded to  Rome.1  At  the  sixth  mile-stone  from  the
city,  pope  Vitalian  came  to  meet  him  with  his  priests

ijuly  5,  663.  No  emperor  had  visited  Rome  for  nearly  two
centuries  (Hodgkin  VI,  276).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

224

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

and  the  Roman  people. 1 And  when  the  emperor  had
come  to  the  threshold  of  St.  Peter  he  offered  there  a
pallium  woven  with  gold ; and  remaining  at  Rome  twelve
days  he  pulled  down  everything  that  in  ancient  times  had
been  made  of  metal  for  the  ornament  of  the  city,  to
such  an  extent  that  he  even  stripped  off  the  roof  of  the
church  of  the  blessed  Mary  which  at  one  time  was  called
the  Pantheon,  and  had  been  founded  in  honor  of  all  the
gods  and  was  now  by  the  consent  of  the  former  rulers
the  place  of  all  the  martyrs ; and  he  took  away  from
there  the  bronze  tiles  and  sent  them  with  all  the  other
ornaments  to  Constantinople.  Then  the  emperor  re-
turned to  Naples,  and  proceeded  by  the  land  route  to
the  city  of  Regium  (Reggio) ; and  having  entered
Sicily*  during  the  seventh  indiction  3 he  dwelt  in  Syra-
cuse and  put  such  afflictions  upon  the  people — the  in-
habitants and  land  owners  of  Calabria,  Sicily,  Africa,  and
Sardinia — as  were  never  heard  of  before,  so  that  even
wives  were  separated  from  their  husbands  and  children
from  their  parents. 4 The  people  of  these  regions  also
endured  many  other  and  unheard  of  things  so  that  the
hope  of  life  did  not  remain  to  any  one.  For  even  the
sacred  vessels  and  the  treasures  of  the  holy  churches  of

*The  relations  between  the  emperor  Constans  and  the  popes
had  been  decidedly  strained  on  account  of  the  Monothelete  contro-
versy (see  note  to  Chap.  6,  supra),

* His  purpose  was  to  use  Sicily  as  a base  of  operations  against
the  Saracens  in  Africa  (Hodgkin  VI,  280).

■ Commencing  September,  663.

4 Sold  into  slavery  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  the  tax  gatherers
(Hodgkin  VI,  280).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

22$

God  were  carried  away  by  the  imperial  command  and
by  the  avarice  of  the  Greeks.  And  the  emperor  re-
mained in  Sicily  from  the  seventh  to  the  twelfth 1 * indic-
tion, a but  at  last  he  suffered  the  punishment  of  such
great  iniquities  and  while  he  was  in  the  bath  he  was  put
to  death  by  his  own  servants. 3

Chapter  XII.

When  the  emperor  Constantine  was  killed  at  Syracuse,
Mecetius  (Mezezius)  seized  the  sovereignty  in  Sicily,
but  without  the  consent  of  the  army  of  the  East. 4 The
soldiers  of  Italy,  others  throughout  Istria,  others  through
the  territories  of  Campania  and  others  from  the  regions
of  Africa  and  Sardinia  came  to  Syracuse  against  him
and  deprived  him  of  life.  And  many  of  his  judges  were
brought  to  Constantinople  beheaded  and  with  them  in
like  manner  the  head  of  the  false  emperor  was  also  car-
ried off.

1 An  error.  This  should  be  eleventh  indiction.  He  was  killed
July  15,  668  (Hodgkin  VI,  281,  note  2).

•In  Sicily  he  decreed  the  independence  of  the  bishopric  of
Ravenna  from  that  of  Rome,  thus  attempting  to  create  two  heads
of  the  church  in  Italy,  a severe  blow  to  the  papacy  (Hartmann  II,
1,  250,  251),  a measure  which,  however,  was  revoked  after  his
death.

•His  valet  Andreas  struck  him  with  a soap  box  (Hodgkin
VI,  281).

4 Paul  seems  to  have  misunderstood  the  Liber  Pontificalis  (Ad-
eodatus)  from  which  he  took  this  passage,  which  reads:  “ Mezezius
who  was  in  Sicily  with  the  army  of  the  East,  rebelled  and  seized
the  sovereignty.”

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

226

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XIII.

The  nation  of  the  Saracens  that  had  already  spread
through  Alexandria  and  Egypt,  hearing  these  things,
came  suddenly  with  many  ships,  invaded  Sicily,  entered
Syracuse  and  made  a great  slaughter  of  the  people — a
few  only  escaping  with  difficulty  who  had  fled  to  the
strongest  fortresses  and  the  mountain  ranges — and  they
carried  off  also  great  booty  and  all  that  art  work  in  brass
and  different  materials  which  the  emperor  Constantine
had  taken  away  from  Rome ; and  thus  they  returned  to
Alexandria.

Chapter  XIV.

Moreover  the  daughter  of  the  king,  who  we  said  had
been  carried  away  from  Beneventum  as  a hostage1  came
to  Sicily  and  ended  her  last  days.

Chapter  XV.

At  this  time  there  were  such  great  rain  storms  and
such  thunders  as  no  man  had  remembered  before,  so
that  countless  thousands  of  men  and  animals  were  killed
by  strokes  of  lightning.  In  this  year  the  pulse  which
could  not  be  gathered  on  account  of  the  rains  grew  again
and  was  brought  to  maturity. a

Chapter  XVI.

But  king  Grimuald  indeed,  when  the  Beneventines
and  their  provinces  had  been  delivered  from  the  Greeks,

1 See  Chapter  8 supra .

* These  events  are  placed  by  the  Liber  Pontificalis  in  the  year
of  the  death  of  Pope  Adeodatus  (672)  (Jacobi,  54,  55).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

22/

determined  to  return  to  his  palace  at  Ticinum,  and  to
Transamund,  who  had  formerly  been  count  of  Capua
and  had  served  him  most  actively  in  acquiring  the  king-
dom, he  gave  his  daughter,  another  sister  of  Romuald
in  marriage,  and  made  him  duke  of  Spoletium  (Spo-
leto)  after  Atto  of  whom  we  have  spoken  above.1
Then  he  returned  to  Ticinum.

Chapter  XVII.

When  indeed  Grasulf,  duke  of  the  Friulans  died,  as
we  mentioned  before,  Ago  was  appointed  his  successor
in  the  dukedom;*  and  from  his  name  a certain  house
situated  within  Forum  Julii  (Cividale)  is  called  Ago’s
House  up  to  this  day.  When  this  Ago  had  died,  Lupus
was  made  commander  of  the  Friulans.3  This  Lupus
entered  into  the  island  of  Gradus  (Grado)  which  is
not  far  from  Aquileia,  with  an  army  of  horsemen  over
a stone  highway  which  had  been  made  in  old  times
through  the  sea,  and  having  plundered  that  city,  he
removed  from  thence  and  carried  back  the  treasures  of
the  church  of  Aquileia.  When  Grimuald  set  out  for
Beneventum,  he  intrusted  his  palace  to  Lupus.

Chapter  XVIII.

Since  this  Lupus  had  acted  very  insolently  at  Ticinum

1 IV,  50  supra,

*The  date  is  uncertain.  De  Rubeis  says  661,  Hodgkin  thinks
about  645  (VI,  285).

■A.  D.  663  according  to  De  Rubeis,  about  660  according  to
Hodgkin  (VI,  285).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

228

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

in  the  king’s  absence,1  because  he  did  not  think  he
would  return,  when  the  king  did  come  back,  Lupus,
knowing  that  the  things  he  had  not  done  rightly  were
displeasing  to  him,  repaired  to  Forum  Julii  and,  con-
scious of  his  own  wickedness,  rebelled  against  this  king.

Chapter  XIX.

Then  Grimuald,  unwilling  to  stir  up  civil  war  among
the  Langobards,  sent  word  to  the  Cagan,  king  of  the
Avars,  to  come  into  Forum  Julii  with  his  army  against
duke  Lupus  and  defeat  him  in  war.  And  this  was
done.  For  the  Cagan  came  with  a great  army,  and  in
the  place  which  is  called  Flovius,2  as  the  older  men  who
were  in  that  war  have  related  to  us,  during  three  days
duke  Lupus  with  the  Friulans  fought  against  the  Cagan’s
army.  On  the  first  day  indeed  he  defeated  that  strong
army,  very  few  of  his  own  men  being  wounded ; on  the
second  day  he  killed  in  like  manner  many  of  the  Avars,
but  a number  of  his  own  were  now  wounded  and  dead ;
on  the  third  day  very  many  of  his  own  were  wounded
or  killed,  nevertheless  he  destroyed  a great  army  of  the
Cagan  and  took  abundant  booty ; but  on  the  fourth  day
they  saw  so  great  a multitude  coming  upon  them  that
they  could  scarcely  escape  by  flight.

1 That  is  when  he  went  to  the  relief  of  Romuald  who  was  be-
sieged at  Benevento  by  Constans.

* Fluvius  Frigidus  in  the  valley  of  Wippach  in  the  province  of
Krain  (Waitz) — “Cold  River  below  the  pass  of  the  Pear  Tree,”
southeast  of  Cividale  (Hodgkin,  VI,  286,  note  1).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

229

Chapter  XX.

When  duke  Lupus  then  had  been  killed  there,  the
rest  who  had  remained  (alive)  fortified  themselves  in
strongholds.  But  the  Avars,  scouring  all  their  terri-
tories, plundered  or  destroyed  everything  by  fire.
When  they  had  done  this  for  some  days,  word  was  sent
them  by  Grimuald  that  they  should  now  rest  from  their
devastation.  But  they  sent  envoys  to  Grimuald  saying
that  they  would  by  no  means  give  up  Forum  Julii,
which  they  had  conquered  by  their  own  arms.

Chapter  XXI.

Then  Grimuald,  compelled  by  necessity,  began  to
collect  an  army  that  he  might  drive  the  Avars  out  of  his
territories.  He  set  up  therefore  in  the  midst  of  the
plain  his  camp  and  the  place  where  he  lodged  the  Avar
(ambassadors),  and  since  he  had  only  a slender  frag-
ment of  his  army,  he  caused  those  he  had  to  pass  fre-
quently during  several  days  before  the  eyes  of  the
envoys  in  different  dress  and  furnished  with  various
kinds  of  arms,  as  if  a new  army  was  constantly  advanc-
ing. The  ambassadors  of  the  Avars  indeed,  when  they
saw  this  same  army  pass  by,  first  in  one  way  and  then
in  another,  believed  that  the  multitude  of  the  Lango-
bards  was  immense.  And  Grimuald  thus  spoke  to
them:  “With  all  this  multitude  of  an  army  which  you
have  seen  I will  straightway  fall  upon  the  Cstgan  and
the  Avars  unless  they  shall  quickly  depart  from  the
territories  of  the  Friulans.”  When  the  envoys  of  the
Avars  had  seen  and  heard  these  things,  and  had  re-

t#

Digitized  by

Google

230

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

peated  them  to  their  king,  he  presently  returned  with
all  his  army  to  his  own  kingdom.

Chapter  XXII.

Finally,  after  Lupus  was  killed  in  this  way,  as  we  have
related,  Arnefrit,  his  son,  sought  to  obtain  the  dukedom
at  Forum  Julii  in  the  place  of  his  father.  But  fearing
the  power  of  king  Grimuald,  he  fled  into  Carnuntum,
which  they  corruptly  call  Carantanum  (Carinthia)  1 * * to
the  nation  of  the  Slavs,9  and  afterwards  coming  with  the
Slavs  as  if  about  to  resume  the  dukedom  by  their  means,
he  was  killed  when  the  Friulans  attacked  him  at  the  for-
tress of  Nemae  (Nimis),  which  is  not  far  distant  from
Forum  Julii.3

Chapter  XXIII.

Afterwards  Wechtari  was  appointed  duke  at  Forum
Julii.  He  was  born  at  the  city  of  Vincentia  (Vicenza),
was  a kind  man,  and  one  who  ruled  his  people  mildly.
When  the  nation  of  the  Slavs  had  heard  that  he  had  set
out  for  Ticinum,  they  collected  a strong  multitude  and
determined  to  attack  the  fortress  of  Forum  Julii,  and
they  came  and  laid  out  their  camp  in  the  place  which  is
called  Broxas,4  not  far  from  Forum  Julii.  But  it  hap-

1 The  name  given  by  Paul  (Carnuntum),  the  modem  Presburg,
is  incorrect,  Carantanum  was  the  proper  name  for  Carinthia
(Hodgkin,  VI,  288,  note  1).

* These  Slavs  belonged  to  the  Slovene  branch  of  the  Slav  race
(Hodgkin  VI,  288).

■About  15  miles  northwest  of  Cividale  (Hodgkin,  VI,  288).

4 Bethmann  believes  that  a certain  stronghold,  Purgessimus,  is

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  V.

2$l

pened  according  to  the  Divine  will  that  the  evening
before,  duke  Wechtari  came  back  from  Ticinum  without
the  knowledge  of  the  Slavs.  While  his  companions,  as
is  wont  to  happen,  had  gone  home,  he  himself,  hearing
these  tidings  concerning  the  Slavs,  advanced  with  a few
men,  that  is,  twenty-five,  against  them.  When  the  Slavs
saw  him  coming  with  so  few  they  laughed,  saying  that
the  patriarch  was  advancing  against  them  with  his  clergy.
When  he  had  come  near  the  bridge  of  the  river  Natisio
(Natisone),1  which  was  where  the  Slavs  were  staying,
he  took  his  helmet  from  his  head  and  showed  his  face
to  them.  He  was  bald-headed,  and  when  the  Slavs
recognized  him  that  he  was  Wechtari,  they  were  imme-
diately alarmed  and  cried  out  that  Wechtari  was  there,
and  terrified  by  God  they  thought  more  of  flight  than
of  battle.  Then  Wechtari,  rushing  upon  them  with  the
few  men  he  had,  overthrew  them  with  such  great
slaughter  that  out  of  five  thousand  men  a few  only
remained,  who  escaped  with  difficulty.2

meant,  near  the  bridge  hereafter  referred  to;  others  say  Prosascus,
at  the  source  of  the  Natisone;  others,  Borgo  Bressana,  a suburb  of
Cividale  (Waitz).  Musoni  (Atti  del  Congresso  in  Cividale,  1899,
pp.  187,  188)  considers  all  these  conjectures  inadmissible,  and
shows  that  it  was  at  the  place  now  called  Brischis,  near  that  city.

1 Waitz  says  the  bridge  of  San  Retro  dei  Schiavi.  Musoni  (Atti,
etc.,  p.  191),  believes  it  was  probably  the  present  bridge  of  San
Quirino.

* It  is  evident  that  this  account,  which  is  no  doubt  based  upon
oral  tradition  and  perhaps  has  some  historical  basis,  has  been
greatly  exaggerated,  if  indeed  there  is  not  a mistake  in  the  figures,
as  Muratori  suggests,  The  allusion  to  the  patriarch  also  appears
to  contain  an  anachronism,  since  it  was  in  73 7,  after  these  events,

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

232  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXIV.

After  this  Wechtari,  Landari  held  the  dukedom  at
Forum  Julii,  and  when  he  died  Rodoald  succeeded  him
in  the  dukedom.

Chapter  XXV.

When  then,  as  we  have  said,  duke  Lupus  had  died,
king  Grimuald  gave  Lupus*  daughter  Theuderada  to  his
own  son  Romuald,  who  was  governing  Beneventum.1
From  her  he  begot  three  sons,  that  is,  Grimuald,  Gisulf,
and  also  Arichis.

Chapter  XXVI.

Also  king  Grimuald  avenged  his  injuries  (received)
from  all  those  who  deserted  him  when  he  had  set  out
for  Beneventum.

Chapter  XXVII.

But  he  also  destroyed  in  the  following  manner  Forum
Populi  (Forlimpopoli),  a city  of  the  Romans,8  whose
citizens  had  inflicted  certain  injuries  upon  him  when  he

that  the  patriarch  Calixtus  removed  his  see  to  Cividale.  Com-
munities of  Slavs  still  inhabit  a portion  of  Friuli;  they  are  divided,
according  to  their  linguistic  peculiarities,  into  four  principal  groups,
and  probably  came  into  this  district  at  different  times.  (Musoni,
Atti  del  Congresso  in  Cividale,  1899,  pp.  187,  193.)

‘Theuderada  emulated  Theudelinda  in  piety,  and  established
the  duchy  of  Benevento  in  the  Catholic  faith  (Hodgkin,  VI,  297,
298).

* On  the  iCmilian  way,  twenty  miles  south  of  Ravenna  (Hodg-
kin, VI,  29Q).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

233

set  out  for  Beneventum  and  had  often  annoyed  his  cour-
iers going  from  Beneventum  and  returning.  Having  left
Tuscany1 *  through  Bardo’s  Alp*  (Bardi)  at  the  time  of
Lent  without  any  knowledge  of  the  Romans,  he  rushed
unexpectedly  upon  that  city  on  the  holy  Sabbath  of
Easter  itself 3 in  the  hour  when  the  baptism  was  occur-
ring and  made  so  great  a carnage  of  men  slain  that  he
killed  in  the  sacred  font  itself  even  those  deacons  who
were  baptizing  little,  infants.  And  he  so  overthrew  that
city  that  very  few  inhabitants  remain  in  it  up  to  the
present  time.

Chapter  XXVIII.

Grimuald  had  indeed  no  ordinary  hatred  against  the
Romans,  since  they  had  once  treacherously  betrayed  his
brothers  Taso  and  Cacco. 4 Wherefore  he  destroyed  to
its  foundations  the  city  of  Opitergium  (Oderzo)  where
they  were  killed,  and  divided  the  territories  of  those  who
had  dwelt  there  among  the  people  of  Forum  Julii  (Civi-
dale),  Tarvisium  (Treviso)  and  Ceneta  (Ceneda).

1 Read  e Tuscia  egressus  in  place  of  Tusciam  ingressus  (Hodg-
kin VI,  290,  note  3).

*A  pass  of  the  Apennines  near  Parma.  There  is  evidently
some  mistake,  either  in  the  text  or  else  by  Paul,  as  the  two  places
are  far  apart  (Hodgkin,  VI,  290,  note  3).  Otto  von  Freising  says
that  the  whole  Apennine  range  was  so  called  (Abel).

1 Sabbato  paschali.  Abel  translates  Easter  Saturday,  Hodgkin
(VI,  290)  Easter  Sunday,  which  seems  more  probable  from  the
context.

4 IV,  38,  supra.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

234

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXIX.

During  these  times  a duke  of  the  Bulgarians,  Alzeco
by  name,  left  his  own  people,  from  what  cause  is  un-
known, and  peacefully  entering  Italy  with  the  whole
army  of  his  dukedom,  came  to  king  Grimuald,  promising
to  serve  him  and  to  dwell  in  his  country.  And  the  king
directing  him  to  Beneventum  to  his  son  Romuald,  ordered
that  the  latter  should  assign  to  him  and  his  people  places
to  dwell  in. 1 * * 4 Duke  Romuald,  receiving  them  graciously,
accorded  to  them  extensive  tracts  to  settle  which  had
been  deserted  up  to  that  time,  namely,  Sepinum  (Sepino),
Bovianum  (Bojano),  Isernia9  and  other  cities  with  their
territories  and  directed  that  Alzeco  himself,  the  name  of
his  title  being  changed,  should  be  called  gastaldius3
instead  of  duke.  And  they  dwell  up  to  the  present  time
in  these  places,  as  we  have  said,  and  although  they  also
speak  Latin,  they  have  not  at  all  forsaken  the  use  of  their
own  language.

Chapter  XXX.

When  the  emperor  Constans,  as  we  said,*  had  been
killed  in  Sicily  and  the  tyrant  Mezetius  who  had  suc-
ceeded him  had  been  punished,  Constantine,  the  son  of
the  emperor  Constantius,  undertook  the  government  of
the  empire  of  the  Romans  and  reigned  over  the  Romans

1 Theophanes  (Historia  Miscella)  relates  the  story  differently
(Waitz).

* Places  in  the  highlands  of  Samnium  (Hodgkin  VI,  284).

•See  note  II,  32,  supra , pp.  88-91.

4Ch.  12,  supra.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

235

seventeen  years.  In  the  times  of  Constans  indeed  the
archbishop  Theodore  and  the  abbot  Adrian,  also  a very
learned  man,  were  sent  by  pope  Vitalian  into  Britain  and
made  very  many  churches  of  the  Angles  productive  of
the  fruit  of  ecclasiastical  doctrine.  Of  these  men  arch-
bishop Theodore  has  described,  with  wonderful  and  dis-
cerning reflection,  the  sentences  for  sinners,  namely,  for
how  many  years  one  ought  to  do  penance  fcr  each  sin.*

Chapter  XXXI.

Afterwards,  in  the  month  of  August,  a comet  appeared
in  the  east  with  very  brilliant  rays,  which  again  turned
back  upon  itself  and  disappeared.  And  without  delay
a heavy  pestilence  followed  from  the  same  eastern  quar-
ter and  destroyed  the  Roman  people.  In  these  days
Domnus  (Donus),  Pope  of  the  Roman  Church,  covered
with  large  white  blocks  of  marble  in  a wonderful  manner
the  place  which  is  called  Paradise  in  front  of  the  church
of  the  blessed  apostle  Peter.

Chapter  XXXII.

At  this  time  Dagipert  governed  the  kingdom  of  the
Franks  in  Gaul  and  with  him  king  Grimuald  entered  into
a treaty  of  lasting  peace.*  Perctarit  also,  who  had
settled  in  the  country  of  the  Franks,  fearing  the  power

1 The  book  is  entitled  PoenitentiaU  (Giansevero).

*This  appears  to  be  doubtful,  as  Dagipert  II,  to  whom  it  refers,
came  to  the  throne  in  674,  after  Grimuald’ s death  (Jacobi,  42).
Hartmann  believes  that  the  treaty  was  made,  though  not  with
Dagipert  (II,  1,  277).  Clothar  III  or  Childeric  are  suggested
(Waitz).

Digitized  by

Google

236

HISTORY  OP  THE  LANGOBARDS.

of  this  Grimuald,  departed  from  Gaul  and  determined  to
hasten  to  the  island  of  Britain  and  the  king  of  the  Saxons.

Chapter  XXXIII.

But  Grimuald  indeed  having  remained  in  the  palace
on  the  ninth  day  after  the  use  of  the  lancet,  took  his
bow  and  when  he  attempted  to  hit  a dove  with  an  arrow,
the  vein  of  his  arm  was  ruptured.  The  doctors,  as  they
say,  administered  poisoned  medicines  and  totally  with-
drew him  from  this  life.  He  added  in  the  edict  which
king  Rothari  had  composed  certain  chapters  of  law
which  seemed  useful  to  him.1 * * * * * * *  He  was  moreover  very
strong  in  body,  foremost  in  boldness,  with  a bald  head
and  a heavy  beard  and  was  adorned  with  wisdom  no
less  than  with  strength.  And  his  body  was  buried  in
the  church  of  the  blessed  Ambrose  the  Confessor,  which
he  had  formerly  built  in  the  city  of  Ticinum.  Upon
the  expiration  of  one  year  and  three  months  after  the
death  of  king  Aripert,  he  usurped  the  kingdom  of  the
Langobards,  reigned  nine  years  and  left  as  king  Garibald
his  son,  still  of  boyish  age  whom  the  daughter  of  king
Aripert  had  borne  him.9  Then,  as  we  had  begun  to
say,  Perctarit  having  departed  from  Gaul,  embarked  in

1 In  these  chapters  he  discouraged  the  wager  of  battle  and  made

strict  provisions  against  bigamy,  a crime  which  seems  to  have

been  increasing.  He  also  incorporated  the  Roman  principle  in

the  succession  of  property,  that  when  a father  died  the  children

should  represent  and  take  his  share.  His  edict  was  issued  A.  D.

668  (Hodgkin,  VI,  291,  292).

* His  elder  son  Romuald  seems  to  have  kept  the  duchy  of  Bene-

vento.

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  V.

237

a ship  to  pass  over  to  the  island  of  Britain  to  the  king-
dom of  the  Saxons.  And  when  he  had  already  sailed
a little  way  through  the  sea,  a voice  was  heard  from  the
shore  of  one  inquiring  whether  Perctarit  was  in  that  ship.
And  when  the  answer  was  given  him  that  Perctarit  was
there,  he  who  called  out  added : “ Say  to  him  he  may
return  to  his  country  since  to-day  is  the  third  day  that
Grimuald  has  been  withdrawn  from  this  life.”  When  he
heard  this,  Perctarit  straightway  turned  back  again  and
coming  to  the  shore  could  not  find  the  person  who  in-
formed him  of  the  death  of  Grimuald,  from  which  he
thought  that  this  was  not  a man  but  a Divine  messenger.
And  then  directing  his  course  to  his  own  country,  when
he  had  come  to  the  confines  of  Italy  he  found  already
there  awaiting  him  all  the  retinue  of  the  palace,  and  all
the  royal  officials  in  readiness  together  with  a great
multitude  of  the  Langobards.  And  thus  when  he  re-
turned to  Ticinum,  and  the  little  boy  Garibald  had  been
driven  aw’ay  from  the  kingdom,  he  was  raised  to  the
kingly  power  by  all  *the  Langobards,  the  third  month
after  the  death  of  Grimuald.1  He  was  moreover  a pious
man,  a Catholic  in  belief,3  tenacious  of  justice  and  a very
bountiful  supporter  of  the  poor.  And  he  straightway
sent  to  Beneventum  and  called  back  from  thence  his
wife  Rodelinda  and  his  son  Cunincpert.

AA.  D.  671  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  255).

*So  much  a Catholic  that  he  caused  the  Jews  in  the  kingdom  to
be  baptized,  and  ordered  all  who  refused  to  be  slain  (Song  of  the
Synod  of  Pavia;  see  Hodgkin,  VI,  303).  Grimuald’ s aggressive
policy  against  the  Romans  was  now  abandoned.

Digitized  by

Google

238  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXXIV.

And  as  soon  as  he  had  taken  upon  himself  the  rights
of  sovereignty,  he  built  in  that  place  which  is  on  the
side  of  the  river  Ticinus  (Ticino)  whence  he  himself
had  previously  escaped,  a convent  called  the  New  one,
to  his  Lord  and  Deliverer  in  honor  of  the  Holy  Virgin
and  Martyr  Agatha.1  In  it  he  gathered  together  many
virgins,  and  he  also  endowed  this  place  with  possessions
and  ornaments  of  many  kinds.  His  queen  Rodelinda
indeed  built  with  wonderful  workmanship  outside  the
walls  of  this  city  of  Ticinum  a church  of  the  Holy
Mother  of  God  which  is  called  “ At  the  Poles,”  and
adorned  it  with  marvelous  decorations.  This  place
moreover  was  called  “ At  the  Poles  ” because  formerly
poles,  that  is  beams,  had  stood  there  upright  which
were  wont  to  be  planted  according  to  the  custom  of  the
Langobards  for  the  following  reason : if  any  one  were
killed  in  any  place  either  in  war  or  in  any  other  way,
his  relatives  fixed  a pole  within  their  burial  ground
upon  the  top  of  which  they  placed  a dove  made  of
wood  that  was  turned  in  that  direction  where  their
beloved  had  expired  so  that  it  might  be  known  in  what
place  he  who  had  died  was  sleeping.

Chapter  XXXV.

Then  Perctarit,  when  he  had  ruled  alone  for  seven
years,  now  in  the  eighth  year  took  his  son  Cunincpert

1 It  is  said  his  escape  occurred  in  the  night  before  the  festival  of
St.  Agatha  (Waitz),

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

239

as  his  consort  in  the  government  and  with  him  he
reigned  in  like  manner  for  ten  years.1 * *

Chapter  XXXVI.

And  while  they  were  living  in  great  peace  and  had
tranquility  around  them  on  every  side,  there  arose
against  them  a son  of  iniquity,  Alahis  by  name,  by
whom  the  peace  was  disturbed  in  the  kingdom  of  the
Langobards,  and  a great  slaughter  was  made  of  the
people.  This  man,  when  he  was  duke  of  the  city  of
Tridentum  (Trent),  fought  with  the  count  of  the
Bavarians  that  they  call  “ gravio  ” 9 who  governed
Bauzanum  (Botzen)  and  other  strongholds,  and  de-
feated him  in  an  astonishing  manner.  Elated  from
this  cause,  he  also  lifted  his  hand  against  Perctarit  his
king,  and  rebelling,  fortified  himself  within  the  strong-
hold of  Tridentum.  King  Perctarit  advanced  against
him  and  while  he  besieged  him  from  the  outside,  sud-
denly Alahis  rushed  unexpectedly  out  of  the  city  with
his  followers,  overthrew  the  king’s  camp  and  compelled
the  king  himself  to  seek  flight.  He  afterwards  however
returned  to  the  favor  of  king  Perctarit  through  the
agency  of  Cunincpert,  the  king’s  son,  who  loved  him  now
for  a long  time.  For  when  the  king  had  at  different  times
wanted  to  put  him  to  death,  his  son  Cunincpert  always
prevented  this  being  done,  thinking  that  he  would  there-
after be  faithful,  nor  did  he  refrain  from  getting  his

1 This  seems  to  be  a mistake.  The  period  was  something  more

than  eight  years  (Hodgkin,  VI,  304).

* Or  grafio%  the  German  Graf,

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

240  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

father  also  to  bestow  upon  Alahis  the  dukedom  of  Brexia
(Brescia),  although  the  father  often  protested  that  Cun-
incpert  did  this  to  his  own  ruin,  since  he  offered  his
enemy  the  means  of  obtaining  the  kingly  power.  The
city  of  Brexia  indeed  had  always  a great  multitude  of
noble  Langobards  and  Perctarit  feared  that  by  their  aid
Alahis  would  become  too  powerful.  In  these  days
king  Perctarit  built  with  wonderful  workmanship  in
the  city  of  Ticinum,  a gate  adjoining  the  palace  which
was  also  called  the  “ Palace  Gate.”

Chapter  XXXVII.

When  he  had  held  the  sovereignty  eighteen  years,1 *
first  alone  and  afterwards  with  his  son,  he  was  withdrawn
from  this  life  and  his  body  was  buried  hard  by  the
church  of  our  Lord  the  Saviour  which  Aripert  his  father
had  built.  He  was  of  becoming  stature,  of  a corpulent
body,  mild  and  gentle  in  all  things.  But  king  Cuninc-
pert  indeed  took  to  wife  Hermelinda,  of  the  race  of  the
Anglo-Saxons.3  She  had  seen  in  the  bath  Theodote,  a
girl  sprung  from  a very  noble  stock  of  Romans,  of
graceful  body  and  adorned  with  flaxen  hair  almost  to
the  feet,  and  she  praised  the  girl’s  beauty  to  king
Cunincpert,  her  husband.  And  although  he  concealed
from  his  wife  that  he  had  heard  this  with  pleasure,  he

1 But  see  chapter  35,  supra  and  note.

* Egbert,  king  of  Kent  from  664  to  673,  had  a sister  Eormengild
and  an  uncle  Eormenred,  whose  daughters*  names  all  begin  with

“Eormen.”  Eormenlind  or  Hermelinda  probably  came  from
one  of  these  families  (Hodgkin,  VI,  305,  note  3).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

241

was  inflamed,  nevertheless,  with  great  love  for  the  girl,
and  without  delay  he  set  forth  to  hunt  in  the  wood  they
call  “ The  City,”  and  directed  his  wife  Hermelinda  to
come  with  him.  And  he  stole  out  from  there  by  night
and  came  to  Ticinum,  and  making  the  girl  Theodote
come  to  him  he  lay  with  her.  Yet  he  sent  her  after-
wards into  a monastery  in  Ticinum  which  was  called  by
her  name.

Chapter  XXXVIII.

Alahis  indeed  gave  birth  to  the  iniquity  he  had  long
since  conceived,  and  with  the  help  of  Aldo  and  Grauso,
citizens  of  Brexia,  as  well  as  many  others  of  the  Lango-
bards,  forgetful  of  so  many  favors  that  king  Cunincpert
had  conferred  upon  him,  forgetting  also  the  oath  by
which  he  had  engaged  to  be  most  faithful  to  him,  he
took  possession,  while  Cunincpert  was  absent,  of  his
kingly  power  and  of  the  palace  that  stood  at  Ticinum.
Cunincpert,  hearing  this  at  the  place  where  he  was,
straightway  fled  to  an  island  which  is  in  Lake  Larius
(Como),  not  far  from  Comum  (Como),  and  there  for-
tified himself  strongly.

But  there  was  great  grief  among  all  who  loved  him
and  especially  among  the  priests  and  clergy,  all  of  whom
Alahis  held  in  hatred.  There  was  indeed  at  that  time  a
bishop  of  the  church  of  Ticinum,  Damianus,  a man  of
God,  distinguished  for  sanctity  and  well  instructed  in  the
liberal  arts.  When  he  saw  that  Alahis  had  taken  pos-
session of  the  palace,  in  order  that  neither  he  nor  his
church  should  suffer  harm  from  him,  he  dispatched  to
him  his  deacon  Thomas,  a wise  and  religious  man  and

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

242  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

sent  by  him  to  this  same  Alahis  the  blessing x of  his  holy
church.  It  was  announced  to  Alahis  that  Thomas  the
deacon  stood  before  the  door  and  had  brought  the  bene-
diction from  the  bishop.  Then  Alahis,  who  as  we  said,
held  all  churchmen  in  hatred,  thus  spoke  to  his  servants :
“ Go,  say  to  him  if  he  has  clean  breeches  he  may  come
in  but  if  otherwise  let  him  keep  his  foot  outside.”
Thomas,  indeed,  when  he  had  heard  these  expressions
thus  answered : “ Say  to  him  that  I have  clean  breeches,
since  I put  them  on  washed  to-day.”  Alahis  sent  word
to  him  again  as  follows : “Ido  not  speak  of  the  breeches
but  of  the  things  that  are  inside  the  breeches.”  To
these  things  Thomas  thus  made  answer : “ Go,  say  to
him  God  only  can  find  blame  in  me  for  these  causes,
but  that  man  can  by  no  means  do  so.”  And  when
Alahis  had  made  this  deacon  come  in  to  him  he  spoke
with  him  very  bitterly  and  with  reproaching.  Then  fear
and  hatred  of  the  tyrant  took  possession  of  all  the
churchmen  and  priests,  since  they  deemed  they  could
not  at  all  bear  his  rudeness ; and  they  began  to  wish  for
Cunincpert  so  much  the  more  as  they  had  in  execration
the  haughty  usurper  of  the  kingdom.  But  not  very  long
did  rudeness  and  rough  brutality  keep  the  sovereignty
they  had  usurped.

Chapter  XXXIX.

In  fine,  on  a certain  day  when  he  was  counting  solidi
upon  a table,  one  tremisses a fell  from  that  table,  which

1 Bette  die  tio , perhaps  * 1 the  bread  of  the  Eucharist  ’ * the  4 4 blessed
bread**  (Waitz).  See  DuCange  Bene  die  tiones,  EuLogia .

* A coin,  the  third  part  of  a solidus,  and  worth,  says  Hodgkin,

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

243

the  son  of  Aldo,  who  was  yet  a little  boy,  picked  from
the  floor  and  gave  back  to  this  Alahis.  Thinking  that
the  boy  understood  but  little,  Alahis  spoke  to  him  as
follows:  “Your  father  has  many  of  these  which  he  is
soon  going  to  give  me  if  God  shall  so  will.”  When  this
boy  had  returned  to  his  father  in  the  evening,  his  father
asked  him  if  the  king  had  said  anything  to  him  that  day,
and  he  reported  to  his  father  all  the  things  as  they  had
happened  and  what  the  king  had  said  to  him.  When
Aldo  heard  these  things  he  was  greatly  concerned ; and

(VI,  308),  about  four  shillings.  Soetbeer  (Forschungen  zur
Deutschen  Geschichte,  II,  pp.  374  to  383)  gives  an  account  of  the
coins  used  by  the  Langobards.  The  mode  of  computation  was
the  same  as  in  the  Greek  jurisdiction  of  Ravenna  (p.  374).  The
tremisses,  not  the  whole  solidus,  was  the  common  coin  and  those
coined  at  Lucca  after  the  time  of  the  Ostrogothic  kingdom  (both  be-
fore that  city  fell  under  the  Langobards  and  afterwards  down  to  797),
were  an  important  medium  of  circulation.  The  average  weight  of
the  oldest  of  these  coins  was  1.38  grammes — corresponding  with
the  Byzantine  coins  of  the  same  period,  while  the  coins  of  Lucca
varied  much  in  the  fineness  of  the  gold,  from  23  carats,  the  Byzan-
tine standard,  down  to  15 — the  average  being  perhaps  17  or  18
(PP*  37 5 » 3 76,  380).  After  the  subjection  of  Lucca  (about  the
year  640)  and  before  the  names  of  the  last  Langobard  kings,
Aistulf  and  Desiderius  were  placed  upon  the  coins,  that  is  during
the  period  described  in  the  text,  the  average  weight  was  1.33
grammes,  while  the  fineness  of  the  gold  was  very  slightly  reduced.
Under  Aistulf  and  Desiderius  the  average  weight  was  1 . 1 2 grammes.
It  is  not  possible  to  say  which  Langobard  king  first  began  to  coin
money.  Rothari  in  his  Edict  made  provision  for  the  punishment
of  false  coinage,  but  the  first  king  whose  monogram  appears  upon
a tremisses  is  Grimuald  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  33),  and  the  first  king’s
portrait  is  that  of  Cunincpert.  The  duchy  of  Benevejito  had  also
l special  coinage  of  its  own  (id).

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

244

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

joining  his  brother  Grauso  he  reported  to  him  all  the
things  the  king  had  ill-naturedly  said.  And  they  pres-
ently took  counsel  with  their  friends  and  with  those
they  could  trust,  in  what  way  they  might  deprive  the
tyrant  Alahis  of  his  sovereignty  before  he  could  do  them
any  injury.  And  later  they  set  out  to  the  palace  and
spoke  to  Alahis  as  follows:  “Why  do  you  deign  to
stay  in  town  ? See ! all  the  city  and  the  whole  people
are  faithful  to  you,  and  that  drunken  Cunincpert  is  so
broken  up  that  he  cannot  now  have  any  further  re-
sources. Depart  and  go  to  the  hunt  and  exercise  your-
self with  your  young  men,  and  we,  with  the  rest  of  your
faithful  subjects,  will  defend  this  city  for  you.  But  we
also  promise  you  that  we  will  soon  bring  you  the  head
of  your  enemy,  Cunincpert.”  And  he  was  persuaded
by  their  words  and  departed  from  the  city  and  set  out
for  the  very  extensive  City  forest,  and  there  began  to
exercise  himself  with  sports  and  huntings.  Aldo  and
Grauso,  however,  went  to  Lake  Comacinus  (Como),
embarked  in  a boat  and  proceeded  to  Cunincpert.
When  they  came  to  him  they  threw  themselves  at  his
feet,  acknowledged  that  they  had  acted  unjustly  against
him  and  reported  to  him  what  Alahis  had  knavishly
spoken  against  them  and  what  counsel  they  had  given
him  to  his  ruin.  Why  say  more?  They  shed  tears
together  and  gave  oaths  to  each  other  fixing  the  day
when  Cunincpert  should  come  that  they  might  deliver
to  him  the  city  of  Ticinum.  And  this  was  done,  for  on
the  appointed  day  Cunincpert  came  to  Ticinum,  was
received  by  them  most  willingly  and  entered  his  palace.
Then  all  the  citizens,  and  especially  the  bishop  and  the

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

245

priests  also  and  the  clergy,  young  men  and  old,  ran  to
him  eagerly  and  all  embraced  him  with  tears,  and  filled
with  boundless  joy,  shouted  their  thanks  to  God  for  his
return ; and  he  kissed  them  all  as  far  as  he  could.  Sud-
denly there  came  to  Alahis  one  who  announced  that
Aldo  and  Grauso  had  fulfilled  all  they  had  promised
him  and  had  brought  him  the  head  of  Cunincpert,  and
not  only  his  head,  but  also  his  whole  body,  for  the  man
declared  that  he  was  staying  in  the  palace.  When  Ala-
his heard  this  he  was  overwhelmed  with  dismay,  and
raging  and  gnashing  his  teeth,  he  threatened  many
things  against  Aldo  and  Grauso,  and  departed  thence
and  returned  through  Placentia  (Piacenza)  to  Austria1
and  joined  to  himself  as  allies  the  various  cities,  partly
by  flatteries,  partly  by  force.  For  when  he  came  to
Vincentia  (Vicenza)  the  citizens  went  forth  against  him
and  made  ready  for  war,  but  presently  they  were  con-
quered and  were  made  his  allies.  Going  forth  from
thence  he  entered  Tarvisium  (Treviso),  and  in  like
manner  also  the  remaining  cities.  And  when  Cuniric-
pert  collected  an  army  against  him,  and  the  people  of
Forum  Julii  (Cividale),2  on  account  of  their  fidelity,

1 This  name  was  used  to  designate  the  eastern  part  of  the  Lango-
bard  kingdom,  and  was  often  mentioned  in  the  laws  of  king
Liutprand  (Waitz).  Its  western  boundary  was  the  Adda,  and  the
land  west  of  that  stream  was  called  Neustria,  which,  with  a third
division,  Tuscia,  constituted  the  main  kingdom  immediately  sub-
ject to  the  king,  as  distinguished  from  the  duchies  of  Spoleto  and
Benevento.

* It  will  be  noticed  here  that  the  people  of  Forum  Julii  and  not
the  duke  is  mentioned.  This  is  one  of  the  signs  of  the  gradual

Digitized  by  v^ooole

246  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

wished  to  march  to  Cunincpert’s  assistance,  Alahis  him-
self lay  hid  in  the  wood  which  is  called  Capulanus  by  the
bridge  of  the  river  Liquentia  (Livenza),  which  is  distant
forty-eight  miles  from  Forum  Julii  and  is  in  the  way  of
those  going  to  Ticinum,  and  when  the  army  of  the
people  of  Forum  Julii  came,  a few  at  a time,  he  com-
pelled them  all  as  they  arrived  to  swear  allegiance  to
him,  diligently  watching  lest  anyone  of  them  should
turn  back  and  report  this  thing  to  the  others  who  were
approaching ; and  thus  all  those  coming  from  Forum
Julii  were  bound  to  him  by  oath.  Why  say  more?
Alahis  with  the  whole  of  Austria,  and  on  the  other  hand
Cunincpert  with  his  followers  came  and  set  up  their
camps  in  the  field  whose  name  is  Coronate  (Kornate).1

Chapter  XL.

Cunincpert  dispatched  a messenger  to  him,  sending
him  word  that  he  would  engage  with  him  in  single  com-
bat ; that  there  was  no  need  of  using  up  the  army  of
either.  To  these  words  Alahis  did  not  at  all  agree.
When  one  of  his  followers,  a Tuscan  by  race,  calling
him  a warlike  and  brave  man,  advised  him  to  go  forth
boldly  against  Cunincpert,  Alahis  replied  to  these  words :
“ Cunincpert,  although  he  is  a drunkard  and  of  a stupid
heart,  is  nevertheless  quite  bold  and  of  wonderful
strength.  For  in  his  father’s  time  when  we  were  boys
there  were  in  the  palace  wethers  of  great  size  which  he

decrease  in  the  power  of  the  dukes  in  the  northern  portions  of  the
Langobard  kingdom.  (See  note  3,  Bk.  II,  Ch.  32  supra.)

1 By  the  Adda,  about  ten  miles  southwest  of  Bergamo  (Hodg-
kin, VI,  31 1).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  V.

m

seized  by  the  wool  of  the  back  and  lifted  from  the
ground  with  outstretched  arm,  which,  indeed,  I was  not
able  to  do.”  That  Tuscan  hearing  these  things  said  to
him : “ If  you  do  not  dare  to  go  into  a fight  with  Cun-
incpert  in  single  combat  you  will  not  have  me  any  longer
as  a companion  in  your  support.”  And  saying  this  he
broke  away  and  straightway  betook  himself  to  Cuninc-
pert  and  reported  these  things  to  him.  Then,  as  we
said,  both  lines  came  together  in  the  field  of  Coronate.
And  when  they  were  already  near,  so  that  they  were
bound  to  join  in  battle,  Seno,  a deacon  of  the  church  of
Ticinum,  who  was  the  guardian  of  the  church  of  St.
John  the  Baptist  (which  was  situated  within  that  city
and  which  queen  Gundiperga  had  formerly  built),  since
he  loved  the  king  very  much,  and  feared  lest  his  sove-
reign should  perish  in  war,  said  to  the  king : “ My  lord
king,  our  whole  life  lies  in  your  welfare.  If  you  perish
in  battle  that  tyrant  Alahis  will  destroy  us  by  various
punishments;  therefore  may  my  counsel  please  you.
Give  me  a suit  of  your  armor  and  I will  go  and  fight
with  that  tyrant.  If  I shall  die,  you  may  still  re-estab-
lish your  cause,  but  if  I shall  win,  a greater  glory  will  be
ascribed  to  you,  because  you  will  have  conquered  by
your  servant.”  And  when  the  king  refused  to  do  this,
his  few  faithful  ones  who  were  present  began  to  beg
him  with  tears  that  he  would  give  his  consent  to  those
things  the  deacon  had  said.  Overcome  at  last,  since  he
was  of  a tender  heart,  by  their  prayers  and  tears,  he
handed  his  cuirass  and  his  helmet,  and  his  greaves  and
his  other  arms  to  the  deacon,  and  dispatched  him  to  the
battle  to  play  the  part  of  the  king.  For  this  deacon

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

248  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

was  of  the  same  stature  and  bearing,  so  that  when  he
had  gone  armed  out  of  the  tent  he  was  taken  for  king
Cunincpert  by  all.  The  battle  then  was  joined  and  they
struggled  with  all  their  might.  And  when  Alahis
pressed  the  harder  there  where  he  thought  the  king
was,  he  killed  Seno  the  deacon,  and  imagined  that
Cunincpert  had  been  slain.  And  when  he  had  ordered
his  head  cut  off  so  that  after  it  was  lifted  upon  a pike
they  should  cry  out  “ Thanks  to  God/*  when  the  helmet
was  removed,  he  learned  that  he  had  killed  a church-
man. Then  crying  out  in  his  rage  he  said : “ Woe  is
me ! We  have  done  nothing  when  we  have  brought  the
battle  to  this  point  that  we  have  killed  a churchman !
Therefore,  I now  make  this  kind  of  a vow  that  if  God
shall  give  me  the  victory  I will  fill  a whole  well  with  the
members  of  churchmen.”

Chapter  XLI.

Then  Cunincpert,  seeing  that  his  men  had  lost,
straightway  showed  himself  to  them,  and  taking  away
their  fear,  strengthened  their  hearts  to  hope  for  victory.
Again  the  lines  of  battle  formed  and  on  the  one  side
Cunincpert,  and  on  the  other,  Alahis  made  ready  for
the  struggles  of  war.  And  when  they  were  already
near  so  that  both  lines  were  joining  to  fight,  Cunincpert
again  sent  a message  to  Alahis  in  these  words : “ See
how  many  people  there  are  on  both  sides ! What  need
is  there  that  so  great  a multitude  perish  ? Let  us  join,
he  and  I,  in  single  combat  and  may  that  one  of  us  to
whom  God  may  have  willed  to  give  the  victory  have  and
possess  all  this  people  safe  and  entire.”  And  when  his

Digitized  by  Caooole

BOOK  V.

249

followers  exhorted  Alahis  to  do  what  Cunincpert  en-
joined him  he  answered : “ I cannot  do  this  because
among  his  spears  I see  the  image  of  the  holy  archangel
Michael1  by  whom  I swore  allegiance  to  him.”  Then
one  of  them  said : “ From  fear  you  see  what  is  not,  and
anyhow,  it  is  now  late  for  you  to  think  of  these  things.”
Then  when  the  trumpets  sounded,  the  lines  of  battle
joined,  and  as  neither  side  gave  way,  a very  great  slaugh-
ter was  made  of  the  people.  At  length  the  cruel  tyrant
Alahis  perished,  and  Cunincpert  with  the  help  of  the
Lord  obtained  the  victory.  The  army  of  Alahis  too,
when  his  death  was  known,  took  the  protection  of  flight.
And  of  these  whomsoever  the  point  of  the  sword  did  not
cut  down  the  river  Addua  (Adda)  destroyed.  Also  the
head  of  Alahis  was  cut  off  and  his  legs  were  cut  away
and  only  his  deformed  and  mangled  corpse  remained.
The  army  of  the  people  of  Forum  Julii  was  not  in  this
war  at  all  because,  since  it  had  unwillingly  sworn  allegi-
ance to  Alahis,  for  this  reason  it  gave  assistance  neither
to  king  Cunincpert  nor  to  Alahis,  but  returned  home
when  the  two  engaged  in  war.  Then  Alahis  having
died  in  this  manner,  king  Cunincpert  commanded  that
the  body  of  Seno  the  deacon  should  be  buried  in  great
splendor  before  the  gates  of  the  church  of  St.  John
which  the  deacon  had  governed.  The  reigning  sover-
eign himself  indeed  returned  to  Ticinum  with  the  re-
joicing of  all  and  in  the  triumph  of  victory.

1 The  patron  saint  of  the  Langobards  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  25  ;
Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

Chapter  I.

While  these  things  were  occurring  among  the  Lango-
bards  across  the  Po,  Romuald,  duke  of  the  Beneventines
after  he  had  collected  a great  multitude  of  an  army,
attacked  and  captured  Tarentum  (Taranto)  and  in  like
manner  Brundisium  (Brindisi)  and  subjugated  to  his  do-
minion all  that  very  extensive  region  which  surrounds
\ them.*  His  wife  Theuderata,  too,  built  at  the  same  time,
a church  in  honor  of  the  blessed  apostle  Peter  outside
the  walls  of  the  city  of  Beneventum  and  in  that  place
she  established  a convent  of  many  nuns.

Chapter  II.

Romuald,  too,  after  he  had  governed  the  dukedom
sixteen  years  was  withdrawn  from  this  life.  After  him
his  son  Grimuald  ruled  the  people  of  the  Samnites*
three  years.  Wigilinda,  a sister  of  Cunincpert  and  daugh-
ter of  king  Perctarit  was  united  to  him  in  marriage.
When  Grimuald  also  died,  Gisulf  his  brother  was  made
duke3  and  ruled  over  Beneventum  seventeen  years.

,This  probably  refers  to  the  “heel  of  Italy,”  the  land  around
Otranto,  which  now  passed  under  the  Langobard  sway  (Hodgkin,
VI,  335)-

* Thus  were  the  Beneventines  called  (IV,  44,  46,  supra).

•His  mother  Theuderata  governed  the  dukedom  during  his
minority  (Waitz).

(250)

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

*5*

Winiperga  was  married  to  him  and  bore  him  Romuald.
About  these  times,  when  a great  solitude  existed  for  a
number  of  years  past  in  the  stronghold  of  Cassinum
(Monte  Cassino)  where  the  holy  body  of  the  most
blessed  Benedict  reposes,  there  came  Franks  from  the
regions  of  the  Celmanici  (Cenomannici)1 *  and  of  the
Aurelianenses,9  and  while  they  pretended  to  keep  a vigil
by  the  venerable  body  they  bore  away  the  bones  of  the
reverend  father  and  also  of  the  revered  Scolastica  his
sister,  and  carried  them  to  their  own  country  where  two
monasteries  were  built,  one  in  honor  of  each,  that  is,  of
the  blessed  Benedict  and  of  St.  Scolastica.  But  it  is
certain  that  that  venerable  mouth,  sweeter  than  all  nectar,
and  the  eyes  beholding  ever  heavenly  things,  and  the
other  members  too  have  remained  to  us,  although  de-
cayed.3 For  only  the  body  of  our  Lord  alone  did  not
see  corruption ; but  the  bodies  of  all  the  saints  have
been  subjected  to  corruption,  to  be  restored  afterwards
to  eternal  glory,  with  the  exception  of  those  which  by
divine  miracles  are  kept  without  blemish.

Chapter  III.

But  when  Rodoald  indeed,  who  as  we  said  before,4 * *
held  the  dukedom  at  Forum  Julii,  was  absent  from  that

1 Inhabitants  of  Le  Mans.

* Inhabitants  of  Orleans.

•Along  controversy  between  the  French  and  Italian  Benedic-

tine monks  has  arisen  from  this  passage,  as  to  the  genuineness  of

the  relics  of  St.  Benedict  (Waitz).

*V,  24  supra.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

2$2

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

city,  Ansfrit  from  the  fortress  of  Reunia  (Ragogna)  x
swept  through  his  dukedom  without  the  consent  of  the
king.  Rodoald,  when  he  learned  this,  fled  into  Istria
and  thence  came  by  ship  through  Ravenna  to  Ticinum
to  king  Cunincpert.  Ansfrit  indeed,  not  content  to  rule
the  dukedom  of  the  Friulans,  but  rebelling  against
Cunincpert  besides,  attempted  to  usurp  his  sovereignty.
But  he  was  seized  in  Verona  and  brought  to  the  king,
his  eyes  were  torn  out  and  he  was  cast  into  banishment.
After  these  things  Ado,  the  brother  of  Rodoald,  gov-
erned the  Friulan  dukedom  a year  and  seven  months
under  the  name  of  caretaker.1 2

Chapter  IV.

While  these  things  occurred  in  Italy,  a heresy  arose
at  Constantinople  which  asserted  that  there  was  one  will
and  mode  of  action  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Georgius  :
the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  Macharius,  Pyrrus,  Paul
and  Peter  stirred  up  this  heresy.  Wherefore  the  em-

1 About  thirty  miles  west  of  Cividale  (Hodgkin,  VI,  328,  note  1).

1 Loci  servator.  The  only  instance  of  this  title  during  the  Lan-
gobard  period.  Later  it  frequently  occurs  (Pabst,  460,  note).
There  is  no  date  for  these  events  except  that  they  occurred  under
Cunincpert,  688-700  (Hodgkin,  VI,  328,  note  3).  By  these  occur-
rences the  dukedom  of  Friuli,  which  had  been  semi-independent,
seems  to  have  been  placed  directly  under  the  power  of  the  king
(Hartmann,  II,  1,  267).

* This  is  a mistake.  Georgius  was  used  by  the  emperor  as  an
instrument  of  reconciliation  (Hartmann,  II,  1,  259).  It  was  the
former  patriarchs,  Sergius,  Pyrrus,  Paul  and  Peter,  who  stirred  up
the  heresy,  and  Macharius,  bishop  of  Antioch,  supported  it  (p.  260).

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

BOOK  VI.

253

peror  Constantine 1 caused  to  be  assembled  a hundred
and  fifty  bishops9  among  whom  were  also  the  legates  of
the  holy  Roman  Church  sent  by  Pope  Agatho— John  the
Deacon  and  John  the  bishop  of  Portus  (Porto) 3 — and
they  all  condemned  this  heresy.*  At  that  hour  so  many
spider  webs  fell  in  the  midst  of  the  people  that  they
were  all  astonished,  and  by  this  it  was  signified  that  the
uncleanesses  of  heretical  depravity  were  driven  away.
And  Georgius  the  patriarch  indeed  was  rebuked,3  the

1 See  V,  30,  supra . He  was  also  called  Pogonatus.

1 Paul  erroneously  places  the  time  of  this  general  council  (A.  D.
680)  in  the  reign  of  Cunincpert,  which  began  688  (Jacobi,  56).

• At  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber.

• We  have  seen  (V,  6,  note,  supra ) that  the  so-called  Monothe-
lete  heresy  had  succeeded  the  controversy  regarding  the  Three
Chapters.  Four  successive  patriarchs  of  Constantinople  had  ap-
proved the  Monothelete  doctrine,  but  the  church  in  the  west  was
united  against  it,  and  the  emperor,  desirous  of  a reconciliation,
issued  an  invitation  to  the  Pope  to  send  deputies  to  a council.
Pope  Agatho  accordingly  dispatched  three  legates  and  three
bishops  to  a conference  at  Constantinople,  which  became  the  Sixth
(Ecumenical  Council.  It  lasted  from  November,  680,  to  Septem-
ber, 681.  Macharius,  patriarch  of  Antioch,  undertook  to  prove
that  the  dogma  of  “ one  theandric  energy  ” was  in  harmony  with
the  decisions  of  the  Fourth  and  Fifth  Councils,  but  the  genuine-
ness of  some  of  his  quotations  was  denied  and  the  relevancy  of
others  disputed.  Gregory,  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  formally
announced  his  adhesion  to  the  cause  of  the  Pope,  who  insisted
that  there  were  two  wills  in  Christ.  The  decrees  of  Pope  Agatho
and  the  Western  Synod  were  ratified,  Macharius  was  deposed  and
the  upholders  of  the  Monothelete  heresy  were  condemned,  includ-
ing Honorius,  former  pope  of  Rome  (Hodgkin,  VI,  345,  346),

• A mistake.  See  note  above.

Digitized  by

Google

254

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

others,  however,  who  persisted  in  their  defense  were
visited  by  the  penalty  of  excommunication.  At  this
time  Damianus,  bishop  of  the  church  of  Ticinum  * com-
posed in  the  name  of  Mansuetus  archbishop  of  Medio-
lanum (Milan),  an  epistle  upon  this  question,  quite
useful  to  correct  belief,  which  in  the  aforesaid  synod,
won  no  ordinary  approbation.  For  the  correct  and
true  belief  is  this,  that  as  there  are  in  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  two  natures,  that  is  of  God  and  of  man,  so  also
there  may  be  believed  to  be  two  wills  or  modes  of  action.
Will  you  hear  what  there  is  of  the  Deity  in  him  ? He
says, “ I and  my  Father  are  one.” 8 Will  you  hear  what
there  is  of  humanity?  “My  Father  is  greater  than  I.”1 * 3
Behold  him  sleeping  in  the  ship  according  to  his  human
nature ! Behold  his  divinity  when  the  evangelist  says :
“ Then  he  arose  and  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea  and
there  was  a great  calm  ! ” 4 This  Sixth  General  Synod
was  celebrated  at  Constantinople  and  recorded  in  the
Greek  language  at  the  time  of  Pope  Agatho,  and  the
emperor  Constantine  conducted  it  while  remaining
within  the  enclosures  of  his  palace.

Chapter  V.

In  these  times  during  the  eighth  indiction  (A.  D.
68o)  the  moon  suffered  an  eclipse ; also  an  eclipse  of
the  sun  occurred  at  almost  the  same  time  on  the  fifth

1 At  this  time  Damianus  was  only  a presbyter  (Waitz).

* John  x.  30.

•John  xiv.  28.

4 Matt  viii.  2$,

Digitized  by  Caooole

BOOK  VI.

255

day  before  the  Nones  of  May 1 * * * about  the  tenth  hour  of
the  day.  And  presently  there  followed  a very  severe
pestilence  for  three  months,  that  is,  in  July,  August  and
September,  and  so  great  was  the  multitude  of  those  dy-
ing that  even  parents  with  their  children  and  brothers
with  their  sisters  were  placed  on  biers  two  by  two  and
conducted  to  their  tombs  at  the  city  of  Rome.  And  in
like  manner  too  this  pestilence  also  depopulated  Ticinum
so  that  all  citizens  fled  to  the  mountain  ranges  and  to
other  places  and  grass  and  bushes  grew  in  the  market
place  and  throughout  the  streets  of  the  city.  And  then
it  visibly  appeared  to  many  that  a good  and  a bad  angel
proceeded  by  night  through  the  city  and  as  many  times
as,  upon  command  of  the  good  angel,  the  bad  angel,
who  appeared  to  carry  a hunting  spear  in  his  hand,
knocked  at  the  door  of  each  house  with  the  spear,  so
many  men  perished  from  that  house  on  the  following
day.  Then  it  was  said  to  a certain  man  by  revelation
that  the  pestilence  itself  would  not  cease  before  an  altar
of  St.  Sebastian  the  martyr  was  placed  in  the  church  of
the  blessed  Peter  which  is  called  “ Ad  Vincula.”  And
it  was  done,  and  after  the  remains  of  St.  Sebastian  the
martyr  had  been  carried  from  the  city  of  Rome,  pres-
ently the  altar  was  set  up  in  the  aforesaid  church  and
the  pestilence  itself  ceased.5*

1 May  2nd.  Pagi  says  that  the  solar  eclipse  occurred  in  680

and  the  other  in  681  (Giansevero).

* The  historians  of  Pavia  declare  that  the  bishop  St.  Damianus

begged  from  the  Roman  pontiff  the  remains  of  the  holy  martyr

and  placed  them  in  the  church  of  St.  Peter  ad  Vincula  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

256

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  VI.

While  king  Cunincpert,  indeed,  after  these  things  was
taking  counsel  in  the  city  of  Ticinum  with  his  master  of
horse,  which  in  their  language  is  called  “ marpahis,” 1
in  what  way  he  might  deprive  Aldo  and  Grauso  of  life,
suddenly  in  the  window  near  which  they  were  standing
sat  a fly  of  the  largest  kind  which  when  Cunincpert
attempted  to  strike  with  his  knife  to  kill  it,  he  only  cut
off  its  foot.  While  Aldo  and  Grauso  indeed,  in  ignor-
ance of  the  evil  design,  were  coming  to  the  palace,  when
they  had  drawn  near  the  church  of  the  holy  martyr
Romanus  which  is  situated  near  the  palace,  suddenly  a
certain  lame  man  with  one  foot  cut  off  came  in  their
way  who  said  to  them  that  Cunincpert  was  going  to  kill
them  if  they  should  go  on  to  him.  When  they  heard
this  they  were  seized  with  great  fear  and  fled  behind  the
altar  of  that  church.  Presently  it  was  announced  to
king  Cunincpert  that  Aldo  and  Grauso  had  taken  refuge
in  the  church  of  the  blessed  martyr  Romanus.  Then
Cunincpert  began  to  accuse  his  master  of  horse  asking
why  he  had  to  betray  his  design.  His  master  of  horse
thus  answered  him : “ My  lord  king,  you  know  that
after  we  conferred  about  these  things  I did  not  go  out
of  your  presence  and  how  could  I have  said  this  to  any
one?  ” Then  the  king  sent  to  Aldo  and  Grauso,  asking
them  why  they  had  taken  refuge  in  the  holy  place.
And  they  answering  said : “ Because  it  was  reported  to
us  that  our  lord  the  king  wished  to  kill  us.”  Again  the
king  sent  to  them,  seeking  to  know  who  he  was  who  had

1 II,  9 supra .

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

257

given  them  the  report,  and  he  sent  them  word  that  un-
less they  would  report  to  him  who  had  told  them,  they
could  not  find  favor  with  him.  Then  they  sent  word  to
the  king  as  it  had  occurred,  saying  that  a lame  man  had
met  them  upon  the  way  who  had  one  foot  cut  off  and
used  a wooden  leg  up  to  the  knee,  and  that  this  man
had  been  the  one  who  told  them  they  would  be  killed.
Then  the  king  understood  that  the  fly  whose  foot  he
had  cut  off  had  been  a bad  spirit  and  that  it  had  betrayed
his  secret  designs.  And  straightway  he  took  Aldo  and
Grauso  on  his  word  of  honor  from  that  church,  pardoned
their  fault  and  afterwards  held  them  as  faithful  subjects.

Chapter  VII.

At  that  time  Felix,  the  uncle  of  my  teacher  Flavian
was  renowned  in  the  grammatical  art.  The  king  loved
him  so  much  that  he  bestowed  upon  him  among  other
gifts  of  his  bounty,  a staff  decorated  with  silver  and  gold.

Chapter  VIII.

During  the  same  time  also  lived  John  the  bishop  of
the  church  of  Bergoma  (Bergamo),  a man  of  wonderful
sanctity.1  Since  he  had  offended  king  Cunincpert  while
they  were  conversing  at  a banquet,  the  king  commanded
to  be  prepared  for  him  when  he  was  returning  to  his
inn  a fierce  and  untamed  horse  who  was  accustomed  to
dash  to  the  earth  with  a great  snorting  those  who  sat
upon  him.  But  when  the  bishop  mounted  him  he  was

1 He  took  part  in  the  council  at  Rome  under  Pope  Agatho
against  the  Monotheletes  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

25$

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

so  gentle  that  he  carried  him  at  an  easy  gait  to  his  own
house.  The  king,  hearing  this,  cherished  the  bishop
from  that  day  with  due  honor  and  bestowed  upon  him
in  gift  that  very  horse,  which  he  had  destined  for  his
own  riding.

Chapter  IX.

At  this  time  between  Christmas  and  Epiphany  there
appeared  at  night  in  a clear  sky  a star  near  the  Pleiades
shaded  in  every  way  as  when  the  moon  stands  behind  a
cloud.  Afterwards  in  the  month  of  February  at  noon-
day there  arose  a star  in  the  west  which  set  with  a
great  flash  in  the  direction  of  the  east.  Then  in  the
month  of  March  there  was  an  eruption  of  Bebius  (Ve-
suvius) for  some  days  and  all  green  things  growing
round  about  were  exterminated  by  its  dust  and  ashes.

Chapter  X.

Then  the  race  of  Saracens,  unbelieving  and  hateful  to
God,  proceeded  from  Egypt  into  Africa  with  a great
multitude,  took  Carthage  by  siege  and  when  it  was
taken,  cruelly  laid  it  waste  and  leveled  it  to  the  ground.

Chapter  XI.

Meanwhile  the  emperor  Constantine  died  at  Constan-
tinople and  his  younger  son  Justinian1  assumed  the
sovereignty  of  the  Romans  and  held  the  control  of  it
for  ten  years.  He  took  Africa  away  from  the  Saracens

1 Here  Paul  misunderstands  Bede  from  whom  he  took  the  state-
ment. Bede  (A.  M.  4649)  speaks  of  * ‘ Justinian  the  younger,  a
son  of  Constantine.**  He  succeeded  to  the  throne  in  685.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

259

and  made  peace  with  them  on  sea  and  land.  He  sent
Zacharias  his  protospatarius 1 and  ordered  that  Pope
Sergius  should  be  brought  to  Constantinople  because  he
was  unwilling  to  approve  and  subscribe  to  the  error  of
that  synod  which  the  emperor  had  held  at  Constanti-
nople.9 But  the  soldiery  of  Ravenna  and  of  the  neigh-
boring parts,  despising  the  impious  orders  of  the  em-
peror, drove  this  same  Zacharias  with  reproaches  and
insults  from  the  city  of  Rome^U^

Chapter  XII.

Leo  seizing  the  imperial  dignity,  in  opposition  to  this
Justinian,  deprived  him  of  his  kingdom,  ruled  the  empire
of  the  Romans  three  years  and  kept  Justinian  an  exile
in  Pontus.4

Chapter  XIII.

Tiberius  in  turn  rebelled  against  this  Leo  and  seized

1 Captain  of  the  imperial  body  guard,  a high  Byzantine  dignity.
1 The  Quinisextan  (Fifth-Sixth)  council  summoned  by  Justinian
II  in  691  (Hodgkin,  VI,  354-356).

•A.  D.  691  (Giansevero).

4 The  reign  of  Justinian  II  had  been  marked  by  oppressive  ex-
actions and  great  cruelties.  After  ten  years*  misgovernment
Leontius  (the  Leo  mentioned  in  the  text)  a nobleman  of  Isauria,
commander  of  the  armies  of  the  East,  who  had  been  imprisoned
by  the  tyrant  and  then  released,  was  proclaimed  emperor  in  695.
A mob  assembled  in  the  Hippodrome  and  demanded  Justinian’s
death.  Leontius  spared  his  life,  but  mutilated  him  by  slitting
his  nose  (whence  he  was  called  Rhinotmetus)  and  banished  him  to
Cherson  on  the  southwest  coast  of  the  Crimea  (Hodgkin,  VI,

359-361).

Digitized

j by  Google

"26o

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

his  sovereignty  and  held  him  in  prison  in  the  same  city
all  the  time  he  reigned.1

Chapter  XIV.

At  this  time*  the  council  held  at  Aquileia,  on  account
of  the  ignorance  of  their  faith,  hesitated  to  accept  the
Fifth  General  Council  until,  when  instructed  by  the  salu-
tary admonitions  of  the  blessed  pope  Sergius,  it  also
with  the  other  churches  of  Christ  consented  to  approve
of  this.  For  that  synod  was  held  at  Constantinople  at
the  time  of  pope  Vigilius  under  the  emperor  Justinian
against  Theodorus  and  all  the  heretics  who  were  assert-
ing that  the  blessed  Mary  had  given  birth  to  a man
only  and  not  to  a God  and  a man.  In  this  synod  it  was
established  as  a Catholic  doctrine  that  the  blessed  Mary
ever  virgin  should  be  called  Mother  of  God  since,  as  the
Catholic  faith  has  it,  she  gave  birth  not  to  a man  only,
but  truly  to  a God  and  a man.3

1 A naval  armament  under  the  command  of  the  patrician  John
had  delivered  Carthage  from  the  Saracens  but  the  latter  had  re-
taken the  city  and  the  imperial  troops  on  their  return  to  Constanti-
nople broke  out  in  a mutiny  against  both  their  general  and
Leontius,  and  a naval  officer  named  Apsimar  was  proclaimed  em-
peror. When  the  fleet  reached  Constantinople,  Leontius  was  de-
throned and  Apsimar  under  the  name  of  Tiberius  III,  reigned
seven  years,  from  698  to  705  (Hodgkin,  VI,  362,  363).

8 A.  D.  698  (Giansevero).

8 Paul  is  in  error  in  saying  that  it  was  the  Synod  of  Constanti-
nople at  the  time  of  pope  Vigilius  which  declared  the  Virgin  Mary
the  Mother  of  God.  Such  declaration  was  made  at  Ephesus.
The  Council  of  Constantinople  v as  the  one  that  condemned  the
Three  Chapters  and  led  to  the  long  schism  described  in  the  previ-

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

26l

Chapter  XV.

In  these  days 1 Cedoal  king  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  who
had  waged  many  wars  in  his  own  country 2 was  converted
to  Christ  and  set  out  for  Rome,  and  when  on  the  way
he  came  to  king  Cunincpert  he  was  magnificently  re-
ceived by  him,  and  when  he  had  come  to  Rome  he  was
baptized  by  pope  Sergius  and  called  Peter  and  while
dressed  in  white 3 he  departed  to  the  heavenly  realms.
His  body  was  buried  in  the  church  of  St.  Peter  and  has
inscribed  above  it  this  epitaph : 4

Cedoal,  mighty  in  arms,  for  the  love  of  his  God  has  forsaken

Eminence,  riches  and  kin,  triumphs  and  powerful  realms,

Arms  and  nobles  and  cities  and  camps  and  gods  of  the  household,

Things  that  the  thrift  of  his  sires  gathered,  or  he  for  himself,

ous  notes  (III,  20,  26;  IV,  33  supra).  The  return  of  the  schis-
matics to  the  church  took  place  according  to  other  authorities
not  at  Aquileia  but  at  Pavia  (Waitz,  Appendix,  p.  245,  248),
when  they  declared  with  shouts  of  triumph  that  they  renounced
the  heresy  of  Theodore  and  his  companions  and  asked  to  be  re-
stored to  the  church.  Legates  were  sent  to  bear  the  news  to  Pope
Sergius  who  ordered  that  the  manuscripts  of  the  schismatics  should
be  burned  (Hodgkin,  V,  483,  484).  Possibly  one  council  was
held  at  Aquileia  and  another  at  Pavia.  Thus  all  the  kingdom  of
the  Langobards  was  now  restored  to  full  Catholic  communion.

1 This  journey  and  conversion  of  king  Cedoal  (or  Ceadwalla  of
Wessex)  is  incorrectly  placed  by  Paul  at  the  time  of  the  synod  at
Aquileia,  698.  It  actually  occurred  in  689  (Hodgkin,  VI,  318;  V,

483).

* He  had  annexed  Sussex,  ravaged  Kent  and  massacred  the  in-
habitants of  the  Isle  of  Wight  (Hodgkin,  VI,  318).

•The  garment  of  the  neophytes,  worn  by  those  just  baptized.

4 The  author  of  this  epitaph  was  Archbishop  Benedict  of  Milan,
A.  D.  681-725  (Waitz,  p.  225).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

262

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

So  that  as  king  and  a guest  he  might  gaze  on  Peter  and  Peter’s
Chair,  and  propitiously  quaff  waters  unstained  from  his  spring,
Taking  in  radiant  draught  the  shining  light  whose  refulgence,
Giving  immortal  life,  floweth  on  every  side!

Swift  to  perceive  the  rewards  of  a life  restored  by  conversion,
Joyful,  he  casts  aside  heathenish  madness,  and  then
Changes  his  name  as  well,  and  Sergius  the  pontiff  commanded
Peter  he  should  be  called;  until  the  Father  himself.

Making  him  pure  by  the  grace  of  Christ  in  the  font  of  the  new  birth,
Lifted  him,  clothed  in  white,  up  to  the  stronghold  of  heaven!
Wonderful  faith  of  the  king,  and  of  Christ  the  astonishing  mercy!

His  is  the  perfect  plan — counsel  that  none  can  approach!
Coming  in  safety  indeed  from  remotest  regions  of  Britain,

Through  many  nations,  along  ways  many,  over  the  straits,
Bringing  his  mystical  gifts,  he  gazed  upon  Romulus’  city
Looked  upon  Peter’s  church,  worthy  of  reverence  due;

Clad  in  white  will  he  go,  in  the  flocks  of  Christ  a companion;

Earth  his  body  may  hold,  heaven  his  spirit  will  keep.

You  may  the  rather  believe  he  has  changed  the  mere  badge  of  the
scepters

He  whom  your  eyes  have  seen  winning  the  kingdom  of  Christ.1 * * *

Chapter  XVI.

At  this  time  in  Gaul  when  the  kings  of  the  Franks
were  degenerating  from  their  wonted  courage  and  skill,
those  who  were  regarded  as  stewards  of  the  palace
began  to  administer  the  kingly  power  and  to  do  what-
ever is  the  custom  for  kings,  since  it  was  ordained  from
heaven  that  the  sovereignty  of  the  Franks  should  be
transferred  to  the  race  of  these  men.  And  Arnulf  was
at  that  time 8 steward  of  the  royal  palace,  a man,  as  was

1 A version  in  rhyme,  less  literal  than  the  foregoing,  is  found  in

Giles’  translation  of  the  Ecclesiastical  History  of  Bede,  Vol.  I,  p.  278.

8 Paul  is  in  error  in  making  Arnulf,  who  died  August  18,  641,

contemporary  with  Cunincpert  (Jacobi,  42).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

263

afterwards  apparent,  pleasing  to  God  and  of  wonderful
holiness,  who,  after  enjoying  the  glory  of  this  world,
devoted  himself  to  the  service  of  Christ  and  was  dis-
tinguished in  the  episcopate  and  finally,  choosing  the
life  of  a hermit,  rendered  all  kinds  of  services  to
lepers  and  lived  in  the  greatest  abstinence.  Concern-
ing his  wonderful  doings  at  the  church  of  Metz  where
he  carried  on  the  bishopric,  there  is  a book  containing
an  account  of  his  miracles  and  the  abstinence  of  his  life.
But  I too,  in  a book  which  I wrote  concerning  the
bishops  of  this  city,  at  the  request  of  Angelramnus,
archbishop  of  the  aforesaid  church,  a very  gentle  man
and  distinguished  by  holiness,  have  set  down  concern-
ing this  most  holy  man  Arnulf,  certain  of  his  miracles
which  I have  considered  it  merely  superfluous  to  repeat
here.

Chapter  XVII.

During  these  occurrences  Cunincpert,  a ruler  most
beloved  by  all,  after  he  had  held  for  twelve  years  alone,
succeeding  his  father,  the  kingdom  of  the  Langobards,
was  finally  withdrawn  from  this  life.  He  built  in  the
field  of  Coronate  where  he  had  waged  war  against
Alahis,  a monastery  in  honor  of  the  holy  martyr
George.1  He  was  moreover  a handsome  man  and  con-
spicuous in  every  good  quality  and  a bold  warrior.  He
was  buried  with  many  tears  of  the  Langobards  near  the

1The  city  of  Modena,  half  ruined  during  the  insurrection  of
Alahis,  was  also  restored  by  him  (Hodgkin,  VI,  314,  note  2).
Cunincpert  was  the  first  Langobard  king  whose  effigy  is  found
upon  the  coins  (id.,  p.  317).  «

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

264  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

church  of  our  Lord  the  Saviour  which  his  grandfather
Aripert  had  formerly  built.1  And  he  left  the  kingdom
of  the  Langobards  to  his  son  Liutpert  who  was  yet  of
the  age  of  boyhood,  to  whom  he  gave  as  his  tutor
Ansprand,  a wise  and  distinguished  man.

Chapter  XVIII.

When  eight  months  had  elapsed  from  this  time,2 *
Raginpert,  duke  of  Turin,  whom  formerly  king  Gode-
pert  had  left  as  a little  boy  when  he  was  killed  by
Grimuald,  of  which  we  have  also  spoken  above, 3 came
with  a strong  force  and  fought  against  Ansprand  and
Rotharit,  duke  of  the  Bergamascans  at  Novariae  (No-
vara), and  defeating  them  in  the  open  field  took  pos-
session of  the  kingdom  of  the  Langobards.  But  he
died  the  same  year.

Chapter  XIX.

Then  his  son  Aripert,  again  making  ready  for  war,
fought  at  Ticinum  with  king  Liutpert  and  with  An-
sprand and  Ato  and  Tatzo  and  also  Rotharit  and  Farao ;
but  overcoming  all  these  in  battle  he  took  the  child
Liutpert  alive  as  a prisoner  of  war.  Ansprand  also  fled
and  fortified  himself  in  the  island  of  Commacina.4

1 In  Ticinum,  where  there  was  an  epitaph  upon  his  tomb,  re-
ferred to  by  Muratori  in  his  book  on  the  Antiquities  of  Este,
Chapters  1-10,  p.  73  (Waitz).

* A.  D.  701  (Giansevero).

»IV,  Ch.  51.

4 Spelled  elsewhere  Comacina.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

265

• Chapter  XX.

But  when  Rotharit  indeed  returned  to  his  city  of
Bergamus  (Bergamo)  he  seized  the  kingly  power.
King  Aripert  marched  against  him  with  a great  army,
and  having  first  attacked  and  captured  Lauda  (Lodi)
he  beseiged  Bergamus,  and  storming  it  without  any
difficulty  with  battering  rams  and  other  machines  of
war,  presently  took  it  and  seized  Rotharit  the  false  king
and  shaving  his  hair  and  his  beard,  thrust  him  into  exile
at  Turin,  and  there  after  some  days  he  was  killed.
Liutpert  indeed  whom  he  had  taken  he  deprived  of  life
in  like  manner  in  the  bath.

Chapter  XXI.

He  also  sent  an  army  into  the  island  of  Commacina
against  Ansprand.  When  this  was  known  Ansprand  fled
to  Clavenna  (Chiavenna),  thence  he  came  through  Curia
(Chur)  a city  of  the  Rhaetians  toTheutpert,  duke  of  the
Bavarians,  and  was  with  him  for  nine  years.  But  the
army  of  Aripert  indeed  took  possession  of  the  island  in
which  Ansprand  had  been  and  destroyed  his  town.

Chapter  XXII.

Then  king  Aripert  when  he  was  confirmed  in  his
sovereignty,  tore  out  the  eyes  cf  Sigiprand,  the  son  of
Ansprand,  and  afflicted  in  various  ways  all  who  had
been  connected  with  the  latter  by  the  tie  of  blood.  He
also  kept  Liutprand.  the  younger  son  of  Ansprand,  in
custody,  but  because  he  regarded  him  as  a person  of  no
importance  and  as  yet  a mere  youth,  he  not  only  in-
flicted no  punishment  at  all  upon  his  body,  but  let  him

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

266

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

depart  so  that  he  coujd  go  to  his  father.  There  is  no
doubt  that  this  was  done  by  the  command  of  God
Almighty  who  was  preparing  him  for  the  management
of  the  kingdom.  Then  Liutprand  proceeded  to  his
father  in  Bavaria  and  caused  him  incalculable  joy  by
his  coming.  But  king  Aripert  caused  the  wife  of
Ansprand,  Theodorada  by  name,  to  be  seized;  and
when  she  with  her  woman's  wilfulness  boasted  that  she
would  get  to  be  queen,  she  was  disfigured  in  the  beauty
of  her  face,  her  nose  and  ears  being  cut  off.  Also  the
sister  of  Liutprand,  Aurona  by  name,  was  mutilated  in
like  manner.

Chapter  XXIII.

At  this  time  in  Gaul,  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks,
Anschis,1  the  son  of  Arnulf,  who  is  believed  to  be
named  after  Anchises  the  former  Trojan,  conducted  the
sovereignty  under  the  title  of  steward  of  the  palace.

Chapter  XXIV.

When  Ado  who  we  said  was  caretaker 2 had  died  at
Forum  Julii,  Ferdulf,  a man  tricky  and  conceited,  who
came  from  the  territories  of  Liguria,  obtained  the  duke-
dom. Because  he  wanted  to  have  the  glory  of  a victory
over  the  Slavs,  he  brought  great  misfortune  upon  him-
self and  the  people  of  Forum  Julii.  He  gave  sums  of
money  to  certain  Slavs  to  send  upon  his  request  an
army  of  Slavs  into  this  province , and  it  was  accord-

1 Or  Ansegis.  He  is  to  be  referred  however  to  an  earlier  period
(Waitz).

*VI,  Chap.  3,  supra .

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

267

ingly  done.  But  that  was  the  cause  of  great  disaster  in
this  province  of  Forum  Julii.  The  freebooters  of  the
Slavs  fell  upon  the  flocks  and  upon  the  shepherds  of
the  sheep  that  pastured  in  their  neighborhoods  and
drove  away  the  booty  taken  from  them.  The  ruler  of
that  place,  whom  they  called  in  their  own  language
“ sculdahis,” x a man  of  noble  birth  and  strong  in  cour-
age and  capacity,  followed  them,  but  nevertheless  he
could  not  overtake  the  freebooters.  Duke  Ferdulf  met
him  as  he  was  returning  thence  and  when  he  asked  him
what  had  become  of  these  robbers,  Argait,  for  that  was
his  name,  answered  that  they  had  escaped.  Then  Fer-
dulf in  rage  thus  spoke  to  him : “ When  could  you  do
anything  bravely,  you  whose  name,  Argait,  comes  from
the  word  coward,”  1 and  Argait,  provoked  by  great  anger,
since  he  was  a brave  man,  answered  as  follows : “ May
God  so  will  that  you  and  I,  duke  Ferdulf,  may  not  de-
part from  this  life  until  others  know  which  of  us  is  the
greater  coward.”  j When  they  had  spoken  to  each  other

'See  the  German,  Schultheiss , local  magistrate.  They  were
subordinate  to  the  judges  (/.  <?.,  the  dukes  or  the  gastaldi).  See
II,  32,  note  4 (pp.  86-91),  supra;  Pabst,  499.

*Arga,  a Langobard  word,  meaning  cowardly,  inert,  worthless.
See  Rothari,  Edict,  Chapter  381  (M.  G.  LL.,  IV,  p.  88),  where
the  word  is  recognized  as  conveying  a particular  insult.  ' 4 If  one
in  rage  calls  another  an  arga , and  he  cannot  deny  it,  and  says  he
has  called  him  so  in  rage,  he  shall  declare  upon  oath  that  he  does
• not  hold  him  for  an  atga,  and  thereupon  he  shall  pay  twelve  solidi
: for  the  offensive  word.  But  if  he  insists  upon  it  and  says  he  can
! prove  it  in  a duel,  so  let  him  convict  him,  if  he  can,  or  let  him
pay  as  above.”

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

268

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

in  turn,  these  words,  in  the  vulgar  tongue,1!  it  happened
not  many  days  afterwards,  that  the  army  of  the  Slavs,
for  whose  coming  duke  Ferdulf  had  given  his  sums  of
money,  now  arrived  in  great  strength.  And  when  they
had  set  their  camp  upon  the  very  top  of  a mountain

i “ Vulgaria  verba."  Hartmann  (II,  2,  58)  regards  this  passage
as  presupposing  that  Ferdulf  and  Argait  could  speak  Latin  with
one  another.  After  the  permanent  settlement  of  the  Langobards
in  Italy  the  current  Latin  language  of  the  time  (which  was  the  only
written  language,  and  the  only  one  fitted  to  many  of  the  new  rela-
tions imposed  by  their  intercourse  with  the  Roman  population)  grad-
ually superseded  their  own  more  barbarous  tongue.  (Hartmann,  II,
2,  22.)  It  is  evident,  however,  from  the  German  words  used  by
Paul,  as  well  as  from  his  description  of  this  controversy  between
duke  Ferdulf  and  Argait,  which  must  have  occurred  not  far  from
A.  D.  700  (Hodgkin,  VI,  328,  note  3),  that  the  Langobard  lan-
guage was  spoken  in  the  eighth  century,  and  there  are  traces  of
its  continuance  even  after  the  Frankish  invasion,  A.  D.  774.  In
a document  in  upper  Italy  the  pronoun  ih  introduced  by  mistake
before  the  Latin  words  "have  subscribed  myself”  indicate  the
existence  of  the  Langobard  as  a spoken  language  in  the  latter  half
of  the  ninth  century.  The  Chronicle  of  Salerno,  composed  in
978  (Ch.  38,  MGH.  SS.,  Ill,  489),  refers  to  the  German  language
as  " formerly”  spoken  by  the  Langobards,  from  which  it  would
appear  that  in  that  region  at  least  it  had  thei\  become  extinct.
But  it  is  quite  uncertain  just  when  it  ceased  to  be  used.  Probably
the  language  continued  longest  where  the  German  population  was
most  dense,  and  the  period  where  it  died  out  as  a living  language
must  have  been  preceded  by  a considerable  time,  in  which  those
who  spoke  it  also  understood  and  spoke  the  Latin  tongue.  The
period  of  its  decline  can  be  traced  by  numerous  Latin  terminations
of  German  words  and  the  addition  of  German  suffixes  (for  exam-
ple, ettgo , ingo,  esco-asco-  ado-  etto - otto)  to  Latin  words,  combina-
tions which  have  been  important  ingredients  in  the  formation  of
modern  Italian  (Bruckner,  Sprache  der  Langobarden,  pp.  11-17).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

269

and  it  was  hard  to  approach  '.iiem  from  almost  any  side,
duke  Ferdulf,  coming  upon  them  with  his  army,  began
to  go  around  that  mountain  in  order  that  he  could  at-
tack them  by  more  level  places.  Then  Argait  of  whom
we  have  spoken  thus  said  to  Ferdulf : “ Remember,
duke  Ferdulf,  that  you  said  I was  lazy  and  useless  and
thatj  you  called  me  in  our  common  speech  a coward, '
but  now  may  the  anger  of  God  come  upon  him  who
shall  be  the  last  of  us  to  attack  those  Slavs/'  and  saying
these  words,  he  turned  his  horse  where  the  ascent  was
difficult  on  account  of  the  steepness  of  the  mountain,
and  began  to  attack  the  fortified  camp  of  the  Slavs.
Ferdulf,  being  ashamed  not  to  attack  the  Slavs  himself,
through  the  same  difficult  places,  followed  him  through
those  steep  and  hard  and  pathless  spots,  and  his  army
too,  considering  it  base  not  to  follow  their  leader,  began
also  to  press  on  after  him.  Consequently  the  Slavs,
seeing  that  they  were  coming  upon  them  through  steep
places,  prepared  themselves  manfully,  and  fighting
against  them  more  with  stones  and  axes1  than  with  arms
they  threw  them  nearly  all  from  their  horses  and  killed
them.  And  thus  they  obtained  their  victory,  not  by
their  own  strength,  but  by  chance.  There  all  the
nobility  of  the  Friulans  perished.  There  duke  Ferdulf
fell  and  there  too  he  who  had  provoked  him  was  killed.
And  there  so  great  a number  of  brave  men  were  van-
quished by  the  wickedness  and  thoughtlessness  of  dis-
sension as  could,  with  unity  and  wholesome  counsel,

1 Seeuribus . Hodgkin  translates  “tree  trunks,”  believing  that
the  axes  were  used  in  felling  trees  to  cast  down  upen  them  (VI,
330,  and  note  3).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

270

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

overthrow  many  thousands  of  their  enemies.  There,
however,  one  of  the  Langobards,  Munichis  by  name,
who  was  afterwards  the  father  of  the  dukes  Peter  of
Forum  Julii  and  Ursus  of  Ceneta  (Ceneda),  alone  acted
in  a brave  and  manly  manner.  When  he  had  been
thrown  from  his  horse  and  one  of  the  Slavs  suddenly
attacking  him  had  tied  his  hands  with  a rope,  he  wrested
with  his  bound  hands  the  lance  from  the  right  hand  of
that  same  Slav,  pierced  him  with  it,  and  tied  as  he  was,
threw  himself  down  through  the  steep  places  and
escaped.  We  put  these  things  into  this  history  especi-
ally for  this  purpose,  that  nothing  further  of  a like
character  may  happen  through  the  evil  of  dissension.

Chapter  XXV.

And  so  duke  Ferdulf  having  died  in  this  way,  Cor-
volus  was  appointed  in  his  place,  but  he  held  the  duke-
dom only  a little  while,  and  when  he  had  offended  the
king,  his  eyes  were  torn  out  and  he  lived  ignominiously.

Chapter  XXVI.

Afterwards  indeed  Pemmo  acquired  the  dukedom.*
He  was  a man  of  talent  and  useful  to  his  country.  His
father  was  Billo  who  had  been  a native  of  Bellunum
(Belluno),  but  on  account  of  a sedition  he  had  caused
at  that  place  he  afterwards  came  to  Forum  Julii,  and
lived  there  peacefully.  This  Pemmo  had  a wife,  Rat-
perga  by  name,  who  since  she  was  boorish  in  appear-

*De  Rubeis  (319)  thinks  this  was  in  705.  He  held  the  duke-
dom about  twenty-six  years  (Hodgkin,  VI,  332).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

271

ance  often  asked  her  husband  to  send  her  away  and  take
another  wife  whom  it  would  befit  to  be  the  spouse  of  so
great  a duke.  But  as  he  was  a wise  man  he  said  that
her  behavior  and  humility  and  reverent  modesty  pleased
him  more  than  beauty  of  body.  From  this  wife  then
Pemmo  begot  three  sons,  Ratchis  and  Ratchait  and
Ahistulf,*  energetic  men,  whose  birth  raised  the  humil-
ity of  their  mother  to  high  honor.  This  duke  collected
all  the  sons  of  all  the  nobles  who  had  died  in  the  war
of  which  we  have  spoken,  and  brought  them  up  in  like
manner  with  his  own  children  as  if  they  themselves  had
been  begotten  by  him.

Chapter  XXVII.

At  this  time  then,  Gisulf  the  ruler  of  the  Beneven-
tines  took  Sura  (Sora),  a city  of  the  Romans,  and  in
like  manner  the  towns  of  Hirpinum  (Arpino)  and  Arx
(Arce).a  This  Gisulf  at  the  time  of  Pope  John  3 came
to  Campania  with  all  his  forces  burning  and  plundering,
took  many  captives  and  set  up  his  camp  as  far  as  in  the
place  which  is  called  Horrea,4  and  no  one  could  resist

1 Ratchis  and  Aistulf  were  afterwards  kings  of  the  Langobards.

* Three  towns  on  or  near  the  river  Liris  or  Garigliano  and  some-
thing over  fifty  miles  southeast  of  Rome.

8 John  VI,  A.  D.  701-704.  Others  think,  John  V,  A.  D.  685
(Waitz).

4 Hodgkin  (VI,  336,  note  2)  believes  that  Puteoli  is  intended —
Duchesne,  followed  by  Hartmann  (II,  2,  1 16),  says  it  was  a place
at  the  fifth  milestone  of  the  Via  Latina.  It  seems  uncertain
whether  one  incursion  or  more  was  meant  by  this  chapter  of  Paul
(id).

Digitized  by

Google

2J2  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

him.  The  Pontiff  sent  priests  to  him  with  apostolic
gifts  and  redeemed  all  the  captives  from  the  hands  of
his  troops,  and  induced  the  duke  himself  to  go  back
home  with  his  army.

Chapter  XXVIII.

At  this  time 1 Aripert  king  of  the  Langobards  made
restitution  by  gift  of  the  patrimony  of  the  Cottian
Alps*  which  had  formerly  belonged  to  the  jurisdiction
of  the  Apostolic  See  but  had  been  taken  away  by  the
Langobards  a long  time  before,  and  he  dispatched  this
deed  of  gift  written  in  golden  letters  to  Rome.  Also  in
these  days3  two  kings  of  the  Saxons*  coming  to  Rome
to  the  footsteps  of  the  apostles,  died  suddenly  as  they
desired.

Chapter  XXIX.

Then  also  Benedict  archbishop  of  Mediolanum
(Milan)  came  to  Rome  and  conducted  his  lawsuit  for
the  church  of  Ticinum,  but  he  was  defeated  because
from  early  times  the  bishops  of  Ticinum  had  been  con-

*A.  D.  707  (Giansevero).

* Paul  does  not  intend  to  say  that  this  patrimony  included  the
whole  province  of  the  Cottian  Alps,  but  simply  that  part  of  the
papal  patrimony  was  in  that  province  (Hodgkin,  VI,  324,  note  2).

•This  is  erroneous,  the  king’s  pilgrimage  did  not  occur  during
the  papacy  of  John  VI  (701-705),  to  whom  Aripert  made  this  gift,
but  in  709  under  Constantine  I (Jacobi,  p.  50;  Hodgkin,  VI,  323).

4 Coinred  king  of  the  Mercians  and  Offa  prince  of  the  Ease
Saxons  (Hodgkin,  VI,  323).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

273

secrated  by  the  Roman  Church.1 *  This  venerable  arch-
bishop Benedict  was  a man  of  eminent  holiness,  and  the
fame  of  good  opinion  concerning  him  shone  brightly
throughout  the  whole  of  Italy.

Chapter  XXX.

Then  when  Transamund,  the  duke  of  the  Spoletans
had  died,*  Faruald  his  son,  succeeded  to  his  father’s
place.  Moreover,  Wachilapus  was  the  brother  of  Tran-
samund and  governed  that  same  dukedom  equally  with
his  brother.

Chapter  XXXI.

But  Justinian,  who  had  lost  his  imperial  power  and  was
in  exile  in  Pontus,  again  received  the  sovereignty  by  the
help  of  Terebellus,  king  of  the  Bulgarians,  and  put  to
death  those  patricians  who  had  expelled  him.  He  took
also  Leo  and  Tiberius3  who  had  usurped  his  place  and
caused  them  to  be  butchered  in  the  midst  of  the  circus
before  all  the  people. 4 He  tore  out  the  eyes  of  Gallici-

1 The  date  of  this  is  fixed  by  Paul  at  too  early  a period  (Jacobi,
56).

8 He  appears  to  have  reigned  forty  years  from  663  to  703
(Hodgkin,  VI,  337).

8 Paul  has  here  misunderstood  the  language  of  Bede  from  whom
he  took  this  statement  and  who  said  that  Justinian  executed  Leo
(Leontius)  and  Tiberius  (Apsimar)  the  patricians  who  had  ex-
pelled him.  No  other  patricians  are  referred  to  (Jacobi,  5c).

♦Justinian  II,  who  had  been  exiled  to  Cherson  (see  ch.  12,  note
sufira),  was  rejected  by  the  citizens  of  that  place,  whereupon  he
roamed  through  the  southern  part  of  Russia  and  took  refuge  with

Digitized  by

Google

274

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

nusx  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople  and  sent  him  to
Rome  and  he  appointed  Cyrus  the  abbot  who  had  taken
care  of  him  when  he  was  an  exile  in  Pontus,  as  bishop
in  the  place  of  Gallicinus.  He  ordered  Pope  Constan-
tine to  come  to  him,  and  received  him  and  sent  him
back  with  honor.  2 Falling  upon  the  earth  he  asked  the
Pope  to  intercede  for  his  sins  and  he  renewed  all*  of  the
privileges  of  his  church.  3 When  he  sent  his  army  into
Pontus  to  seize  Filippicus,  whom  he  had  held  there  in
bondage,  this  same  venerable  Pope  earnestly  forbade
him  from  doing  this  but  he  could  not,  however,  pre-
vent it.

the  Cagan  of  the  Khazars,  a Hunnish  tribe  settled  around  the  sea
of  Azof,  and  the  Cagan  gave  him  in  marriage  his  sister  Theodora.
The  reigning  emperor  Tiberius  sent  messengers  to  the  Cagan
offering  him  great  gifts  to  kill  or  surrender  Justinian.  The  Cagan
listened  to  the  tempting  proposals,  but  Theodora  warned  her  hus-
band, who  fled  to  the  Danube,  where  Terbel  or  Terebellus  joined
him  in  an  effort  to  regain  the  throne.  With  the  aid  of  the  Bul-
garians he  attacked  and  conquered  Constantinople.  His  two
rivals,  who  had  successively  reigned  in  his  absence,  were  now
both  loaded  with  chains  and  brought  before  his  throne  in  the
Hippodrome  where  he  placed  his  feet  upon  their  necks  before
causing  them  to  be  beheaded  at  the  place  of  public  execution
(Hodgkin,  365-368).

1 Callinicus  (not  Gallicinus)  had  preached  a sermon  rejoicing  at
the  overthrow  of  Justinian  ten  years  before  (Hodgkin,  VI,  361).

•Constantine  left  Rome  October,  710  (Hodgkin,  VI,  375)  and
returned  October,  71 1 (id.,  p.  379).

8 It  is  probable  that  the  decrees  of  the  Quinisextan  Council  were
now  accepted  by  the  pope  (Hodgkin,  VI,  378-379)-

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

27s

Chapter  XXXII.

The  army  too  which  had  been  sent  against  Filippicus
joined  Filippicus*  side  and  made  him  emperor.  He
came  to  Constantinople  against  Justinian,  fought  with
him  at  the  twelfth  milestone  from  the  city,  conquered
and  killed  him,  and  obtained  his  sovereign  power.
Justinian  indeed  reigned  six  years  with  his  son  Tiberius
in  this  second  term. 1 Leo  in  banishing  him  cut  off  his
nostrils  and  he,  after  he  had  assumed  the  sovereignty,
as  often  as  he  wiped  off  his  hand  flowing  with  a drop  of
rheum,  almost  so  often  did  he  order  some  one  of  those
who  had  been  against  him  to  be  slain. a

1 In  his  insane  fury  for  revenge  against  the  people  of  Cherson
who  had  rejected  him  when  he  was  exiled,  Justinian  sent  three
expeditions  against  that  city  to  destroy  it.  In  the  first  of  these  its
leading  citizens  were  seized  and  sent  for  punishment  to  Constanti-
nople, where  some  were  roasted  alive  and  others  drowned ; but
Justinian  still  accused  his  generals  of  slackness  in  executing  his
orders  and  sent  others  in  their  places,  who  were,  however,  com-
pelled to  give  up  the  bloody  work,  and  then  for  self-protection  to
join  the  party  of  revolt  which  gathered  around  one  Bardanis,  an
Armenian,  who  was  proclaimed  emperor  under  the  name  of  Filip-
picus, whereupon  an  expedition  set  out  for  Constantinople  to  de-
throne Justinian.  It  was  entirely  successful.  The  tyrant  was
deserted  by  his  subjects,  and  with  his  son  Tiberius  was  captured
and  slain  (Hodgkin,  379-384).

* A reign  of  terror  had  followed  the  restoration  of  Justinian  and
innumerable  victims  perished.  Some  were  sewn  up  in  sacks  and
thrown  into  the  sea,  others  invited  to  a great  repast  and  when
they  rose  to  leave  were  sentenced  to  execution  (Hodgkin,  VI,  369).
He  was  specially  infuriated  against  the  city  of  Ravenna  and  sent
a fleet  thither  under  the  patrician  Theodore,  seized  the  chief  men
pf  the  city,  brought  them  to  Constantinople,  blinded  the  arch-

Digitized  by

Google

276  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XXXIII.

In  these  days  then,  when  the  patriarch  Peter  was  dead,
Serenus  undertook  the  government  of  the  church  of
Aquileia.*  He  was  a man  endowed  with  a simple  char-
acter and  devoted  to  the  service  of  Christ.

Chapter  XXXIV.

But  Filippicus  indeed,  who  was  called  Bardanis,  after
he  was  confirmed  in  the  imperial  dignity,  ordered  that
Cyrus,  of  whom  we  have  spoken,  should  be  turned  out
of  his  patriarchate  and  return  to  Pontus,  to  govern  his
monastery.  This  Filippicus  dispatched  letters  of  per-
verted doctrine  to  pope  Constantine  which  he,  together

bishop  Felix,  and  put  the  rest  to  death  (pp.  373-374).  Justinian
then  sent  as  exarch  to  Italy  John  Rizokopus,  who  went  first  to
Rome  and  put  to  death  a number  of  papal  dignitaries  and  then
proceeded  to  Ravenna,  where  in  a struggle  with  the  local  forces
he  was  killed.  The  people  of  Ravenna  refused  to  recognize  Jus-
tinian, and  chose  a leader  of  their  own  in  the  person  of  Georgius,
who  organized  an  autonomous  government  and  established  a mili-
tary organization  in  Italy  independent  of  Byzantium  (Hartmann,
II,  2,  78-81).

1 It  was  afterwards,  at  the  request  of  king  Liutprand,  that  pope
Gregory  II  sent  the  pallium  of  a metropolitan  to  Serenus,  bishop
of  Aquileia  (Dandolo,  VII,  2,  13,  see  Muratori  Rer.  Ital.  Script.
XII,  1 31  ; Chronicle  of  John  the  Deacon,  p.  96,  Monticolo).  Dis-
sensions arose  between  the  patriarchs  of  Aquileia  and  Grado,  and
Gregory  wrote  to  Serenus  warning  him  not  to  pass  beyond  the
bounds  of  the  Langobard  nation  and  trespass  upon  Grado  (Hodg-
kin, 466-467).  The  seat  of  the  patriarch  was  subsequently  re-
moved, first  to  Cormons,  and  after  Serenus  had  died  and  Calixtus
had  succeeded  him  (see  Ch.  51,  infra),  to  Cividale.

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

BOOK  VI.

277

with  a council  of  the  Apostolic  See,  rejected,1  and  on
account  of  this  affair  he  caused  pictures  to  be  made  in
the  portico  of  St.  Peter  representing  the  transactions  of
the  six  holy  general  councils.  For  Filippicus  had
ordered  that  pictures  of  this  kind  which  were  in  the  im-
perial city,  should  be  carried  away.  The  Roman  people
determined  that  they  would  not  take  the  name  of  the
heretical  emperor  upon  their  documents,  nor  his  like-
ness upon  their  coins.  Hence  his  image  was  not
brought  into  the  church,  nor  was  his  name  mentioned
in  the  solemnities  of  the  mass.  When  he  had  held  the
sovereignty  one  year  and  six  months,  Anastasius,  who
was  also  called  Artemius,  rising  against  him,  expelled
him  from  the  sovereignty  and  deprived  him  of  his  eyes,
but  did  not  however  kill  him.*  This  Anastasius  sent
letters  to  Rome  to  pope  Constantine  by  Scolasticus,  the
patrician  and  exarch  of  Italy,  in  which  he  declared  him-
self to  be  an  adherent  of  the  Catholic  church  and  an
acknowledger  of  the  Sixth  Holy  Council.

Chapter  XXXV.

Then  after  Ansprand  had  been  in  exile  in  Bavaria  for
now  nine  full  years,  in  the  tenth  year,  after  Teutpert
was  at  last  prevailed  upon,  (to  make  war)  the  com-
mander of  the  Bavarians  came  with  his  army  to  Italy

1 The  authorities  disagree  and  the  passage  is  not  clear.  Per-
haps a partial  council,  summoned  by  the  Pope,  is  meant.  Fil-
ippicus declared  in  favor  of  the  Monotheletes,  who  had  been  con-
demned by  the  Sixth  (Ecumenical  Council  at  Constantinople
(Giansevero).

*A.  D.  713  (Hodgkin,  VI,  386).

Digitized  by  Caooole

27%

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

and  fought  with  Aripert  and  there  occured  a great
slaughter  of  the  people  on  both  sides.  But  although  at
last,  night  broke  off  the  battle,  it  is  certain  that  the
Bavarians  had  turned  their  backs  and  that  the  army  of
Aripert  had  returned  as  a victor  to  its  camp.  But  since
Aripert  was  unwilling  to  remain  in  camp  and  preferred
to  go  into  the  city  of  Ticinum,  by  this  act  he  brought
despair  upon  his  own  people  and  boldness  upon  his
adversaries,  and  after  he  had  returned  to  the  city  and
had  felt  that  he  had  offended  his  army  by  this  deed,  he
presently  took  advice  that  he  should  flee  to  France
and  carried  with  him  from  the  palace  as  much  gold
as  he  thought  useful  to  him.  And  when  weighted  down
with  the  gold,  he  attempted  to  swim  across  the  river
Ticinus,  he  sank  there  and,  choked  with  the  waters,  ex-
pired. His  body  was  found  on  the  following  day,  was
cared  for  in  the  palace  and  was  thence  brought  forth  to
the  church  of  our  Lord  the  Saviour  which  the  former
Aripert  had  built,  and  was  there  buried.  In  the  days
when  he  held  the  kingly  power,  Aripert,  going  forth  at
night,  and  proceeding  to  one  place  and  another,  inquired
for  himself  what  was  said  about  him  by  particular  cities,
and  diligently  investigated  what  kind  of  justice  the  var-
ious judges  rendered  to  the  people.  When  the  ambas-
sadors of  foreign  nations  came  to  him,  he  wore  in  their
presence  mean  garments  and  those  made  of  skins,  and
in  order  that  they  should  not  form  designs  against  Italy
he  never  offered  them  precious  wines  nor  delicacies  of
other  kinds.  He  reigned  moreover  with  his  father
Ragimpert,  and  alone,  up  to  the  twelfth  year.  He  was
also  a religious  man,  given  to  charities  and  a lover  of

Digitized  by  v^ooole

BOOK  VI.

*79

justice.1  In  his  days  there  was  very  great  fertility  of
the  land,  but  the  times  were  barbarous.  His  brother
Gumpert  then  fled  to  France  and  remained  there  to  the
day  of  his  death.  He  had  three  sons,  of  whom  the
eldest  one,  Ragimpert  by  name,  governed  the  city  of
Aureliani  (Orleans)  in  our  own  days.  After  the  death
of  this  Aripert,  Ansprand  obtained  possession  of  the
kingdom  of  the  Langobards*  but  reigned  only  three
months.  He  was  a man  distinguished  in  all  ways  and
very  few  were  to  be  compared  with  him  in  wisdom.
When  the  Langobards  become  aware  of  his  approach-
ing death  they  set  his  son  Liutprand  on  the  royal
throne  3 and  when  Ansprand,  while  he  was  living,  heard
this  he  greatly  rejoiced/

Chapter  XXXVI.

At  this  time  the  emperor  Anastasius  dispatched  a fleet
to  Alexandria  against  the  Saracens.  His  army  was
turned  to  another  purpose,  and  in  the  midst  of  its
journey  came  back  to  the  city  of  Constantinople,  and
hunting  up  the  orthodox  Theodosius,  chose  him  as
emperor  and  when  he  was  put  by  force  upon  the  throne
of  the  empire,  confirmed  him.  This  Theodosius  con-
quered Anastasius  in  a severe  battle  at  the  city  of  Nicea,

1 Paul’s  estimate  of  Aripert’ s character  is  evidently  too  favorable.

* Thus  a new  dynasty  came  to  the  throne.  The  descendants  of
Theudelinda  were  set  aside  and  ended  their  lives  in  the  kingdom
of  the  Franks  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  125).

•June  12,  712  (Pabst,  474).

•Ansprand  was  buried  in  Pavia  in  the  chapel  of  Adrian  the
martyr  which  he  is  said  to  have  built.  Waitz  gives  his  epitaph.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

280

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

and  having  imposed  an  oath  upon  him,  caused  him  to  be
ordained  a churchman  and  a presbyter.  When  Anas-
tasius  received  the  sovereignty,  he  presently  put  up  in
its  former  place  in  the  imperial  city  that  revered  picture
in  which  the  holy  councils  were  painted  and  which  had
been  torn  down  by  Filippicus.  In  these  days  the  river
Tiber  had  such  an  inundation  that  having  overflowed  its
bed  it  did  many  injuries  to  the  city  of  Rome  so  that  it
rose  in  the  Via  Lata  to  one  and  a half  times  the  height
of  a man,  and  from  the  gate  of  St.  Peter  to  the  Molvian
bridge 1 the  waters  all  mingled  together  as  they  flowed
down.

Chapter  XXXVII.

In  these  times,  by  the  inspiration  of  Divine  Love,
many  of  the  nobles  and  common  people,  men  and  wo-
men, dukes  and  private  persons  of  the  nation  of  the
Angles  were  in  the  habit  of  coming  from  Britain  to
Rome.  Pipin a at  that  time  obtained  the  sovereignty  in
the  kingdom  of  the  Franks.  He  was  a man  of  astonish-
ing boldness  who  instantly  crushed  his  foes  in  attacking
them.  For  he  crossed  the  Rhine  and  with  only  one  of
his  attendants  he  fell  upon  a certain  adversary  of  his
and  killed  him  with  his  followers  in  his  bedchamber
where  he  lived.  He  also  courageously  waged  many
wars  with  the  Saxons  and  especially  with  Ratpot,  king
of  the  Frisians.  He  had  also  a number  of  sons  but

*The  Pons  Mulvius  (now  the  Ponte  Molle)  was  built  by  the
censor  M.  jEmilius  Scaurus,  B.  C.  109.

* The  lather  of  Charles  Martel  (Abel).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VL

281

among  these  Charles,  who  succeeded  him  afterwards  in
the  sovereignty,  was  the  most  distinguished.

Chapter  XXXVIII.

But  when  king  Liutprand  had  been  confirmed  in  the
royal  power,*  Rothari,  a blood  relation  of  his,  wished  to
kill  him.  He  prepared  therefore  a banquet  for  him  in
his  home  at  Ticinum,  in  which  house  he  hid  some  very
strong  men  fully  armed  who  were  to  kill  the  king  while
he  was  banqueting.  When  this  had  been  reported  to
Liutprand  he  ordered  Rothari  to  be  called  to  his  palace,
and  feeling  him  with  his  hand  he  discovered,  as  had
been  told  him,  a cuirass  put  on  under  his  clothing.*
When  Rothari  found  out  that  he  was  detected,  he
straightway  leaped  backwards  and  unsheathed  his  sword
to  strike  the  king.  On  the  other  hand  the  king  drew
forth  his  own  sword  from  his  scabbard.  Then  one  of
the  king's  attendants  named  Subo,  seizing  Rothari  from
behind,  was  wounded  by  him  in  the  forehead,  but  others
leaping  upon  Rothari  killed  him  there.  Four  of  his
sons  indeed  who  were  not  present  were  also  put  to  death
in  the  places  where  they  were  found.  King  Liutprand
was  indeed  a man  of  great  boldness  so  that  when  two
of  his  armor-bearers  thought  to  kill  him  and  this  had
been  reported  to  him,  he  went  alone  with  them  into  a
very  deep  wood  and  straightway  holding  against  them

A.  D.  712  (Hodgkin,  VI,  389).  By  this  confirmation  the
usurpation  of  the  new  dynasty  of  Ansprand  was  recognized  (Hart-
mann, II,  2,  125).

* The  story  of  Grimuald  and  Godepert  seems  to  be  here  repeated
with  a slight  variation.

Digitized  by  v^ooole

2%2

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

his  drawn  sword  he  reproached  them  because  they  had
planned  to  slay  him  and  urged  them  to  do  it.  And
straightway  they  fell  at  his  feet  and  confessed  all  they
had  plotted.  And  he  also  did  this  thing  in  like  manner
with  others,  but  nevertheless  he  presently  pardoned
those  who  confessed  even  a crime  of  such  great  wicked-
ness.

Chapter  XXXIX.

Then  when  Gisulf,  the  duke  of  the  Beneventines  had
died,  Romuald  his  son  undertook  the  government  of  the
people  of  the  Samnites.

Chapter  XL.

About  these  times  Petronax,  a citizen  of  the  city  of
Brexia  (Brescia)  spurred  by  the  love  of  God,  came  to
Rome  and  then  by  the  exhortation  of  Pope  Gregory  of
the  Apostolic  See,  proceeded  to  this  fortress  of  Cassi-
num ; 1 and  when  he  came  to  the  holy  remains  of  the
blessed  father  Benedict  he  began  to  dwell  there  with
certain  honest  men  who  were  already  living  there  before.
And  they  appointed  this  same  venerable  man  Petronax
as  their  superior,  and  not  long  afterwards,  with  the  aid
of  Divine  Mercy  and  through  favor  of  the  merits  of  the
blessed  father  Benedict,  after  the  lapse  of  about  a
hundred  and  ten  years  from  the  time  when  that  place
had  become  destitute  of  the  habitation  of  men,  he  be-
came there  the  father  of  many  monks  of  high  and  low
degree  who  gathered  around  him,  and  he  began  to  live,
when  the  dwellings  were  repaired,  under  the  restraint

1 Paul  wrote  this  at  Monte  Cassino.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

283

of  the  Holy  Rule  of  the  Order  and  the  institutions  of
the  blessed  Benedict,  and  he  put  this  sacred  monastery  in
the  condition  in  which  it  is  now  seen.  At  a subsequent
time  Zacharias,  Chief  of  Priests  and  Pontiff  beloved  by
God,  bestowed  many  useful  things  upon  this  venerable
man  Petronax,  namely  the  books  of  Holy  Scripture  and
all  sorts  of  other  things  that  relate  to  the  service  of  a
monastery  and  moreover  he  gave  him  with  fatherly  piety
the  Rule  of  the  Order  which  the  blessed  father  Benedict
had  written  with  his  own  holy  hands.1  The  monastery
indeed  of  the  blessed  martyr  Vincent,  which  is  situated
near  the  source  of  the  river  Vulturnus  and  is  now  cele-
brated for  its  great  community  of  monks,  was  then  al-
ready founded  by  three  noble  brothers,  that  is,  Tato,
Taso  and  Paldo,  as  the  writings  of  the  very  learned
Autpert,  abbot  of  this  monastery  show,  in  the  volume
which  he  composed  on  this  subject.  While  the  blessed
Pope  Gregory  indeed 2 of  the  Roman  See  was  still  liv-
ing, the  fortress  of  Cumae  was  taken  by  the  Langobards
of  Beneventum,  but  when  night  came  on,  certain  of  the
Langobards  were  captured  and  others  were  killed  by  the
duke  of  Naples ; also  the  fortress  itself  was  re-taken  by
the  Romans.  For  the  ransom  of  this  fortress  the  Pon-
tiff gave  seventy  pounds  of  gold  as  he  had  promised  in
the  first  place.3

1 Afterwards  burned  A.  D.  896  (Waitz).

* Gregory  II.

* A.  D.  717.  The  recapture  of  this  place  did  not  occur  at  once
as  Paul’s  account  seems  to  indicate,  but  the  duke  of  Naples  was
urged  to  the  act  by  the  Pope  who  promised  and  paid  him  the  so-
called  ransom  (Hodgkin,  VI,  442).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

284

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XLI.

Meanwhile  the  emperor  Theodosius,  who  had  ruled
the  empire  only  one  year,  having  died,1 * *  Leo  was  sub-
stituted as  emperor  in  his  place.®

Chapter  XLII.

Among  the  people  of  the  Franks,  after  Pipin  had
been  released  from  life,  his  son  Charles  3 of  whom  we
have  spoken  took  the  sovereignty  from  the  hand  of
Raginfrid  only  by  means  of  many  wars  and  struggles.
For  when  he  was  held  in  prison  he  was  set  free  by  God's
command  and  escaped  and  at  first  he  began  two  or  three
times  a struggle  against  Raginfrid  with  a few  men  and
at  last  overcame  him  in  a great  battle  at  Vinciacum
(Vincy).4  Nevertheless  he  gave  him  one  city  to  dwell
in,  that  is,  Andegavi  (Angers)5  while  he  himself  under-
took the  government  of  the  whole  natton  of  the  Franks.6

1 An  error.  Theodosius  did  not  die  but  was  deposed  (Waitz).

* Leo  the  Isaurian,  the  great  iconoclastic  emperor,  born  about
670,  was  appointed  to  a place  in  the  life-guards  of  Justinian  II,
and  was  afterwards  sent  on  a desperate  mission  to  the  Alans  in
the  Caucasus  where  he  showed  great  courage  and  ingenuity.
Anastasius,  the  successor  of  Justinian  appointed  him  general  of  the
forces  of  Anatolia  in  Asia  Minor  where  he  kept  the  Saracens  at
bay.  Theodosius  III  who  succeeded  Anastasius  was  considered
incompetent  to  defend  Constantinople  against  the  Saracens  and  in
716  Leo  was  raised  to  the  throne  (Hodgkin,  VI,  425,  426).

* Charles  Martel.

4 Near  Cambray.

6 In  this  statement  Paul  is  not  supported  by  other  authorities  and
he  is  not  well  informed  in  Frankish  history  (Jacobi,  43).

•His  title  was  not  that  of  king  but  mayor  of  the  palace;  during

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

285

Chapter  XLIII.

At  this  time  king  Liutprand  confirmed  to  the  Roman
Church  the  gift  of  the  patrimony  of  the  Cottian  Alps,
and  not  long  afterwards  the  same  ruler  took  in  marriage
Guntrut,  the  daughter  of  Teutpert,  duke  of  the  Bava-
rians x with  whom  he  had  lived  in  exile,  and  from  her
he  begot  one  daughter  only.

Chapter  XLIV.

During  these  times  Faroald,  duke  of  the  Spoletans,
attacked  Classis,  a city  of  the  Ravenna  people,  but  by
command  of  king  Liutprand  it  was  restored  to  these
same  Romans.  Against  this  duke  Faroald  his  own
son  Transamund  revolted  and  usurped  his  place  and
made  him  a churchman.3  In  these  days  Teudo,  duke  of

the  latter  part  of  his  life  however  there  was  no  king.  He  was  the
real  founder  of  the  Amulfing  or  Carolingian  dynasty,  and  his  son
Pipin  assumed  the  title  of  king  (Hodgkin,  VI,  421,  422).

1 The  policy  of  the  Bavarian  dynasty,  as  to  friendly  relations
with  the  Catholic  church  and  with  the  neighboring  Bavarians  was
continued  by  Liutprand.  This  marriage  however  afterwards  led  to
other  complications.  After  Teutpert’ s death,  his  brother  Grimoald
attempted  to  rob  his  son  Hucbert  of  the  sovereignty.  Charles
Martel,  who  had  established  his  dominion  over  the  Frankish  king-
dom, now  seized  the  opportunity  to  restore  his  own  suzerainty  over
the  Bavarian  dukedom,  while  Liutprand  (probably  about  725)  in-
vaded the  Bavarian  territories  and  pushed  forward  the  boundaries
of  the  Langobard  kingdom  up  to  Magias  or  Mais,  by  Meran.
Charles  also  married  Suanahild,  a Bavarian  princess,  and  thus  be-
came the  brother-in-law  of  Liutprand,  and  the  friendship  between
these  sovereigns  was  firmly  established  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  125).

1 A.  p.  724  (Waitz;  Pabst,  469,  note  2).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

286

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

the  nation  of  the  Bavarians  came  for  the  purpose  of
devotion  to  Rome  to  the  foot  steps  of  the  holy  apostles.1

Chapter  XLV.

When  then  at  Forum  Julii  (Cividale)  the  patriarch
Serenus  had  been  taken  away  from  human  affairs,  Calix-
tus,  a distinguished  man  who  was  archdeacon  of  the
church  of  Tarvisium  (Treviso)  received  through  the
efforts  of  king  Liutprand  the  government  of  the  church
of  Aquileia.  At  this  time  as  we  said,  Pemmo  ruled  the
Langobards  of  Forum  Julii.  When  he  had  now  brought
to  the  age  of  early  manhood  those  sons  of  the  nobles
whom  he  had  reared  with  his  own  children,  suddenly  a
messenger  came  to  him  to  say  that  an  immense  multi-
tude of  Slavs  was  approaching  the  place  which  is  called
Lauriana.2  With  those  young  men,  he  fell  upon  the
Slavs  for  the  third  time,  and  overthrew  them  with  a
great  slaughter,  nor  did  any  one  else  fall  on  the  part  of
the  Langobards  than  Sicuald,  who  was  already  mature
in  age.  For  he  had  lost  two  sons  in  a former  battle,
which  occured  under  Ferdulf,  and  when  he  had  avenged
himself  upon  the  Slavs  a first  and  a second  time  accord-
ing to  his  desire,  the  third  time,  although  both  the  duke
and  the  other  Langobards  forbade  it,  he  could  not  be
restrained  but  thus  answered  them : “ I have  already
revenged  sufficiently,”  he  says,  “ the  death  of  my  sons

1 A.  D.  716  (Waitz).  He  had  divided  his  dominion  among  his
four  sons.  One  of  his  granddaughters  had  married  Liutprand
and  another  Charles  Martel  (Hodgkin,  VI,  440).

* Supposed  to  be  the  village  of  Spital  near  Villach  (Waitz)  on
the  Drave  in  Carinthia  (Waitz):  This  seems  quite  uncertain*

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  VI.

287

and  now  if  it  shall  happen,  I will  gladly  receive  my  own
death.”  And  it  so  happened,  and  in  that  fight  he  only
was  killed.  Pemmo,  indeed,  when  he  had  overthrown
many  of  his  enemies,  fearing  lest  he  should  lose  in  battle
any  one  more  of  his  own,  entered  into  a treaty  of  peace
with  those  Slavs  in  that  place.  And  from  that  time  the
Slavs  began  more  to  dread  the  arms  of  the  Friulans.

Chapter  XLVI.

At  that  time  the  nation  of  the  Saracens,  passing  over
from  Africa  in  the  place  which  is  called  Septem  (Ceuta),
invaded  all  Spain. x Then  after  ten  years  they  came
with  their  wives  and  children  and  entered  the  province
of  Aquitaine  in  Gaul  so  as  to  inhabit  it.  Charles,1 * * * * * * *  9 in-
deed, had  then  a quarrel  with  Eudo,  prince  of  Aquitaine,
but  they  joined  together  and  fought  by  common  con-
sent against  those  Saracens.  The  Franks  attacked  them
and  killed  three  hundred  and  seventy-five  thousand  of
the  Saracens,  while  on  the  side  of  the  Franks  only
fifteen  hundred  fell  there.  Eudo  also  with  his  followers
fell  upon  their  camp  and  in  like  manner  killed  many  and
ravaged  everything.  3

1The  first  invasion  of  Spain  by  Tank  was  in  the  year  711,

before  Ansprand  returned  from  his  exile  in  Bavaria.  It  was  in

721,  nine  years  after  the  accession  of  Liutprand,  that  having  con-

quered Spain,  the  Saracens  were  defeated  by  Eudo  of  Aquitaine

at  Toulouse  (Hodgkin,  VI,  418,  419).

* Charles  Martel.

•Jacobi  (43)  believes  that  Paul  has  here  combined  two  battles

in  one,  the  victory  of  Eudo  over  the  Saracens  at  Toulouse  in  721

and  the  battle  of  Ppictiers  in  7^2.  The  latter  battle,  however,

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

288

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Chapter  XLVII.

Also  at  this  time  this  same  nation  of  Saracens  came
with  an  immense  army,  surrounded  Constantinople  and
besieged  it  continually  for  three  years  but  when  the
citizens  with  great  fervor  cried  to  God,  many  (of  the  in-
vaders) perished  by  hunger  and  cold,  by  war  and  pesti-
lence, and  thus,  exhausted  by  the  siege,  they  departed.  *
When  they  had  gone  thence  they  attacked  in  war  the
nation  of  the  Bulgarians  beyond  the  Danube  but  they
were  overcome  also  by  them  and  took  refuge  in  their
ships.  When  they  sought  the  high  sea  a sudden  tempest
‘attacked  them  and  very  many  also  perished  by  drown-
ing and  their  ships  were  dashed  to  pieces.  Within
Constantinople,  indeed,  three  hundred  thousand  men
perished  by  pestilence.

Chapter  XLVIII.

Liutprand  also,  hearing  that  the  Saracens  had  laid
waste  Sardinia  and  were  even  defiling  those  places  where
the  bones  of  the  bishop  St.  Augustine  had  been  form-
erly carried  on  account  of  the  devastation  of  the  bar-
barians and  had  been  honorably  buried,  sent  and  gave
a great  price  and  took  them  and  carried  them  over  to
the  city  of  Ticinum  and  there  buried  them  with  the  honor

appears  to  be  indicated,  for  Eudo.  after  his  victory  at  Toulouse,
had  been  vanquished  by  tne  Saracens,  and  it  would  seem  that  the
remnant  of  his  troops  shared  with  those  of  Charles  Martel  the  vic-
tory of  Poictiers  (Hodgkin,  VI,  419,  420).

1 Hartmann  says  (II,  2,  85)  the  siege  lasted  one  year,  A.  D.

717-718.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.  289

due  to  so  great  a father.  In  these  days  the  city  of
Narnia  (Narni)  was  conquered  by  the  Langobards. 1

Chapter  XLIX.

At  this  time  king  Liutprand  besieged  Ravenna  and
took  Classis  and  destroyed  it. 2 Then  Paul  the  patri-
cian sent  his  men  out  of  Ravenna  to  kill  the  Pope,  but
as  the  Langobards  fought  against  them  in  defense  of
the  Pope  and  as  the  Spoletans  resisted  them  on  the
Salarian  bridge3  as  well  as  the  Tuscan  Langobards  from
other  places,  the  design  of  the  Ravenna  people  came  to
nought.  At  this  time  the  emperor  Leo  burned  the
images  of  the  saints  placed  in  Constantinople  and  ordered
the  Roman  pontiff  to  do  the  like  if  he  wished  to  have
the  emperor’s  favor,  but  the  pontiff  disdained  to  do  this
thing.  Also  the  whole  of  Ravenna  and  of  Venetia4  re-
sisted such  commands  with  one  mind,  and  if  the  pontiff
had  not  prohibited  them  they  would  have  attempted  to
set  up  an  emperor  over  themselves. 5 * * * * *

1 Probably  by  the  duke  of  Spoleto  (Hodgkin,  VI,  444).

* Probably  not  later  than  A.  D.  725  (Hodgkin,  VI,  444,  note  3).

* A bridge  on  the  Salarian  way,  over  the  Anio  (Hodgkin,  VI,
448).

4 This  word  is  the  plural,  11  the  Venices,”  for  there  were  then

two,  land  Venice,  mostly  under  the  Langobards,  and  sea  Venice,

under  Ravenna.  (See  opening  words  of  the  Chronicon  Venetum

by  John  the  Deacon,  Monticolo’s  ed.,  p.  59.)

* To  understand  this  controversy  we  must  return  to  the  time  of

Gregory  I.  The  weakness  of  the  Byzantine  empire  and  its  in-
ability to  protect  its  Italian  subjects  from  the  Langobards,  com-

bined with  the  growth  of  the  administrative  powers  of  the  Pope

throughout  the  extensive  domains  of  the  church,  gave  the  papacy

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

290

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Also  king  Liu tprand  attacked  Feronianum  (Fregnano)

more  and  more  a political  character.  Gregory  extended  this  in-
fluence ; he  even  attempted  to  make  a separate  peace  with  the
Langobards,  an  act  which  was  resented  by  the  emperor  Maurice.
The  people  of  Italy  began  to  look  to  the  Pope  for  protection,  and
there  were  aspirations  for  independence  from  the  Eastern  Empire
and  for  a re-establishment  of  the  Empire  of  the  West.  The  usur-
pation of  the  exarch  Eleutherius  and  the  subsequent  rebellion  of
Olympius  which  was  supported  by  Pope  Martin  I,  as  well  as  the
revolt  of  Ravenna  under  Georgius,  all  show  this  separatist  ten-
dency. Ecclesiastical  differences  such  as  the  assumption  of  the
title  of  Universal  Bishop  by  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  the
Monothelete  controversy,  the  Type , the  imprisonment  of  Pope
Martin,  etc.,  accentuated  the  irritation  of  the  West.  Constantine
Pogonatus,  indeed,  like  some  of  his  predecessors,  had  adopted  a
policy  of  friendship  with  the  papacy,  and  also  concluded  a defin-
itive treaty  with  the  Langobards,  fixing  the  boundaries  of  the
Langobard  and  Roman  dominions.  But  after  this  peace  was
made,  the  Langobards  became  subject  to  the  ecclesiastical  juris-
diction of  the  Pope  and  it  became  the  interest  of  the  Roman  See
to  play  the  emperor  and  the  Langobard  king  against  each  other
in  favor  of  its  own  greater  power  and  independence.  (Hartmann,
Atti  del  Congresso  in  Cividale,  1899,  pp.  153  to  162).  When  Leo
the  Isaurian  mounted  the  throne,  he  was  recognized  at  Ravenna,
but  an  insurrection  broke  out  against  him  in  Sicily,  which,  how-
ever, was  soon  suppressed.  But  his  heavy  hand  was  felt  in  Rome
in  his  efforts  to  collect  from  church  property  the  means  for  carry-
ing on  his  contests  against  the  Saracens.  Gregory  II,  a man  of
great  ability,  then  occupied  the  papal  chair  and  resisted  his  exac-
tions, whereupon  plots  were  laid  by  imperial  officers  to  depose  and
perhaps  to  assassinate  the  Pope.  Then  came  the  conflict  in  regard
to  the  worship  of  images,  a practice  which  had  gradually  grown
in  the  church  and  which  Leo  determined  to  eradicate.  In  725  he
issued  a decree  for  their  destruction.  The  work  was  begun  with
energy  at  Constantinople,  all  opposition  was  stamped  out  with
great  severity  and  a popular  insurrection,  as  well  as  an  attack

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  VI.

291

Mons  Bellius,  (Monteveglio)  Buxeta  (Busseto)  and

upon  the  city  by  a rebellious  fleet  was  suppressed  with  a strong
hand.  In  Rome,  however,  his  efforts  were  not  successful,  and
when  in  727  the  order  for  the  destruction  of  the  images  was  re-
newed, Gregory  armed  himself  against  the  emperor.  The  people
now  elected  dukes  for  themselves  in  different  parts  of  Italy  and
proposed  to  elect  a new  emperor,  but  the  Pope  restrained  them,
not  wishing  perhaps  to  have  an  emperor  close  at  his  side  or  pos-
sibly fearing  a greater  danger  from  the  Langobards.  Italy  was
distracted  by  internal  struggles,  the  Pope,  aided  by  the  Spoletans
and  Beneventans,  prevailed,  and  the  exarch  Paul  was  killed.
Upon  his  death  the  eunuch  Euty chius  was  appointed  to  succeed
him.  He  landed  at  Naples  and  sent  a private  messenger  to  Rome
instructing  his  partisans  to  murder  the  Pope  and  the  chief  nobles,
but  the  people  assembled,  anathematized  Eutychius  and  bound
themselves  to  live  or  die  with  the  Pope.  Then  Eutychius  turned
for  aid  to  the  Langobards,  and  Liutprand,  who  had  at  first  favored
the  Pope  and  the  Italian  revolutionary  movement  and  had  im-
proved the  occasion  to  seize  a number  of  the  possessions  of  the
empire,  now  changed  his  policy  and  formed  a league  with  the  ex-
arch to  subject  Spoleto  and  Benevento  to  his  own  dominion  and
enable  the  exarch  to  control  the  city  of  Rome.  The  king  first
marched  to  Spoleto  where  he  took  hostages  and  oaths  of  fidelity,
then  he  moved  to  Rome  and  encamped  on  the  plain  of  Nero  close
to  the  city.  The  Pope  came  forth  to  meet  him,  attended  by  his
ecclesiastics  and  Liutprand  fell  before  him  and  took  off  his  mantle,
his  doublet,  his  sword  and  spear,  crown  and  cross,  and  laid  them
in  the  crypt  before  the  altar  of  St.  Peter.  In  spite  of  these  mani-
festations of  reverence,  however,  Liutprand  insisted  upon  a recon-
ciliation between  the  Pope  and  the  exarch  which  put  a limit  to  the
Italian  movement  toward  independence  and  to  the  political  aspir-
ations of  the  papacy,  and  in  great  measure  restored  the  power  of
the  exarch — although  in  the  controversy  regarding  the  destruction
of  images,  in  which  the  people  took  a passionate  interest,  the  em-
peror Leo  was  never  able  to  impose  his  will  upon  his  subjects  in
Italy.  In  other  matters  too,  local  self-government  had  made

Digitized  by

Google

292

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Persiceta  (San  Giovanni  in  Persiceto)  Bononia  (Bo-

great  progress  during  the  various  revolutionary  movements  and
nowhere  more  than  in  the  islands  of  the  Venetian  lagoons,  where
the  new  settlements  made  by  the  fugitives  from  the  mainland,  had
now  assumed  a semi-independent  character  under  the  doges  or
dukes  of  Venice,  who  in  Liutp rand’s  time  made  treaties  with  the
Langobard  king  (defining  the  boundaries  of  each)  and  (regulating
the  intercourse  between  the  two  communities.)  Liutprand  also
made  a treaty  with  Comacchio,  the  rival  of  Venice  in  the  com-
merce on  the  Po.  It  is  surprising  that  these  events  should  have
been  omitted  by  Paul,  especially  as  they  are  referred  to  in  the
Liber  Pontificalis,  one  of  his  sources.  It  shows  the  incomplete
character  of  this  last  book  of  Paul’s  unfinished  history.

Gregory  II  died  in  731,  but  his  successor  Gregory  III  pursued
the  same  policy  in  respect  to  the  emperor’s  edict  for  the  destruc-
tion of  the  images.  He  convened  a council  attended  by  the
archbishops  of  Grado  and  Ravenna  and  ninety-three  Italian
bishops,  with  other  clergy  and  laity,  which  anathematized  all  who
took  part  in  the  work  of  destruction.  The  emperor  now  withdrew
from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Roman  See  all  the  dioceses  east  of  the
Adriatic,  as  well  as  those  in  Sicily,  Bruttium  and  Calabria,  and
made  them  subject  to  Constantinople,  and  the  rich  and  important
papal  possessions  in  the  three  last-named  provinces  were  confis-
cated. The  portions  of  Italy  still  subject  to  the  empire  became
now  divided  into  three  parts — 1st,  southern  Italy  and  Sicily,  more
directly  subject  to  the  central  authority  of  Constantinople ; 2nd,
the  duchy  of  Rome,  which,  subject  to  papal  influence,  gradually
became  more  and  more  independent ; and  3d,  the  immediate
exarchate  of  Ravenna,  which  conducted  for  a short  time  a des-
perate struggle  for  existence  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  85-114;  Hodgkin,
VI,  432-436).

After  king  Liutprand  had  attained  his  purpose  in  regard  to  the
dukedoms  of  Spoleto  and  Benevento,  his  unnatural  alliance  with
the  exarch  came  to  an  end.  A Roman  army  under  Agatho,  duke
of  Perugia,  attacked  Bologna,  which  was  in  possession  of  the
Langobards,  and  was  defeated  (Ch.  54,  infra),  and  Liutprand

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  VI.

293

logna)  1 and  the  Pentapolis 9 and  Auximun  (Osimo)  3
fortresses  of  Emilia.  And  in  like  manner  he  then  took
possession  of  Sutrium  (Sutri)4  but  after  some  days  it
was  again  restored  to  the  Romans.5  During  the  same
time  the  emperor  Leo  went  on  to  worse  things  so  that
he  compelled  all  the  inhabitants  of  Constantinople  either
by  force  or  by  blandishments,  to  give  up  the  images  of
the  Saviour  and  of  his  Holy  Mother  and  of  all  the  saints
wherever  they  were,  and  he  caused  them  to  be  burned
by  fire  in  the  midst  of  the  city.  And  because  many  of
the  people  hindered  such  a wickedness  from  being  done,
some  of  them  were  beheaded  and  others  suffered  muti-
lation in  body.  As  the  patriarch  Germanus  did  not
consent  to  this  error  he  was  driven  from  his  see  and  the
presbyter  Anastasius  was  ordained  in  his  place.

Chapter  L.

Romoald  then,  duke  of  Beneventum,  chose  a wife
Gumperga,  by  name,  who  was  the  daughter  of  Aurona,
king  Liutp rand's  sister.  From  her  he  begot  a son  whom

captured  Ravenna  itself  (A.  D.  732-3),  though  the  city  was  after-
wards re-taken  by  the  Venetians  (see  Hartmann,  II,  2,  1 32-1 33).

*Tregnano  is  west  of  the  Panaro  (Hodgkin  VI,  454,  note  1) ;
Monteveglio  is  west,  and  San  Giovanni  in  Persiceto  is  a little
northwest  of  Bologna  (id.).

* Rimini,  Pesaro,  Fano,  Sinigaglia  and  Ancona.

5 Near  Ancona.

4 A.  D.  728-729  (Jacobi,  58).  It  is  a place  about  25  miles
northwest  of  Rome.

6 Liutprand  took  it  from  the  empire,  but  in  restoring  it  put  it
into  the  possession  of  the  pope,  who  was  then  at  the  head  of  the
independent  movement  in  Italy  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  96-97).

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

294

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

he  called  by  the  name  of  his  father,  Gisulf.  He  had
again  after  her  another  wife,  Ranigunda  by  name,  the
daughter  of  Gaiduald,  duke  of  Brexia  (Brescia).

Chapter  LI.

At  the  same  time  a grievous  strife  arose  between
duke  Pemmo  and  the  patriarch  Calixtus  and  the  cause
of  this  discord  was  the  following:  Fidentius,  bishop  of
the  Julian  fortress  (Julium  Carnicum) 1 came  on  a
former  occasion  and  dwelt  within  the  walls  of  the  fort-
ress of  Forum  Julii  (Cividale)  and  established  there  the
see  of  his  bishopric  with  the  approval  of  the  former
dukes.  When  he  departed  from  life,  Amator  was  or-
dained bishop  in  his  place.  Up  to  that  day  indeed,  the
former  patriarchs  had  their  see,  not  in  Forum  Julii,  but
in  Cormones  (Cormons)  because  they  had  not  at  all
been  able  to  dwell  in  Aquileia  on  account  of  the  incur-
sions of  the  Romans.  It  greatly  displeased  Calixtus
who  was  eminent  for  his  high  rank  that  a bishop  dwelt
in  his  diocese  with  the  duke  and  the  Langobards  and
that  he  himself  lived  only  in  the  society  of  the  common
people.  Why  say  more  ? He  worked  against  this  same
bishop  Amator  and  expelled  him  from  Forum  Julii  and
established  his  own  dwelling  in  his  house.  For  this
cause  duke  Pemmo  took  counsel  with  many  Langobard
nobles  against  this  same  patriarch,  seized  him  and
brought  him  to  the  castle  of  Potium,®  which  is  situated

‘Now  Zuglio,  a town  north  of  Tolmezzo  (Hodgkin,  VI,  41,
note  2).

* Not  identified.  Giansevero  believes  it  was  the  castle  of  Duino.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

m

above  the  sea,  and  wanted  to  hurl  him  thence  into  the
sea  but  he  did  not  at  all  do  this  since  God  prohibited.
He  kept  him,  however,  in  prison  and  nourished  him  with
the  bread  of  tribulation.  King  Liutprand  hearing  this
was  inflamed  with  great  rage,  and  taking  away  the  duke-
dom from  Pemmo,  appointed  his  son  Ratchis  in  his
place.  Then  Pemmo  arranged  to  flee  with  his  followers
into  the  country  of  the  Slavs,  but  Ratchis  his  son  be-
sought the  king  and  reinstated  his  father  in  the  mon-
arch's favor.  Pemmo  then,  having  taken  an  assurance
that  he  would  suffer  no  harm,  proceeded  to  the  king
with  all  the  Langobards  with  whom  he  had  taken  counsel.
Then  the  king,  sitting  in  judgement,  pardoned  for
Ratchis'  sake  Pemmo  and  his  two  sons,  Ratchait  and
Aistulf,  and  ordered  them  to  stand  behind  his  chair.
The  king,  however,  in  a loud  voice  ordered  that  all
those  who  had  adhered  to  Pemmo,  naming  them,  should
be  seized.  Then  Aistulf  could  not  restrain  his  rage  and
attempted  to  draw  his  sword  and  strike  the  king  but
Ratchis  his  brother  prevented  him.  And  when  these
Langobards  were  seized  in  this  manner,  Herfemar,  who
had  been  one  of  them,  drew  his  sword,  and  followed
by  many,  defended  himself  manfully  and  fled  to  the
church  of  the  blessed  Michael  and  then  by  the  favor  of
the  king  he  alone  secured  impunity  while  the  others
were  for  a long  time  tormented  in  bonds.

Chapter  LII.

Then  Ratchis  having  become  duke  of  Forum  Julii  as
we  have  said,  invaded  Carniola  (Krain),  the  country  of
the  Slavs,  with  his  followers,  killed  a great  multitude  of

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

296  • HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Slavs  and  laid  waste  everything  belonging  to  them.
Here  when  the  Slavs  had  suddenly  fallen  upon  him  and
he  had  not  yet  taken  his  lance  from  his  armor-bearer,
he  struck  with  a club  that  he  carried  in  his  hand  the
first  who  ran  up  to  him  and  put  an  end  to  his  life.

Chapter  LIII.

About  these  times  Charles  the  ruler  of  the  Franks
dispatched  his  son  Pipin  to  Liutprand  that  the  latter
should  take  his  hair  according  to  custom.  And  the
king,  cutting  his  hair,  became  a father  to  him  and  sent
him  back  to  his  father  enriched  with  many  royal  gifts.1

Chapter  LIV.

During  the  same  time  the  army  of  the  Saracens  again
entering  into  Gaul  made  much  devastation.  Charles
giving  battle  against  them  not  far  from  Narbo  (Nar-
bonne)  overthrew  them  in  the  same  manner  as  before
with  the  greatest  slaughter.9  Again  the  Saracens  in-
vaded the  boundaries  of  the  Gauls,  came  as  far  as  Pro-
vincia  (Provence),  took  Arelate  (Arles)  and  destroyed
everything  around  it.3  Then  Charles  sent  messengers

'This  friendship  between  the  royal  houses  of  the  Franks  and
the  Langobards  had  been  the  traditional  policy  since  Agilulf  s
time  and  had  been  of  great  advantage  to  both  kingdoms  (Hart-
mann, II,  2,  137).

*A.  D.  73 7 (Waitz).

•The  Frankish  writers  have  related  nothing  of  this.  It  seems
doubtful  whether  a new  incursion  of  the  Saracens  was  meant  in-
asmuch as  they  occupied  Arles  in  A.  D.  737  (Waitz).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

297

with  gifts  to  king  Liutprand  and  asked  assistance  from
him  against  the  Saracens  and  he  without  delay  hastened
with  the  whole  army  of  the  Langobards  to  his  assist-
ance.1 * * * * * * * The  nation  of  the  Saracens  when  they  learned
this,  presently  fled  away  from  those  regions  and  Liut-
prand with  his  whole  army  returned  to  Italy.9  The
same  ruler  waged  many  wars  against  the  Romans  in
which  he  was  always  the  victor  except  that  once  in  his
absence  his  army  was  defeated  in  Ariminum  (Rimini),
and  at  another  time,  when  at  the  village  of  Pilleum,  a
great  multitude  of  those  who  were  bringing  small  pres-
ents and  gifts  to  the  king  and  the  blessings  of  particular
churches  were  attacked  and  killed  or  captured  by  the
Romans  while  the  king  was  stopping  in  the  Pentapolis.
Again  when  Hildeprand  the  nephew  of  the  king  and
Peredeo  the  duke  of  Vincentia  (Vicenza)  got  possession
of  Ravenna,  the  Venetians  suddenly  attacked  them.
Hildeprand  was  taken  by  them  and  Peredeo  fell  fighting

1 Jacobi  says  (p.  44)  that  Paul  has  arbitrarily  changed  the  history

of  this  campaign.  The  Chron.  Moiss.  (MG.  SS.  1 292)  states  that

Charles  Martel  on  the  news  of  the  invasion  of  the  Saracens  into

Provence,  by  which  Arles,  Avignon,  and  other  places  fell  into
their  hands,  marched  against  them,  drove  them  back  over  the

Rhone,  besieged  Narbonne,  and  without  raising  the  siege,  de-

feated a second  army  of  the  Arabs  approaching  for  the  relief

of  the  city.  Paul  out  of  this  makes  two  campaigns.  In  the

first,  the  Saracens  invaded  Gaul  and  were  defeated  by  Charles
not  far  from  Narbonne;  in  the  second,  they  devastated  Provence
and  took  Arles,  whereupon  Charles  called  upon  Liutprand  for
help  and  the  fame  of  his  name  frightened  the  enemy.

•A.  D.  737  (Hodgkin,  VI,  475).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

298

manfully.1  At  a subsequent  period 2 also,  the  Romans,
swollen  with  their  accustomed  pride,  assembled  on  every
side  under  the  leadership  of  Agatho,  duke  of  the  Peru-
gians, and  came4  to  seize  Bononia  (Bologna),  where
Walcari,  Peredeo  and  Rotcari  were  then  staying  in
camp,  but  the  latter  rushed  upon  the  Romans,  made  a
great  slaughter  of  them  and  compelled  those  who  were
left  to  seek  flight.

1 This  confused  chapter  in  which  Peredeo  (unless  it  be  some
other  of  the  same  name)  afterwards  comes  to  life  again,  has  been
considered  to  indicate  that  Ravenna  had  been  taken  by  the  Lango-
bards  and  was  recovered  by  the  Venetians.  These  Venetians
were  still  a feeble  community.  Their  chief  towns  were  not  on  the
site  that  Venice  now  occupies,  but  in  other  parts  of  the  lagoons,
at  Heraclea,  Equilium,  and  Metamaucus.  The  present  city  on  the
Rialto  was  not  founded  until  nearly  seventy  years  after  the  death  of
Liutprand  (Hodgkin,  VI,  484,  485),  notwithstanding  Venetian
traditions  to  the  contrary.

The  tribunes  who  had  originally  ruled  the  different  islands  had
been  superseded  by  a single  doge  or  duke  who  may  have  been
originally  an  official  selected  by  the  emperor  or  the  exarch.  After
the  reigns  of  three  doges  the  infant  community  remained  for  five
years  subject  to  “Masters  of  Soldiery  ” who  were  elected  annually;
then  the  dogeship  was  restored.  John  the  Deacon  who  wrote  near
the  end  of  the  tenth  century  says  (Monticolo’s  edition,  Chronache
Veneziane  Antichissime,  p.  95),  that  during  the  administration  of
Jubianus  one  of  these  Masters  of  Soldiery  (A.  D.  731-735),  the
exarch  (probably  Eutychius),  came  to  Venetia  and  entreated  the
Venetians  to  help  him  guard  and  defend  his  own  city,  which  Hil-
deprand,  nephew  of  Liutprand,  and  Peredeo,  duke  of  Vicenza
had  captured;  that  the  Venetians  hastened  to  Ravenna;  that  Hil-
deprand  was  captured,  Peredeo  fell  and  the  city  was  handed  over
to  the  exarch  (Hodgkin,  VI,  487,  488).

•Probably  in  a preceding  period  since  Peredeo  is  mentioned
(Waitz).

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

299

Chapter  LV.

In  these  days  Transamund  rebelled  against  the  king,
and  when  the  king  came  upon  him  with  his  army,  Transa-
mund himself  repaired  to  Rome  in  flight.  Hilderic  was
appointed  in  his  place.1  When  indeed  Romuald  the
younger,  duke  of  the  Beneventines,  died, 9 after  he  had

1 It  would  seem  that  duke  Transamund  of  Spoleto  about  the  year
737  or  738  had  taken  the  castle  of  Gallese  from  the  Romans  and
had  thereby  interrupted  the  communication  between  Ravenna  and
Rome.  Gregory  III,  realizing  how  valuable  would  be  an  alliance
with  the  duke  and  how  dangerous  he  was  as  an  enemy,  offered  a
a large  sum  of  money  for  the  restitution  of  Gallese  and  for  a treaty
binding  him  to  make  no  war  upon  the  Pope.  Transamund  made
the  treaty  and  restored  the  place,  whereupon  the  duchy  of  Bene-
vento  also  joined  the  alliance.  This  was  contrary  to  Liutprand’ s
policy  of  conquest  and  expansion,  and  the  king,  for  this  and  per-
haps other  causes,  treated  Transamund  as  a rebel  and  traitor,  and
on  June  16,  739  we  find  Liutprand  in  possession  of  Spoleto
(Hartmann,  II,  2,  137-138).  After  he  had  appointed  Hilderic
he  marched  on  Rome  where  Transamund  had  taken  refuge,  and
as  Gregory  refused  to  give  up  the  fugitive,  the  king  took  four
frontier  towns,  Ameria  (Amelia),  Horta  (Orte),  Polimartium
(Bomarzo)  and  Blera  (Bieda).  Gregory  now  wrote  to  Charles
Martel,  king  of  the  Franks,  telling  him  of  the  sufferings  of  the
church  and  exhorting  him  to  come  to  its  aid.  But  Charles  was
the  friend  of  Liutprand  and  refused  (Hodgkin,  475-478).  Transa-
mund recovered  Spoleto  in  740  but  he  now  refused  to  restore  the
four  cities  taken  by  Liutprand  and  the  Pope  withdrew  his  aid  (id.,
479-480).  Before  Liutprand  set  forth  to  recover  Spoleto  again
Gregory  III  died  and  was  succeeded  in  the  papal  chair  by  Zacha-
rias,  who  had  an  interview  with  the  king,  who  promised  to  sur-
render the  four  towns,  whereupon  the  Roman  army  joined  him
and  Transamund  was  forced  to  give  up  Spoleto  (see  Ch.  57,  infra).

*A.  D.  731  or  732  (Hartmann,  II,  132).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

300

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

held  the  dukedom  six  and  twenty  years,  there  remained
Gisulf  his  son,  who  was  still  a little  boy.  Some  con-
spirators rose  against  him  and  sought  to  destroy  him,
but  the  people  of  the  Beneventans  who  were  always
faithful  to  their  leaders,  slew  them  and  preserved  the  life
of  their  duke.1 * * * * * * *  Since  this  Gisulf  was  not  yet  fit  to
govern  so  great  a people  on  account  of  his  boyish  age,
king  Liutprand,  then  coming  to  Beneventum,  took  him
away  from  thence  and  appointed  his  own  nephew
Gregory  as  duke  at  Beneventum,  with  whom  a wife,
Giselperga  by  name,  was  united  in  marriage. 9 Matters
being  thus  arranged,  king  Liutprand  returned  to  his  own
seat  of  government  and  bringing  up  his  nephew  Gisulf
with  fatherly  care,  he  united  to  him  in  marriage  Scauni-
perga,  bom  from  a noble  stock.  At  this  time  the  king
himself  fell  into  a great  weakness  and  came  near  to
death.  When  the  Langobards  thought  that  he  was  de-
parting from  life  they  raised  as  their  king  his  nephew
Hildeprand,3  at  the  church  of  the  Holy  Mother  of  God,
which  is  called  “ At  the  Poles  ” outside  the  walls  of  the
city.  When  they  handed  to  him  the  staff  as  is  the
custom,  a cuckoo  bird  came  flying  and  sat  down  on  the

1 A catalogue  of  Beneventan  dukes  preserved  at  Monte  Cassino

shows  that  one  Audelais,  probably  a usurper,  reigned  for  two

years  after  Romuald  II  (Hodgkin,  VI,  471).

•Gregory  ruled  Benevento  732  to  739  (id.).  Hilderic’s  appoint-

ment in  Spoleto  occurred  about  the  time  of  Gregory’s  death  or

afterwards  (Hodgkin,  VI,  475).

•A.  D.  735  (Hodgkin,  VI,  473).  The  election  of  Hildeprand

actually  preceded  the  rebellion  of  Transamund,  and  Paul  has  in-

verted these  events  (Waitz  ; Pabst,  478,  note  5).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  VI.

301

top  of  the  staff.  Then  to  certain  wise  persons  it  ap-
peared to  be  signified  by  this  portent  that  his  govern-
ment would  be  useless.  King  Liutprand  indeed  when
he  had  learned  this  thing  did  not  receive  it  with  equa-
nimity, yet  when  he  became  well  of  his  illness  he  kept
him  as  his  colleague  in  the  government.  When  some
years  had  elapsed  from  this  time,  Transamund,  who  had
fled  to  Rome,  returned  to  Spoletum, 1 * killed  Hilderic
and  again  undertook  the  daring  project  of  rebellion
against  the  king.

Chapter  LVI.

But  Gregory  when  he  had  managed  the  dukedom  at
Beneventum  seven  years  was  released  from  life.  After
his  death  Godescalc  was  made  duke  a and  governed  the
Beneventines  for  three  years,  and  to  him  a wife,  Anna
by  name,  was  united  in  marriage.  Then  king  Liutprand
hearing  these  things  concerning  Spoletum  and  Bene-
ventum, again  advanced  with  his  army  to  Spoletum.
When  he  came  to  the  Pentapolis,  while  he  was  proceed-
ing from  Fanum  (Fano)  3 to  the  City  of  Forum  Simph-
ronii  (Fossombrone),4  in  the  wood  which  is  between
these  places,  the  Spoletans  uniting  with  the  Romans
brought  great  disasters  on  the  king's  army.  The  king
placed  duke  Ratchis  and  his  brother  Aistulf  with  the

1 December,  740.  Supported  by  the  army  of  the  dukedom  of
Rome  and  by  the  Beneventines  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  139).

* A.  D.  740.  Without  the  nomination  or  approval  of  the  king
(Hartmann,  II,  2,  138).

8 On  the  Adriatic  coast  northwest  of  Ancona.

4 In  the  March  of  Ancona.

Digitized  by  Caooole

302

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Fritrians  in  the  rear;  the  Spoletans  and  Romans  fell
upon  them  and  wounded  some  of  them,  but  Ratchis  with
his  brother  and  some  other  very  brave  men,  sustaining
all  that  weight  of  the  battle  and  fighting  manfully,  killed
many  and  brought  themselves  and  their  followers  from
thence  except  as  I said  the  few  who  were  wounded.
There  a certain  very  brave  man  of  the  Spoletans  named
Berto  cried  out  to  Ratchis  by  name,  and  came  upon  him
clothed  in  full  armor.  Ratchis  suddenly  struck  him,
and  threw  him  from  his  horse.  And  when  his  com-
panions attempted  to  kill  the  man,  Ratchis  with  his  ac-
customed magnanimity  allowed  him  to  get  away,  and  the
man  crawling  upon  his  hands  and  feet  entered  the  forest
and  escaped.  Two  other  very  strong  men  of  Spoleto
indeed  came  up  behind  Aistulf  on  a certain  bridge,
whereupon  he  struck  one  of  them  with  the  blunt  end  of
his  spear  and  hurled  him  down  from  the  bridge  and
suddenly  turning  upon  the  other,  killed  him  and  plunged
him  into  the  water  after  his  companion.

Chapter  LVII.

But  Liutprand  indeed  when  he  reached  Spoletum
drove  Transamund  from  the  ducal  power  and  made  him
a churchman,1  and  in  his  place  he  appointed  Agiprand

1 After  Transamund  had  been  reinstated  in  the  duchy  of  Spoleto
the  Pope  called  upon  him  to  perform  his  part  of  the  engagement
upon  which  Gregory  had  supported  him,  namely,  to  restore  to
Roman  dominion  the  four  fortified  places  which  had  been  taken
by  the  Langobards,  but  Transamund  refused.  About  this  time
(at  the  end  of  the  year  741)  Gregory  III  died,  and  was  succeeded
in  the  papal  chair  by  Zacharias.  The  new  pope  now  asked  the

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

303

his  own  nephew.  When  he  hastened  to  Beneventum,
Godescalc  having  heard  of  his  approach,  endeavored  to
embark  in  a ship  and  flee  to  Greece.  After  he  had  put
his  wife  and  all  his  goods  in  the  ship  and  attempted
himself,  last  of  all,  to  embark,  the  people  of  Beneven-
tum who  were  faithful  to  Gisulf,  fell  upon  him  and  he
was  killed.  His  wife  indeed  was  carried  to  Constanti-
nople with  everything  she  possessed.

Chapter  LVIII.

Then  king  Liutprand,  arriving  at  Beneventum,1  ap-
pointed his  nephew  Gisulf  duke  again  in  the  place  which
had  belonged  to  him.9  And  when  matters  were  thus
arranged  he  returned  to  his  palace.3  This  most  glorious

king  to  restore  the  four  places,  and  offered  to  support  him  with  a
Roman  army  in  recovering  Spoleto.  The  king  agreed,  and  in  the
spring  of  742  advanced  with  his  army,  as  related  in  the  text,  de-
posed Transamund  with  the  aid  of  the  Romans,  and  then  pro-
ceeded to  Benevento  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  pp.  139,  140).

1 About  742  (Waitz).

•Gisulf  II  reigned  for  ten  years,  outliving  Liutprand  (Hodgkin,
VI,  472).  He  conformed  to  the  policy  of  Liutprand,  who  had
restored  him  to  his  dukedom  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  14 1).

* After  Liutprand  had  recovered  control  of  Spoleto  and  Bene-
vento he  delayed  restoring  the  frontier  cities  to  the  duchy  of  Rome
(VI,  55,  note  supra ),  and  Pope  Zacharias  set  forth  with  a train  of
ecclesiastics  to  Temi,  where  the  king  resided,  for  a personal  inter-
view, as  a result  of  which  the  four  cities  were  restored,  with  other
territory,  and  a peace  was  concluded  for  twenty  years.  But  in
the  following  year  Liutprand  resumed  his  preparations  for  the  con-
quest of  Ravenna,  and  Zacharias,  at  the  request  of  the  exarch,
journeyed  to  Pavia  to  the  king,  and  in  a second  interview  en-

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

304

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

king  built  many  churches  in  honor  of  Christ  in  the  var-
ious places  where  he  was  accustomed  to  stay.  He
established  the  monastery  of  St.  Peter  which  was  situ-
ated outside  the  walls  of  the  city  of  Ticinum  and  was
called  the  “ Golden  Heaven.”

He  built  also  on  the  top  of  Bardo’s  Alp  a monastery
which  is  called  “ Bercetum.”  * He  also  established  in
Olonna,  his  suburban  manor,  a dwelling  to  Christ  of
wonderful  workmanship  in  honor  of  the  holy  martyr
Anastasius,  and  in  it  also  he  made  a monastery.  In
like  manner  too  he  established  many  churches  to  God
in  different  places.  Within  his  palace  also  he  built  a
chapel  of  our  Lord  the  Saviour  and  he  appointed
priests  and  churchmen  to  perform  for  him  daily  divine
services,  which  no  other  kings  had  had.  In  the  time  of
this  king  there  was  in  the  place  whose  name  is  Forum  a
(Foro  di  Fulvio),  near  the  river  Tanarus,  (Tanaro)  a
man  of  wonderful  holiness  Baodolinus  by  name,  who,

treated  him  to  desist.  Liutprand  reluctantly  consented  to  restore
the  country  districts  around  Ravenna  and  two-thirds  of  the  terri-
tory of  Cesena,  and  to  grant  a truce  until  the  king’s  emissaries
should  return  from  Constantinople,  whither  they  had  gone  for  the
purpose  of  concluding  a final  treaty.  This  interview  was  one  of
the  last  public  acts  of  Liutprand,  whose  ambition  for  the  unifica-
tion of  Italy  was  thus  at  the  last  moment  apparently  renounced.
Possibly  the  near  approach  of  death  and  his  consciousness  of  the
impossibility  of  his  schemes  of  conquest  being  realized  by  his  suc-
cessor may  have  led  to  their  abandonment  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  144,
145  ; Hodgkin,  491-498).

1 Or,  more  correctly,  Liutprand  endowed  this  monastery,  which
had  been  built  before  (Waitz).

* To-day  Valenza,  near  Alessandria  (Giansevero).

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  VI.

305

aided  by  the  grace  of  Christ,  was  distinguished  for  many
miracles.  He  often  predicted  future  events  and  told  of
absent  things  as  if  they  were  present.  Finally  when
king  Liutprand  had  gone  to  hunt  in  the  City  Forest,
one  of  his  companions  attempted  to  hit  a stag  with  an
arrow  and  unintentionally  wounded  the  king's  nephew,
that  is,  his  sister's  son,  Aufusus  by  name.  When  the
king  saw  this  he  began  with  tears  to  lament  his  mis-
fortune, for  he  loved  that  boy  greatly,  and  straightway
he  sent  a horseman  of  his  followers  to  run  to  Baodo-
linus  the  man  of  God,  and  ask  him  to  pray  to  Christ  for
the  life  of  that  boy.  And  while  he  was  going  to  the
servant  of  God,  the  boy  died.  And  when  he  came  to
him  the  follower  of  Christ  spoke  to  him  as  follows : “ I
know  for  what  cause  you  are  coming,  but  that  which
you  have  been  sent  to  ask  cannot  be  done  since  the  boy
is  dead."  When  he  who  had  been  sent  had  reported  to
the  king  what  he  had  heard  from  the  servant  of  God,
the  king,  although  he  grieved,  because  he  could  not
have  the  accomplishment  of  his  prayer,  nevertheless
clearly  perceived  that  Baodolinus  the  man  of  God  had
the  spirit  of  prophecy.  A man  not  unlike  him,  Teude-
lapius  by  name,  also  lived  at  the  city  of  Verona,  who
among  other  wonderful  things  which  he  performed,
predicted  also  in  a prophetic  spirit  many  things  which
were  to  happen.  In  that  time  also  their  flourished  in
holy  life  and  in  good  works,  Peter,  bishop  of  the  church
of  Ticinum,  who,  because  he  was  a blood  relative  of  the
king  had  been  driven  into  exile  at  Spoletum  by  Aripert
who  was  formerly  king.  To  this  man,  when  he  attended
the, church  of  the  blessed  martyr  Savinus,  that  same

Digitized  by  Caooole

30  6

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

venerable  martyr  foretold  that  he  would  be  bishop  at
Ticinum,  and  afterwards  when  this  occurred,  he  built  a
church  to  that  same  blessed  martyr  Savinus  upon  his
own  ground  in  that  city.  This  man,  among  the  other
virtues  of  an  excellent  life  which  he  possessed,  was  also
distinguished  as  adorned  with  the  flower  of  virgin  chas-
tity. A certain  miracle  of  his  which  was  performed  at
a later  time  we  will  put  in  its  proper  place.*  But  Liut-
prand  indeed  after  he  hail  held  the  sovereignty  thirty
one  years  and  seven  months,  already  mature  in  age,
completed  the  course  of  this  life,*  and  his  body  was
buried  in  the  church  of  the  blessed  martyr  Adrian1 * 3
where  his  father  also  reposes.  He  was  indeed  a man  of
much  wisdom,  very  religious  and  a lover  of  peace,
shrewd  in  counsel,  powerful  in  war,  merciful  to  offenders,
chaste,  modest,  prayerful  in  the  night-watches,  generous
in  charities,  ignorant  of  letters  indeed,  yet  worthy  to  be
likened  to  philosophers,  a supporter  of  his  people,  an
increaser  of  the  law.4  At  the  beginning  of  his  reign  he

1 Paul  died  before  this  history  was  completed,  and  no  account
of  this  miracle  appears.

1 A,  D.  744  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  146).

• He  was  afterwards  buried  in  another  church  (San  Pietro  in
Cielod’Oro).  See  epitaph  in  Waitz.

4 On  the  first  of  March  of  each  year  during  fifteen  out  of  the
thirty-one  years  of  his  reign,  Liutprand,  by  the  advice  of  his
judges  (and  no  longer  under  the  sanction  of  a popular  assembly),
issued  certain  laws  to  settle  matters  not  provided  for  by  his  prede-
cessors. He  claims  that  these  laws  were  framed  by  divine  inspi-
ration, “because  the  king’s  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  God.'*  The
laws  of  Liutprand  were  written  in  Latin  so  barbarous  as  to  be
almost  incomprehensible.  They  show  a great  change  in  tho

Digitized  by

Google

BOOK  VI.  307

took  very  many  fortresses  of  the  Bavarians.  He  relied

social  life  of  the  Langobards.  We  no  longer  find  provisions  in
regard  to  hunting  and  falconry,  but  instead,  there  are  enactments
providing  for  the  enforcement  of  contracts  and  the  foreclosure  of
mortgages.  The  fine  paid  for  murder  is  superseded  by  absolute
confiscation  of  the  offender’s  property,  and  if  that  property  is  in-
sufficient, the  murderer  is  handed  over  to  the  heirs  of  the  murdered
man  as  a slave.  Some  of  these  laws  mention  the  fact  that  they
refer  to  Langobards  only,  and  one  law  concerning  scribes  ordains
that  those  who  write  deeds,  whether  according  to  the  laws  of  the
Langobards  or  those  of  the  Romans , must  not  write  them  contrary
to  these  laws,  thus  indicating  that  at  least  a part  of  the  population
was  governed  to  seme  extent  by  Roman  law.  (Hodgkin,  VI,
392-399).  It  would  be  a necessary  result  of  the  peace  made  at
different  times  between  Langobards  and  Romans  that  the  civil
rights  of  Romans  who  lived  in  the  Langobard  territory  should  be
recognized,  which  was  not  the  case  in  the  earlier  days  of  Lango-
bard domination  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  2-4).  Under  Liutprand's
laws  if  a Roman  married  a Langobard  woman  she  lost  her  status,
and  the  sons  bom  in  such  a union  were  Romans  like  their  father
and  had  to  live  by  his  laws.  There  were  many  laws  against
oppressions  by  the  king’s  agents,  and  heavy  penalties  were  im-
posed upon  judges  who  delayed  judgment.  The  barbarous  wager
of  battle  was  continued,  but  somewhat  restricted,  for  it  was  said,
“We  are  uncertain  about  the  judgment  of  God,  and  we  have
heard  of  many  persons  unjustly  losing  their  cause  by  wager  of
battle,  but  on  account  of  the  custom  of  our  nation  of  the  Lango-
bards we  cannot  change  the  law  itself.”  There  were  severe  laws
against  soothsayers  and  against  certain  forms  of  idolatry.  (Hodg-
kin, VI,  400-407).  A number  of  the  later  provisions  of  Lango-
bard laws  must  be  traced  to  Roman  influence  (Hartmann,  II,  2-29).

There  is  a question  how  far  the  Langobards  supplanted  the
Romans  and  how  far  their  institutions  superseded  those  of  the
Romans.  The  great  preponderance  of  the  Latin  over  the  Ger-
manic ingredients  in  the  Italian  tongue  to-day  and  the  survival  of

Digitized  by

Google

308

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

always  more  upon  prayers  than  upon  arms,  and  always
with  the  greatest  care  kept  peace  with  the  Franks  and
the  Avars.1

Roman  laws  and  institutions  down  to  the  present  time  seems  to
indicate  that  the  Roman  population  and  civilization  greatly  out-
weighed that  of  the  Langobards.  (See  Savigny,  Geschichte  des
Romischen  Rechts  im  Mittelalter,  I,  p.  398.)

IrThe  constant  object  of  Liutprand’s  policy,  at  least  until  his
final  interview  with  pope  Zacharias,  was  the  unification  of  Italy
under  his  own  scepter,  though  the  means  he  took  for  the  accom-
plishment of  this  object  varied  with  the  occasion.  For  this  pur-
pose the  friendship  of  the  Frankish  king  was  necessary  and  this
he  constantly  maintained,  aiding  Charles  Martel  against  the  Sara-
cens without  claiming  any  territorial  concessions  at  his  hands.
The  principal  objects  of  Liutprand’s  aggressions  during  the  greater
part  of  his  career  were  the  duchies  of  Spoleto  and  Benevento  so
far  as  these  aspired  to  independent  sovereignty;  also  the  Eastern
Empire,  though  he  allied  himself  with  the  exarch  when  he  found
it  necessary  for  the  purpose  of  reducing  the  duchies  to  submission.
The  Catholic  church  and  the  papacy  were  protected  by  him,  and
he  encouraged  the  movement  in  favor  of  the  autonomy  of  Italy
against  Byzantium,  until  the  pope  identified  himself  with  the  re-
bellious dukes.  Even  then  Liutprand’s  opposition  to  the  papacy
remained  always  of  a political,  and  not  of  a religious  character
(Hartmann,  II,  2,  125,  126).  He  encouraged  the  culture  as  well
as  the  religion  of  Rome,  and  his  aim  was  to  rule  ultimately  over  a
civilized,  as  well  as  a Catholic  Italy.  lie  adapted  himself  to
general  as  well  as  local  currents  of  popular  opinion,  as  is  seen  in
the  fact  that  he  retained  in  his  laws  the  trial  by  battle  while  ex-
pressing his  own  disbelief  in  its  justice  and  that  he  gave  to  Bene-
vento and  to  Friuli  rulers  of  their  own  princely  lines,  after  he  had
subjugated  them  to  his  authority.  He  always  recognized  the
limits  of  possible  achievement,  and  did  not,  like  his  successor
Aistulf,  contend  madly  against  the  inevitable.  He  was  an  effi-
cient administrator  and  an  able  legislator  as  well  as  a courageous

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  VI.

309

and  successful  warrior.  And  yet  this  really  great  statesman,  like
his  distinguished  Ostrogothic  predecessor  Theodoric,  could  neither
read  nor  write  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  127).

Paul’s  last  book  contains  many  grammatical  errors  and  faults
of  construction.  It  was  more  carelessly  written  than  the  preceding
portions  of  the  work,  and  being  the  last  book  of  an  unfinished  his-
tory, it  is  itself  somewhat  incomplete.

It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  that  Paul’s  work  ceases  at  the  very
place  where,  independently  of  other  sources,  he  could  have  told
his  story  in  great  part  out  of  the  rich  abundance  of  his  own  experi-
ence. From  his  position  toward  the  last  Langobard  princes  on
the  one  side  and  their  Frankish  conquerors  and  the  church  upon
the  other,  he  possessed  the  highest  qualifications  for  writing  an
impartial  contemporary  history  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Langobard
kingdom,  yet  for  this  period,  the  most  pregnant  of  all  in  its  re-
sults on  general  history,  we  have  only  the  meager  accounts  of  the
Frankish  authorities,  and  the  papal  writings  which  are  filled  with
partisan  spirit.  The  most  important  source  for  the  last  half  cen-
tury of  the  Langobard  kingdom  is  found  in  the  lives  of  the  Roman
popes,  composed  by  members  of  the  Roman  court,  mostly  con-
temporaneous, and  collected  by  Anastasius  in  the  second  half  of
the  ninth  century.  Besides  these  we  have  the  letters  of  the  popes
to  the  Frankish  kings  and  such  authorities  as  the  Chronicle  of  the
monk  Benedict  of  Soracte,  the  Legend  of  St.  Julia,  the  legendary
Life  of  Saints  Amelius  and  Amicus,  and  the  Chronicles  of  Nova-
lese  and  Salerno  (Abel,  p.  xxiv  to  xxvi).

Our  knowledge  of  the  last  days  of  the  Langobard  kingdom  is
therefore  very  fragmentary  and  great  care  is  required  even  in  the
use  of  the  slender  materials  we  have.  No  adequate  explanation
is  given  in  them  for  the  extraordinary  fact  that  a powerful  and
freedom-loving  people,  fifty  years  after  it  had  reached  the  summit
of  its  power  under  king  Liutprand,  was  overthrown  and  became
the  spoil  of  its  Frankish  neighbor.

A closer  investigation  shows  that  this  was  due  to  the  lack  of  any
proper  law  of  succession  to  the  Langobard  throne,  to  the  absence
of  sufficient  cohesive  power  in  the  monarchy,  to  the  intractable
character  of  the  Langobard  nobles,  to  increasing  difficulties  with

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

3io

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

the  church,  and  to  the  civil  disturbances  and  quarrels  occasioned
by  all  these  causes.  After  the  time  of  Gregory  I,  the  independ-
ence of  the  papacy  and  its  desire  for  temporal  power  greatly
increased,  while  the  authority  of  the  Greek  empire  over  its  scat-
tered Italian  possessions  grew  constantly  weaker.  Charles  Martel
was  bound  to  Liutprand  by  friendship  and  by  the  need  of  aid
against  the  Saracens,  but  after  Liutprand’ s death  the  relations
between  the  Franks  and  the  Langobards  became  more  strained.
(Abel,  xxvii,  et  seq.)  Liutprand’ s successor,  Hildeprand,  did  not
possess  sufficient  skill  either  to  conciliate  the  adherents  of  the
Pope  or  to  control  his  Langobard  subjects.  Duke  Transamund
was  reinstated  in  Spoleto,  and  soon  the  most  powerful  Langobard
leader  in  the  north,  duke  Ratchis  of  Friuli,  was  chosen  king  by
his  dependents,  and  Hildeprand  was  deposed  after  a reign  of  only
eight  months.  Ratchis,  whose  diplomatic  character  had  been
shown  in  his  career  under  Liutprand,  now  concluded  a twenty
years*  truce  with  Rome,  but  from  some  cause  unknown  to  us,  diffi-
culties afterwards  arose,  and  he  found  himself  constrained  to
attack  the  Pentapolis  and  to  lay  siege  to  Perugia.  The  Pope
came  from  Rome  with  a train  of  followers,  visited  the  camp  of
Ratchis,  and  in  a personal  interview  induced  him  to  desist  from
his  undertaking.  This  subserviency  to  papal  influence,  however,
aroused  the  contempt  of  his  own  nobles  and  followers,  who  in
Milan,  in  June,  749,  chose  as  their  king  his  younger  brother
Aistulf,  a man  of  headstrong  and  unyielding  character,  whereupon
Ratchis  became  a monk  in  the  cloister  of  Monte  Cassino.  Aistulf
now  began  a career  of  conquest,  capturing  Comacchio  and  Fer-
rara, and  within  two  years  from  his  accession,  Ravenna,  the
capital  of  the  exarchate,  was  in  his  hands.  Then  he  pushed  on
to  Rome,  and  thus  gave  occasion  to  the  coalition  between  the
papacy  and  the  Frankish  kingdom,  which  ultimately  led  to  the
overthrow  of  the  Langobard  dominion.  (Hartmann,  II,  2,  146-
1 5 1 .)  Owing  to  the  weakness  of  the  empire  and  to  the  theological
and  other  differences  between  Rome  and  Byzantium,  the  practical
separation  of  the  West  from  the  East  was  already  far  advanced,
and  the  spiritual  influence  of  the  pontiff  over  the  countries  of  the
West,  stimulated  by  reforms  in  the  church  and  by  numerous  pil-

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

BOOK  VI.

311

grimages  to  Rome  from  Britain  and  other  countries,  was  becoming
very  powerful.  Charles  Martel  had  been  succeeded  by  Pipin,
who  desired  to  change  his  title  of  Mayor  of  the  Palace  (where  he
reigned  in  the  name  of  a helpless  Merovingian  monarch)  to  that
of  king,  and  who  wished  to  secure  the  recognition  of  his  new  title,
not  only  by  the  chiefs  and  nobles  of  his  realm,  but  also  by  the
church  and  by  the  Roman  empire.  Accordingly  he  sent  an  em-
bassy to  Rome  to  enquire  of  the  Pope  whether  it  was  proper  that
in  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks  there  should  be  kings  who  possessed
no  kingly  power,  and  the  Pope  answered,  as  had  been  anticipated,
that  it  would  be  better  that  he  who  had  the  power  should  be  the
monarch.  Pipin  now  assumed  that  he  was  called  to  the  sover-
eignty by  apostolic  authority.  The  Franks  assembled  at  Soissons
and  chose  him  as  their  king,  and  he  ascended  the  throne  in  No-
vember, 751,  while  the  last  Merovingian  monarch  was  sent  to  a
cloister.  The  papacy  had  thus  rendered  the  new  Frankish  king
a most  important  service,  and  now  when  it  found  itself  in  peril
from  the  Langobards  it  was  natural  that  a return  should  be  solic-
ited. In  June,  752,  when  Aistulf  with  his  army  threatened  Rome,
Stephan,  who  had  succeeded  Zacharias  in  the  papacy,  secretly
sent  a message  to  Pipin  imploring  him  to  send  ambassadors  to
that  city  to  conduct  the  Pope  to  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks.  Not
long  afterwards  an  imperial  messenger  from  Constantinople
brought  word  to  Stephan  that  the  emperor  could  send  no  help,
but  he  commanded  the  Pope  to  seek  a personal  interview  with  the
Langobard  king  and  induce  him  if  possible  to  relinquish  his  de-
signs. In  the  meantime  Pipin’  s ambassadors  had  come  to  con-
duct the  Pope  to  the  Frankish  king,  and  in  October,  753,  Stephan,
in  company  with  these,  as  well  as  the  imperial  representatives,
proceeded  to  Aistulf,  who  had  withrawn  from  Rome  and  was  then
at  Pavia,  his  own  capital  city.  He  refused,  however,  to  abate  his
pretentions  or  to  restore  any  of  the  territory  he  had  taken  from
the  empire.  The  emissaries  of  the  Frankish  king  now  requested
Aistulf  to  dismiss  the  Pope  that  he  might  go  with  them  to  Pipin.
Aistulf  fell  into  a fury  at  the  prospect  of  his  plans  being  thwarted
by  a combination  with  the  Franks,  but  he  did  not  venture  to  re-
strain the  Pope  and  thus  bring  on  an  inevitable  conflict.  Stephan

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

312

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

proceeded  upon  his  journey,  and  Pipin,  after  an  assembly  of  the
Frankish  kingdom  had  ratified  his  policy,  agreed  to  restore,  not
to  the  emperor,  but  to  the  representative  of  St.  Peter,  the  terri-
tories that  had  been  seized  by  the  Langobard  king.  Pipin  and
his  two  sons,  Charles  and  Carloman,  were  now  consecrated  by  the
Pope,  and  the  Frankish  nobles  bound  themselves  under  pain  of
excommunication  to  choose  no  sovereign  from  any  other  line.
The  Frankish  authorities  relate  that  the  king  and  his  sons  were  at
the  same  time  made  patricians,  which  was  an  imperial  rank,  and
implied  a recognition  of  their  title  at  Constantinople.  (Hartmann,
2,  176-187.)  This  title  may  have  been  granted  in  accordance
with  a previous  understanding  with  the  emperor  or  his  representa-
tives, but  if  so  the  empire  subsequently  derived  little  advantage
from  the  act.

The  league  between  Pipin  and  the  Pope  was  thus  sealed  by
the  mutual  exchange  of  possession  that  belonged  to  neither,  since
Stephan  gave  Pipin  the  crown  of  the  Merovingians,  and  the  king
promised  the  Pope  the  territories  which  had  belonged  to  the
empire  (Abel,  xxviii,  xxix).  The  king  accordingly  set  out  with
his  army  for  Italy ; defeated  Aistulf  near  the  foot  of  the  Alps
and  laid  siege  to  Pavia,  whereupon  the  Langobard  king  agreed  to
restore  Ravenna  and  the  rest  of  the  conquered  territory  and  to
comply  with  the  Pope’s  demands.  But  scarcely  had  the  Franks
left  Italy  when  he  repudiated  his  promises,  and  in  January,  756  he
renewed  his  attack  upon  Rome.  Again  Stephan  implored  and
secured  the  intervention  of  the  Franks,  again  Aistulf  was  defeated
and  besieged  in  his  capital  city  and  again  Pipin  “gave  him  his
life  and  his  kingdom, ' ’ but  upon  condition  that  Aistulf  should  not
only  restore  the  captured  territory,  but  should  give  to  the  Franks
one-third  of  the  royal  treasure  in  Pavia  besides  other  gifts,  and  pay
an  annual  tribute  of  twelve  thousand  solidi.  Aistulf  did  not  long
survive  this  last  humiliation,  he  died  in  December,  756  (Hart-
mann, II,  2,  189  to  197),  from  an  accident  while  hunting.  His
brother  Ratchis  now  forsook  his  monastery,  and  was  recognized
as  king  by  the  Langobards  north  of  the  Apennines,  while  De-
siderius,  a duke  in  Tuscia,  set  up  his  own  pretensions  to  the  throne
and  the  Spoletans  and  Beneventans  joined  the  league  of  the  Pope

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

BOOK  vr.

3*3

with  the  Frankish  king.  Ratchis  appeared  to  have  the  advantage
of  Desiderius  until  the  latter  appealed  to  Stephan,  who  required
from  him  an  oath  to  surrender  the  cities  belonging  to  the  empire
and  to  live  in  peace  with  Roifte  and  faithful  to  the  Frankish  king-
dom. Upon  these  terms  Stephan  agreed  to  support  his  preten-
sions; he  now  became  undisputed  king  and  Ratchis  again  retired.
Faenza  and  Ferrara  however  were  the  only  territories  he  had  sur-
rendered when  Stephan  died  and  was  succeeded  by  his  brother
Paul,  whereupon  Desiderius,  far  from  fulfilling  his  promises,
pushed  forward  with  his  army  through  the  papal  Pentapolis  into
Spoleto,  treated  its  duke  as  a rebel,  expelled  the  duke  of  Bene-
vento  and  put  his  own  son-in-law  Arichis  into  the  vacant  place.
He  raised  difficulties  in  respect  to  the  boundaries  of  the  places  to
be  ceded,  but  by  Pipin’ s intervention  a compromise  was  effected
by  which  the  Pope  renounced  his  claim  upon  the  territories  not
yet  surrendered,  and  Desiderius  agreed  to  recognize  the  Pope’s
authority  over  his  Italian  possessions  and  to  protect  him  against
an  attack  from  his  own  nominal  sovereign  the  emperor  (Hart-
mann, II,  2,  206-215).

In  768  Pipin  died  and  was  succeeded  by  his  sons  Charles  and
Carloman,  whose  mother  Bertrada  sought  an  alliance  with  the
Bavarians  and  the  Langobards,  and  asked  for  the  hand  of  the
daughter  of  Desiderius  for  Charles.  In  771  Carloman  died,
whereupon  Charles  seized  his  brother’s  share  of  the  kingdom,  re-
pudiated the  marriage  planned  for  him  by  his  mother  and  sent
back  the  daughter  of  Desiderius.  The  widow  and  children  of
Carloman  were  now  taken  under  the  protection  of  the  Langobard
monarch,  and  deadly  hatred  arose  between  the  two  sovereigns.
Desiderius  now  seized  Faenza,  Ferrara  and  Comacchio  and  pushed
forward  into  the  territories  of  Ravenna  and  Rome.  Hadrian,  who
then  occupied  the  papal  throne,  urgently  besought  Charlemagne
for  immediate  aid.  Charlemagne  traversed  the  passes  of  the
Alps,  marched  against  Desiderius  and  laid  siege  to  Pavia.  In
June,  774,  the  city  was  taken,  Desiderius  was  led  into  cap-
tivity and  the  kingdom  of  the  Langobards  was  destroyed.  Charle-
magne was  afterwards  crowned  Emperor  of  the  West  and  the
temporal  power  of  the  papacy  over  a region  in  the  middle  of  Italy

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

314

HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

was  permanently  established  (Abel,  xxvii  to  xxix).  Grievous
consequences  have  followed  the  division  of  that  peninsula  into
fragments  which  have  continued  almost  to  the  present  time;  and
the  dream  of  Italian  unity  cherished  by  Rothari  and  Liutprand
was  not  to  be  realized  until  the  days  of  Victor  Emmanuel,  Cavour
and  Garibaldi.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle  •

APPENDIX  I.

ETHNOLOGICAL  STATUS  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.

Bruckner  (Sprache  der  Langobarden \ pp.  24  to  32)  remarks
that  it  is  usual  to  consider  the  Langobards  as  a Suevian  and
therefore  a High-German  stock,  but  that  Mtillenhof  in  his  dis-
cussion concerning  the  German  peoples  on  the  North  and  Baltic
seas  pronounces  the  Langobards  to  be  Ingvaeones1  closely
allied  in  saga  and  history  with  the  peoples  of  the  peninsula  of
Jutland.  As  evidence  that  the  Langobards  are  Suevians,  the
statements  of  Tacitus  and  Ptolemy  and  the  progressive  change
of  mute  consonants  which  has  taken  place  in  the  Langobard
language  are  adduced.  But  with  Tacitus  and  Ptolemy  many
tribes  were  included  under  name  of  Suevi  that  were  not  of
Suevian  origin,  for  example  the  Angles  who  were  Ingvaeones,
and  with  these  authors  the  name  Suevi  possibly  had  a politi-
cal meaning  designating  the  great  league  under  Marobod.
That  the  Langobards  in  their  language  made  the  progressive
change  in  mute  consonants  common  to  High- Germans,  Bruck-
ner does  not  consider  conclusive,  since  even  in  their  abodes  on
the  lower  Elbe  they  were  neighbors  of  the  Suevi,  and  after  their
migration  to  the  south  at  the  end  of  the  third  century  they
completely  lost  their  connection  with  other  Ingvaeones  and
came  into  contact  with  numerous  High-  German  races  until  at
last  in  Italy  they  became  the  neighbors  of  the  Bavarians  and

1 Tacitus  (Germania,  II)  divides  the  West-German  peoples  into
three  principal  classes,  Ingvaeones  (or  Ingaevones),  Hermiones
and  Istaevones  from  the  names  of  the  three  sons  of  Mannus  from
whom  they  were  supposed  to  be  descended.  The  Ingvaeones
lived  by  the  sea  (id.)  and  included  the  Low-German  tribes  (Zeuss,
7®.  70-

(315)

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

3i6

APPENDIX  I.

the  Alamanni.  If,  therefore,  the  same  changes  of  language
occurred  in  the  Langobard  as  in  the  High- German  dialects,
this  would  not  prove  the  Suevian  origin  of  that  people.

On  the  other  hand,  Langobard  jurisprudence  does  not  closely
resemble  that  of  the  Franks  and  other  High-German  races ,
but  forms  a group  with  that  of  the  Old- Saxons  and  Anglo-
Saxons.  A series  of  similar  legal  principles  has  been  collected  ,
the  relationship  between  Langobard  and  Saxon  law  has  been
shown,  as  well  as  certain  characteristic  resemblances  in  Anglo-
Saxon  and  Langobard  constitutions  and  a great  similarity  be-
tween Langobard  and  Scandinavian  laws  and  customs.

The  vocabulary  of  the  Langobard  language  shows  numerous
points  of  close  resemblance  with  that  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  and
the  Old- Saxon,  particularly  in  legal  expressions,  and  the  inflec-
tion agrees  in  the  few  points  which  we  can  recognize  with  cer-
tainty and  indeed  in  some  points  in  which  the  Old-High-
German  varies  from  the  Old-Saxon  and  the  Anglo-Saxon.
Thus  the  Langobard  shows  the  distinction  between  long  and
short  syllabled  i roots  in  the  nominative  singular  and  between
short  and  long  syllabled  feminine  a roots  which  latter  distinc-
tion occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Anglo-Saxon.

There  is  also  a remarkable  resemblance  in  saga  and  myth.
For  example , the  Langobards  gave  special  reverence  to  Wotan
and  his  wife  Frea  whose  worship  was  indigenous  to  the  people
of  North  Germany  and  Scandinavia,  but  not  to  the  High- Ger-
man races.  It  is  further  known  that  the  Anglo-Saxon  hero
Sceaf  is  named  in  the  Widsith  or  Traveller’s  Song  (see  Hodgkin
V,  176)  as  king  of  the  Langobards,  (Koegel,  Geschichte  d.  d.
Litteratur  i , 1 04  ) . Bruckner  finds  a resemblance  in  the  names
of  the  kings  of  the  Langobards,  as  shown  by  the  genealogy  of
Rothari,  with  those  of  the  kings  of  the  Anglo-Saxons ; and  he
also  refers  to  the  fact  that  the  old  Langobard  costumes  were
similar  to  those  of  the  Anglo-Saxons  ( Paul  I V , 2 2 ) . For  these
reasons  he  believes  that  the  language  of  the  Langobards  became

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

ETHNOLOGICAL  STATUS  OF  THE  LANGOBARDS.  3 1 ?

modified  after  their  migration  toward  the  south,  and  he  places
that  people  with  the  Anglo-Frisian  group  of  Ingvseones.

Hodgkin  (V,  152,  153)  also  speaks  of  the  difference  of
opinion  as  to  the  ethnological  position  of  the  Langobards,  men-
tions the  contention  of  Bluhme  for  their  Low-German  charac-
ter, and  that  of  Schmidt  (p.  74)  for  their  High-German
origin,  and  thus  concludes : “We  have  in  the  Lombards,  as
I venture  to  think,  a race  originally  of  Low-German  origin,
coming  from  the  coasts  and  islands  of  the  Baltic,  and  closely
akin  to  our  own  Anglo-Saxon  forefathers.  So  far  the  case
seems  clear,  and  probably  the  Lombards  spoke  a pure  Low-
German  dialect  when  they  dwelt  in  Bardengau  by  the  Elbe
and  when  they  fought  with  the  Vandals.  But  by  about  the
middle  of  the  second  century  after  Christ  they  gravitated
towards  the  great  Suevic  confederation  and  visited,  in  its
train,  the  lands  of  the  Middle  Danube,  where  (if  I read  their
history  aright)  they  remained  more  or  less  persistently  for
nearly  four  hundred  years.  This  surely  was  a long  enough
time  to  give  a Suevic,  that  is,  a Swabian  or  High-German,
character  to  their  speech,  sufficient  time  to  change  their  B’s
into  P’s,  their  G’s  into  K’s,  and  their  T’s  into  Z’s  before  they
emerged  into  the  world  of  book-writing  and  book-reading
men.”

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

APPENDIX  II.

sources  of  Paul’s  history  of  the  langobards.

The  overthrow  of  the  Roman  empire  had  as  its  necessary
result  that  in  the  different  political  territories  comprising  it,  the
historical  literature  of  one  people  was  superimposed  upon  that
of  another.  There  were  soon  formed  three  principal  groups,
that  of  the  Eastern  empire,  that  of  the  Langobards  and  that  of
the  Franks.  Naturally  these  did  not  stand  shut  off  and  dis-
connected from  each  other  but  they  were  mutually  intertwined.
No  author  has  worked  together  these  three  groups  in  connection
with  the  history  of  the  undivided  Roman  empire  in  so  compre-
hensive a manner  as  Paul.  In  this  way  direction  is  given  to
the  investigation  of  the  sources  of  his  history.  These  three
masses  are  first  to  be  separated  (Mommsen,  p.  56).  We  have
therefore  :

(a)  Frankish  sources,1

(b)  Langobard  sources,

(c)  Roman  sources.

(a)  FRANKISH  SOURCES.

For  the  Frankish  tradition  Paul  has  used  almost  exclusively
in  the  first  part  of  his  narrative  the  “ History  of  the  Franks  99
by  Gregory  of  Tours.2  He  omits  the  earlier  portions  of  that

1 These  being  the  simplest  are  considered  first.  I follow
Mommsen's  order  in  this  discussion.

2 Georgius  Florentius,  who  afterwards  took  the  ecclesiastical
name  of  Gregory,  was  born  about  538  at  Clermont  Ferrand,
Auvergne,  France,  became  bishop  of  Tours  573,  died  594  or  595.
His  history,  written  in  most  ungrammatical  Latin,  is  of  the  highest
authority  in  regard  to  Frankish  affairs,  for  the  period  561  to  591

(318)

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

FRANKISH  SOURCES.

319

history,  but  from  the  time  of  the  immigration  of  the  Lango-
bards  into  Italy,  which  makes  them  the  neighbors  of  the
Franks,  he  uses  the  work  in  a general  way  and  especially  in
regard  to  the  relations  between  these  two  peoples,  and  he
often  transcribes  it,  as  he  himself  says  (III,  29) , “ almost  in
the  same  words  Paul’s  third  book  consists  in  greater  part
of  such  excerpts  (Mommsen,  57).

From  Gregory  is  taken  (Jacobi,  33-37)  the  statement  that
Buccelinus  (P.  II , 2 ; Greg.  Ill , 32  ) sent  booty  to  Theudepert ;
the  account  of  the  help  which  Alboin  received  from  the  Saxons
for  his  expedition  to  Italy  (P.  II,  6 ; Gregory  IV,  42-43  ; V,
15  ) ; the  enumeration  of  the  sons  of  Chlothar,  who  were  reign-
ing when  the  Langobards  invaded  Italy  (P.  II,  10 ; Greg.  IV,
22),  and  the  wars  of  Sigisbert  with  the  Avars  (id.  IV,  23,  29)
as  well  as  his  marriage  with  Brunicheldis,  (id.  IV,  27).

There  are  some  mistakes  in  Paul’s  citations  from  Gregory.
Thus  Gregory  mentions  (IV,  41 ) the  expedition  of  Alboin  and
adds  that  in  seven  years  the  conquest  of  the  country  was  com-
pleted amid  great  devastation.  Paul  relates  (II,  32)  that  this
occured  in  the  seventh  yea  rafter  Alboin’s arrival  (Jacobi,  34).

Gregory  is  the  source  also  (Jacobi,  35)  for  Paul’s  account  of
St.  Hospitius  (P.  Ill,  1 , 2 : Greg.  VI,  6)  ; of  the  irruption  of
the  Langobards  and  Saxons  into  Provence  and  their  repulse  by
Mummulus  (P.  Ill,  3,  4 ; Greg.  IV.  42)  ; of  the  return  of  the
Saxons  to  their  former  abodes  (III,  5,6;  Greg.  IV,  42)  ; of
their  conflicts  there  and  their  overthrow  by  the  Suevians  (P.
Ill,  7 ; Greg.  V,  15)  ; of  the  foray  of  the  three  Langobard
dukes  Amo,  Zaban  and  Rodanus  (P.  Ill,  8 ; Greg.  IV,  44)  ;
of  the  murder  of  Sigisbert  I (P.  Ill,  10 ; Greg.  IV,  51,  52,
V,  I)  and  the  succession  of  Childebert  II.  Paul  copies  in

when  it  closes.  He  is  less  reliable  as  to  external  matters  and  his
sketches  of  the  Langobard  campaigns  in  the  south  of  Gaul  are
meaner  and  unsatisfactory  (Hodgkin,  V,  179  to  181).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

320

APPENDIX  II.

full  detail  from  Gregory  the  account  of  Justin  II  and  Tiberius
II  (P.  Ill,  ii,  12,  13,  15  ; Greg.  IV,  40;  V,  19,  30;  VI,
2,  30)  but  upsets  the  chronology  (see  note  P.  Ill,  11)  as  he
also  does  in  transcribing  the  account  of  the  subsidy  paid  by  the
emperor  Maurice  to  Childepert  for  the  invasion  of  Italy  (P.
Ill,  17,  note,  also  P.  Ill,  22  ; Greg.  VI,  42  ; VIII,  18 ; See
Jacobi,  35  ).  The  narrative  of  the  irruption  of  a Frankish  army
into  Italy  in  588  and  its  overthrow  (P.  Ill,  29;  Greg.  IX,
25)  and  of  the  campaign  of  590  (P.  Ill,  31)  also  come  from
Gregory  (X,  2,  3).  As  to  the  events  in  Spain  and  the  rela-
tion between  the  Gothic  and  Frankish  kingdoms  resulting
therefrom  (III,  21)  Paul  treats  Gregory’s  account  as  given  too
much  in  detail  and  uses  Bede’s  Chronicle  (AM.  4536)  in  part,
instead1  (See  note  supra,  III,  21).

Paul  also  took  from  Gregory  the  account  of  the  negotiations
of  king  Authari  (P.  Ill,  28 ; Greg.  IX,  25)  for  the  sister  of
Childepert  and  how  Childepert  in  violation  of  his  promises  gave
her  to  the  Catholic  king  of  the  Goths ; also  the  fable  of  the
dragon  seen  in  the  Tiber,  the  account  of  the  seven-fold  litany
(P.  Ill,  24 ; Greg.  X,  1)  and  the  embassy  to  Childepert  (P.
Ill,  35  ; Gregory  X,  3)  on  the  death  of  Authari.  The  use  of
Gregory  as  an  authority  here  ceases  (Jacobi,  37).

The  history  of  Gregory  of  Tours  comes  down  to  591  and
after  this  period  Paul’s  accounts  of  events  in  the  Frankish
kingdom  become  very  scanty  (Mommsen,  p.  57).  He  adds  a
legend  however,  which  he  learned  in  France  regarding  king
Gunthram  which,  as  he  says,  was  not  included  in  the  History
of  the  Franks  (III,  34  ; Momm,,  p.  57).  There  is  consider-
able doubt  what  other  Frankish  sources,  if  any,  he  has  used.
An  important  authority  at  this  period  is  the  so-called  Frede-

1 Gregory’s  statement  that  Ingunde  died  in  Africa  (Greg.,  VIII,
21,  28)  is  to  be  preferred  to  that  of  Paul  (III,  21)  who  says  she
died  in  Sicily  (Jacobi,  36,  37).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

FRANKISH  SOURCES.

321

gar ius,  the  name  assigned  to  the  unknown  compiler  or  com-
pilers of  a work  coming  down  to  642. 1 There  is  much
difference  of  opinion  whether  Paul  has  used  this  authority.
Points  of  resemblance  appear  between  the  two  accounts ; for
instance,  Paul’s  statement  (II,  5)  that  the  empress  Sophia
sent  word  to  Narses  that  she  would  make  him  portion  out  the
tasks  of  wool  in  the  womens’  chamber,  to  which  Narses  an-
swered that  he  would  prepare  her  such  a web  as  she  could
not  unravel  in  her  lifetime.  Fredegarius  (Epit.,  ch.  65)  re-
lates a similar  circumstance  although  the  words  are  different.
Moreover  a story  like  that  which  Paul  tells  of  the  marriage  of
Theudelinda  with  Agilulf  (III,  35)  is  related  by  Fredegarius
(Chron.,  ch.  70)  of  Rothari  and  Gundeperga,  the  widow  of
Arioald.  According  to  Fredegarius  (ch.  51,  70,  71)  Gunde-
perga had  to  suffer  both  from  Arioald  and  from  Rothari  quite
similar  treatment  as  from  Rodoald  according  to  Paul.  Frede-
garius (Chron.,  ch.  34)  says  that  Agilulf  and  Theudelinda  had
caused  the  murder  of  Gunduald  from  jealousy  of  his  popular-
ity, while  Paul  says  (IV,  40)  that  the  author  of  the  deed  is
unknown.  Pabst  (Forsch.,  428,  n.  4)  considers  Paul’s
statement  (IV.,  41)  that  Adaloald  was  deposed  after  a ten
years’  reign  on  account  of  insanity,  as  a simple  extract  from  the
chronicle  of  Fredegarius  (ch.  49).  But  Fredegarius  says  noth-
ing of  Theudelinda  reigning  with  her  son,  although  the  Lango-
bard  Chronicler  of  the  year  641  confirms  this  (Jacobi,  39).

1 Fredegarius  was  apparently  a Burgundian  ecclesiastic  who,  in
the  first  three  books  of  his  Chronicle,  which  began  with  the  crea-
tion of  the  world,  copied  from  Gregory’s  history,  inserting  long
passages  from  Jerome,  Hippolytus,  Idatius  and  Isidore,  but  in  the
fourth  book,  which  commences  in  the  year  583,  he  writes  as  a more
independent  historian  and  continues  the  work  of  Gregory  to  a later
period.  He  died  probably  before  663.  From  about  631  he
speaks  as  a contemporary,  though  he  is  often  ill-informed  and  in-
accurate (Hodgkin,  VI,  149).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

322

APPENDIX  II.

Paul’s  accounts  concerning  Frankish  history  from  590  to
612  need  not  be  traced  to  Fredegarius.  Paul  mentions  a war
about  593  (IV,  4)  between  Childepert  II  and  the  son  of
Hilperic,  a bloody  rain  in  the  land  of  the  Briones  and  a stream
of  blood  in  the  Renus,  all  which  are  lacking  in  Fredegarius.
So  also  the  statement  that  Childepert  made  Tassilo  king
(IV,  7)  in  Bavaria.  Paul  relates  the  death  of  Childepert  II
and  his  wife  by  poison  (IV,  n);  Fredegarius  (Chron.,  ch.
16)  merely  says  Childepert  died.  Paul  puts  Childepert’s
death  before  that  of  Gunthram,  which,  according  to  Frede-
garius, occurred  four  years  earlier  (Jacobi,  40).  Fredegarius
has  no  account  of  the  invasion  of  the  Avars  into  Thuringia
mentioned  by  Paul  (IV,  n)  ; nor  of  the  peace  between  Agilulf
and  Theoderic  (P.  IV,  13).  When  therefore  Paul  (IV,  15)
speaks  of  the  appearances  in  the  heavens  in  almost  the  same
words  as  Fredegarius  (Chron.,  ch.  20)  the  resemblance  is
either  accidental  or  is  due  to  the  use  by  these  two  authors  of
a common  source , since  Paul  immediately  adds  an  account  of
a war  between  Clothar  and  Theudepert,  while  according  to
Fredegarius,  Clothar  fought  with  the  two  sons  of  Childepert
(Chron.,  ch.  20).  Paul’s  statement  (IV,  28)  regarding  the
war  is  so  indefinite  that  a conclusion  that  it  was  drawn  from
Fredegarius  cannot  be  made.  Paul  also  states  quite  briefly
(IV,  40)  Theudepert’s  death,  while  Fredegarius  describes  his
overthrow  in  detail,  but  omits  his  death  (ch.  38).  All  these
occurrences  took  place  between  590  and  618  and  it  does  not
speak  in  favor  of  the  use  of  Fredegarius  that  Paul  from  that
time  to  663  omits  all  Frankish  history,  and  first  mentions,
(V,  5)  a legendary  victory  of  Grimuald  at  Rivoli  over  a
Frankish  army  from  Provence,  which  the  Frankish  sources  do
not  speak  of.

As  the  result  of  his  investigation  Jacobi  concludes  (41)  that
if  any  use  was  made  by  Paul  of  Fredegarius  it  must  be  limited
to  the  story  of  the  flight  of  Cesara,  the  Persian  queen,  to

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

FRANKISH  SOURCES.

323

Constantinople  (IV,  50 ; Fred.  Chron.,  ch.  9)  and  that  Paul’s
statements  regarding  Frankish  history  are  to  be  traced,  not  to
Fredegarius,  but  to  Secundus.

Even  as  to  Cesara  the  use  of  Fredegarius  seems  improbable,
for  while  Paul  makes  the  Persian  king  come  to  Constantinople
for  baptism  (IV,  50), according  to  Fredegarius  (Chron., ch.  9)
the  scene  occurs  at  Antioch ; Fredegarius  gives  the  name  of  the
Persian  king  as  Anaulf,  Paul  does  not  name  him ; Fredegarius
puts  the  whole  occurrence  in  588,  about  eight  years  earlier
than  Paul.  Jacobi  explains  these  discrepancies  by  adopting  the
view  that  Paul  did  not  have  the  chronicle  immediately  before
him,  but  inserted  the  story  from  memory  or  from  a short  ex-
tract. It  seems  more  probable  that  here , as  well  as  in  matters
relating  to  Frankish  history,  Paul  and  Fredegarius  used  more
or  less  directly  a number  of  the  same  traditions,  and  it  cannot
now  be  determined  which  of  the  two  has  followed  the  original
sources  of  these  traditions  the  more  closely.

The  immediate  use  of  Fredegarius  by  Paul  seems  to  be
disproved  by  another  circumstance  : Fredegarius  speaks  of  the
murder  of  duke  Taso  as  occasioned  by  king  Arioald  (Chron.
79)  but  Paul  says  (IV,  41)  that  no  information  concerning
Arioald  has  come  to  him.  How  then  can  he  have  consulted
Fredegarius?

Did  Paul  use  any  other  Frankish  sources?  In  his  account
(II,  10)  of  the  wars  of  the  Frankish  king  Sigisbert  over  the
Avars,  he  mentions  Turingia  as  the  scene  of  the  war  and  the
Elbe  as  the  place  of  Sigisbert’s  victory.  These  statements  are
not  found  in  Gregory  of  Tours,  from  whom  the  rest  of  the  ac-
count is  taken,  and  they  come  (Jacobi,  34)  from  an  unknown
source,  possibly  Secundus.  Besides,  in  Paul’s  legendary  account
(V,  5)  of  a victory  of  king  Grimuald  over  the  Franks  at
Rivoli,  occurs  an  equally  doubtful  statement  (V,  32  and  note)
of  a league  between  Grimuald  and  king  Dagipert.

Paul  (VI,  16  and  note)  mentions  St.  Arnulf  of  Metz

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

324

APPENDIX  II.

with  whose  biography  he  was  acquainted,  but  he  incorrectly
makes  him  contemporary  with  Cunincpert.  The  mention  of
Anschis  (VI,  23)  is  erroneously  put  in  the  time  of  Aripert  II
(701  to  712).  These  things,  as  well  as  what  Paul  (VI,  37)
says  of  Pipin  II  (that  accompanied  by  a single  follower,  he  at-
tacked an  enemy  in  his  bedchamber  beyond  the  Rhine),  do  not
seem  to  Jacobi  (p.  42)  to  indicate  the  immediate  use  of  a
written  source.  Then  Paul  mentions  Pipin’s  wars  with  the
Saxons  and  with  Ratpot,  king  of  the  Frisians,  speaks  of  Pi-
pin’s  son  Charles  Martel, and  later  (VI,  42)  mentions  Charles’
wars  against  his  enemies,  where  an  expression : “ When  he
was  held  in  prison  he  was  set  free  by  God’s  command  and  es-
caped,” indicates  the  use  of  an  annalistic  source,  and  resem-
bles a phrase  in  the  Chronicon  Moissiacense,  a document  of  the
early  part  of  the  ninth  century  (MG.  SS.  I,  290)  that  he
“ was  held  in  prison  but  with  God’s  help  presently  escaped.”
Also  Paul  correctly  gives  the  battle  of  Vincy  as  the  decisive
victory  over  Raginfrid  (Jacobi,  43).  The  statement  that
Charles  Martel  assigned  Angers  as  a dwelling-place  to  Ragin-
frid (VI,  42)  is  peculiar  to  Paul,  who  differs  in  this  from  other
sources.  Paul’s  account  (VI,  46)  of  the  battle  of  Poictiers
shows  that  he  took  it  from  some  source  which  was  related  to
the  Chron.  Moiss.1  (MG.  SS.  I,  291),  which  also  speaks  of
an  alliance  between  Charles  Martel  and  Eudo,  while  the  an-
nals of  Metz  (MG.  SS.  I,  325)  say  that  Eudo  called  upon  the
Arabs.  In  the  account  of  the  battle  of  the  little  river  Berre,
the  Chron.  Moiss.  (MG.  SS.  I,  292)  states  that  Charles
Martel,  upon  the  news  of  the  invasion  into  Provence,  marched
against  the  Saracens,  drove  them  back  over  the  Rhone,  be-
sieged Narbonne,  and  without  raising  the  siege,  repulsed  by
the  river  Berre  a second  army  of  Arabs  approaching  for  the

1Waitz  refers  this  to  the  Liber  Pontificalis,  (Gregory  II)f  but
other  matters  were  added  by  Paul.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

FRANKISH  SOURCES.

325

relief  of  the  city ; Paul  (VI,  54)  speaks  of  two  different  cam-
paigns, in  one  of  which  Charles  calls  upon  Liutprand  for  help.
The  statement  that  Charles  sent  his  son  Pipin  to  Liutprand
for  adoption  (VI,  53)  occurs  only  in  Paul.  This  account,
which  is  undoubtedly  authentic,  could  hardly  be  traced,  Jacobi
thinks  (p.  45),  to  a Frankish  source,  and  he  regards  Paul  him-
self as  the  authority.

The  foregoing  facts  indicate  that  Paul  used  certain  oral  ac-
counts and  traditions  he  had  learned  when  in  France  and  that
if  he  used  any  other  written  Frankish  sources  such  use  was
sparing  and  fragmentary,  and  his  authorities  were  far  from  re-
liable.

Gregory  of  Tours  is,  therefore,  the  only  Frankish  source  of
any  importance  used  in  the  History  of  the  Langobards.

(b)  langobard  sources.

Paul’s  Langobard  authorities,  so  far  as  known,  are  two-fold  :

1.  “The  Origin  of  the  Nation  of  Langobards”  (Origo
Gentis  Langobardorum).

2.  “ The  Acts  of  the  Langobards,”  by  Secundus  of  Trent
(now  lost).

1.  The  Origin  of  the  Nation  of  the  Langobards .

Paul  twice  refers  to  a prologue  to  the  Edict  of  Rothari  as  one
of  the  sources  of  his  history  (Jacobi, 4).  In  book  I, chap.  21
he  says  : “ At  the  same  time  Waccho  fell  upon  the  Suavi  and
subjected  them  to  his  authority.  If  any  one  may  think  that
this  is  a lie  and  not  the  truth  of  the  matter,  let  him  read  over
the  prologue  of  the  edict  which  king  Rothari  composed  (rele-
gat  prologum  edicti  quem  rex  Rothari  * * * composuit1)  of

1 Bethmann  refers  quem  to  edicti  following  a grammatical  mis-
take in  the  edict  itself.  Vesme  refers  it  to  prologum  implying
that  Paul  considered  Rothari  the  author  of  the  prologue  (see
Jacobi,  5).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

3^6

APPENDIX  II.

the  laws  of  the  Langobards  and  he  will  find  this  written  in
almost  all  the  manuscripts  as  we  have  inserted  it  in  this  little
history.* * Also  in  book  IV,  chapter  42  he  says:  **  It  was
now  indeed  the  seventy- seventh  year  from  the  time  when  the
Langobards  had  come  into  Italy  as  that  king  (Rothari)  bore
witness  in  a prologue  to  his  Edict.  * *

The  last  passage  apparently  refers  to  a short  preface  to
Rothari*s  laws  (Edicti  Codices,  MG.  LL.  IV,  p.  1),  although
the  76th  year  and  not  the  77th  is  there  mentioned.  But  this
preface  contains  no  account  of  the  overthrow  of  the  Suavi  by
Waccho.  Bethmann  (p.  351  et  seq .),  Baude  di  Vesme
(Edicta  Regum  Langobardorum  Aug.  Taur.  1855,  p.  LXXI ;
see  Jacobi,  4,  5)  and  others  therefore  believe  that  Paul’s  re-
ference must  be  attributed  to  a short  history  of  the  Origin  of
the  Nation  of  the  Langobards  contained  in  three  manuscripts
(of  Modena,  Madrid  and  La  Cava1)  and  in  a fourth  form
greatly  interpolated  in  the  so-called  Chronicon  Gothanum
(Jacobi,  4).  A translation  of  the  Origo  as  contained  in  these
three  MSS.  is  here  given  :2

1 These  manuscripts  are  described  in  Bethmann,  356  to  360.
There  is  much  difference  of  opinion  as  to  which  is  the  best.
Bruckner  (Zeitschrift  fur  deutsches  Alterthum,  vol.  34,  pt.  1 , p.  49*
note)  considers  the  Modena  more  ancient  and  original  than  the
Madrid.  Also  Schmidt  (9)  who  among  many  reasons  refers  to
the  correct  spelling  of  Winniles,  Waltari,  Walderada  instead  of
Guinniles,  Gualtari,  Gualderada.  Mommsen  speaks  of  the  Madrid
and  LaCava  MSS.  as  the  two  best  (p.  57,  note)  but  says  the  choice
of  the  reading  is  free  and  that  sometimes  the  Modena  is  more
correct  (id.,  60,  note  2).  The  Madrid  MSS.  closed  A.  D.  671,
the  Modena  A.  D.  668,  and  Waitz  has  shown  that  in  so  far  the
latter  stood  nearer  the  original  form  (id.).

* I follow  the  edition  of  Waitz  in  Monumenta  Germaniae  His-
torica — Scriptores  Rerum  Langobardicarum,  pp.  1-6.

/

Digitized  by

Google

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

327

I.  There  is  an  island1  that  is  called  Scadanan,*  which
is  interpreted  “ destruction,” s in  the  regions  of  the  north,
where  many  people  dwell.  Among  these  there  was  a small
people  that  was  called  the  Winniles.  And  with  them  was  a
woman,  Gambara  by  name,  and  she  had  two  sons.  Ybor  was
the  name  of  one  and  Agio  the  name  of  the  other.  They,  with
their  mother,  Gambara  by  name,  held  the  sovereignty  over
the  Winniles.  Then  the  leaders  of  the  Wandals,  that  is,
Ambri  and  Assi,  moved  with  their  army,  and  said  to  the  Win-
niles : i * Either  pay  us  tributes  or  prepare  yourselves  for  battle
and  fight  with  us.  * * Then  answered  Ybor  and  Agio , with  their
mother  Gambara  : “ It  is  better  for  us  to  make  ready  the  bat-
tle than  to  pay  tributes  to  the  Wandals.* 9 Then  Ambri  and
Assi,  that  is,  the  leaders  of  the  Wandals,  asked  Godan  that  he
should  give  them  the  victory  over  the  Winniles.  Godan
answered,  saying : “ Whom  I shall  first  see  when  at  sunrise,
to  them  will  I give  the  victory.**  At  that  time  Gambara  with
her  two  sons,  that  is,  Ybor  and  Agio,  who  were  chiefs  over  the
Winniles,  besought  Frea,  the  wife  of  Godan,  to  be  propitious
to  the  Winnilis.  Then  Frea  gave  counsel  that  at  sunrise  the
Winniles  should  come,  and  that  their  women,  with  their  hair
let  down  around  the  face  in  the  likeness  of  a beard,  should
also  come  with  their  husbands.  Then  when  it  became  bright,
while  the  sun  was  rising,  Frea,  the  wife  of  Godan,  turned
around  the  bed  where  her  husband  was  lying  and  put  his  face
toward  the  east  and  awakened  him.  And  he,  looking  at  them,
saw  the  Winniles  and  their  women  having  their  hair  let  down
around  the  face . And  he  says , * ‘ Who  are  those  Long- beards  ? * *
And  Frea  said  to  Godan,  “As  you  have  given  them  a name,

'The  Madrid  and  La  Cava  manuscripts  in  place  of  “ There  is
an  island  ” have  “That  is  under  the  consul”  which  is  evidently
a corruption  (see  Mommsen,  p.  60,  note  2).

* “ Scadan  ” says  the  Modena  MS.,  “ Scandanan,”  the  La  Cava
MS.

8 Exscidia  (Modena  MSS.).  A derivation  pointing  to  the  Gothic
word  skattigan , to  injure,  German  Schaden , English  scathe
(Hodg.,  VI,  90).  Mommsen  considers  this  a later  interpolation
to  be  rejected  (p.  60,  note  3).

Digitized  by  LjOOQle

328

APPENDIX  II.

give  them  also  the  victory/ * And  he  gave  them  the  victory,
so  that  they  should  defend  themselves  according  to  his  counsel
and  obtain  the  victory.  From  that  time  the  Winniles  were
called  Langobards.

II.  And  the  Langobards  moved  thence  and  came  to  Golaida
and  afterwards  they  occupied  the  aldionates  cf  Anthaib  and
Bainaib  and  also  Burgundaib.  And  it  is  said  that  they  made
for  themselves  a king,  Agilmund  by  name,  the  sen  cf  Agio,  cf
the  race  of  Gugingus.  And  after  him  reigned  Laiamicho  of  the
race  cf  Gugingus.1  And  after  him  reigned  Lcthuc  and  it  is
said  that  he  reigned  about  forty  years.  And  after  him  reigned
Aldihoc  the  sen  of  Lethuc.  And  after  him  reigned  Godchoc.

III.  At  that  time  king  Audoachari  went  forth  from  Ravenna
with  the  army  of  the  Alani  and  came  into  Rugiland  and  fought
with  the  Rugians  and  killed  Theuvane  king  of  the  Rugians,
and  led  many  captives  with  him  into  Italy.  Then  the  Lango-
bards departed  from  their  own  territories  and  dwelt  some  years
in  Rugiland.

IV.  Claffo,  the  son  cf  Godehoc  reigned  after  him.  And  after
him  reigned  Tato  the  sen  of  Claffo.  The  Langobards  settled
three  years  in  the  fields  cf  Feld.  Tato  fought  with  Rodolf
king  of  the  Heruli  and  killed  him  and  carried  off  his  banner
( vando ) and  helmet.  After  him  the  Heruli  had  no  kingly
office.  And  Wacho  the  son  of  Unichis  killed  king  Tato  his
paternal  uncle  together  with  Zuchilo.  And  Wacho  fought,
and  Ildichis  the  son  of  Tato  fought,  and  Ildichis  fled  to  the
Gippidi  where  he  died.  And  to  avenge  his  wrong  the  Gypidis
made  war  with  the  Langobards.  At  this  time  Wacho  bent  the
Suabians  under  the  dominion  cf  the  Langobards.  Wacho  had
three  wives : (first)  Raicunda,  daughter  of  Fisud  king  of  the
Turingi.  After  her  he  took  as  his  wife  Austrigusa  a girl  of  the
Gippidi.2  And  Wacho  had  from  Austrigusa  two  daughters  ; the
name  of  one  was  Wisigarda  whom  he  gave  in  marriage  to

1 The  words  * * Of  the  race  of  Gugingus  ’ * are  omitted  in  the  Mo-
dena MSS.  and  Mommsen  regards  them  (p.  68)  as  an  interpolation
(see  also  Bruckner  Zeitschrift  fur  deutsches  Alterthum,  p.  56).

* Jacobi,  20,  note  4.

Digitized  by

Google

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

329

Theudipert  king1  of  the  Franks,  and  the  name  of  the  second
was  Walderada  whom  Scusuald  king  of  the  Franks  had  as  his
wife,  but  having  her  in  hatred  he  transferred  her  to  Garipald
for  a wife.  He  had  as  his  third  wife  the  daughter  of  the  king
of  the  Heruli,  Silinga  by  name.  From  her  he  had  a son,
Waltari  by  name.  Wacho  died  and  his  son  Waltari  reigned
seven  years  without  posterity.2  These  were  all  Lethinges.

V.  And  after  Waltari,  reigned  Auduin.3  He  led  the  Lango-
bards  into  Pannonia.  And  there  reigned  after  him  Albuin,
his  son,  whose  mother  is  Rodelenda.  At  that  time  Albuin
fought  with  the  king  of  the  Gippidi,  Cunimund  by  name,  and
Cunimund  died  in  that  battle  and  the  Gippidi  were  subjugated.  >
Albuin  took  as  his  wife  Cunimund ’s  daughter  Rosemund,
whom  he  had  captured  as  booty,  since  his  wife  Flutsuinda,
who  was  the  daughter  of  Flothar,  king  of  the  Franks,  had
already  died.  From  her  he  had  a daughter  by  name  Albsuinda.

And  the  Langobards  dwelt  forty-two  years 4 * in  Pannonia.  This
I Albuin  led  into  Italy  the  Langobards  who  were  invited  by
Narses  (chief)  of  the  secretaries.  And  Albuin,  king  of  the
Langobards,  moved  out  of  Pann<mkuTn  the  month  of  April  >:v
after6  Easter  in  the  first  indiction^In  the  second  indiction
indeed,  they  began  to  plunder  in  italy,  but  in  the  third  indic-
> tioiThe  became  master  of  Italy,  j Albuin  reigned  in  Italy  three
years,  and  was  killed  in  Verona  in  the  palace  by  Rosemund
his  wife  and  Hilmichis  upon  the  advice  of  Peritheo.  Hil-
michis  wished  to  be  king  and  could  not  because  the  Lango-
bards wanted  to  slay  him.  Then  Rosemund  sent  word  to  the
prefect  Longinus  that  he  should  receive  her  in  Ravenna.
When  Longinus  presently  heard  this  he  rejoiced ; he  sent  a
ship  of  the  public  service  and  they  brought  Rosemund  and
Hilmichis  and  Albsuinda,  king  Album’s  daughter,  and  con-

1 Read  regi  with  Modena  MS.  in  place  of  regis.

* “ Farigaidus"  (Bruckner,  pp.  19,  203).

* ••  Of  the  stock  of  Gausus  " says  the  list  of  kings  in  Rothari’ s
Prologue  (Mon.  Germ.  Hist.  Leges,  IV,  2).

4 The  Modena  MS.  says  twelve.  Neither  number  is  correct.

They  probably  remained  there  about  twehty-two  years.

h A Pascha,  (Waitz,  p.  II,  7,  note.)

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

330

APPENDIX  II.

ducted  all  the  treasures  of  the  Langobards  with  them  to
Ravenna.  Then  the  prefect  Longinus  began  to  persuade
Rosemund  to  kill  Hilmichis  and  become  the  wife  of  Longinus.
Having  given  ear  to  his  counsel,  she  mixed  poison  and,  after
the  bath,  gave  it  to  him  (Hilmichis)  to  drink  in  a goblet.  1 *
But  when  Hilmichis  had  drunk,  he  knew  that  he  had  drunk
something  pernicious.  He  commanded  that  Rosemund  her-
self should  drink,  although  unwilling,  and  they  both  died.
Then  the  prefect  Longinus  took  the  treasure  of  the  Langobards
and  commanded  Albsuinda,  the  daughter  of  king  Albuin,  to  be
put  in  a ship,  and  sent  her  over  to  Constantinople  to  the  em-
peror.

VI.  The  rest  of  the  Langobards  set  over  themselves  a king
named  Cleph,  of  the  stock  of  Beleos,  and  Cleph  reigned  two
years  and  died.  And  the  dukes  of  the  Langobards  adminis-
tered justice  for  twelve  years  and  after  these  things  they  set  up
over  themselves  a king  named  Autari,  the  son  of  Cleph.  And
Autari  took  as  his  wife  Theudelenda,  a daughter  of  Garipald
and  of  Walderada  from  Bavaria.  And  with  Theudelenda  came
her  brother  named  Gundoald,  and  king  Autari  appointed  him
duke  in  the  city  of  Asta.  And  Autari  reigned  seven  years.
And  Aequo,*  the  Thuringian  duke,3  departed  from  Turin  and
united  himself  with  queen  Theudelenda  and  became  king  of
the  Langobards.  And  he  killed  his  rebel  dukes  Zangrolf  of
Verona,  Mimulf  of  the  island  of  St.  Julian  and  Gaidulf  of  Ber-
gamo, and  others  who  were  rebels.  And  Aequo  begot  of
Theudelenda  a daughter,  Gunperga4  by  name.  And  Aequo
reigned  six  years,  and  after  him  Aroal  reigned  twelve  years.5

1 Thus  Abel  translates  in  caldo  (p.  6),  or  perhaps  it  is  “ In  a hot
potion.*'

* Aggo  in  Modena  MSS.

8 Turingus . Perhaps  this  merely  means  that  he  was  duke  of
Turin.  * * Of  the  stock  of  Anawas  * * adds  the  Prologue  to  Rothari’ s
Edict  (Mon.  Germ.  Hist.  Leges,  Vol.  IV,  p.  2).

4 *•  And  a son  named  Adwald  ’*  adds  the  Modena  MSS.

•In  the  Prologue,  •*  Arioald  of  the  race  of  Caupus.**  The  text
here  seems  greatly  corrupted.  Paul  and  the  Chronicon  Gothanum
give  Agilulfs  reign  at  25  years  and  that  of  his  son  Adalwald  (here
omitted)  at  10  years.

Digitized  by

Google

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.;  33 1

' i

And  after  him  reigned  Rothari,  of  the  race  of  Arodus,  and  he
destroyed  the  city  and  fortresses  of  the  Romans  which  were
around  the  coasts  from  the  neighborhood  of  Luna 1 * up  to  the
land  of  the  Franks  and  in  the  east  up  to  Ubitergium  (Oderzo).
And  he  fought  near  the  river  Scultenna,5*  and  there  fell  on  the
side  of  the  Romans  the  number  of  eight  thousand.

VII.  And  Rothari  reigned  seventeen  years.  And  after  him
reigned  Aripert  nine  years.  And  after  him  reigned  Grimoald.3 4
At  this  time  the  emperor  Constantine  departed  from  Constan-
tinople and  came  into  the  territories  of  Campania  and  turned
back  to  Sicily  and  was  killed  by  his  own  people.  And  Grimoald
reigned  nine  years,  and  after  him  Berthari  reigned.*

Bluhme  says  (Mon.  Germ.  Hist.  Leges,  IV,  p.  646,  note)
that  several  reasons  indicate  that  the  text  of  this  Origo  was
written  when  Berthari  (Perctarit)  was  king.  Baude  di  Vesme
attributes  it  to  Rothari ’s  time,  and  believes  that  the  final  state-
ments were  subsequent  additions.  Bethmann  (p.  414)  at-
tributes it  to  the  seventh  year  of  the  reign  of  Grimoald.  (See
also  Jacobi,  8,9.)

Of  the  fourth  text,  the  Chronicon  Gothanum , Hodgkin  re-
marks (V,  69),  “To  one  manuscript  of  the  Lombard  laws,  that
now  preserved  in  the  ducal  library  of  Gotha,  there  is  prefixed
an  introduction  on  the  history  of  the  Lombards  which  evidently
shows  a certain  affinity  to  the  Origo,  but  is  of  later  date,
and  contains  some  curious  additions  as  to  the  early  migrations
of  the  race.  It  continues  the  history  down  to  the  time  of
Charles  the  Great,  and  was  probably  written  under  his  son
Pipin,  (A.  D.  807-810.)  (See  also  Schmidt,  10.)  The  author
is  a strongly-pronounced  Christian,  and  loves  to  support  his
statements  by  quotations  from  Scripture.  He  is,  however,

1 Northwest  of  Lucca.

* In  Modena.

•The  Modena  MSS.  adds  “seventeen  years.”

4 The  Modena  MSS.  omits  the  sentence  regarding  Berthari.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

332

APPENDIX  II.

very  imperfectly  informed  as  to  early  Lombard  history ; he
wrote,  as  will  be  seen,  two  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  the
invasion,  and  it  does  not  seem  wise  to  place  much  dependence
on  his  statements  where  they  differ  from  those  of  the  Origo.  * *

The  question  what  Paul  took  from  the  Origo  has  been  ex-
haustively discussed,  first,  in  Jacobi’s  monograph,  “ The
Sources  of  Paul  the  Deacon’s  History  of  the  Langobards**
(Halle,  1877),  and,  secondly,  in  an  article  by  Theodore
Mommsen  published  in  the  Neues  Archiv,  Vol.  V,  53,  et  seq.
(1879).  Let  us  consider  these  discussions  in  their  order.

According  to  Jacobi  (p.  10)  Paul  took  from  the  Origo,  first,
the  account  of  the  origin  of  the  Langobards  in  the  North.
With  the  aid  of  Pliny,  he  identified  Scadan  or  Scadanan  (1,2;
Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.,  IV,  27  [13])  with  Scadinavia.  The  de-
scription he  gives  of  that  “ island  ’ * may  be  from  an  oral
account.  The  words  of  the  Origo,  “ In  the  regions  of  the
north  where  many  people  dwell/ * give  occasion  for  Paul’s
first  chapter,  showing  the  advantage  of  northern  lands  for  the
development  of  powerful  peoples.  In  this  he  garnished  his
account  from  Isidore,  as  will  hereafter  appear.

Paul  then  causes  the  Langobards  to  come  forth  from  Scadi-
navia (I,  3)  on  account  of  over- population,  “ although  other
causes  are  asserted  for  their  emigration.*  * The  Origo  assigns
no  cause,  but  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  says  in  its  confused
way,  “The  ancient  ancestors  of  the  Langobards  assert  from
their  parent  Gambara  for  what  purpose  was  their  departure  or
emigration/*  etc.  They  came  first  to  Scoringa  (I,  7),  where
they  remained  a long  time.  Here  they  were  attacked  by  the
Wandals  under  Ambri  and  Assi.  Now  Paul  (I,  7 and  8) , fol-
lowing the  Origo,  relates  the  saga  by  which  the  victory  was
accorded  to  them  by  Wotan  with  Frea*s  help  and  they  acquired
the  name  of  Langobards.  Jacobi  believes  (p.  13)  that  the
name  Scoringa  was  dropped  from  the  text  of  the  Origo  as  it
has  come  down  to  us,  and  that  the  derivation  of  the  name  of

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

333

the  Langobards  from  their  method  of  wearing  their  hair  is  also
drawn  from  some  earlier  copy  of  the  Origo,  although  this  addi-
tion is  lacking  in  the  three  manuscripts.  The  Chronicon
Gothanum  states  that  they  changed  their  name  to  Langobards
“ because  their  beard  was  long  and  never  shaved.* * These
last  words  come  from  Isidore  (Etymology,  IX,  2,  94),  but
Jacobi  (13)  considers  it  probable  that  they  were  derived
therefrom  through  the  Origo,  since  there  is  found  elsewhere  in
the  Origo  traces  of  the  use  of  Isidore  (Jacobi,  14).

The  Langobards  obtain  the  victory  over  the  Vandals  (1, 10)
but  a famine  soon  breaks  out  in  Scoringa  and  they  resolve  to
emigrate  (I,  n,  12)  to  Mauringa.  But  they  must  pass
through  the  territory  of  the  Assipitti  who  refuse  them  transit.
By  cunning  the  Langobards  divert  a threatened  attack,  and  a
duel  between  a champion  of  the  Assipitti  and  a Langobard  slave
opens  the  way  to  them.  To  increase  the  number  of  men  cap-
able of  bearing  arms  they  bestow  freedom  upon  many  of  their
slaves  by  the  ancient  symbol  of  the  arrow  (See  Hammerstein,
Bardengau,  65).  The  Origo  contains  nothing  of  all  this
(Jacobi,  15).

The  Origo  knows  nothing  of  the  famine  which  compelled
the  people  to  emigrate  from  Scoringa.  Jacobi  considers  it
incredible  that  Paul  arbitrarily  inserted  Scoringa  and  Mauringa,
and  he  believes  that  these  names  were  in  the  original  copy  of
the  Origo  which  Paul  used.

According  to  Jacobi  (i6),Vesme*s  view  that  everything
Paul  did  not  borrow  from  the  Origo  and  Gregory  of  Tours
regarding  the  early  history  of  his  people  comes  from  the  lost
work  of  Secundus,  has  been  refuted  by  Waitz  (Gotting  gel.
Anz.  1856  p.  1587).  Everything  which  can  be  traced  with
certainty  to  Secundus  indicates  that  the  lost  work  of  that  author
had  an  annalistic  form.

The  statements  of  the  wandering  from  Mauringa  to  Vur-
gundaib,  Paul  takes  almost  word  for  word  (I,  13)  from  the

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

334

APPENDIX  II.

Origo.  His  account  of  the  elevation  of  king  Agelmund  to  the
throne  (1, 14)  and  the  thirty-three-year  reign  of  that  monarch
does  not  vary  from  his  copy,  but  the  motive  for  the  selection
of  a king  appears  to  be  Paul's  own  addition.  It  is  the  same
which  was  attributed  to  the  Israelites  when  Saul  was  made
their  king  (I  Samuel  VIII,  5)  ‘‘Now  make  us  a king  to  judge
us  like  all  the  nations  ” (Jacobi,  17).

Paul  then  mentions  Lamissio  as  the  second  king  (P.  1 , 17)
but  relates  much  more  than  stands  in  the  Origo  which  simply
declares,  “ After  Agilmund,  reigned  Laiamicho  of  the  race  of
Oughts/ 1 It  appears  to  Jacobi  that  all  this  addition  comes
from  another  source,  since  departing  from  the  Origo,  Lamis-
sio’s  monstrous  birth  and  rescue  from  the  pond  by  king  Agel-
mund is  stated  (I,  15)  while  his  six  brothers  are  drowned,  and
afterwards  the  Langobards  pass  over  a river  and  fight  with  the
Amazons.  Neither  can  the  defeat  of  the  Langobards  by  the
Bulgarians  nor  the  liberation  of  the  people  through  Lamissio’s
boldness  be  traced  to  the  Origo,  but  Paul  returns  to  that  ac-
count when  he  mentions  the  succession  of  king  Lethu  and  the
two  following  kings  (chap.  18),  and  the  taking  possession  of
Rugiland  by  the  Langobards  (Paul,  ch.  19,  Jacobi,  p.  19).
This  short  account  of  the  Origo,  Paul  amplifies  with  additions
from  Eugippius  Life  of  St.  Severinus  and  from  the  Chronicle  of
Jordanis.  According  to  the  Origo  he  then  mentions  the  death
of  Godeoc,  the  succession  of  Claffo  and  Tato,  the  emigration
of  the  Langobards  from  Rugiland,  their  three  years  stay  in  the
open  “ feld,”  the  war  of  Tato  with  Rodolf , king  of  the  Heroli,
the  overthrow  of  the  latter  and  the  capture  of  his  banner  and
his  helmet  (ch.  20).  On  the  other  hand  Paul  gives  as  the
cause  of  the  war  the  murder  of  Rodolf 's  brother  at  the  insti-
gation of  Rumetruda  and  describes  the  fight  in  detail  from  an
unknown  source  and  he  then  comes  back  to  the  Origo  with  the
statement  that  Tato  carried  off  the  standard  of  Rodolf.  Here
two  sources  can  clearly  be  distinguished  (Jacobi,  20).  Tato’s

Digitized  by

Google

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

335

overthrow  by  Waccho  (whom  Paul  erroneously  makes  the  son
of  Zuchilo)  ; Waccho’s  contest  with  Hildechis ; the  flight  of  the
latter  to  the  Gepidae  ; the  enmity  thereafter  between  the  two
peoples  and  the  subjugation  of  the  Suevi  by  Waccho  are  re-
ported by  Paul  from  the  Origo  without  variation.  From  the
same  source  he  enumerates  the  three  wives  of  Waccho  and
their  children,  but  with  Ranicunda  he  leaves  out  the  name  of
her  father.  He  calls  Austrigusa  a daughter  of  the  king  of  the
Gepidae  (I,  21),  departing  from  the  Origo  which  called  her
a girl  of  the  Gepidae.  Waltari,  Waccho’s  son  is  called  in  the
Origo  farigaidus,  “without  descendants”  an  adjective  lack-
ing in  Paul  (Jacobi,  21).  Audoin’s  expedition  to  Pannonia
(I,  22)  and  the  name  of  his  wife  Rodelinda  (I,  27)  are  taken
from  the  Origo.1  On  the  other  hand  Paul  introduces  from
another  source  the  account  (I,  23-24)  of  the  duel  of  Alboin
with  Turismod  the  son  of  Turisind  and  the  expedition  to  the
latter  king  to  get  his  arms.  Paul  takes  from  the  Origo  the
account  of  Alboin ’s  first  marriage  with  Chlotsuinda ; the  battle
with  the  Gepidae  and  the  marriage  of  Alboin  with  Rosemund
(I,  27),  but  he  makes  two  additions;  one  that  Alboin  found
support  from  the  Avars  and  the  other  that  the  skull  of  Cuni-
mund  was  used  as  a drinking-cup.  Since  Paul  says  (II,
28)  he  saw  this  drinking  vessel  in  the  hand  of  king  Ratehis,
perhaps  that  king  is  our  author’s  authority.  Menander
(Exc.  legatt,  p.  303,  304,  Bonn,  ed.)  confirms  the  state-
ment that  the  Langobards  had  the  help  of  the  Avars  (Jacobi,
22).  Paul  now  follows  other  sources  and  returns  to  the  Origo
when  he  states  that  Alboin  by  treaty  relinquished  Pannonia  to
the  Avars  (II,  7).  The  three  manuscrips  of  LaCava,  Madrid

lThe  Chronicon  Gothanum  calls  Audoin’s  mother  “ Menia  the
wife  of  king  Pissa,”  and  speaks  of  him  as  of  the  race  of  Gausus
(M.  G.  LL.,  IV,  644).  Paul  and  the  Origo  make  no  mention  of
the  matter.

Digitized  by

Google

336

APPENDIX  II.

and  Modena  here  give  evidence  of  an  important  omission.
The  Chronicon  Gothanum  alone  has  kept  the  account  of  this
matter 1 and  Jacobi  considers  that  from  this  place  on  it  gives
us  the  better  text.  The  story  that  Narses  called  the  Lango-
bards  into  the  country  occurs  in  the  Origo,  but  Paul  here  gives
the  preference  to  another  and  more  complete  source , the  Liber
Pontificalis.  On  the  other  hand  he  gives  from  the  Origo  (and
incorrectly)  the  stay  of  the  Langobards  in  Pannonia  as  forty-
two  years,  also  the  date  of  their  emigration  as  the  second  of
April ; the  fact  that  Easter  fell  upon  the  first  of  April  in  the
year  568  is  correctly  reckoned  up  by  Paul  himself  (II,  7).
The  mention  of  the  year  of  our  Lord  probably  comes  from
another  source , perhaps  Secundus.

The  account  of  Alboin’s  murder  in  Verona  (II,  28)  is  trace-
able in  some  features  to  the  Origo,  but  Paul  relates  in  detail
the  adultery  of  Rosemund  on  which  the  Origo  is  silent  but
which  the  Langobard  chronicle  of  the  year  641  confirms.
Whence  Paul  got  his  account  can  scarcely  be  determined
(Jacobi,  22).  The  statement  of  Helmechis*  vain  attempt  to
obtain  the  crown,  his  flight  with  Rosemund,  Albsuinda  and
the  royal  treasure  to  Ravenna,  and  the  fate  which  there  over-
took the  conspirators  (II,  29)  were  taken  by  Paul  from  the
Origo,  also  the  statement  that  Albsuinda  was  sent  to  Constan-
tinople with  the  treasure  (II,  30).  We  next  meet  with  the
Origo  in  the  execution  of  the  rebellious  dukes  Mimulf  (IV,  3) ,

1 It  states  11  At  this  time  when  the  Langobards  began  to  go  out
of  Pannonia,  the  Avars  then  made  an  agreement  and  treaty  of
friendship  with  those  Langobards  and  a document  of  writing,  that
up  to  two  hundred  years  if  they  should  again  seek  Pannonia,  they
(the  Avars)  would  relinquish  to  their  side  that  land  without  any
wars  of  contest  and  would  be  ready  for  their  assistance  in  Italy  to
which  they  had  set  out,  up  to  full  two  hundred  years  (M.  G.  LL.,

IV,  p.  644).

Digitized  by

Google

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

337

Zangrulf  and  Gaidulf  (IV,  13) , but  the  repeated  rebellions  of
the  latter,  Paul  took  from  another  source.  He  appears  to  have
inserted  from  the  Origo  the  statement  that  Gunduald  was  duke
of  Asti  (IV,  40),  as  well  as  the  account  of  the  conquests  of
Rothari  (IV,  45)  and  his  victory  at  the  Scultenna.

The  foregoing  is  Jacobi’s  opinion  as  to  the  use  of  the  Origo.

According  to  Mommsen’s  view  (Neues  Archiv,  V,  58)  Paul
had  before  him  a source  that  was  far  more  copious,  and  from
the  condensed  Origo  as  we  have  it  and  Paul’s  narrative  taken
together,  there  can  be  formed  a combination  nearer  the  orig-
inal than  either.1  Even  in  Paul’s  time  there  were  manuscripts
of  the  laws  of  the  Langobards  which  did  not  contain  the  Origo,
and  of  the  numerous  ones  which  have  come  down  to  us  only
three,  all  of  the  10th  and  ri,th  century,  have  the  Origo,  and
that  in  different  forms,  besides  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  from
a single  manuscript  of  the  irth  century,  with  still  greater  var-
iations; Mommsen  therefore  considers  it  probable  that  at  a
later  time  this  historical  introduction  to  Rothari’s  laws,  where
not  omitted , was  adopted  only  in  abbreviated  form  ( p . 5 9 ) . He
adds  that  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  contains  certain  statements
not  found  in  the  other  three  manuscripts,  but  which  certainly
belong  to  the  original,  and  some  of  which  are  also  found  in
Paul.  Among  these  is  the  statement  that  when  the  Lango-
bards, before  their  emigration  from  Pannonia,  turned  over  all
their  territory  to  the  Avars , the  latter  agreed  to  evacuate  it  if
the  Langobards  should  be  driven  from  Italy  (I,  27  ; II,  7),
and  that  no  other  explanation  is  possible,  except  that  the  Origo
omitted  this  account.  Mommsen  here  compares  the  opening

1 Bethmann  also  says  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  sometimes  con-
tains matters  lacking  in  the  Origo  but  which  are  found  in  Paul
who  did  not  use  the  Chronicon  Gothanum,  and  that  these  things
must  have  existed  in  the  common  source  of  both  the  Origo  and
Chronicon  Gothanum  (p.  364).

Digitized  byCjOOQlC

338

APPENDIX  II.

statements  of  the  Origo  with  Paul  (1,2  and  3)  and  adds  (p.
63)  that  the  account  of  the  over-population  of  Scadinavia,  the
division  of  its  inhabitants  into  three  parts  and  the  emigration
of  one-third  is  found  only  with  Paul,  although  its  saga-like
form  indicates  that  it  is  borrowed  from  the  Origo  in  which  the
abbreviated  words  “among  these  ( inter  quos)  was  a small
people  that  was  called  the  Winnilis  * * represent  this  account.
The  remark  of  Paul,  that  besides  over-population  other  causes
of  their  emigration  are  also  asserted,  points  to  the  fact  that  the
complete  Origo  added  something  further,  perhaps  of  floods  or
failure  of  crops  or  similar  afflictions.1

Mommsen  (p.  64)  here  compares  the  accounts  in  the  Origo
and  in  Paul  regarding  the  origin  of  the  name  of  the  Lango-
bards  and  the  victory  given  to  the  Winnili  by  Wotan.  He
notes  (p.  65)  that  Scoringa  is  mentioned  only  by  Paul,  and
that  in  the  Origo  no  place  is  assigned  to  the  battle,  and  he
adds ; ‘ ‘ That  this  is  the  result  of  an  abbreviation  appears
clearly  from  the  expression  which  follows,  ‘And  the  Lango-
bards  moved  thence  and  came  into  Golaida/  while  no  place  is
mentioned  previously  except  Scadanan,  and  the  word  ‘ thence  *
is  therefore  without  relation  to  anything  which  precedes.  The
account  of  the  famine  (p.  66)  is  found  only  in  Paul ; also  the
opposition  of  the  Assipitti,  the  story  of  the  men  with  the  dogs*
heads,  of  the  duel  of  the  Langobard  slave  with  the  champion
of  the  Assipitti,  of  emancipation  by  the  arrow,  and  finally  of
the  immigration  into  Mauringa.  For  none  of  these  legends  is
there  any  statement  which  explains  their  origin,  and  Mommsen
insists  that  they  fit  excellently  into  the  Origo.  He  adds :

1 May  not  the  reason  given  in  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  (M.  G.
LL.,  IV,  641),  that  “the  people  were  moved,  not  by  necessity  or
hardness  of  heart,  or  oppression  of  the  poor,  but  that  they  should
attain  salvation  from  on  high,*’  be  one  of  the  causes  to  which
Paul  refers  (Schmidt  Neues  Archiv,  XIII,  392,  note  1)?

Digitized  by

Google

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

339

4 ‘With  the  emigration  into  Golaida  both  the  accounts  again
come  together.  The  Origo  says  : 4 And  the  Langobards  moved
thence  and  came  into  Golaida,  and  afterwards  they  possessed
the  aldionates  of  Anthaib  and  Bainaib,  and  also  Burgundaib.’
Paul  says  (I,  13)  : 4 Then  the  Langobards  went  forth  from
Mauringa  and  arrived  in  Golanda,  where,  having  remained
some  time,  they  are  afterwards  said  to  have  possessed  for  some
years  Anthab,  Banthab  and  also  Vurgundaib,  which  we  can
consider  are  names  of  districts  (cantons)  or  of  some  kinds  of
places.*  Here  it  appears  clearly  that  the  Origo  is  abbrevi-
ated ; that  the  four  oldest  abodes  of  the  Langobards,  Scadina-
via,  Scoringa,  Mauringa  and  Golanda,  belong  to  a connected
legend  will  hardly  be  contested,  but  as  the  Origo  now  stands,
the  Winniles  come  from  Scadanan  to  Golaida,  and  of  their  four
abodes  the  second  and  third  are  lacking,  although  in  the  word
4 thence  * the  trace  of  an  intermediate  station  is  seen  M (p.  67).

44  The  account  (p.  68)  of  the  ignoble  birth  of  the  second
king  Lamissio  * * * is  lacking  in  the  Origo,  but  Beth-

mann  says,  incorrectly  (Waitz,  note  1,  15),  that  it  contra-
dicts the  Origo.  The  words  4 of  the  race  of  Gugingus  * which
are  added  both  in  the  Origo  and  Paul  to  the  name  of  the  first
king  (Agelmund)  are  added  to  that  of  the  second  (Lamissio)
only  in  one  edition  of  the  Origo,1  and  are  a palpable  interpo-
lation, since  the  name  of  the  family  is  not  given  in  the  case  of
any  later  king,  and  in  the  list  of  kings  incorporated  in  Rothari’s
laws  the  family  name  is  affixed  only  in  the  case  of  the  first  king.’  *

Mommsen  (p.  71)  observes  that  in  the  account  of  Rosemund
and  Alboin  the  condensation  in  the  Origo  is  again  evident,
that  it  is  improbable  that  a story-teller  who  reports  with  such
particularity  how  Frea  turned  around  her  husband’s  bed  should
have  left  out  of  the  Rosemund  story  the  goblet  made  of  the

1 That  of  the  La  Cava  and  Madrid  MSS.  which  are  closely
allied.  They  are  omitted  in  the  Modena  MS.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

340

APPENDIX  II.

king’s  skull,  but  that  with  epitomizers  everything  is  possible,
and  not  the  least  to  leave  out  the  point  of  the  story,  “ It  is
not  clear,”  he  adds,  “ how  the  r61es  in  this  tragedy  were  dis-
tributed. According  to  the  Origo,  Alboin  was  killed  by  Rose-
mund  and  Helmechis  by  the  counsel  of  Peredeo.  According
to  Paul,  Helmechis,  the  armor- bearer  of  the  king,  procures
Peredeo  as  an  unwilling  confederate,  and  it  is  then  said,
‘According  to  the  counsel  of  Peredeo,  she,  more  cruel  than
any  beast,  introduced  the  murderer  Helmechis.’  ”

“ It  looks  as  if  Paul  had  not  properly  understood  his  copy,
for  which  the  latter  was  in  fault,  and  therefore  wrote  something
that  mdkes  no  clear  sense.”  1

Mommsen  thus  continues  (p.  72).  “ Waitz  adopts  for

the  Langobardic  sections  of  Paul’s  history  a triple  source  ;
first,  the  Origo ; second,  another  narrative  which  related  divers
matters  concerning  the  abodes  and  migration  of  that  people ,
(the  contradictions  between  which  two  sources  Paul  either  does
not  notice  or  has  not  considered  worthy  of  regard) , and  finally
the  writing  of  Secundus  concerning  the  acts  of  the  Langobards.
That  the  first  two  sources  are  rather  to  be  combined  into  one
has  been  shown  in  the  previous  argument.  Of  contradictions
I see  simply  nothing,  since  the  discrepancies  in  regard  to  the
origin  of  Lamissio  and  the  murder  of  Alboin  depend  respec-
tively upon  a mistake  of  the  text  and  an  erroneous  interpreta-
tion ; but  the  harmonizing  of  both  versions  appears  to  me  easy
and  natural.”

“ It  is  quite  different  with  the  writing  of  Secundus  of  Trent.
Paul  mentions  this  work  twice  (III,  29 ; IV,  40)  under  the
title  ‘The  Acts  of  the  Langobards.’  A series  of  statements

1 Does  it  not  rather  look  as  if  he  took  his  account  from  two  con-
tradictory sources  which  he  tried  to  reconcile  in  his  usual  incon-
clusive way  just  as  he  made  Odoacar  king  of  part  of  the  Rugians
(I,  19)  at  a time  when  he  was  fighting  against  the  Rugians  f *

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

341

can  be  traced  with  complete  certainty  to  this  authority,  partly
on  account  of  personal  references  and  partly  on  account  of
the  places  where  they  occurred.  This  has  often  been  done , and
was  done  in  a satisfactory  way  by  Jacobi  (p.  65  et  seq.).  *
* * If  it  is  to  be  accepted  with  good  reason  that  the  historical

accounts  in  Paul  for  the  time  before  612,  so  far  as  they  depend
upon  a Langobard  source,  ought  to  be  traced  to  Secundus,  it
appears  all  the  more  difficult  to  determine  the  relation  of
Secundus  to  the  Origo.  It  is  pure  caprice  to  attribute  with
Jacobi  the  accounts  which  bear  a legendary  character  to  the
Origo  and  contemporaneous  statements  to  Secundus.  It  is  a
peculiarity  of  the  earlier  Langobard  history  to  mingle  truth  and
poetry  indistinguishably  even  in  matters  which  are  not  properly
legendary,  as  in  the  case  of  Rosemund’s  crime  and  Authari’s
wooing.  On  the  one  hand  the  Origo  included  the  later  times
of  Langobard  history,  and  on  the  other,  the  title  of  Secundus*
book  is  opposed  to  the  idea  that  he  wrote  only  the  history  of
his  own  time  (p.  73).  * * * Besides,  in  the  occurences
under  Agilulf  (A.  D.  590  to  616)  which  properly  fall  in  the
time  of  Secundus,  the  close  relationship  between  the  Origo  and
Paul  is  still  preserved.  Moreover,  the  early  Langobard  tradi-
tion in  Paul  has  a homogeneous  character  and  there  is  scarcely
room  in  it  for  more  than  one  authority.*’

“ There  is  only  one  way  out  of  this  embarrassment,  but  noth-
ing hinders  us  from  taking  it.  Is  it  not  evident  that  the  Origo
Gentis  Langobardorum  is  nothing  but  an  extract  from  the
writing  of  Secundus  of  Trent  furnished  with  a short  continua-
tion? Then  everything  explains  itself  simply.  The  Origo
was  prefixed  as  an  historical  introduction  to  the  laws  of  the
Langobards,  possibly  upon  their  issue  in  643,  or  probably  in
668.  How  should  the  man  who  did  this  have  been  ignorant
of  the  chronicle  of  Secundus  of  Trent  which  had  been  brought
down  to  612?  Nothing  is  more  probable  than  that  Secundus
was  used  for  this  purpose  and  that  the  editor  limited  himself

Digitized  by  LjOOQle

342

APPENDIX  II.

to  continuing  it  up  to  the  time  he  wrote.  That  Paul  cited  the
book  as  the  Prologue  of  the  Edict  of  king  Rothari,  according
to  its  official  position,  when  he  wanted  to  defend  himself
against  the  reproach  of  the  falsification  of  history  and  that  he
elsewhere  called  it  the  “ Acts  of  the  Langobards  ” of  Secundus
is  not  opposed  to  this  (?).  Once  admit  that  the  historical
work  was  a component  part  of  the  book  of  laws  as  Paul  at
least  considered  it,  and  nothing  can  be  objected  to  both  these
designations  (p.  74).”

Schmidt  (Neues  Archiv,  13,  p.  391)  supports  Mommsen’s
contention  that  the  copy  of  the  Origo  from  which  Paul  took
his  extracts  was  more  extensive  than  the  manuscripts  which
have  come  down  to  us.  He  remarks  that  as  Paul  did  not  find
the  account  of  the  subjugation  of  the  Suevi  by  king  Waccho  in
all  his  copies,  abbreviated  editions  must  have  been  before  him,
and  the  statements  in  Paul’s  history  which  are  not  in  our  pres-
ent texts  of  the  Origo  must  be  traced  to  some  earlier  and
fuller  edition  of  that  work.1  (p.  392  et  seq.)

But  Schmidt  considers  Mommsen’s  view,  that  this  original
Origo  was  identical  with  Secundus,  as  not  tenable  and  believes
with  Jacobi  that  the  latter  work  was  more  in  the  nature  of  an-
nals  (p.  394) . Ebert  also  ( Litteratur  des  Mittelalters , II , 46 ,
note  1 ) insists  that  the  book  from  which  Mommsen  declares
Paul  had  taken  so  much,  could  not  be  the  “ succinct  little
history  ” which  Paul  described  in  book  IV,  chapter  40.

Waitz  (Neues  Archiv,  Vol.  V,  page  421)  thus  answers
Mommsen’s  contention  : “ For  myself  I can  in  no  way  con-
sider probable  the  view  that  the  so-called  Origo,  the  Chronicon
Gothanum  and  Paul  have  drawn  from  a common  source,  and

JThe  totally  varying  statements  of  the  time  of  Agilulf  s reign,
six  years  according  to  the  Origo  and  twenty-five,  according  to  Paul
are  due  to  the  great  corruption  of  the  manuscripts  in  this  place  •
(compare  the  various  readings  in  Waitz’ s ed.).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

343

that  their  contents  are  to  be  traced  back  in  great  part  to  the
lost  book  of  Secundus.  I will  never  convince  myself  that  Paul
has  cited  the  same  work  at  one  time,  as  4 The  Acts  of  the
Langobards,’  of  this  author  and  at  another  time  as  a prologue
to  an  edict,  * * * j also  see  no  ground  whatever  to  con-
sider the  Origo  an  extract  from  a greater  work,  an  extract
which  according  to  Mommsen’s  view  must  have  simply  omitted
important  occasions  in  the  History  of  the  Langobards.  In  the
words  which  are  introduced  as  a proof  or  mark  of  the  abbre-
viation, ‘And  the  Langobards  moved  thence,’  the  word
4 thence  ’ relates  to  Scadinavia  or  Scadanan.  The  Origo
gives  us  the  tradition  in  regard  to  the  naming  of  the  Lango-
bards in  naive  originality.  It  lets  the  people  receive  their
name  in  the  place  where  their  first  home  was,  and  it  inquires
little  whether  there  were  Wandals  there  or  not.  I can  only
consider  it  one  of  the  arbitrary  combinations  of  Paul  when
he  puts  the  story  during  the  emigration  to  the  land  of
Scoringa.  * * *

“ Mommsen  seeks  to  remove  a contradiction  between  the
statement  of  the  Origo  regarding  the  ancestry  of  Laiamicho
and  the  detailed  narrative  given  by  Paul  of  the  birth  of  Lam-
issio,  as  the  king  is  here  called,  by  removing  the  words  ‘ from
the  race  of  Gugingus  ’ with  one  manuscript  out  of  the  text.
But  this  manuscript  (p.  423),  or  as  Mommsen  writes  it,  this
recension  is  troubled  with  mistakes  of  all  kinds,  and  it  must
appear  unjustified  to  give  it  the  preference  in  one  place  where
it  seems  to  fit.  The  same  words  are  also  left  out  in  the  manu-
script immediately  before,  with  reference  to  Agelmund,  and
only  later  are  restored  to  the  margin,  which  can  easily  have
been  forgotten  the  second  time.  We  cannot  therefore  speak
here  of  an  erroneous  text.”

As  to  Paul’s  mistaken  interpretation  of  the  account  of
Alboin’s  murder,  which  Mommsen  thinks  is  due  to  the  fault  in
the  source  from  which  he  took  the  account,  Waitz  remarks ;

Digitized  by  kaOOQle

344

APPENDIX  II.

“ It  constantly  appears  to  me,  on  the  other  hand,  that  he  has
transcribed  his  copy,  especially  in  the  Origo,  only  too  faith-
fully,1 without  remarking  that  the  detailed  narrative  which  he
previously  followed,  divides  the  roles  otherwise — assigns  the
advice  to  Helmechis  and  the  act  to  Peredeo.*’

An  interesting  light  is  now  thrown  upon  this  discussion  by
the  skillful  efforts  of  Bruckner  and  others  to  trace  the  Origo
to  a Langobard  epic  song.  Bruckner  (Sprache  der  Lango-
barden,  p.  17  et  seq. ) observes  that  although  no  remnant  of
Langobard  poetry  has  come  down  to  us  in  its  original  form ,
yet  there  is  evidence  that  such  poetry  existed,  and  certain
features  in  the  Origo  as  preserved  in  the  Latin  language  indi-
cate that  its  statements  were  taken  at  least  in  part  from  a
Langobard  poem.  In  the  first  place,  the  word  farigaidus ,2
“ without  posterity,* * is  a sure  proof  that  the  author  made  use
of  a German  source.  In  the  next  place,  the  alliteration  in  the
first  chapters  which  was  noticed  by  Mtillenhoff  (Beowulf,  101 ) ,
Schmidt  (p.  16)  and  Koegel  (I,  107)  is  made  apparent  by
the  re-translation  into  Old-German  of  portions  of  the  first  four
chapters.  Bruckner  accordingly  gives  a number  of  such  re-
translations, showing  alliteration.  His  view  was  contested  by
Much  (Gotting  gel.  Anzeiger,  1896,  p.  892)  and  also  by
Kraus  (Zeitschrift  fur  die  osterreichischen  Gymnasien,  1896,
Vol.  47,  pp.  313,  314)  who  showed  the  objections  to  such  re-
translations and  claimed  that  alliterative  proper  names  did
not  prove  that  a song  was  the  immediate  source  from  which

1 Paul  (II,  28),  1 1 Rosemund  * * * * according  to  the  advice
of  Peredeo  brought  in  the  murderer  Helmichis.”  Origo,  “He
was  killed  in  Verona  in  the  palace  by  Hilmichis  and  Rosemund
his  wife  upon  the  advice  of  Peritheo.  * *

*Or  fargaetum  as  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  has  it.  Beth-
mann  considers  this  word  related  to  the  modern  German  vergesscn ,
“forgotten”  (M.  G.,  Script.  Rerum  Langob.,  p.  4),  and  thinks  it
is  a mere  author’s  note  of  something  forgotten.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

345

the  Latin  account  was  taken.  By  way  of  illustration  Kraus
translated  into  German  a passage  taken  haphazard  from  Livy,
and  the  translation  certainly  showed  a goodly  number  of  allit-
erative words.  Kraus  therefore  insisted  that  the  traces  of
alliteration  must  be  much  more  numerous  and  evident  than
those  given  by  Bruckner  to  exclude  the  suspicion  of  accident.
Bruckner  then,  in  an  article  in  the  * 4 Zeitschrift  fur  deutsches
Alterthum  (vol.  43,  part  I,  p.  47),  answers  these  criticisms.

He  treats  the  Origo,  not  as  a whole,  but  in  single  parts  sep-
arated from  each  other  (p.  48).  The  first  chapter  tells  how
the  Wandals  and  Winnili  encounter  each  other  ready  for  battle  ;
how  Frea  interferes  in  a cunning  manner  in  favor  of  the  Win-
nili, and  how  Wotan  then  gave  to  them  the  name  of  Lango-
bards,  and  the  victory  over  their  enemies.  “ It  is  hard  to
see  ” says  Bruckner  “ how  the  legend  of  the  origin  of  this
people,  in  which  myth  and  history  appear  closely  united,  could
have  been  transmitted  to  subsequent  generations  otherwise
than  in  an  epic  song.  Original  nationality  expresses  itself
in  the  whole  delightful  and  simple  narrative.  Learned  acces-
sories are  wholly  absent.  We  have  in  this  first  chapter  an  old
saga  of  the  people  in  unadulterated  form.  * * * The  con-

duct of  Frea  toward  Godan  reminds  one  of  that  of  Hera  to-
ward Zeus  as  described  in  the  Iliad1  (Book  14,  line  153).
In  the  songs  of  the  Edda  similar  contrivances  are  related  of
the  gods.  * * *

“ The  account  of  the  Origo  shows  the  essential  character-
istics of  an  epic  song.  The  action  is  related  in  a concise  but
powerful  manner,  mostly  in  the  shape  of  a dialogue,  and  al-

1 After  the  Trojans  under  the  guidance  of  Zeus  had  attacked  the
Greeks  by  their  swift  ships,  and  were  defeating  them,  Hera  bor-
rowed the  girdle  of  Aphrodite,  secured  the  aid  of  Sleep,  and  be-
guiled Zeus  into  a deep  slumber,  whereupon  the  Greeks,  aided  by
Poseidon,  defeated  the  Trojans  and  drove  them  back.

Digitized  by

Google

346

APPENDIX  II.

though  the  account  is  relatively  a short  one , the  repetitions
characteristic  of  epic  poetry  are  not  lacking.  For  example,
‘Then  the  leaders  of  the  Wandals,  Ambri  and  Assi  moved'
and  shortly  afterwards  ‘ Then  Ambri  and  Assi,  that  is  the
leaders  of  the  Wandals.*  Again  ‘They  besought  Frea,  the
wife  of  Godan  * and  a few  lines  later  ‘ Frea  the  wife  of  Godan
turned  the  bed  around.*  It  corresponds  moreover  with  the
epic  style  that  the  counsel  which  Frea  gives  the  Winniles  and
its  results  are  related  with  the  same  expressions  almost  word
for  word.  ‘ Then  Frea  gave  the  advice  that  when  the  sun  rose
the  Winniles  should  come , and  that  their  women,  with  their  hair
letdown  around  the  face,  etc.*  and  again,  ‘ And  he  (Godan),
looking  upon  them , saw  the  Winniles  and  their  women  with
their  hair  let  down  around  the  face.*  According  to  the
custom  of  epic  poetry  of  seizing  only  the  principal  events  of
the  action,  the  carrying  out  of  this  counsel  on  the  part  of  the
Winniles  is  not  related  of  itself,  but  after  the  advice  is  given
them  it  is  straightway  shown  how  Godan  sees  them,  together
with  their  women,  on  awakening.**  * * *

“ In  the  Origo,  on  account  of  the  simple  mode  of  presenta-
tion, the  traces  of  alliteration  are  so  clear  and  extensive  as  to
exclude  the  possibility  that  they  are  due  to  accident.  One
peculiarity,  which  shows  an  original  composition  in  verse,  is
that  the  action  moves  in  strikingly  short  sentences  or  in  sharply
marked  divisions  of  sentences  which  correspond  in  length  to
a half  verse.  This  circumstance  is  all  the  more  important
when  the  different  character  of  the  construction  of  sentences
in  Latin  is  considered,  and  this  division  of  verse  results  natur-
ally and  without  any  effort  to  produce  it.**

Bruckner  now  attempts  the  work  of  reconstructing  the  Origo
in  the  form  of  a German  song.  He  makes  no  effort  to  use
any  conjectural  inflected  forms,  but  puts  the  substantive  in  the
nominative  and  the  verb  in  the  infinitive , and  thus  reconstructs
metrically  the  greater  part  of  the  first  chapter.  There  are  a

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

347

few  passages  that  cannot  be  reproduced  in  alliterative  verse  if
no  change  is  made , and  some  of  his  proposed  translations  may
be  questioned,  but  he  insists  there  is  enough  remaining  to
show  the  epic  origin  of  the  Origo.  The  following  extract,
beginning  at  the  second  sentence  of  the  Origo  (where  the
poem  probably  commenced)  shows  this  effort  of  reproduction  :

werod  Winnilis

• * There  was  a small  people  that  was  called  Winnilis,

And  with  them  was  a woman,  Gambara  by  name,  and  she  had
two  sons.

Ibor  Agio

Ibor  was  the  name  of  one  and  Agio  the  name  of  the  other.
They  with  their  mother,  Gambara  by  name,

gize/ald  Jf'inniles  ara/egan

Held  the  sovereignty  over  the  Winniles.  Moved  then
erl  (or  adaling)  Ambri  Assi

The  leaders  of  the  Wandals,  that  is,  Ambri  and  Assi,
werod  Winniles

With  their  army  and  said  to  the  Winniles,
gamban  gel  dan  garuuian
Either  pay  tributes  or  prepare  yourselves
wig  winnan.

For  battle  and  ffght  with  us.

anduuordian  Ibor  - Agio
Then  answered  Ibor  and  Agio,

With  their  mother  Gambara,

bazzira  badu

It  is  better  for  us  to  make  ready  the  battle
gamban  geldan  gairewandilum
Than  to  pay  tributes  to  the  Wandals.

Ambri  Assi  erl  (adaling)

Then  Ambri  and  Assi,  that  is,  the  leaders  of  the  Wandals,
W6dan 1 Winniles

Asked  Wodan  that  over  the  Winniles

1 The  Godan  of  the  Latin  text  is  probably  a corruption  of  Wotan
or  Wodan  (see  Paul  I,  9).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

348

APPENDIX  II.

saljan  sigu

He  should  give  them  the  victory.

Wodan  wordun  sprak

Wodan  answered  and  said,

sunna  upstigan  air  sehan
Whom  at  sunrise  I shall  first  see,
salgan  sigu

To  them  will  I give  the  victory.

At  that  time  Gambara  with  her  two  sons,

Ibor  Agio  adaling  or  erl

That  is,  Ibor  and  Agio,  who  were  chiefs  over  the  Winniles,
Frea  fri

Besought  Frea,  the  wife  of  Wodan,

weg6n  ? (Old-High-German)  Winniles
To  be  propitious  to  the  Winniles.

rad  umsan

Then  Frfca  gave  counsel  that  at  sunrise

Winniles  wib

The  Winniles  should  come,  and  that  their  women,
har  hleor

With  their  hair  let  down  around  the  face
gidcnissie  liudweros  (?)

In  the  likeness  of  a beard,  should  come  also  with  their  husbands,
suigli  (?)  sunna

Then  when  it  became  bright,  while  the  sun  was  rising,

Frea  fri

Frea,  the  wife  of  Wodan,  turned  around
The  bed  where  her  husband  was  lying
andwlita  austar

And  put  his  face  toward  the  east
wakjan  wlitan

And  awakened  him,  and  he,  looking  at  them,

Winniles  wib

Saw  the  Winniles  and  their  women

har  hleor

Having  their  hair  let  down  around  the  face.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.

349

And  he  says,  1 Who  are  these  long-beards  ?'
wordun  sprak  Wodan

And  Frea  said  to  Wodan,

saljan  sigu

As  thou  hast  given  a name,  give  them  also  the  victory.”  1

In  the  concluding  passage — “And  he  gave  them  the  victory
so  that  they  should  defend  themselves  according  to  his  counsel
and  obtain  the  victory.  From  that  time  the  Winnili  were
called  Langobards  ” — there  are  also  traces  of  alliteration,  but
there  is  evidently  a defect  in  the  translation  or  a change  from
the  original  form,  and  there  is  some  contradiction  between  the
manuscripts.

The  next  chapter,  which  tells  of  the  emigration  of  the  Lan-
gobards, the  election  of  their  king,  and  the  succession  of  the
two  subsequent  kings,  also  contains  national  traditions,  and  in
like  manner  the  elements  of  alliterative  verse  appear  in  it,  as
well  as  in  the  third  chapter,  describing  the  fight  between  king
Odoacar  and  the  Rugians  and  the  settlement  of  the  Langobards
in  Rugiland.  The  same  is  true  of  the  earlier  parts  of  Chapter
IV.  In  this  chapter  the  battle  between  Tato  and  Rodolf , king
of  the  Heroli,  is  described.  In  Paul’s  History  of  the  Lango-
bards (I,  20)  we  are  told:  “Tato  indeed  carried  off  the
banner  of  Rodolf,  which  they  call  bandum , and  his  helmet
which  he  had  been  accustomed  to  bear  in  war.”  Bruckner
believes  (p.  55)  that  the  redundant  clause,  “ Which  he  had
been  accustomed  to  bear  in  war,”  can  only  be  explained  as  a

1 It  will  be  noted  that  four  out  of  the  six  lines  in  the  foregoing,
which  it  is  impossible  to  render  into  alliterative  German,  are  those
relating  to  Gambara,  so  that  a single  interpolation  or  defect  in  the
translation  into  Latin  might  account  for  them  all.  Every  one  of
these  four  lines  might  be  omitted,  and  scarcely  any  change  would
be  required  in  the  rest  of  the  poem.  May  it  not  be  that  the  state-
ments concerning  Gambara  came  from  another  source  ?

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

350

APPENDIX  II.

translation  of  a German  composite  word ; that  the  combat  be-
tween the  Langobards  and  the  Heroli  was  celebrated  in  a
German  song,  and  that  the  traces  of  this  song  appear  in  what
precedes  and  follows.1

In  the  latter  part  of  the  fourth  chapter,  however  (Bruckner,
p.  57),  the  traces  of  alliteration  begin  to  disappear  at  the  pas-
sage, ‘ And  Wacho  fought  and  Ildichis,  the  son  of  Tato,  fought
and  Ildichis  fled  to  the  Gippidi  where  he  died,  etc.1  * The
rest  of  chapter  IV  shows  few  recognizable  traces  of  alliterative
song.  The  account  of  the  three  wives  of  Wacho  and  his  var-
ious children  evidently  comes  from  another  source.  Only  three
lines  (describing  Wacho’s  death,  that  his  son  Waltari  reigned
seven  years,  and  that  these  were  Lethinges)  are  alliterative.
After  these  Bruckner  finds  no  traces  of  a poetic  source  and
considers  that  this  part  of  the  Origo  is  rather  historical  than
traditional,  that  it  shows  a style  quite  different  from  the  first
part,  with  more  involved  construction  and  indirect  quotations,
and  the  impossibility  of  turning  it  into  alliterative  verse  seems
to  him  to  show  all  the  more  clearly  that  the  first  part  of  the
poem,  which  can  be  so  easily  done  into  such  verse,  has  a poet-
ical origin.

It  appears  to  the  present  translator  that  Bruckner  has  made
out  his  case , and  that  in  his  reconstruction  of  these  alliterative
verses  he  has  shown  the  strongest  probability  of  the  epic  origin
of  the  first  part  of  the  Origo.

In  regard  to  the  general  question  as  to  the  source  from
which  Paul  derived  his  account,  Bruckner  in  this  article  (p.
47)  follows  the  opinion  of  Waitz,  and  whereas  Mommsen  sees

1 If  this  is  so  it  would  seem  to  indicate — since  the  phrase,

1 * which  he  had  been  accustomed  to  bear  in  war ' ’ does  not  appear
in  the  Origo— -that  Paul  had  taken  his  account  from  some  different
(perhaps  more  extended)  version  which  had  also  for  its  source  an
epic  poem.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  ORIGO.  35 1

no  contradiction  between  Paul  and  the  Origo,  Bruckner  con-
siders that  Paul’s  account  varies  so  widely  from  it  that  even  a
common  source  cannot  be  inferred  !

In  the  presence  of  such  divergent  views,  it  is  hazardous  for
the  editor  to  venture  an  opinion.  It  seems  to  him,  however,
that  Waitz  and  Bruckner  have  effectually  refuted  Mommsen’s
contention  that  Paul  drew  his  account  from  a single  and  more
extensive  Origo  contained  in  the  lost  historical  work  of
Secundus.  Paul’s  own  statement  (I,  21)  shows  that  he  con-
sulted, not  only  one,  but  several  manuscripts  in  regard  to  the
early  history  of  his  people.  He  would  hardly  have  given  two
different  titles  to  the  single  work  of  Secundus.  The  fact  that
the  Origo  came  originally  from  an  epic  poem  makes  it  im-
probable that  an  historical  work  should  have  been  the  single
source  from  which  it  was  derived.  It  is  more  than  likely  that
one  or  more  of  the  manuscripts  Paul  consulted  were  similar  in
scope  and  phraseology  to  the  Origo  as  we  have  it,  and  that  he
made  extracts  therefrom  almost  word  for  word.1

Waitz *s  contention  that  there  were  three  sources  : first,  the
Origo  as  we  have  it,  second,  some  other  account  not  known
to  us,  and  third,  Secundus  of  Trent,  seems  highly  probable.
This  second  source,  however,  may  well  have  been  a more  ex-
tended version  of  the  Origo  than  that  preserved  in  the  three
manuscripts  of  Madrid,  LaCava  and  Modena.  The  evidence
of  abbreviation  in  these  manuscripts  as  set  forth  by  Mommsen
and  Schmidt  as  well  as  Jacobi,-  is  quite  strong.

The  fact  that  the  Origo  was  taken  in  part  from  an  epic
poem  does  not  conflict  with  this  view.  Upon  the  whole,

1 Bluhme  in  his  preface  to  the  Laws  of  the  Langobards  (Mon.
Germ.  Hist.  LL,  IV,  cxii,  sec.  x)  states  that  the  Madrid  and
LaCava  MSS.  came  from  Benevento.  If  so,  their  prototypes  were
probably  accessible  to  Paul.

* See  also  Bethmann,  364.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

352

APPENDIX  II.

Waite’ s opinion  appears  to  the  editor  to  be  sound,  with  the
understanding  that  the  “ other  source  ” he  speaks  of  may
well  have  been  another  version  of  the  Origo  in  a greatly  ex-
tended and  somewhat  altered  form.

2.  The  Acts  of  the  Langobards  by  Secundus  of  Trent .

In  the  foregoing  discussion  mention  has  been  made  of  the  lost
work  of  Secundus  of  Trent.1  Paul  twice  mentions  this  work  as
one  of  his  authorities  (III,  29  ; IV,  40),  and  he  also  speaks  of
Secundus  as  godfather  on  the  occasion  of  the  baptism  of  Ada-
loald  (IV,  27).  Secundus  is  also  mentioned  several  times  in
the  letters  of  Pope  Gregory  the  Great ; in  January,  596,  he  is
deacon  to  archbishop  Marinianus  of  Ravenna  (Jacobi,  63  ;
Gregory’s  Epistles,  VI,  24).  In  April  of  the  same  year  Greg-
ory writes  to  Secundus  at  Ravenna  (Epistles,  VI,  30)  to  has-
ten the  conclusion  of  the  peace  with  Agilulf ; in  April,  599,
Gregory  again  writes  to  him  (Epistles,  II,  52)  to  allay  his
doubts  in  regard  to  the  synod  of  Chalcedon.  In  603  Secundus
appears  (from  Gregory’s  letter  to  queen  Theudelinda)  to  have
been  at  the  Langobard  court.  He  was  then  an  abbot.  Secun-
dus’ work  was  a “ History  of  the  Acts  of  the  Langobards”
(P.,  IV,  40),  and  was  brought  down  to  612.  It  is  harder  to
say  when  it  began.  In  determining  what  Paul  took  from  it,
the  fact  that  Secundus  came  from  Trent  is  important*  and  the
local  accounts  in  Paul’s  history  relating  to  Trent  must  be
ascribed  to  this  source.  These  statements  are  quite  numerous.
First,  Paul  mentions  (III,  9)  the  taking  of  Anagnis  above
Trent  by  the  Franks,  the  defeat  of  count  Ragilo  of  Lagaris,
the  victory  of  duke  Euin  of  Trent  at  Salum,  his  marriage
(III,  10)  with  a daughter  of  duke  Garibald  of  Bavaria,  his
command  of  the  expedition  to  Istria  (III,  27),  the  irruption
of  the  Franks  into  Italy  in  590  (III,  31)  where  Paul  supple-

* The  statements  regarding  Secundus  are  taken  almost  exclu-
sively from  Jacobi,  pp.  63-84.

Digitized  by

Google

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  SECUNDUS.

3S3

merits  the  account  of  Gregory  of  Tours  by  statements  from
Secundus,  the  embassy  of  bishop  Agnellus  to  Gaul  to  secure
the  liberation  of  prisoners,  the  peace  concluded  by  duke  Euin
(IV,  i)  ; the  drought,  famine  and  plague  of  grasshoppers
(IV,  2) ; the  death  of  duke  Euin;  the  appointment  of  his
successor  Gaidoald  (IV,  10) ; the  insurrection  of  the  latter
against  Agilulf  and  his  subsequent  reconciliation,  and  the  men-
tion of  Secundus  as  godfather  to  Adaloald  (IV,  27).

That  Secundus  had  close  relations  to  queen  Theudelinda  and
the  Langobard  court  brings  us  to  a second  class  of  questions
we  can  trace  to  his  lost  work,  namely — those  which  relate  to
this  court  (Jacobi,  67),  such  as  Agilulf  s elevation  to  the
throne  (III,  35)  and  the  punishment  of  the  rebellious  dukes
Mimulf , Gaidulf  and  Ulfari 1 (IV,  3).  Probably  the  statement
that  pope  Gregory  the  Great  sent  a copy  of  his  Dialogues  to
queen  Theudelinda  (IV,  5)  comes  from  Secundus  since  no
hint  of  this  is  found  in  Gregory’s  letters.  Jacobi  doubts  (p.
67)  whether  what  Paul  says  of  Agilulf s and  Theudelinda’s
attitude  to  the  Catholic  church  (IV,  6)  can  be  traced  to
Secundus,  as  the  latter  would  hardly  have  designated  the  Lan-
gobards  as  heathens  at  the  time  of  their  invasion  and  it  is
doubtful  whether  Agilulf  held  the  Catholic  faith ; but  it  would
seem  quite  as  likely  that  in  this  Paul  copied  Secundus*  errors
as  that  he  interpolated  statements  of  his  own.  We  can
attribute  to  Secundus  what  Paul  says  of  the  appointment  of
Tassilo  as  duke  or  king  in  Bavaria  by  Childepert ; of  Tassilo’s
victory  over  the  Slavs  (IV,  7)  ; of  the  overthrow  of  the  Bava-
rians in  595  by  the  Cagan  (IV,  10) ; of  the  succession  of
Garibald  (IV,  39)  after  Tassilo’s  death  and  his  wars  waged
with  the  Slavs.  Through  queen  Theudelinda  and  duke  Euin’s
wife , a connection  existed  with  Bavaria  (Jacobi  68).  Paul

lThe  Origo  mentions  the  two  first  but  says  nothing  of  Mimult’s
desertion  to  the  Franks,  and  Paul  here  follows  the  completer  source.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

3S4

APPENDIX  II.

relates  (IV,  8)  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis  the  attack  by  the
exarch  Romanus  upon  various  cities  possessed  by  the  Lango-
bards,  but  he  adds  apparently  from  Secundus  that  Agilulf  cap-
tured Perugia  and  executed  the  traitorous  duke  of  that  city.
Paul’s  statement  of  the  appearance  of  a comet  in  January
following ; of  the  death  of  archbishop  John  of  Ravenna  and
the  installment  of  his  successor  Marianus ; of  the  introduction
of  wild  horses  and  buffaloes  into  Italy  ; of  the  death  of  duke
Euin ; the  defeat  of  the  Bavarians ; (IV,  io)  the  coming  of  an
embassy  from  the  Cagan ; the  peace  with  him  and  with  Galli-
cinus  and  Theodoric  II  (IV,  12)  all  point  to  Agilulf ’s  court
and  to  Secundus.  The  account  of  this  execution  of  dukes
Zangrulf  and  Gaidulf  may  be  traceable  either  to  Secundus  or
to  the  Origo,  but  the  punishment  of  duke  Wamecautius  comes
from  Secundus  (IV,  13)  as  well  as  the  ravages  of  the  plague
in  Ravenna  and  in  Verona  (IV,  14  ; the  capture  of  duke  Go-
descalc  of  Parma  and  his  wife,  king  Agilulf *s  daughter  by  the
exarch;  the  sending  of  ship-builders  to  the  Cagan  (IV,  20),
and  perhaps  the  consecration  of  the  church  of  St.  John  in
Monza  (IV,  21),  though  Paul  probably  knew  personally  that
queen  Theudelinda  has  built  a palace  there  (IV,  22)  since  he
described  the  pictures  in  it.  The  capture  and  .destruction  of
Padua  can  more  certainly  be  traced  to  Secundus  (IV,  23),
also  the  statement  that  Agilulf  *s  ambassadors  to  the  Cagan  re-
turned with  the  ambassador  of  the  Avars  who  proceeded  to
Gaul  to  make  peace  between  the  Langobards  and  Franks,  and
the  statement  that  an  army  of  Langobards  and  Avars  with
Slavs  invaded  Istria  (IV,  24).  Adaloald’s  birth;  the  attack
upon  Monselice ; the  return  of  Smaragdus  (IV,  25);  the
campaign  against  the  exarch  for  the  liberation  of  the  king’s
daughter  and  her  death  (IV,  28)  ; the  cold  winter  and  failure
of  crops  following  the  death  of  pope  Gregory  (IV,  29)  ; the
coronation  of  Adaloald  (IV,  30)  ; the  death  by  lightning  of
the  choir-leader  Peter  (IV,  31);  the  truces  between  Agilulf

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  SECUNDUS.

355

and  Smaragdus ; the  comet  (IV,  32)  ; the  sending  of  Agilulf’s
notary  to  the  emperor  Phocas,  and  the  securing  of  an  annual
truce  (IV,  35),  are  all  probably  derived  from  Secundus,  but
Jacobi  (p.  71)  thinks  there  is  more  doubt  as  to  the  account  of
the  irruption  of  the  Avars  into  Friuli  and  the  treason  of  the
duchess  Romilda  since  that  account  was  legendary  (IV,  37)
and  the  indefinite  expression  44  about  these  times 99  points  to
the  use  of  another  source.  The  account  of  the  transactions
in  Bavaria  (IV,  39)  ; the  annual  peace  of  Agilulf  with  the  em-
peror and  the  renewal  of  the  same  ; the  peace  with  the  Franks ;
the  irruption  of  the  Slavs  into  Istria  (IV,  40)  ; appear  to  be
taken  from  Secundus.  Then  follows  the  statement  of  Secun-
dus*  death  (id).

In  considering  the  character  of  Secundus*  work,  Jacobi  be-
lieves (p.  72)  that  when  Paul  says  (IV,  40)  that  Secundus
wrote  a short  history  of  the  acts  of  the  Langobards  up  to  his  own
time , this  means  that  Secundus  wrote  a contemporary  history,
and  that  his  work  was  in  the  nature  of  a chronicle  or  a series
of  annals.  Paul  generally  follows  his  sources  nearly  word  for
word,  and  the  participial  construction  and  the  frequent  use  of
the  perfect  tense  and  the  passive  voice,  the  introduction  of
sentences  taken  from  Secundus  by  the  phrases  44 in  this  year,**
44  at  this  time,”  44  in  the  following  year,”  44  in  the  following
month,”  and  the  mention  of  natural  phenomena,  point  to  the
fact  that  Secundus  wrote  in  the  manner  of  the  chroniclers  of
his  time.  Jacobi  therefore  thinks  (p.  72)  that  he  probably
began  with  the  conquest  of  Italy  in  568.

Secundus  stated  that  the  patriarch  Paul  fled  from  Aquileia
from  the  Langobards  to  Grado  (II,  10)  and  that  that  winter
there  was  a great  fall  of  snow,  followed  by  abundant  harvests.
The  catalogue  of  the  patriarchs  down  to  Severus  in  Aquileia
and  Epiphanius  in  Grado  (IV,  33),  Jacobi  believes  (p.  73)  is
traceable  to  Secundus.1  Perhaps  Paul’s  statement  (III,  20.)

1 Cipolla,  after  collating  and  discussing  the  various  sources  now

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

356

APPENDIX  II.

that  Gregory  was  the  author  of  the  letter  sent  by  Pope  Pela-
gius  II  to  the  patriarch  Elias  is  traceable  to  Secundus ; 1 also
the  account  (III,  26)  of  the  forcible  kidnapping  of  Severas
and  other  bishops  by  Smaragdus,  their  return  to  Grado  and
their  retraction  at  the  Synod  of  Marano,  since  Agnellus  of
Trent  was  one  of  the  bishops  who  took  part  in  this  synod.
Paul  may  have  made  use  of  some  document  besides,  but  more
likely  this  was  done  by  Secundus.2  Alboin’s  meeting  with
bishop  Felix  of  Treviso  (II,  12)  ; the  conquest  of  Venetia
(II,  14) ; the  king’s  entrance  into  Milan  on  September  5th,
569  ; the  conquest  of  Liguria  up  to  the  coast  cities ; the  flight
of  archbishop  Honoratus  to  Ravenna  (II,  25),  are  traceable
in  like  manner  to  Secundus  (Jacobi,  74).

Paul’s  account  of  the  conquest  of  Ticinum  by  Alboin  (II,
26)  may  come  from  Secundus  or  from  the  Origo.  The  Origo
says  that  the  city  was  beseiged  for  three  years,  and  to  judge

accessible  upon  this  point  (Atti  del  Congresso  in  Cividale,  1899,
pp.  135-140),  concludes  that  Paul  used  a catalogue  then  existing
in  his  own  city  of  Cividale  which  was  substantially  the  same  as  the
one  used  by  the  See  of  Grado,  and  contained,  besides  the  years  of
the  pontificate  of  each  patriarch,  certain  brief  historical  statements.
Paul’s  omission  of  the  patriarchate  of  Marcianus,  however,  which
is  contained  in  the  Chronicle  of  the  Patriarchs  of  Aquileia  and  in
the  Chronicle  of  Altino,  makes  it  probable  that  he  relied  upon
some  secondary  source.

^ipolla  (Atti,  etc.,  pp.  143- 144)  thinks  Paul  found  this  letter
among  some  documents  at  Cividale,  but  did  not  read  or  under-
stand it,  since  he  gave  it  the  wrong  interpretation.  It  would  seem
more  probable  that  he  took  his  statements  wholly  from  some  other
source.

* Cipolla  believes,  however  (Atti,  etc.,  p.  144),  that  the  matters
relating  to  Severus  were  taken  from  the  acts  of  the  schismatic
Synod  of  Marano,  and  that  Paul  was  ignorant  of  the  fact  that
Gregory  regarded  Severus  as  the  head  of  the  schism.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

LANGOBARD  SOURCES.  SECUNDUS.

357

from  the  Chronicon  Gothanum  it  mentioned  also  the  capture
of  Milan  and  other  cities.  The  mention  of  the  failure  of  crops
in  the  second  year  of  the  siege  points  to  Secundus,  so  that
Paul  here  very  likely  fused  together  different  statements.
Other  legendary  accounts  were  also  accessible  to  Paul  as  is
shown  by  his  story  (II,  27)  of  Alboin’s  entry  into  Pavia.

What  Paul  states  about  the  murder  of  Alboin  is  traceable  to
other  sources,  but  what  he  tells  of  the  reign  and  death  of  Cleph
(II,  31)  may  be  taken  from  Secundus.

The  statement  (II,  32)  regarding  the  time  of  the  interreg-
num, which  Paul,  differing  from  other  sources,  fixes  at  ten
years,  as  well  as  that  which  gives  the  number  of  the  dukes,
and  tells  of  the  distribution  of  the  Romans  among  the  Lango-
bards  are  traceable  to  Secundus.  Also  the  account  of  Authari’s
elevation  to  the  throne  (III,  16)  and  that  he  took  the  name
of  Flavius,  but  Jacobi  (p.  75)  does  not  attribute  to  this  histor-
ian the  statement  that  the  dukes  relinquished  half  their  pos-
sessions to  the  king,  and  Pabst  (Forsch.,  II,  425,  n.  2)
regards  as  wholly  legendary  what  Paul  relates  of  the  Golden
Age  under  Authari.  With  greater  certainty  we  can  determine
that  Secundus  mentioned  the  conquest  of  Brexillum  ; the  three
years*  truce  with  Smaragdus  (III,  18)  ; the  floods  in  Liguria
and  Venetia ; the  damage  to  the  walls  of  Verona ; the  great
thunder  storm ; the  fire  in  Verona  (III,  23),  and  Paul  com-
pleted his  account  from  Gregory  the  Great  and  Gregory  of
Tours  (Jacobi,  76).  Paul’s  account  of  Authari’s  wooing  (III,
30),  however,  seems  to  Jacobi  legendary  (p.  76).  Only  two
places  in  it  show  by  the  form  of  their  narrative  that  they  have
proceeded  from  historical  sources ; the  account  of  the  murder
of  Ansul  (III,  30)  at  Verona  and  the  statement  of  the  date
and  place  of  the  marriage  of  Authari  and  Theudelinda.  These
point  to  the  use  of  a source  like  Secundus.  Jacobi  thinks  that
what  Paul  says  of  the  flight  of  Theudelinda  from  Bavaria  is
legendary,  since  queen  Theudelinda  has  her  coming  announced

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

358

APPENDIX  II.

and  the  Frankish  sources  are  silent.  Paul  knew  from  the
Origo  that  Gundoald  came  to  Italy  with  his  sister  Theudelinda.

Jacobi  (p.  77)  traces  the  date  of  Authari’s  death  (III,  35)
and  the  suspicion  that  he  had  been  poisoned,  to  Secundus  and
believes  that  in  the  narrative  of  Agilulf ’s  choice  by  Theude-
linda connected  with  historical  dates,  saga  and  fact  are  united.

Jacobi  also  traces  to  Secundus  (p.  77)  the  conquest  of
Classis  (III,  13)  by  duke  Faroald  of  Spoleto  the  accession
and  death  of  duke  Ariulf  and  the  struggles  of  the  sons  of  Far-
oald for  the  succession,  which  led  to  the  appointment  of  Theu-
delapius  (IV,  16).  What  Paul  says  of  Arichis,  the  successor
of  Zotto  of  Beneventum  (IV,  18)  seems  to  Jacobi  (p.  78)  to
come  from  Secundus,  on  account  of  the  words,  “ sent  by  the
king  Agilulf,’ * though  Beneventan  sources  were  certainly  ac-
cessible to  Paul,  and  the  first  mention  of  Zotto  (III,  33)  is
not  derived  from  the  historian  of  Trent.

The  statements  which  Paul  borrowed  from  Secundus  in  re-
gard to  Langobard  history  are  concluded  at  this  point,  but
Secundus  hardly  confined  himself  to  the  special  history  of  his
own  country.  At  this  time  the  relations  between  the  Frankish
and  Langobard  kingdoms  were  important ? and  nothing  is  more
natural  than  that  Secundus  should  bring  into  his  work  what
came  to  his  knowledge  under  this  head.  The  statements  con-
cerning Frankish  affairs  down  to  612  which  are  not  traceable
to  Gregory  are  probably  taken  from  Secundus, and  where  Paul
follows  Gregory  with  variations,  we  can  trace  these  variations
(where  they  are  not  due  to  mere  carelessness)  to  Secundus,
such  as  the  statement  in  regard  to  Sigisbert’s  struggles  with  the
Avars  in  Thuringia  and  by  the  Elbe  (II,  10;  Greg.,  IV,  23).
Thus  Gregory  gives  as  the  reason  of  the  unfortunate  campaign

1 The  epitaph  of  Droctulf  indeed  states  this  circumstance  (III,
19),  but  as  Paul  mentions  Faroald  as  first  duke  of  the  people  of
Spoleto  (III,  13),  another  source,  probably  Secundus,  was  used.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.  $59

of  Childepert  II  against  the  Langobards  in  585,  the  lack  of
union  in  their  leaders  (Greg.,  VIII,  18),  and  Paul  (III,  22)
attributes  it  to  the  discord  between  the  Alamanni  and  the
Franks.  It  is  uncertain  whether  the  account  (III,  10)  of
Sigisbert’s  death  is  taken  from  Gregory  (IV,  51  ; V,  1)  or
Secundus.  Since  Paul  immediately  adds  a statement  about
Euin  of  Trent  he  may  have  taken  it  from  Secundus.

Finally,  the  short  accounts  (IV,  26)  of  the  fall  and  over-
throw of  the  emperor  Maurice  by  Phocas,  as  well  as  the  over-
throw of  the  latter  in  610  and  the  accession  of  Heraclius
(IV,  36)  to  the  throne,  appear  to  be  traceable  to  Secundus.1

In  the  same  style  in  which  Paul  (IV,  40),  before  the  state-
ment of  Secundus*  death,  speaks  of  the  conclusion  of  a peace
between  the  Langobards,  the  emperor  and  the  Franks,  and  the
irruption  of  the  Slavs  into  Istria,  he  goes  on,  after  the  account
of  Secundus*  death,  with  the  statement  of  a truce  between  Agi-
lulf  and  the  emperor  and  of  the  death  of  Theudipert  II  and  of
duke  Gundoald  of  Asti.  The  possible  sources  from  which  Paul
had  learned  the  death  of  Secundus  in  March,  612,  are  many,
but  the  most  probable  seems  to  Jacobi  (79)  to  be  that  a con-
tinuer of  the  chronicle  also  mentioned  the  death  of  the  author
and  added  the  above  short  statements.

The  foregoing  discussion  concludes  our  review  of  the  Lan-
gobard  sources  from  which  Paul  derived  the  statements  in  his
history.

(c)  ROMAN  SOURCES.

We  turn  now  to  the  last  division  of  this  investigation,  to
the  ascertainment  of  the  Roman  sources  which  Paul  used.
These  were  quite  numerous,  a great  number  of  short  and

1 Ebert  (Litteratur  des  Mittelalters,  II,  46,  note)  believes  that
Jacobi  has  attributed  too  much  to  Secundus,  in  view  of  the  fact
that  Paul  had  spoken  of  his  work  as  “ a succinct  little  history.**

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

36o

APPENDIX  II.

sometimes  unimportant  extracts  having  been  made  *by  Paul
from  various  Roman  authorities.  There  was,  however,  a
very  considerable  and  a very  important  portion  of  Paul’s  his-
tory which  was  taken  from  a source  in  regard  to  which
there  is  a serious  controversy,  Mommsen  insisting  that  it
is  derived  from  a chronicle  now  lost,  and  Jacobi  and  Waitz
claiming  that  the  bulk  of  this  portion  of  the  history  is  taken
from  the  Liber  Pontificalis  and  Bede , and  that  only  a small
portion  is  taken  from  the  lost  chronicle.  There  is  also  a dis-
pute as  to  the  source  from  which  Paul  derived  his  Catalogue  of
the  Provinces  of  Italy  in  the  Second  Book.  We  may,  there-
fore , conveniently  divide  this  part  of  our  discussion  into  three
divisions.  First,  Miscellaneous  Sources ; second,  Liber  Pon-
tificalis, Bede,  and  the  Lost  Chronicle ; third,  the  Catalogue  of
the  Provinces  of  Italy.

(i)  Miscellaneous  Sources .

These  are  set  forth  by  Jacobi  in  detail,  and  there  is  little
difference  of  opinion  in  regard  to  them.  They  are  Eugippius,
Gregory  the  Great,  Marcus  Casinensis,  Venantius  Fortunatus,
Autpert,  Life  of  Columban,  the  Elder  Pliny,  Justin,  the  Cos-
mographer  of  Ravenna,  Virgil,  Donatus,  Sextus  Aurelius
Victor,  Festus,  Isidore,  Jordanis,  Justinian.  These  will  be
considered  in  order.

Eugippius 1 (Jacobi,  24).  Eugippius*  biography  of  St.  Sev-
erinus was  used  by  Paul  only  once,  when  he  added  to  the
account  in  the  Origo  of  Odoacar’s  victory  over  Fewa  (I,  19)
some  few  statements  in  regard  to.  the  latter,  including  Fewa’s
other  name,  Feletheus,  and  the  fact  that  the  saint  often  ad-
monished him  and  his  wife  Gisa  in  vain  regarding  their  errors

1 An  Italian  monk,  the  pupil  of  St.  Severinus  of  Noricum,  who
wrote  about  511a  life  of  the  saint,  which  is  an  important  source
of  early  German  History.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.

361

and  finally  prophesied  their  fate.  Also  the  statement  that  the
saint  was  buried  uuNaples  (Eugipp.  Vita.  Severini  Acta.  SS.,
Jan.  8, 1,  p.  486  et  seq . See  chap.  I,  3,  sec.  15  ; IX,  sec.
39;  XI ; XII,  sec  57).

Gregory  the  Great 1 (Jacobi,  24,  25,  26).  Paul  mentions
the  Dialogues  of  Gregory  the  Great  on  several  occasions  (I,
26 ; III,  23  ; IV,  5)  and  his  two  poems  on  St.  Benedict  are
based  almost  entirely  on  statements  made  in  the  second  book
of  these  Dialogues  (See  Appendix  III).  The  first  thing  in
the  historical  part  of  Paul’s  work  traceable  to  Gregory  is  the
mention  of  those  terrible  signs  which  appeared  in  the  northern
sky  like  lances  and  swords,  and  foretold  the  irruption  of  the
Langobards  (p.  II,  5 ; Dialog.  Ill,  38;  I,  Homily  on  the
Gospels).  From  Gregory  also  comes,  as  our  author  himself
states,  the  account  of  the  flood  in  Verona  (III,  23  ; Dialogue
III,  19).  But  since  Paul  mentions  the  17th  of  October  as
the  day  of  the  occurrence  and  speaks  of  a fire  in  Verona  of
which  Gregory  says  nothing,  he  had  evidently  another  source
at  his  hand,  probably  Secundus.  Paul  also  takes  (IV,  17)
from  the  Dialogues  (II,  17)  the  account  of  the  destruction  of
the  cloister  of  Monte  Cassino  in  589,  which,  however,  he  puts
at  too  late  a period,  about  601  (Jacobi,  26).  He  adds  that
the  Rule  of  the  Order  written  by  St.  Benedict’s  own  hand  was
rescued  and  sent  to  Rome  from  which  it  was  later  re-acquired
for  the  newly  established  cloister  (VI,  40).  This  was  prob-
ably taken  from  some  account  at  Monte  Cassino.  Paul  names
in  this  place  (IV,  17)  the  four  abbots  who  succeeded  St.  Bene-

* Gregory  I,  or  St.  Gregory,  bom  at  Rome  about  540,  pope  from
590  to  604.  He  was  the  author  of  numerous  homilies  on  Ezekiel
and  the  Gospels,  of  •*  Morals,”  • * Pastoral  care,  * * " Dialogues,”
11  Letters,”  etc.  His  letters  are  of  great  value  as  sources  of  con-
temporary history.  (See  note  III,  24.)

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

3^2

APPENDIX  II.

diet.  Gregory  in  the  prologue  to  the  Second  Book  of  Dia-
logues mentions  the  first  two.1 2

Paul  refers  (IV,  8)  to  Gregory’s  homilies  on  Ezekiel  where
he  mentions  that  Gregory  was  so  greatly  affected  by  Agilulf’s
advance  that  he  had  to  interrupt  his  description  of  the  temple.
Gregory  relates  this  occurrence  in  the  preface  of  the  second
book  of  the  homilies  (Waitz).  Paul  brings  this  circumstance
into  connection  with  the  attack  by  the  exarch  Romanus  in  594
upon  several  cities,  whereupon  Agilulf  marched  against
Romanus,  stormed  Perugia  and  pressed  on  to  Rome  (Greg-
ory’s Epistles  V,  40).

Besides  the  letteis  to  Agilulf  and  Theudelinda  (IV,  9 ; Ep.
IX,  42, 43)  Paul  gives  us  only  one  complete  letter  of  Gregory,
that  to  duke  Arichis  of  Benevento  January  602  (IV,  19  ; Ep.
XII,  21), and  then,  in  a characterization  of  Gregory,  he  gives
us  a part  of  a letter  to  the  deacon  Saviiiianus  (IV,  29  ; Ep.
IV,  47  : II).  The  statement  that  Gregory  is  the  author  of
the  letter  to  Elias  of  Aquileia  which  Pelagius  II  addressed  to
him  on  the  occasion  of  the  schism  is  found  only  in  Paul  (III,
20).  There  appears  no  mention  of  it  in  Gregory’s  letters.

Marcus  Casinensis  (Jacobi,  27).  Paul  (I,  26)  mentions
the  poet  Marcus  who  composed  a poem  on  St.  Benedict  in
thirty-three  distichs  concerning  the  establishment  of  the  clois-
ter of  Monte  Cassino.  Paul  gives  us  line  38  (See  Muratori
Script.  IV,  605-606).

Venantius  Fortunatus'1  (Jacobi,  27,  28).  From  the  poem
of  Venantius  Fortunatus  on  St.  Martin  of  Tours  (Book  IV,
verses  640,  700)  Paul  took  the  birth  place  of  the  poet,  the

1 Paul’s  account  of  the  destruction  of  the  people  of  Italy  (III,  32)

‘ 1 who  had  grown  up  like  crops  * * comes  from  the  Dialogues  (II,  38).

2 A Latin  poet,  bishop  of  Poictiers,  born  at  Ceneda,  Italy,  about
530,  died  about  600.  He  was  the  author  of  600  hymns,  among
them  the  Vexilla  regis  prodeuni.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.  3^3

healing  of  his  eyes  in  the  church  at  Ravenna  and  his  journey
to  Tours  (II,  13).1

Autpert  (Jacobi,  28).  Paul  tells  us  (VI,  40)  that  he  took
the  account  of  the  establishment  of  the  cloister  of  St.  Vincent
on  the  Voltumo  by  the  brothers  Tato,  Taso  and  Paldo  from
their  biographies  composed  by  the  abbot  Autpert.*

Life  of  St.  Colutnban 3 (Jacobi,  28).  The  establishment  of
the  cloisters  of  Luxeuil  and  Bobbio  by  St.  Columban  is  men-
tioned by  Paul  (IV,  41)  quite  briefly,  and  while  it  is  probable,
it  is  not  certain,  that  he  used  for  this  statement  the  Life  of  St.
Columban.  Mommsen  believes  (p.  66)  that  the  identification
of  Wotan  with  Mercury  is  also  taken  from  this  life  (ch.  53).

The  Elder  Pliny  (Jacobi,  28).  Paul  (1,2)  refers  to  Pliny’s
Natural  History  (IV,  27  [13])  to  establish  the  identity  of  the
“ Scadanan  ” of  the  Origo  with  Scadinavia.  In  the  account
of  Lamissio  (I,  15),  Paul  refers  to  Pliny  (VII,  3)  to  establish

1 The  verses  do  not  say  that  Venantius  made  the  journey  in  that
way,  but  at  the  end  of  his  poem  apostrophizing  his  book,  which  he
sends  to  his  friends  in  Italy,  he  indicates  the  way  that  book  is  to
take,  which  is  surely  that  which  he  himself  took  on  his  journey
from  Italy  to  France.  In  this  poem  mention  is  made  of  Forum
Julii,  but  not  in  its  proper  order,  and  Paul  does  not  speak  of  this
place  (which  was  his  own  birthplace,  or  near  it)  in  relating  the
journey.  Crivellucci  (Studi  Storici,  1899)  concludes  that  the
mention  of  Forum  Julii  is  an  interpolation,  and  that  as  it  is  absent
in  some  of  the  MSS.,  it  could  not  have  been  in  the  one  consulted
by  Paul.

* Autpert  came  from  the  Frankish  kingdom  to  the  cloister  of  St.
Vincent,  and  died  there  778  (Bethmann,  384).

8 Written  by  Jonas,  a monk  of  Bobbio,  about  640  (Hodgkin,  VI,
105).  St.  Columban  was  bom  in  Leinster,  Ireland  about  543
(id.,  p.  no),  died  at  Bobbio,  Italy,  615  (id.,  p.  145).  He  was  a
missionary  in  France,  Switzerland  and  Italy,  and  founded  the
monasteries  of  Luxeuil  and  Bobbio  (id.,  m-133).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

3^4

APPENDIX  II.

the  credibility  of  his  story  of  that  king’s  wonderful  birth.
Mommsen  believes  (p.  92)  that  Paul’s  statement  (II,  17)
that  the  river  Siler  is  the  boundary  between  Campania  and
Lucania  is  from  Pliny,  also  Paul’s  reference  to  the  Atemus  or
Piscarium  (II,  19)  and  to  “ the  left  horn  of  Italy  ” (II,  21),
etc.

Justin 1 (Jacobi,  29).  In  his  account  of  the  irruption  of
the  Gauls  under  Brennus  into  Italy  (II,  23)  Paul  mostly  fol-
lows the  Epitome  of  Justin  (XXIV)  which  gives  the  number  of
the  Gauls  at  300 ,000  and  states  that  a part  of  them  destroyed
Rome,  another  part  went  to  Greece  and  were  there  defeated
at  Delphi,  and  the  third  part  proceeded  to  Asia  (XXV,  2)  and
settled  in  Galatia,  and  the  last,  Paul  adds,  were  the  Galatians
to  whom  St.  Paul  wrote  his  epistle.  Paul  arbitrarily  attributed
to  these  three  bands  of  invaders  the  strength  of  100,000  men
each.  The  names  of  the  cities  established  by  the  Gauls  are
also  taken  from  Justin  (XX,  5)  (?).*

The  Cosmographer  of  Ravenna  (I,  n,  see  Jacobi,  30)
mentions  Mauringa,  which  according  to  Paul  (I,  n)  is  the
third  settlement  of  the  Langobards,  and  describes  the  Skride-
finnen  who  are  probably  the  Scritobini  of  Paul  (1,5).  (See
Procopius  B.  G.,  II,  15.)  Possibly  Paul’s  explanation  of  the
ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide  (1,6)  can  be  traced  to  this  source.

Virgil  (Jacobi,  30).  Virgil’s  verses  (^Eneid  III,  420  to
423)  are  quoted  in  Paul’s  reference  to  Charybdis.

Donatus s (Jacobi,  30).  Paul  refers  (II,  23)  to  Donatus’

1 A Roman  historian  who  lived  before  the  fifth  century  ; he  was
the  compiler  of  an  epitome  of  a lost  history  by  Pompeius  Trogus,
written  near  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  era  (Larousse).

* But  Justin  names  Conium,  Verona,  Tridentum  and  Vincentia
and  omits  Ticinum.

•Aelius  Donatus,  a Roman  grammarian  and  rhetorician  who

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.

36s

commentary  upon  Virgil  for  his  assertion  that  Mantua  was  in
Gaul.  The  place  in  question  is  found  in  Servius  on  the
^Eneid  (Bk.  X,  line  200).

Sextus  Aurelius  Victor  (Jacobi,  30).  To  prove  that  the
Cottian  Alps  were  a province  by  themselves  (II,  18)  Paul  ap-
peals to  a history  by  Sextus  Aurelius  Victor  (De  Caesar.
Ch.  V,  Nero).  Perhaps  also  the  derivation  of  the  name  of
the  Cottian  Alps  from  king  Cottius  comes  from  this  history.

Festus 1 (Jacobi,  31).  From  Festus’  De  Verborum  Signifi-
cation (Exc.  ed.  Muller)  Paul  deduces  the  origin  of  the
names  Lucania  (p.  119),  Picenum  (p.  212),  Samnium  (p.
327),  Italia  (p.  46),  Ausonia  (p.  4).  Also,  according  to
Mommsen  (95),  Forum  Julii  (p.  84).*

Isidore 8 (See  Jacobi,  31).  Paul  took  from  Isidore’s  Ety-
mologies (XIII,  19  ; 6)  that  Lake  Benacus  lay  in  Venetia  (P.
II,  14).  Also  the  explanation  of  the  names  Histria  (Etym.
XIV,  4,  i8)4,Tuscia  (20),  Umbria  (21),  Campania  (XV,  1,
64),  Apennine  Alps  (XIV,  8,  13),  Etruria  (XIV,  4,  22),
Sicily  (XIV,  6,  30),  Corsica  (35),  Sardinia  (XIV,  6,  34),

lived  in  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century,  who  wrote,  among  other
things,  a commentary  on  Virgil.

1 Sextus  Pompeius  Festus,  a Latin  lexicographer,  who  lived  per-
haps in  the  second  century.  He  epitomized  a glossary  of  Latin
words  and  phrases,  entitled  “ De  Verborum  Significatu,"  by  M.
Verrius  Flaccus,  which  is  now  lost.

‘These  citations  from  Festus  may  be  found  in  alphabetical
order  in  other  editions  than  Muller’s.

• Isidorus  Hispalensis,  or  Isidore  of  Seville,  bom  at  Cartagena
about  560,  died  636,  became  bishop  of  Seville  600.  He  wrote  a
work  on  etymology,  a chronicle,  etc.,  and  his  books  were  held  in
high  esteem  during  the  Middle  Ages.

4 1 cite  the  Madrid  edition  of  Isidore  (Ulloa,  1 77 8),  which  differs
from  the  texts  cited  by  Jacobi  and  Mommsen.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

366

APPENDIX  II.

Italy  (XIV,  4,  19).1  Also  the  introductory  first  chapter  of  his
first  book,  describing  the  advantages  of  northern  lands  for  the
propagation  of  the  human  race,  must  be  traced  to  Isidore  (IX,
2,  96 ; XIV,  4,  2).  The  remarkable  derivation  of  Germania
from  germinare  is  also  traceable  to  a certain  extent  to  a state-
ment of  Isidore  (XIV.  4,  2).  Paul’s  statement  of  the  bound-
aries of  Italy  (II,  9)  was  also  taken  from  Isidore’s  Etymolo-
gies (XIV,  4,  19).  On  the  other  hand,  Paul  only  used  the
Chronicle  of  Isidore  twice  in  his  Langobard  history ; first,  for
the  conquest  of  Belisarius  over  the  Persians  (I.  25  ; see  Chron-
icle AM.,  5762),  and  second,  for  the  insurrection  of  the  fac-
tions of  the  circus,  the  Blues  and  the  Greens  under  Phocas
(P.,  IV,  36  ; Chron.  AM.,  5809).

Jordanis 2 (Jacobi,  32).  From  the  Chronicle  of  Jordanis
Paul  took  (1, 19)  the  names  of  the  peoples  which  Odoacar  led
into  the  field  against  Fewa  (Ed.  Lindenbr.  Hamb.,  1611,  p.
59);  also  the  statement  (P.,  II,  1)  of  the  alliance  of  the
Langobards  with  the  Byzantine  court  (id.,  p.  67).  From
Jordanis’  History  of  the  Goths  Paul  took  the  explanations  of
the  names  of  Brittia  (chap.  XXX ; see  Mommsen,  p.  94)  and
Venetia  (chap.  XXIX;  see  Mommsen,  p.  97).

Justinian  (Jacobi,  32).  Paul  took  his  statement  regarding
the  composition  of  the  Code,  Institutes  and  Pandects  of  Jus-
tinian (I,  25)  from  the  second  preface  of  Justinian  to  the
Digests.  From  this,  too,  came  the  enumeration  of  the  titles
of  Justinian.

The  explanation  of  the  derivation  of  Liguria,  ^Emilia,  Fla-
minia  and  Apulia  are  peculiar  to  Paul  (II,  15,  19,  21), 3 per-

1 Mommsen  adds  (p.  95)  Latium  (Isid.  XIV,  4,  19).

3 A Gothic  historian  and  ecclesiastic  of  the  sixth  century.  He
wrote  a history  of  the  Goths  and  a general  chronicle.

3 Mommsen  believes  (p.  97)  that  the  meaning  of  Apulia,  Atella,
Aurelia  and  Liguria  were  derived  from  the  complete  edition  of
Festus  which  Paul  had,  and  which  has  not  come  down  to  us.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.  3 67

baps  also  has  derivation  of  the  Cottian  Alps  from  king  Cottius
(II,  16;  Jacobi,  32).

It  would  seem  that  Paul  had  before  him  documents  from
Monte  Cassino  only  to  a very  limited  extent  (Jacobi,  86).
The  account  of  the  robbery  of  the  bones  of  St.  Benedict  and  his
sister  (P.  VI,  2)  appear  to  rest  upon  some  such  authority,  and
the  account  of  the  second  establishment  of  the  cloister  by
Petronax  (VI,  40)  on  the  use  of  some  local  source.  The  nar-
rative of  the  conflict  between  duke  Pemmo  of  Friuli  and  the
patriarch  Calixtus  (VI,  51)  may  rest  upon  certain  Friulan
accounts,  since  the  work  of  our  author  in  its  latter  portion
deals  with  legends  of  the  marvelous  doings  of  the  Langobard
kings  and  the  dukes  of  Beneventum,  Friuli  and  Spoleto.

(2).  The  Liber  Pontificate , Bede  and  the  Lost  Chronicle .

In  treating  of  these  it  will  be  convenient  first  to  consider
Jacobi’s  analysis  of  Paul’s  sources  and  then  to  compare  this
with  Mommsen’s  divergent  views.  Jacobi  says  (p.  45)  that
for  the  later  part  of  the  History  of  the  Langobards  the  Liber
Pontificalis  and  Bede’s  Chronicle  are  almost  the  only  sources
which  have  come  down  to  us,  and  that  about  one-sixth  of
Paul’s  work  is  derived  from  these  two.  His  whole  system  of
chronology  depends  in  a general  way  upon  Bede.  Paul  used
the  Liber  Pontificalis  from  John  III  to  Gregory  II.  He  ap-
pears to  have  used  an  edition  known  as  B of  Muratori  (Ja-
cobi 46  and  47).  From  it  he  took  the  story  (P.  II,  5 ; Lib.
Pont.,  John  III)  of  the  invitation  of  the  Langobards  into  Italy
by  Narses ; also  the  account  of  Narses’  departure  to  Naples,
his  return  to  Rome,  his  death  and  the  sending  of  his  body  to
Constantinople  (P.  II,  n ; Lib.  Pont.,  John  III)  ; the  state-
ment that  at  the  time  of  Pope  Benedict  the  Langobards  laid
waste  the  country  surrounding  Rome  and  that  Justin  II  brought
grain  from  Egypt  to  relieve  the  famine  (P.  Ill,  1 1 ; Lib.  Pont.,
Bened.  I)  ; and  of  the  election  of  pope  Pelagius  (P*  III,  20,

Digitized  by

Google

368

APPENDIX  II.

Lib.  Pont.  Pelagius  II)  without  the  confirmation  of  the  em-
peror.

As  Bede  also  used  the  Liber  Pontificalis,  it  is  sometimes
hard  to  tell  whether  Paul  made  his  extract  from  the  former
or  the  latter ; for  example,  in  regard  to  the  missionaries  sent
to  Britain  by  Gregory  I (P.  Ill,  25  ; Bede  4536 ; Lib.  Pont.
Greg.  I).  Sometimes  he  supplements  one  by  the  other.  It
is  doubtful  which  source  he  followed  in  relating  the  confirma-
tion by  Liutprand  of  the  gift  of  the  Cottian  Alps  (P.  VI,  28 ;
Bede  4659;  Lib.  Pont.  John  VII;  Jacobi  49-50).  Thus
Paul  (V,  30)  recapitulates  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis  (Vita-
lianus  and  Adeodatus)  the  murder  of  Constans  II  in  Sicily  in
668  ; the  suppression  of  the  uprising  of  Mezetius  and  the  suc-
cession of  Constantine  IV,  but  the  period  of  the  reign  of  the
latter  is  taken  from  Bede  (A.  M.  4639).  Sometimes  Paul  con-
nects the  statements  in  such  a way  that  mistakes  occur.  Thus
he  takes  the  account  of  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  (VI,  5)
(June  28th,  680)  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis  (Agatho),  and  of
an  eclipse  of  the  sun  (May  2, 680)  from  Bede  (A.  M.  4622),
but  the  chronological  order  is  inverted.  To  the  gift  of  the
patrimony  of  the  Cottian  Alps  by  king  Aripert  (VI,  28)  to  the
Holy  See  (Bede  A.  M.  4659  ; Lib.  Pont.  John  VII)  Paul  joins
as  contemporaneous  the  pilgrimage  of  two  Anglo-Saxon  kings
to  Rome,  which  is  incorrect,  since  the  Liber  Pontificalis  fixes
the  event  under  Pope  Constantine  I (708  and  715).  Also  in
the  account  of  the  second  reign  of  Justinian  II  Paul  works  to-
gether (VI,  31)  the  account  of  the  Liber  Pontificalis  (John
VII)  and  Bede  (A.  M.  4665)  stating  that  Justinian  put  to
death  certain  patricians,  as  well  as  his  two  rivals  Leo  (Leon-
tius) and  Tiberius  (Apsimar)  whereas  Bede  had  simply  des-
ignated these  as  patricians.

Paul  (VI,  31)  relates  in  Bede’s  language  (A.  M.  4665)
that  Justinian  sent  the  patriarch  Callinicus  whom  he  calls  Gal-
licinus,  blinded  to  Rome,  made  the  abbot  Cyrus  patriarch,  and

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.

369

caused  Pope  Constantine  I to  come  to  Constantinople,  and  on
the  other  hand  he  relates  in  the  words  of  the  Liber  Pontificalis
(Constantine,  Murat.  Ill,  p.  153,  n.  16)  that  the  Pope  vainly
tried  to  dissuade  the  emperor  from  sending  an  army  against
the  banished  Filippicus.  Paul  takes  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis
(VI,  36  ; Lib.  Pont.,  Gregory  II)  the  insurrection  of  the  fleet
sent  by  Anastasius  II  against  Egypt,  but  he  adds  from  Bede
(A.  M.  4671)  the  victory  of  Theodosius  over  Anastasius  at
Nicea,  the  setting  up  again  of  the  Council  picture  in  Constanti-
nople, and  the  overflow  of  the  Tiber.  The  siege  of  Constanti-
nople by  the  Arabs,  Paul  takes  (VI,  47)  from  Bede  (A.  M.
4680),  but  adds  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis  (Greg.  II)  that
300,000  persons  perished  by  pestilence.  He  relates  from
Bede  (A.  M.  4680)  that  the  Saracens  were  defeated  by  the
Bulgarians  and  the  rest  of  their  army  destroyed  by  a storm  at
sea,  and  that  the  bones  of  St.  Augustine  were  transported  from
Sardinia  to  Ticinum  by  king  Liutprand,  and  he  correctly  puts
as  contemporary  therewith  (VI,  48)  from  the  Liber  Pontifi-
calis (Greg.  II)  the  conquest  of  Narnia  by  the  Langobards.

Paul  relates  (IV,  8)  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis  alone  (Greg.
1)  the  capture  by  the  exarch  Romanus  of  some  cities  that
already  belonged  to  the  Langobards ; the  taking  of  Naples  by
John  of  Consia;  his  defeat  by  the  patrician  Eleutherius,  and
the  murder  of  the  latter  in  Luceoli  (Jacobi,  52,  53)  ; the  ac-
count (IV,  45)  of  the  earthquake  and  plague  in  Rome  (Lib.
Pont.,  Deusdedit,  MuratoriHI,  p.  135),  and  the  expedition  of
Constans  II  to  Italy  (V,  6 ; Lib.  Pont. , Vitalian) , but  he  adds
from  other  sources  more  detailed  accounts  and  legends  of  the
struggle  between  king  Grimoald  and  the  emperor.  Paul  tells
us  (V,  II)  also  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis  (Vitalian)  of  Con-
stans*  entrance  into  Rome,  the  plundering  of  the  Pantheon,
the  departure  of  the  emperor  to  Naples  and  Sicily  and  his
murder  in  Syracuse;  the  insurrection  of  Mecetius  (Meze-
tius)  (V,  12;  Lib.  Pont.,  Adeodatus) ; the  plundering  of

Digitized  by  LjOOQle

370

APPENDIX  II.

Sicily  by  the  Saracens  (V,  13)  ; the  storms  of  rain  and  the
second  crop  of  leguminous  plants  (V,  15);  the  sending  of
archbishop  Theodore  and  abbot  Hadrian  to  Britain  (V,
30;  Lib.  Pont.  Vitalian)  ; the  comet  (V,  31;  Lib.  Pont.
Donus)  ; the  pestilence  that  followed ; the  adornment  by
Pope  Donus  of  the  so-called  “ Paradise  ” in  front  of  St.  Peter’s
with  a pavement  of  white  marble  (id),  and  the  account  of  the
Sixth  General  Council  (VI,  4 ; Lib.  Pont.  Agatho).  The  letter
of  Damianus  however  is  not  found  in  the  Liber  Pontificalis  nor
Bede.  Possibly  Paul  saw  the  letter  and  perhaps  his  confession
of  faith  was  taken  from  it.  The  eclipse  of  the  moon  and  the
pestilence  ( VI , 5 ) comes  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis  (Agatho).
Paul  places  as  contemporaneous  with  these  the  ravages  of  the
disease  in  Pavia  and  the  bringing  of  the  relics  of  St.  Sebastian
from  Rome.  Two  remarkable  star  phenomena  and  an  erup-
tion of  Vesuvius  (VI,  9)  come  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis
(Benedict  II),  also  the  invasion  by  duke  Gisulf  (VI,  27)  in
702  of  the  Roman  Campania  (John  VI),  but  not  the  name  of
the  conquered  cities.  The  journey  of  archbishop  Benedict
(VI,  29)  of  Milan  to  Rome  comes  from  the  Life  of  Pope
Constantine  I.  The  account  of  the  capture  and  re-capture  of
Cumae  (VI,  40)  ; the  coming  of  duke  Theudo  of  Bavaria  to
Rome  (VI,  44,  Liber  Pont.  Greg.  II)  ; the  conquest  of  Spain
by  the  Saracens  and  the  battle  of  Poictiers.(VI,  46);  Liut-
prand’s  siege  of  Ravenna  and  capture  of  Classis ; the  unsuc-
cessful attempt  (VI,  49)  which  the  exarch  Paul  made  against
Gregory  II  and  Gregory’s  opposition  to  the  iconoclastic
measures  of  Leo  the  Isaurian,  are  all  taken  from  the  Liber
Pontificalis  (Gregory  II)  together  with  Gregory’s  refusal  to
favor  the  insurrection  against  the  emperor.  While  the  Liber
Pontificalis  states  that  several  cities  of  Aemilia,  as  well  as  the
Pentapolis  and  Auxinum  surrendered  to  Liutp'rand  (Pabst,
476),  Paul  leaves  in  uncertainty  the  conquest  of  these  cities
by  the  king.  The  taking  of  Sutrium  (VI,  49;  Liber  Pont,

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.

371

Gregory  II)  by  Liutprand  and  the  restoration  of  it  to  the  Pope
are  mentioned  by  Paul  from  this  source.  The  repeated  attempts
of  Leo  to  prevent  the  worship  of  images,  the  removal  of  the
patriarch  Germanus  and  the  naming  of  his  successor  Anastasius
are  the  last  facts  which  Paul  took  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis
(P.  VI,  49 ; Lib.  Pontiff.,  Greg.  II).

It  is  remarkable  that  Paul  omits  so  much  which  he  found  in
his  copy,  such  as  the  league  of  Liutprand  with  the  exarch
Eutychius,  the  subjugation  of  Spoleto  and  the  meeting  of
Liutprand  and  Gregory  II  at  Rome.  The  reason  for  this
silence  cannot  be  certainly  given.

From  Bede’s  Chronicle  Paul  (see  Jacobi,  58)  takes  the
account  (I,  25)  of  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  the
Vandals  in  Africa  by  Belisarius  (Bede  A.  M.  4518)  the
mention  of  Dionisius,  the  founder  of  the  Christian  computa-
tion of  time  (id.)  ; the  statement  (III,  13  ; Bede  A.  M.  4529)
that  Gregory  the  Great  composed  his  book  of  Morals  or  Com-
mentaries on  Job  at  the  court  of  Tiberius  in  Constantinople,
and  there  successfully  opposed  the  heresy  of  Euthicius ; the
death  of  Gregory  (P.  IV,  29 ; Bede  A.  M.  4565)  ; the  trans-
formation of  the  Pantheon  into  a church ; the  period  of  Focas*
reign;  the  war  of  the  Persians  against  the  empire  (IV,  36)  ;
the  death  of  Heraclius ; the  reign  of  his  son  Heracleonas
with  his  mother  Martina ; the  six  months’s  reign  of  Constan-
tine III  and  the  succession  of  Constans  II,  whom  Paul  calls
Constantine  (P.  IV,  49;  Bede  A.  M.  4591,  4593,  4504,
4622),  and  Paul’s  chronological  errors  are  thus  explained
(Jacobi,  59).

The  conquest  of  Africa  and  the  destruction  of  Carthage  by
the  Arabs  (VI,  10 ; Bede,  4649)  ; the  accession  of  Justinian  II
(VI,  11 ; Bede  A.  M.  4649)  (in  which  he  makes  the  mistake

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

372

APPENDIX  II.

of  calling  Justinan  a younger  son  of  Constantine,  whereas
Bede  calls  him  Justinian  the  younger,  a son  of  Constantine)  ;
Justinian’s  unsuccessful  attempt  to  bring  Pope  Sergius  to  Con-
stantinople ; the  peace  with  the  Arabs  (id.)  ; Justinian’s  over-
throw by  Leo  (VI,  12  ; Bede,  4649, 4652)  ; the  account  (VI,
14)  of  the  synod  of  Aquileia  which  ended  a schism  (Bede,
4659)  and  the  statement  that  the  Fifth  Synod  was  directed
against  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia  (VI,  14  ; Bede,  4639),  all  come
from  Bede,  but  Paul  adds  erroneously  that  this  synod  pro-
claimed Mary  the  Mother  of  God,  confusing  it  with  the  Third
General  Council  (Jacobi,  61).  Paul  takes  from  Bede  (VI  ,32;
Bede  A.  M.  4665,  4667)  the  insurrection  of  Filippicus  which
ended  Justinian’s  second  reign,  but  Paul  adds  from  another
source  that  Justinian  had  his  nose  cut  off  when  he  was  banished
by  Leonitus  and  after  his  return  sought  to  revenge  himself  by
continual  executions  of  his  opponents.  Paul  took  word  for
word  from  Bede  (VI,  34  ; Bede  A.  M.  4667)  the  statement  of
the  removal  of  the  patriarch  Cyrus,  but  the  other  name  of
Filippicus,  Bardanis,  as  well  as  the  name  Artemius,  Paul  took
from  another  source.  Paul  took  from  Bede  the  attempt  of
Filippicus  the  Monothelete  to  influence  the  Pope,  and  the
account  of  the  picture  of  the  six  oecumenical  councils  and  of
the  removal  of  the  imperial  effigies  (VI,  34 ; Bede,  4667 ) ;
Filippicus’  overthrow  through  Anastasius,  who  recognized  the
Sixth  Council  (Bede,  4670) ; the  journeys  of  the  Angles  to
Rome  (VI,  37  ; Bede,  4671) ; the  rise  of  Leo  the  Isaurian  to
the  throne  (VI,  41  ; Bede,  4680)  ; also  the  statement  (VI,
48 ; Bede,  4680)  of  the  removal  of  the  bones  of  St.  Augustine
by  king  Liutprand,  so  that  Bede’s  Chronicle  is  used  down  to
the  last  syllable.

The  remaining  part  of  Bede’s  work,  “De  Temporum
Ratione,”  was  only  used  once  by  Paul  (I,  5,  Bede,  ch.  31)
in  his  comparison  of  the  changing  length  of  the  days  and  the
difference  in  the  length  of  the  shadow  in  different  lands.

Digitized  by

Google

ROMAN  SOURCES.

373

Bede’s  History  of  the  Church  was  used  by  Paul  only  once  (VI,
15)  in  regard  to  the  journey  and  conversion  of  king  Cedoal
(Bede  V,  7).  He  incorrectly  makes  this  contemporary  with
the  synod  of  Aquileia.

Such  is  the  account,  (considerably  condensed) , which  Jacobi
gives  of  the  extracts  from  Bede  and  the  Liber  Pontificalis.
At  another  place,  in  his  discussion  of  the  sources  used  by  Paul
(p.  84),, he  insists  that  an  indication  of  an  annalistic  source
now  lost  occurs  in  Paul  (II,  14)  where  he  says  : “ For  Venetia
does  not  only  consist  in  the  few  islands  which  we  now  call
Venice.  * * * * This  is  proved  by  the  books  of  annals,
in  which  Pergamus  (Bergamo)  is  said  to  be  a city  of
Venice.”  In  Paul’s  Roman  History  (bk.  XVI)  he  had  said  :
“ Biorgor,  king  of  the  Alani,  was  overcome  and  killed  not  far
from  Bergamo,  a city  of  Venetia.”  Bauch  (p.  59,  74)  and
Holder- Egger  (Neues  Archiv,  I,  302)  have  shown  the  annal-
istic origin  of  the  latter  passage,  and  that  its  source  may  be
traced  to  Ravenna.  Other  passages  can  be  traced  to  similar
sources,  for  instance,  the  account  of  the  destruction  of  the
Vandal  kingdom  in  Africa  by  Belisarius,  and  of  the  conquest
of  the  king  of  the  Moors,  Amtalas,  by  the  ex-consul  Joannes
(I,  25).  Another  series  of  annalistic  statements  occurs  in
the  beginning  of  the  second  book,  where  Paul  mentions  (II,  1 )
the  conquest  of  Totila  by  Narses  with  the  aid  of  Langobard
auxiliaries,  and  varies  from  Procopius  in  his  account  of  their
dismissal,  while  he  omits  all  mention  of  the  conflict  of  Narses
with  Teia.  On  the  other  hand,  he  relates  the  victory  of  Narses
over  Buccellinus,  Amingo  and  Leuthari  (II,  2),  and  seems  to
have  drawn  from  a source  common  to  Marius  of  Avenches  and
the  Liber  Pontificalis  for  the  History  of  Sinduald  (II,  3)  and
Dagisteus.  Marius,  as  well  as  Paul,  praises  Narses  strongly,
and  as  Paul  appears  to  have  drawn  the  statement  (II,  4)  of
the  punishment  of  the  bishop  Vitalis  of  Altino  from  an  annal-
istic source,  this  may  contain  the  expressions  Paul  used  in

Digitized  by  LjOOQle

374

APPENDIX  II.

regard  to  Narses,  and  he  may  have  made  additions  from
another  source  (Jacobi,  86).

So  much  for  the  discussion  of  Jacobi.  On  the  other  hand
Mommsen  (p.  77)  first  considers  Paul’s  Roman  sources  in
connection  with  the  concluding  part  of  his  previous  work,  his
Roman  History,  and  says  : 44  Paul  brings  that  history  down  to
the  death  of  Totila  in  552,  and  closes  his  16th  book  with  the
promise  of  relating  in  a subsequent  book  the  things  which  may
be  said  concerning  the  good  fortune  of  the  emperor  Justinian.
This  following  book  does  not  exist,  but  in  its  place  is  the
History  of  the  Langobards.  For  in  the  account  of  Justinian
the  events  related  in  detail  in  the  Roman  History  (the
Persian  war ; the  conquest  of  Africa ; the  overthrow  of  the
Goths  in  Italy  through  Belisarius)  are  here  condensed  into  the
briefest  compass.  But  the  narrative  goes  into  greater  detail
in  things  not  mentioned  in  the  Roman  History — the  vanquish-
ing of  Am  talas,  king  of  the  Moors ; the  great  work  in  juris-
prudence ; the  building  of  the  church  of  St.  Sophia — and
closes  with  a general  estimate  of  the  emperor.  In  the  follow-
ing book  the  account  of  the  Gothic  war  is  taken  up  just  at  the
point  where  the  Roman  History  breaks  off,  that  is,  with  the
struggle  between  Narses  and  Buccellinus  in  the  year  553,  ex-
cept that  the  sending  of  the  auxiliary  Langobard  troops  to  the
army  of  Narses,  which  occurred  in  Totila’s  lifetime,  is  put  at
the  head.  Therefore,  the  pieces  fit  together  as  closely  as
could  be  expected,  and  Paul  has  arranged  his  history  of  Italy,
or  rather  he  has  modified  his  original  plan,  in  such  a way  that
he  has  entitled  the  first  sixteen  books  as  the  Roman  History ,
and  his  last  six  books  as  the  History  of  the  Langobards.  * * * * ’ 1

1 Ebert  (Litteratur  des  Mittelalters,  II,  45,  note  1)  insists  that  we
are  not  justified  in  considering  Paul’s  “History  of  the  Lango-
bards” as  a continuation  of  his  “Roman  History”  and  that  we
cannot  speak  of  a history  of  Italy  composed  of  the  two  works,

Digitized  by

Google

ROMAN  SOURCES.

375

“ This  relation  of  the  two  works  of  Paul  is  also  useful  in
the  question  of  the  sources,  since  the  latter  part  of  the  Roman
History  and  the  Roman  portions  of  the  Langobard  History
must  be  combined  in  the  investigation.  Since  the  introduc-
tion of  Droysen  (the  editor  of  Paul’s  Roman  History)  only
dealt  with  the  former,  I will  now  attempt  to  show  briefly  that
the  results  found  by  him  are  applicable  here,  and  that  in  fact
a chronicle  now  lost  or  incompletely  preserved  lies  at  the  basis
of  these  sources . When  we  separate  from  the  first  four  books
(I  include  also  the  3d  and  4th  in  the  circle  of  investigation)
everything  which  can  be  traced  with  probability  either  to
Gregory  of  Tours  and  his  continuers,  or  to  Secundus  of  Trent
and  his  continuers,  or  to  the  literature  known  to  Paul  which
is  not  in  the  nature  of  a chronicle,  there  remain  approxi-
mately the  following  portions :

“ Book  I,  ch.  25.  This  is  the  section  already  mentioned
in  regard  to  Justinian’s  government  in  general.  What  Paul
says  at  the  end  in  regard  to  the  authors  Cassiodorus,  Dionisius
the  Less,  Priscian  and  Arator,  is  not  taken  from  a chronicle,
but  from  the  titles  and  prefaces  of  their  works,  and  it  further
confirms  his  extensive  knowledge  of  literature.

Book  II,  ch.  1 to  5 (compare  Book  III,  ch.  12).  History
of  Narses  and  of  the  immigration  of  the  Langobards  into  Italy,
after  deducting  from  it  what  can  belong  to  Secundus  (Momm-
sen, p.  78).

Book  II,  ch.  11,  Narses’  death.

Book  III,  chs.  11  and  12,  Justin  II,  Tiberius  Constantine,
after  deducting  the  extensive  extracts  taken  from  Gregory  and
the  Liber  Pontificalis.

taken  together,  since  the  Roman  history  deals  with  the  whole
empire  and  not  Italy  alone.  In  a strict  sense  this  is  true,  yet  in  a
more  general  way,  Mommsen’s  view  is  not  without  justification  and
elucidates  very  clearly  the  connection  of  the  two  works.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

3j6  appendix  ii.

Book  III,  chs.  15,22,  Maurice , after  deducting  what  belongs
to  Gregory.

Book  IV,  ch.  26,  Maurice,  Focas.

Book  IV,  ch.  29,  Death  of  Pope  Gregory.

Book  IV,  ch.  36,  Focas,  Heraclius.

Book  IV,  ch.  49,  Sons  of  Heraclius.  Constantine  (the  so-
called  Constans  II).”

“ If  we  compare  with  these  accounts  the  annalistic  narratives
which  have  come  to  us  from  other  quarters,  many  of  them  are
repeated  in  such  a way  that  their  common  origin  is  undoubted.
Such  analogies  occur  repeatedly  between  Paul  on  the  one  side
and  on  the  other  side  Isidore  and  the  Copenhagen  Continuer
of  Prosper.  But  above  all  there  appear  such  close  relations
between  this  portion  of  Paul  and  the  Chronicle  of  Bede  that
they  agree  even  in  their  false  statements,  which  is  always  the
surest  guide.”  1

Mommsen  here  compares  with  Paul  (Book  IV,  ch.  36)  cer-
tain passages  from  Isidore , from  the  Copenhagen  Continuer  of
Prosper,1  and  from  Bede.  He  (81)  thinks  it  strange  that  Paul

1 Thus  they  reckon  the  period  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Vandals  as
ninety-six  years,  as  Paul  also  estimates  it  in  his  Roman  history.
Justinian  and  Procopius  reckoned  it  at  ninety-five  years,  which
number  is  official  and  correct.  Pope  Gregory  died  in  the  seventh
indiction  ; Paul  as  well  as  Bede  places  his  death  in  the  eighth.
Both  have  alike  in  incorrect  order,  the  sons  of  Heraclius,  Constan-
tinus  and  Heracleones,  reigning  for  a short  time  after  each  other.
(Mommsen,  79.)

* Otherwise  called  the  Langobard  Chronicle  of  641 — a chronicle
discovered  by  Waitz  in  Copenhagen  which  comes  down  to  that
year.  Up  to  378  it  is  merely  a brief  extract  from  Jerome,  with
short  additions  upon  the  margin.  From  378  to  455  it  is  a literal
copy  of  the  Chronicle  of  Prosper  with  a few  additions  from  Isidore,
etc.  From  455  to  523  it  is  a compilation  from  the  Annals  of
Ravenna,  with  additions  from  Isidore,  from  a Gallic,  annalistical

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.

377

should  have  taken  nothing  further  from  Isidore’s  Chronicle  than
a statement  concerning  the  quarrels  between  the  Greens  and
Blues,  and  that  he  should  have  taken  this  account  and  the  fol-
lowing one  in  Isidore  about  the  capture  of  Jerusalem  by  the
Persians  in  the  same  order  as  Isidore  has  them , but  only  the
first  in  the  words  of  Isidore  and  the  second,  word  for  word
from  Bede.  Mommsen  adds  that  the  conduct  of  the  authors
of  the  early  Middle  Ages  as  compilers  offers  extraordinary  prob-
lems ; that  in  Paul’s  History  a number  of  statements  remain
which  come  neither  from  Langobard  sources  nor  from  Isi-
dore or  Bede,  and  he  insists  that  Paul  has  used  for  the  later
books  of  his  Roman  History , as  well  as  for  his  Langobard
History , certain  annals  composed  in  the  Byzantine  portions
of  Italy  and  now  lost.  What  kind  of  a chronicle  this  was  can
in  a manner  be  determined , and  Mommsen  in  describing  it
says  that  accounts  of  the  occurrences  in  the  East  were  not
completely  lacking  (IV,  36),  but  were  scanty,  and  that  the
horizon  of  the  author  was  not  that  of  Constantinople , but  of
Rome  or  Ravenna  (Mommsen,  82)  ; that  the  chronicle  intro-
duced the  names  of  the  emperors  with  an  enumeration  of  their
order  (P.  Ill,  12),  the  number  of  years  of  the  reign  of  each,
and  here  and  there  a brief  statement  of  the  emperor’s  origin
and  early  condition  of  life  (P.  Ill,  n,  12,  15)  ; that  Paul’s
characterization  of  Justinian  comes  from  this  group  of  sources,
yet  it  cannot  be  traced  back  to  any  of  the  documents  that  have
come  down  to  us ; that  we  recognize  Am  talas,  the  king  of  the

source  and  from  a catalogue  of  the  bishops  of  Milan,  all  arranged
according  to  the  years  of  the  consuls.  After  523  the  annalistical
form  is  abandoned  and  it  is  derived  from  unknown  sources.
Schmidt  (22)  thinks  the  two  last  portions  are  by  different  authors.
Bethmann  (381)  believed  that  the  chronicler  used  Secundus  as
one  of  his  sources.  Jacobi  (80-84)  disproves  this.  The  chronicle
is  of  little  authority  (Schmidt,  24,  25).

Digitized  by

Google

37«

APPENDIX  II.

Moors,  from  John  of  Corippus  and  Procopius*  history  of  the
Vandals,  but  that  no  western  source  mentions  his  name  except
Paul.

Mommsen  thus  continues  (p.  82):  “The  remarkable  re-
sume of  the  legislation  of  Justinian  must  be  attributed  to  the
same  source,  owing  to  the  connection  in  which  it  appears,  and
it  is  not  without  significance  that  this  is  the  only  testimony  at
hand  of  the  complete  publication  of  the  Novels  of  Justinian.
The  accounts  relating  to  Narses,  especially  those  concerning
the  Gothic  war  of  Buccellinus,  and  of  the  transfer  of  Names’
body  to  Constantinople  for  burial  can  not  well  be  attributed  to
Secundus  in  their  totality,  for  the  account  is  given  from  the
Roman  standpoint,  and  most  of  the  events  mentioned  do  not
refer  to  the  Langobards.  Paul  took  from  these  annals  of  the
Eastern  Empire,  and  not  from  the  Langobard  annals,  his
account  of  the  expedition  of  Heraclianus  for  the  overthrow  of
Focas,  of  which  no  Latin  author,  so  far  as  I know,  makes  any
mention.  Isidore , Bede , Paul  and  the  Copenhagen  Con-
tinuer of  Prosper , have  drawn  from  this  common  source ,
but  not  one  from  the  other . * * * ’ *

“ A series  of  other  questions  is  connected  with  these.  It  is
very  probable  that  the  Liber  Pontificalis,  which  also  belongs  to
Byzantine  Italy , was  closely  related  to  these  Italian  annals  of
the  Eastern  Empire.  Indeed,  the  question  can  be  asked
whether  the  numerous  and  extensive  extracts  which  pass  with
Bede  and  with  Paul  as  excerpts  from  the  Liber  Pontificalis
may  not  rather  have  been  taken  from  these  annals . Unfortu-
nately, owing  to  the  lack  of  a critical  edition  of  the  Liber
Pontificalis,  and  the  uncertainty  resulting  from  versions  that  vary
greatly  from  each  other,  this  can  hardly  be  decided  at  the
present  time  **  (Mommsen,  p.  84).

Waitz  in  Neues  Archiv,  V,  423  et  seqy  thus  answers  Momm-
sen’s contentions :

“So  far  as  it  relates  to  the  Roman  accounts,  I agree  with

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

Roman  sources.

379

Mommsen  that  Paul  used  one  or  several  works  of  annals,  lost  to
us,  in  his  History  of  the  Langobards  as  well  as  in  his  Roman
History.  But  I see  no  ground,  therefore,  to  strike  Bede  or  the
Liber  Pontificalis  out  of  the  list  of  the  books  used  by  him , and
to  trace  back  to  such  a lost  work  the  accounts  which  corre-
spond with  them  in  part  word  for  word.**

( 3 ) Catalogue  of  the  Provinces  of  Italy .

Mommsen  (p.  84),  discusses  Paul’s  description  of  the
provinces  of  Italy  (II,  14  to  24)  and  the  sources  from  which
it  is  derived.  He  tells  us  that  Diocletian  divided  Italy  into
twelve  districts  as  follows  : 1.  Raetia.  2.  Venetiaand  Histria.
3.  Aemilia  and  Liguria.  4.  The  Cottian  Alps.  5.  Flaminia
and  Picenum.  6.  Tuscia  and  Umbria.  7.  Campania  and
Samnium.  8.  Apulia  and  Calabria.  9.  Lucania  and  Bruttii.
10.  Corsica,  n.  Sardinia.  12.  Sicily.  The  number  of  dis-
tricts before  the  end  of  the  fourth  century  rose  to  sixteen,  by
dividing  Raetia  into  first  and  second  Raetia,  and  by  separating
Aemilia  froip  Liguria,  Picenum  Suburbicarium  from  Flaminia
and  Picenum  Annonarium , and  Campania  from  Samniunj.  The
oldest  complete  list  of  the  Italian  provinces  contained  in  the
Calendar  of  Polemius  Silvius  gives  this  number.  But  before
399,  the  number  was  increased  to  seventeen,  through  the  es-
tablishment of  Valeria.

It  is  these  seventeen  provinces  which  Paul  described  in  his
catalogue  of  the  provinces  of  Italy.  “If  he  gives  eighteen,*  *
continues  Mommsen  (p.  86) , “ this  rests  upon  a mistake  made
by  him,  the  discovery  and  removal  of  which,  however,  he  has
placed  in  our  hands  in  his  honorable  way.  The  Apennine
Alps  constitute  his  ninth  province,  which  according  to  him
begin  from  the  Cottian  Alps  and  lie  between  Tuscia  and  Um-
bria on  the  one  side  and  Aemilia  and  Flaminia  on  the  other,
and  comprise  the  places  Bobbio,  Verona,  Frignano  by  Bologna,
Monteveglio  by  Cesena  and  Urbino.  But  this  province  lies  in
the  air.  Of  the  places  which  Paul  contributes  to  this  ninth

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

3$o

APPENDIX  II.

province,  he  elsewhere  puts  Bobbio  in  the  Cottian  Alps  (II,  1 6 ;
IV,  41),  Verona  in  Venetia  (II,  14),  Frignano  and  Monte-
veglio  in  Aemilia  (VI,  49),  and  therefore  refutes  himself  in  a
most  thorough  manner,  which  indeed  was  not  necessary,  since
the  territories  between  which  this  province  lies,  Tuscia,  Um-
bria, Flaminia,  Picenum,  adjoin  each  other.  * * Strike  out
this  province  improperly  imported,  and  Paul’s  list  corresponds
exactly  with  the  above-mentioned  list  of  seventeen  provinces.  * 9

A map  of  the  provinces  of  Italy,  according  to  Paul,  was
prepared  for  Mommsen  by  Kiepert,  and  a copy  of  it  is  here
inserted.

The  source  from  which  Paul  derived  this  list  of  the  provinces
of  Italy  forms  the  subject  of  an  interesting  discussion  between
Mommsen  and  Wait z.

Waitz  in  his  edition  of  Paul’s  History  (p.  188)  publishes  in
an  appendix  the  following  catalogue  of  the  provinces  of  Italy
as  contained  in  a manuscript  of  the  tenth  century  in  the  Madrid
Library  :

The  first  province  is  Venetia.  This  Venetia  contains
Verona,  Vincentia,  Patavium,  Mantua  and  other  cities,  but
among  all,  the  city  of  Aquileia  was  the  capital,  in  place  of
which  just  now  is  Forum  Julii,  so  called  because  Julius  Caesar
had  established  a market  there  for  business.

The  second  province  is  Liguria,  in  which  is  Mediolanum
and  Ticinum,  which  is  called  by  another  name,  Papia.  It
stretches  to  the  boundaries  of  the  Langobards . Between  this
and  the  country  of  the  Alamani  are  two  provinces,  that  is  First
Reptia  and  Second  Reptia  lie  among  the  Alps,  in  which  prop-
erly the  Reti  are  known  to  dwell.

The  Cottian  Alps  are  called  the  third  province.  This  ex-
tends from  Liguria  in  a southerly  direction  up  to  the  Tyrrenian
Sea,  and  on  the  west  it  is  reckoned  from  the  boundaries  of  the
Gauls.  In  it  are  contained  Aquis  (where  there  are  hot  springs)
and  the  cities  of  Dertona,  Genua  and  Saona  and  the  monastery
of  Bovium.

The  fourth  province  is  Tuscia.  This  includes  Aurelia

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

The  Provinces  of  Italy  According  to  Paul  the  Deacon.

Kiepert  Neus  Archiv.  V,  p.  104.

[f.  p.  380]

Digitized  by  Google

Digitized  by

Google

ROLxAN  SOURCES.

381

toward  the  northwest  and  Umbria  on  the  eastern  side.  In  this
province  Rome  was  situated,  which  was  at  one  time  capital  of
the  whole  world.  In  Umbria  are  Perusium  and  Lake  Clitorius
and  Spoletium.

Campania,  the  fifth  province  stretches  from  the  city  of
Rome  to  the  Siler,  a river  of  Lucania.  In  it  the  very  rich
cities  of  Capua,  Neapolis  and  Salemum  are  situated.

The  sixth  province,  Lucania,  begins  at  the  river  Siler  and
extends  with  Oritia 1 as  far  as  the  Sicilian  strait  along  the  coast
of  the  Tirrenian  Sea,  like  the  two  last  named  provinces,  hold-
ing the  right  horn  of  Italy.  In  it  cities  are  placed,  that  is ,
Pestus,  Laynus,  Cassanus,  Cosentia,  Malvitus  and  Regium.

The  seventh  province  is  reckoned  in  the  Apennine  Alps,
which  take  their  origin  from  the  place  where  the  Cottian  Alps
terminate.  These  Apennine  Alps,  extending  through  the  middle
of  Italy,  separate  Tuscia  from  Emilia,  and  Umbria  from  Fla-
minea.  In  it  are  the  cities  of  Feronianum  and  Montebellium
and  Bovium  and  Orbinum,  and  also  the  town  which  is  called
Verona.

The  eighth  province,  Emilia,  beginning  from  the  province
of  Liguria,  extends  towards  Ravenna  between  the  Apennine
Alps  and  the  waters  of  the  Padus.  It  contains  wealthy  cities  :
Plagentia,  Regio,  Boonia  and  the  Forum  of  Cornelius,  the  for-
tress of  which  is  called  Imola.

The  ninth  province,  Flaminea,  is  placed  between  the
Apemline  Alps  and  the  Adriatic  Sea.  In  it  are  Ravenna,  most
noble  of  cities,  and  five  other  cities  which  in  the  Greek  tongue
are  called  Pentapolis.

The  tenth  province,  Picenum,  comes  after  Flaminea.  It
has  on  the  south  the  Apennine  mountains,  on  the  other  side,  the
Adriatic  Sea.  It  extends  to  the  river  Piscaria.  In  it  are  the
cities  Firm  us,  Asculus  and  Pennis,  also  (Hadriae)  consumed
with  old  age. 2

Valeria,  the  eleventh  province,  to  which  Nursia  is  attached,
is  situated  between  Umbria  and  Campania,  and  Picenum,  and

1 Evidently  a mistake  for  Britia  (Bruttium).

aWaitz  supplies  here  “ Hadriae”  from  Paul’s  History.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

382

APPENDIX  II.

it  touches  on  the  east  the  region  of  Samnium.  This  contains
the  cities  of  Tibur,  Carsiolis,  Reate,  Forconis  and  Amite  mum,
and  the  regions  of  the  Marsians  and  their  lake  which  is  called
Focinus.

The  twelfth  province , Samnium , is  between  Campania  and
the  Adriatic  Sea  and  Apulia.  This  begins  at  the  Piscaria.  In
it  are  the  cities  of  Theate,  Aufidianum,  Hisemia  and
Sampnium,  consumed  by  its  old  age,  from  which  the  whole
province  is  named,  and  that  most  wealthy  Beneventum,  the
capital  of  this  province.

The  thirteenth  province  is  Apulia,  united  with  it  Calabria.
It  contains  the  tolerably  rich  cities  of  Luceria,  Sipontum,
Canusium,  Acerentia,  Brundisium,  Tarentum,  and  in  the  left
horn  of  Italy,  lying  distant  fifty  miles,  Ydrontum,  fitted  for
commerce.

The  island  of  Sicily  is  reckoned  the  fourteenth  province.
In  this  province  are  very  rich  cities , among  which  is  the  great
city  of  Syracuse.

The  fifteenth  province  is  the  island  of  Corsica,  which  is
full  of  corners  with  many  promontories .

The  sixteenth  province  is  the  island  of  Sardinia.  Both  of
these  are  girt  by  the  waves  of  the  Tirrenian  Sea.  This  ex-
tends into  the  African  sea  in  the  shape  of  the  human  foot9  more
broadly  in  the  west  as  well  as  in  the  east,  its  sides  being  alike
in  shape . It  extends  in  length  north  and  south  140  miles y in
breadth  40  miles . 1

1 The  first  province,  Venetia,  is  mentioned  in  language  quite  dif-
ferent from  the  description  of  Paul — otherwise  the  resemblance  of
the  above  catalogue  to  Paul’s  account  of  the  provinces  of  Italy
is  very  close.  There  are  a number  of  grammatical  errors  in  this
catalogue  where  the  corresponding  sentences  are  written  correctly
in  Paul.  The  names  of  many  of  the  places  are  spelled  differently,
the  First  Raetia  and  Second  Raetia,  although  named,  are  not  enu-
merated here,  but  are  included  in  Paul’s  enumeration,  hence  the
numbering  is  different  after  the  second  province,  and  there  are  a
few  matters  (printed  above  in  italics)  which  are  not  found  in  Paul,
or  where  Paul’s  statement  differs  from  the  catalogue.  Many
additional  matters  are  found  in  Paul.

Digitized  by

Google

ROMAN  SOURCES.

383

Waitz,  in  his  appendix  (p.  188)  insists  (following  Bethmann)
that  the  prototype  of  this  catalogue  is  earlier  than  the  time  of
Paul,  and  that  Paul  copied  and  cited  it,  and  made  additions  to
it  drawn  mostly  from  Isidore.  Mommsen  declares  (p.  88)  that
this  is  an  error,  that  the  catalogue  is  a mere  epitome  of  Paul.
He  says : “ Paul  enumerates,  as  we  have  seen,  eighteen  pro-
vinces, the  catalogue  sixteen,  both  with  the  inclusion  of  the
fictitious  Apennine  Alps.  The  difference  consists  in  this,  that
both  of  the  Raetiae  are  enumerated  by  Paul,  since  they  were
well  known  to  belong  to  the  diocese  of  Italy  ever  since  there
was  such  a diocese,  and  in  the  catalogue,  on  the  other  hand,
these  two  provinces  are  named,  but  they  are  not  enumerated.
This  is  explained  very  simply  by  a stupid  misunderstanding  of
Paul’s  language  of  which  the  writer  of  the  Madrid  catalogue
was  guilty.  Paul  names  Liguria  as  the  second  province,  then
adds  the  two  provinces  of  First  and  Second  Raetia,  and  then
enumerates  the  Cottian  Alps  as  the  fifth.  The  epitomizer
copies  this,  word  for  word,  but  because  Paul  does  not  designate
the  third  and  fourth,  as  he  was  otherwise  accustomed  to  do,  as
tertia  and  quarta , but  only  as  two  provinces,  when  the  epito-
mizer goes  on  mechanically  with  his  numbering,  he  makes  the
fifth  of  Paul  the  third,  and  so  on.  This  silly  oversight  puts  it
beyond  doubt  that  the  Madrid  catalogue  is  nothing  but  a bad
extract  from  our  Paul.”

Mommsen  insists  (p.  89)  that  Paul’s  list  is  nothing  else  than
an  extract  of  the  catalogue  which  has  subsequently  come  down
to  us  in  the  Speier  and  Bamberg- Oxford  manuscripts.  He
compares  these  manuscripts  with  each  other,  and  declares  that
the  remarkable  resemblance  of  this  catalogue  with  Paul  in  its
substance  as  well  as  in  the  collateral  observations  which  it  con-
tains (for  instance,  in  referring  to  the  Tyrrenian  sea  in  con-
nection with  each  of  the  three  islands)  strikes  the  eye  at  once.
This  catalogue  did  not  merely  comprise  the  provinces  of  Italy,
but  all  the  provinces  of  the  still  existing  Roman  empire,  and  it

Digitized  by  LaOOQle

APPENDIX  II.

384

belonged  to  a compilation  extending  back  far  beyond  the  time
of  Paul  and  probably  to  the  fifth  century.  This  is  confirmed
by  a closer  comparison,  for  while  the  catalogue  is  essentially
reproduced  (although  with  an  author’s  freedom)  in  Paul’s  de-
scription, it  offers  the  key  to  Paul’s  doubts  and  mistakes.
This  appears  especially  in  regard  to  the  unfortunate  Apennine
Alps.  There  was  actually  no  Alpine  province  except  the  Cottian
Alps,  but  Paul  found  that  province  described  in  the  catalogue
as  “ the  Cottian  and  Apennine  Alps,”  and  this  false  name
occurs  both  in  the  Speier  and  Bamberg-Oxford  manuscripts.
What  Paul  says  (II,  20)  of  the  region  of  the  Marsians,  that
* ‘ it  was  not  at  all  described  by  the  ancients  in  the  Catalogue
of  the  Provinces  of  Italy,”  accords  with  these  manuscripts.
Finally,  the  remark  (II,  18),  “there  were  also  some  who
called  Aemilia  and  Valeria  and  Nursia  one  province,”  found
its  evident  explanation,  according  to  Mommsen,  in  the  con-
fusion which  prevailed  between  the  Speier  catalogue  on  the  one
side  and  the  Bamberg-Oxford  on  the  other,  and  was  taken,
Mommsen  thinks,  from  the  original  manuscript  which  lay  at
the  foundation  of  both.

In  the  Speier  manuscript  we  have  (Mommsen,  p.  90)  :

“ The  provinces  of  Italy  are  seventeen.

First.  Campania,  in  which  is  Capua.

Second.  Tuscia  with  Umbria,  in  which  is  Rome.

*********

Fourth.  Nursia,  Valeria,  in  which  is  Reate.

Fifth.  Flammina,  in  which  is  Ravenna,”  etc.

In  the  Bamberg  and  Oxford  catalogue  we  have  :

“ The  provinces  of  Italy  then  are  sixteen.

First.  Campania,  in  which  is  Capua.

Second.  Tuscia  with  Umbria.

Third.  Emilia,  Nursia,  Valeria.

Fourth.  Flaminia,  in  which  is  the  city  of  Ravenna,”  etc.

Digitized  by  C^ooQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.

385

This  must  mean  that  the  third  province  was  Emilia,  the
fourth  Nursia  and  Valeria, and  that  in  the  Speier  list  Emilia  had
dropped  out,  but  the  enumeration  was  in  order,  while  in  the
Bamberger  list  the  word  “ fourth  **  had  dropped  out  between
the  words  “ Emilia  **  and  “ Nursia,* * and  as  a result  of  this,
the  numbering  of  the  subsequent  provinces  was  altered.
Mommsen  suggests  that  in  the  manuscript  before  him  Paul
may  have  read  “Third,  Emilia,  Nursia,  Valeria,  Fifth,
Flaminia,etc.M  and  that  it  can  easily  be  understood  that  he
hesitated  whether  Emilia,  Nursia  and  Valeria  constituted  one
province  and  that  a mistake  was  made  in  the  subsequent
enumeration,  or  whether  the  word  “Fourth**  was  dropped
after  “ Emilia,**  which  on  the  whole  he  preferred  to  believe
(Mommsen,  91,  92).

Waitz  (Neues  Archiv,  V,  417)  controverts  the  view  taken
by  Mommsen,  and  insists  that  Paul  took  his  list  of  provinces
from  the  catalogue  in  the  Madrid  manuscript  as  well  as  from  the
source  of  the  Speier  catalogue.  He  refers  to  several  observa-
tions by  Paul  indicating  a double  prototype , and  adds  in  regards
to  the  “stupid  misunderstanding**  attributed  by  Mommsen
to  the  writer  of  the  Madrid  catalogue  in  changing  the  enumer-
ation by  numbering  the  provinces  mechanically  : “ I think  it
would  have  been  still  more  mechanical  for  a simple  copyist  or
epitomizer  to  adhere  to  the  enumeration  of  Paul.  But  for  an
author  who  composed  the  Madrid  catalogue  upon  the  basis  of
an  old  prototype  yet  with  a certain  independence,  there  could
well  be  reasons  for  naming  both  the  Raetiae  after  his  source,
but  not  counting  them  as  provinces  of  Italy.  He  must  have
written  at  a time  when  they  were  not  connected  with  the  rest
of  Italy,  but  belonged  to  the  kingdom  of  the  Franks.  When
Paul  varied  from  this  and  went  back  to  the  old  enumeration
and  turned  6 the  third  * into  6 the  fifth he  might  be  induced  to
do  this  through  the  other  (Speier)  list,  which  included  both  the
Raetiae,  especially  when  the  reason  for  excluding  them  from

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

386

APPENDIX  II.

Italy  ceased  to  exist,  or  had  at  least,  become  less  important,
since  at  the  time  of  Charlemagne  everything  was  united  under
one  sovereignty,  and  the  antiquarian  point  of  view,  so  to  speak,
in  the  enumeration  could  alone  come  into  operation.  Paul
acts,  moreover,  under  all  circumstances,  with  a certain  freedom
in  his  enumeration,  since  he  has  not  sixteen  provinces  like  the
Bamberg  and  Oxford  text,  and  in  another  way  the  Madrid  cat-
alogue ; not  seventeen  as  the  Speier  catalogue  properly  con-
tains (although  it  enumerates  them  with  the  omission  of  the
third),  but  eighteen.  Eighteen  because  (improperly  as
Mommsen  says,  but  coinciding  with  the  Madrid  catalogue)  the
Apennine  Alps  are  introduced  besides  the  Cottian  Alps.  Paul
might  well  be  induced  by  the  passage  in  Victor  in  regard  to  the
Cottian  Alps  to  give  the  preference  to  one  prototype  over  the
other,  but  not,  if  he  had  only  one  before  him,  to  depart  wholly
from  this  one.

“ From  this  come  into  force,  I think,  all  the  grounds  which
otherwise  speak  in  favor  of  the  priority  of  the  Madrid  catalogue.
It  contains  something  more  than  Paul,  which  would  be  hard  to
understand  in  an  excerpt  which  is  otherwise  so  literal.  * * In
regard  to  the  islands  of  Sicily,  Corsica  and  Sardinia,  there  are
statements  which,  as  Mommsen  remarks,  are  all  taken  from
Isidore , and  in  regard  to  which  one  can  hardly  understand  how
the  author  of  the  list  came  to  add  them  if  he  otherwise  did
nothing  except  make  excerpts  from  Paul.  * * * *

“ He  (Paul)  is  much  more  complete  (than  the  Madrid
manuscript) , and  has  a large  number  of  statements  which  are
not  found  in  that  catalogue.  The  source  of  these  can  be
pointed  out  with  more  or  less  certainty  and  more  than  formerly
now  that  we  can  compare  the  Speier  list.  Apart  from  this
list  there  is  not  a single  statement  to  be  found  in  the  Madrid
catalogue  where  the  source  can  be  traced . If  this  catalogue
was  an  excerpt  from  Paul,  the  author  must  have  subtracted
with  wonderful  skill,  one  could  say  with  genuine  divination,

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

ROMAN  SOURCES.

387

everything  which  is  not  borrowed  from  Festus,  Jordanis  and
Isidore,  in  order  then,  on  the  other  side,  to  add  something  else
out  of  the  same  Isidore.  That  is  simply  impossible,  and  I
think  I have  shown  that  every  reason  fails  to  support  such  a
view.  * *

Wait z thus  sums  up  his  conclusion  : * * Upon  the  basis  of  the
older  ‘ Notitia  Provinciarum  * there  was  developed  after  the
middle  of  the  seventh  century  and  during  the  time  of  the  Lan-
gobards  a sketch  of  the  provinces  which  has  come  down  to  us
in  the  form  of  the  Madrid  manuscript.  Paul  incorporated  it
almost  completely  in  his  book,  but  compared  it  with  the  older,
shorter  and  in  many  ways  different  composition,  which  was
also  known  to  him , and  which  is  known  to  us  in  the  Speier  and
Bamberg- Oxford  manuscripts,  and  he  added,  moreover, certain
etymological  and  historical  statements  which  his  considerable
learning  in  the  old  writings  placed  at  his  disposition.* *

The  arguments  presented  by  Waitz  appear  convincing.
Paul’s  method  of  using  his  authorities,  especially  in  the  early
portion  of  his  history,  is  generally  to  follow  them  pretty  closely,
sometimes  almost  word  for  word,  and  following  the  order  and
arrangement  of  his  original,1  and  it  does  not  seem  probable
that  he  would  have  arbitrarily  changed  entirely  the  order  of
the  Speier  list,  as  was  done  in  his  enumeration,  if  that  list  had
been  his  only  authority.

1 Compare  for  instance  his  method  of  treatment  of  the  miracles
of  St.  Benedict  in  the  verses  in  Book  I (see  Appendix  III),  where
he  follows  strictly  the  order  observed  by  St>  Gregory  in  his  Dia-
logues (Book  II).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

388

APPENDIX  II.

Index  of  Sources  (Jacobi  89). 1
book  1.

I,  Isidore  Etymol.,  XIV,  IV,  2,  Origo.  II,  Origo,  Pliny,
IV , 2 7 (13).  Ill , Origo.  V,  Bede  De  Temp.  Rat. , cap.  3 1 ;
Cosmographer  of  Ravenna,  I,  11.  VI,  Virgil’s  ^Eneid,  III,
420.  VII,  VIII,  Origo.  IX,  Origo ; Isidore,  Etym.,  IX,  2 ;
Life  of  St.  Columban,  ch.  43.  X,  Origo.  XI,  Cosmographer
of  Ravenna,  I,  n.  XIII,  XIV,  Origo.  XV,  Pliny  Nat.
Hist.,  VII,  3.  XVIII,  Origo.  XIX,  Origo  and  Eugippius’
Life  of  Severinus,  Ch.  1;  III  (sec.  15),  IX  (sec.  39),  XI,
XII  (sec.  57)  ; Jordanis,  Ed.  Lindenbr.  Hamb.  1611,  p.  59.
XX,  XXI,  XXII,  Origo.  XXV,  Bede’s  Chron.,  AM.  4518,
Paul’s  Roman  Hist.,  XVI,  n-19  (see  Mommsen,  56,  note)  ;
Isidore’s  Chron.,  AM.  5762  ; Annalistic  source  ; Justinian,  2d
preface  to  Pandects,  perhaps  derived  from  a legal  text  book
connected  with  a Turin  manuscript ; see  Fitting,  Juristical  Writ-
ings of  the  Middle  Ages,  Halle,  1876,  p.  103,  1 31-145  ; see
Jacobi,  p.  88.  XXVI,  Gregory’s  Dialogues,  Bk.  II,  see
Appendix  III,  infra.,  Marcus  Casinensis  (line  38,  Muratori
Script,  IV,  605,  606).  XXVII,  Origo.

1 The  italics  refer  to  the  various  chapters  in  Paul.  For  brevity
I have  omitted  Jacobi’s  references  to  the  particular  sentences,
phrases  and  words  used  by  Paul  and  taken  from  the  various
authorities  named.  These  will  be  found  in  most  cases  by  com-
paring the  source  cited  here,  with  the  reference  to  that  source  in
the  previous  portion  of  this  appendix.  I have  also  added  to  the
sources  mentioned  by  Jacobi  a number  of  additional  sources  men-
tioned by  Waitz  and  Mommsen.  Chapters  and  parts  of  chapters
derived  from  unknown  sources  are  not  referred  to  in  the  above
inde*.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

INDEX  OF  SOURCES.

389

BOOK  n.

I,  Jordanis,  Ed.  Lindenbr.  Hamb.,  1611,  p.  67  ; Annalistic
source.  II,  Greg.  Tours,  III,  32  ; Annalistic  source.  Ill,
Annalistic  source.  IV,  Bede  ; Annalistic  source.  V9  Liber
Pontif,  John,  III;  Fredegarius  Epitom.,  65  (?) ; St.
Gregory’s  Homil.  I on  the  Gospels,  Dialogues  III,  38.  VI9
Gregory  of  Tours,  IV,  42,  43  ; V,  15.  VII 9 Origo,  Secun-

dus.  VIII 9 Isidore,  Etym.,  XIV,  14,  16.  IX,  Secundus ;
Isidore,  Etym.,  XIV,  IV,  19.  X9  Gregory  of  Tours,  IV,  22,
23*27,  29;  Lib.  Pontif.  Benedict,  I;  Secundus.  XI,  Lib.
Pontif.,  John,  III.  XII,  Secundus.  XIII,  Venant.  For-
tunat.  Life  of  St.  Martin,  IV,  640-700.  XIV,  Secundus ;
Madrid  Catalogue  of  the  Provinces  of  Italy  (Waitz,  p.  188)  ;
Speier  Manuscript  and  Bamberg-Oxford  Catalogue  (Mommsen,
90,  91)  ; Annalistic  source  ; Isidore,  Etymol.,  XIII,  19  ; XIV,
4,  18;  Festus,  84;  Jordanis  de  Reb.  Get.,  ch.  29.  XV,
Madrid,  Speier  & Bamberg  Catalogues.  X VI,  Isidore , Etymol. ,

XIV,  IV,  20,  21 ; same  catalogues.  XVII,  Isidore,  Etymol.,

XV,  I,  64;  Festus  (ed.  Miiller),  p.  119;  Jordanis  de  Reb.
Get.,  ch.  30;  same  catalogues.  XVIII,  Sextus  Aurelius
Victor,  De  Caesar,  ch.  5 , Nero ; Isidore,  XIV,  VIII,  13  ; same
catalogues.  XIX,  Festus,  212;  same  catalogues.  XX,  Isi-
dore, XIV,  IV,  22 ; Festus,  327;  same  catalogues.  XXII,
Isidore,  XIV,  VI,  30,  35,  34;  same  catalogues.  XXIII,
Donatus,see  Servius  on  ^Eneid,X,  200 ; Justin.,  Epit., XXIV,
4,  8 ; XXV,  2 ; XX,  5 ; XXIV,  4 ; same  catalogues.  XXIV,
Isidore,  XIV,  IV,  18;  Festus,  p.  40,  4.  XXV,  Secundus.
XXVI,  XXVII,  Origo ; Secundus.  XXVIII,  XXIX,  XXX,
Origo.  XXXI,  Secundus.  XXXII,  Secundus ; r Gregory  of
Tours,  IV,  41 ; St.  Gregory’s  Dialogues,  III,  38.

BOOK  III.

I ; II,  III ; IV,  Greg.  Tours,  IV,  42  ; VI,  6.  V,  VI,  Greg.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

390

APPENDIX  II.

Tours,  IV,  42.  VII,  Greg. Tours,  V,  15 . VIII,  Greg.  Tours,
IV,  44.  IX,  Secundus.  X,  Greg.  Tours,  IV,  51, 52  ; V,  1 ;
Secundus.  XI,  Greg.  Tours,  IV,  39-40;  V,  19,  30;  Lib.
Pontif.  Benedict  I.  XII,  Greg.  Tours,  V,  19-30.  XIII,
Greg.  Tours,  VI,  2 ; Bede,  4529  ; Secundus.  XIV,  Secundus.
XV,  Greg.  Tours,  VI,  30.  XVI,  Secundus.  XVII,  Greg.
Tours,  VI,  42.  XVIII,  Secundus ; Epitaph  of  Droctulft.
XIX,  Epit.  Droct.  XX,  Lib.  Pontif.  Pelagius  II ; Secundus.
XXI,  Greg.  Tours,  V,  39;  VIII,  28;  Bede,  4536.  XXII,
Greg.  Tours,  VIII,  18;  Secundus.  XXIII,  Secundus;  St.
Gregory's  Dialogues,  III,  19  ; Greg.  Tours,  X,  praef.  XXIV,
Greg.  Tours,  X,  1.  XXV,  Lib.  Pontif.  Gregory  I;  Bede,
4536.  XXVI,  XXVII,  Secundus.  XXVIII,  XXIX,  Greg.
Tours,  IX,  25.  XXX,  Secundus.  XXXI,  Greg.  Tours,  X,  2,
3 ; Secundus.  XXXIII,  Beneventine  account.  XXXIV,
Greg.  Tours,  X,  3 ; Legend  of  Chalons.  XXXV,  Greg.  Tours,
X,  3 ; Secundus.

BOOK  IV.

I,  II,  III,  Secundus ; Origo;  IV,  V,  Secundus;  Dia-
logues of  Gregory  the  Great.  VII,  Secundus.  VIII,  Lib.
Pontif.  Gregory  I ; Secundus ; Gregory’s  Homily  on  Ezek.
Preface,  Bk.  II.  IX,  St.  Gregory’s  Letters,  IX,  42-43.  X,
id.,  IX,  43;  Secundus.  XI,  XII,  XIII,  XIV,  XV,  XVI,
Secundus.  XVII,  Gregory’s  Dialogues,  II,  Preface  and  17.
XVIII,  Secundus;  Benevent.  account.  XIX,  Gregory's  Let-
ters, XII,  21.  XX,  XXI,  Secundus.  XXII,  Isidore,  Etym.,
XIX,  22.  XXIII,  XXIV,  XXV,  XXVI,  XXVII,  XXVIII,
Secundus.  XXIX,  Bede,  4565;  Lib.  Pontif.  Sabinian;  Se-
cundus; Gregory’s  Letters,  IV,  47.  XXX,  XXXI,  XXXIi,
XXXIII,  Secundus.  XXXIV,  Lib.  Pontif.  Deusdedit,  Boni-
face, V.  XXXV,  Secundus.  XXXVI,  Bede,  4565  ; Isidore,
Chron.  AM.,  5809;  Secundus.  XXXVII,  Friulan  legend.
XXXVIII,  see  Fredegarius'  Chronicle,  50-69  (?).  XXXIX \

Digitized  by

Google

Index  of  sources.

391

Secundus.  XL,  Secundus  and  his  continuer ; Origo.  XLI,
List  of  Langobard  kings;  Fredegarius,  ch.  49(?).  XLIT,
Origo ; Edict  Rothari,  sec.  386  and  Prologue ; Benevent.  ac-
count. XLIII,  XLIV , Benevent.  account.  XL  V,  Origo ; Lib.
Pontif . Deusdedit.  XL  VI,  Benevent.  account.  XL  VII,  Origo ;
see  Fredegarius*  Chronicle,  51  (?).  XL VIII,  List  of  the
kings.  XLIX,  Bede,  4591,  4593,  4594,  4622.  L,  Frede-
garius*  Chronicle,  9 ( ?)  ; Friulan  account ; Catalogue  of  dukes
of  Spoleto.  Li,  Pavian  and  Benevent.  accounts.

book  v.

VI,  XI,  Lib.  Pontif.  Vitalian.  XII,  XIII,  XV,  Lib.  Pontif.
Adeodat.  XXX,  Bede , 4639  ; Lib.  Pontif.  Adeodat ; id. , Vital-
ian. XXXI,  Lib.  Pontif.  Donus.  XXXV,  List  of  the  kings.

BOOK  VI.

I,  II,  Benevent.  account.  Ill,  Friulan  account.  IV,
Lib.  Pontif.  Agatho;  Bede,  4639.  V,  Lib.  Pontif.  Agatho;
Bede,  4622.  IX,  Lib.  Pontif.  Benedict,  II.  X,  XI,  Bede,
4649.  XII,  Bede,  4649-4652.  XIII,  Bede,  4665.  XIV,
Bede,  4659,  4639;  XV,  Bede,  Eccles.  History,  V,  7.
XXIV,  XXV,  XXVI,  Friulan  account.  XXVII,  Benevent.
account ; Lib.  Pontif. , John,  VI.  XXVIII,  Bede,  4659  ; Lib.
Pontif.  John,  VII ; id.,  Constantine,  I.  XXIX,  Lib.  Pontif.,
Constantine , I.  XXX,  Catalogue  of  dukes  of  Spoleto.  XXXI,
Lib.  Pontif.,  John,  VII ; Bede,  4665  ; Lib.  Pontif.,  Constan-
tine, I.  (Muratori,  p.  153,  n.  16.)  XXXII,  Bede,  4665-
4667;  XXXIV,  Bede,  4667,  4670.  XXXVI,  Lib.  Pontif.
Gregory,  II ; Bede,  4671.  XXXVII,  Bede, 4671.  XXXIX,
Benevent.  account.  XL,  Monte  Cassino  account;  Life  of
Paldo,  Tasso  and  Tato  by  Autpert ; Lib.  Pontif.  Gregory  II.
XLI,  Bede , 4680.  XLH,  Frankish  annals , see  Chron.  Moiss.
M.  G.  SS.,  1,290.  XLIII,  Bede,  4670;  Lib.  Pontif.  Greg-
ory II.  XLIV,  Lib.  Pontif.  Gregory,  II.  XLV,  Catalogue

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

392

APPENDIX  II.

of  the  Patriarchs  of  Aquileia;  Friulan  legend.  XL  VI,  Lib.
Pontif.;  Gregory  II.  See  Chron.  Moiss.  M.  G.  SS.,  1,291,
292.  XLVJI , XL  VIII , Bede,  4680;  Lib.  Pontif.  Gregory
II ; XLIX , Lib.  Pontif.  Gregory  II.  L,  Benevent.  account.
LI,  Friulan  account.  LIV,  Frankish  Annals;  see  Chron.
Moiss.  L VIII,  Miracles  in  the  Life  of  St.  Baodolinus.

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

APPENDIX  III.

PAUL  THE  DEACON’S  POEMS  IN  HONOR  OF  ST.  BENEDICT.1
( Contained  in  Book  /,  Ch.  26 , of  the  foregoing  History.')

Where,  holy  Benedict,  shall  I begin  the  long  tale  of  thy  tri-
umphs?

Countless  thy  virtues  to  tell ; where  shall  thy  bard  begin?

Father  and  saint,  all  hail ! Thy  name  proclaimeth  thy  virtue,*
Shining  light  of  the  world  1 father  and  saint  all  hail  1

Nursia,5  praise  him  well,  by  such  son  proudly  exalted,

Bringing  the  stars  to  the  world — Nursia  abundantly  praise  !

O the  decorum  of  boyhood  ! 4 Transcending  his  years  by  his
virtues,

Passing  the  wisdom  of  age  ,6  O the  decorum  of  youth  !

1 The  second  book  of  the  Dialogues  of  Gregory  the  Great  eluci-
date the  meaning  of  these  distichs  of  which  some  would  otherwise
be  incomprehensible.

* Benedictus,  “blessed.”  St.  Gregory  calls  him  “Blessed  by
grace  and  by  name”  (Dialogues,  Book  II,  Introduction).

8 The  birthplace  of  St.  Benedict  in  Umbria  (id.).

4 He  was  sent  to  Rome  to  study  literature  and  science,  but  while
yet  a boy  was  filled  with  loathing  at  the  profligacy  of  his  fellow-
students  (id.).

6 St.  Gregory  says  of  him  that  he  bore  the  heart  of  an  old  man
from  the  very  time  of  his  boyhood.  St.  Gregory  also  says,  “ In-
deed, surpassing  his  age  in  his  morals,  he  gave  his  mind  to  no
pleasure*’  (id.).

(393)

Digitized  by

Google

394

APPENDIX  III.

Flower  of  the  garden  of  heaven,  the  blossoms  of  earth  despising,1
Prized  not  the  .riches  of  Rome,*  flower  of  the  garden  of  heaven  !

Sadly  the  governess  bore  the  broken  halves  of  the  vessel ;
Joyfully,  when  restored,  bore  the  preceptress  the  sieve.*

He  who  is  named  from  the  city,  ’mid  rocks  concealeth  the
novice —

Treasures  of  piety  bears — he  who  is  named  from  the  town.4

Praises  resound  from  the  caves,  deep  hid  from  the  vision  of
mortals ;

Known,  Christ,  only  to  thee,  praises  resound  from  the  caves.*

‘This  again  comes  from  St.  Gregory.  ••  He  already  despised
the  world  in  its  bloom  as  if  it  were  withered  ” (id.).

2 He  left  Rome  for  a hermitage  at  a boyish  age.  As  St.  Gregory
says,  ••  He  withdrew  therefore,  knowingly  ignorant  and  wisely  un-
learned” (id).

8 His  nurse  or  governess,  who  had  taught  him  and  brought  him
up  in  infancy,  followed  him  from  Rome  and  tended  him.  To  pre-
pare food  for  him  she  borrowed  from  a neighbor  an  earthen  sieve
or  vessel  for  cleaning  wheat ; she  broke  it  and  was  in  great  dis-
tress, not  having  the  money  to  replace  it.  Benedict  repaired  it  by
a miracle  (Dialogues  II,  Chapter  I).  St.  Gregory  says  “But
Benedict,  the  religious  and  pious  boy,  when  he  saw  his  nurse
weeping,  filled  with  pity  for  her  grief,  took  away  both  parts  of  the
broken  sieve  and  tearfully  betook  himself  to  prayer.  When  he
arose  from  his  prayer  he  found  the  vessel  whole  and  sound  at  his
side,  so  that  no  trace  of  the  fracture  could  be  found  in  it,  and
presently,  having  kindly  consoled  his  nurse,  he  returned  the  sieve  to
her  whole  and  sound  which  she  had  brought  to  him  broken  ” (id.)*
4 Benedict  fled  from  his  nurse  and  sought  the  solitude  of  waste
places,  whereupon  the  monk  Romanus  (whose  name  is  derived
from  Rome  which  was  pre-eminently  “ the  City  ”)  concealed  him
in  a cave  and  ministered  to  his  necessities  (Dialogues,  II,  ch.  i).

6 Benedict  remained  three  years  in  this  cave  at  Sublacus  (Subiaco)
about  forty  miles  from  Rome  (id).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

poems.  395

Frost  and  the  tempest  and  snow  three  years  thou  unwearied
endurest ;

Filled  with  God’s  love  thou  dost  scorn  frost  and  the  tempest
and  snow.

Holy  devices  are  pleasing ; approved  are  the  tricks  of  the  pious,
Whereby  the  saint  was  sustained — holy  devices  delight.1

“Here  is  the  feast  of  God’s  love,”  he  signals;  the  spiteful
one  checks  him ;

None  the  less  faith  undismayed  signals i i The  feast  is  at  hand.  ’ ’ 2

Duly  observes  he  the  festivals  who  lendeth  ear  to  Christ’s
teaching,

And  when  he  breaketh  his  fast,  duly  observes  he  the  feast. 3

1 “This  Romanus,”  says  St.  Gregory,  “lived  not  far  off  in  a
monastery  under  the  rule  of  father  Adeodatus.  But  he  piously
stole  away  his  hours  from  the  presence  of  this  same  father  of  his,
and  carried  to  Benedict  on  certain  days  what  bread  he  could  pur-
loin for  him  to  eat.  There  was  no  way  indeed  to  his  cave  from
the  cell  of  Romanus,  because  this  cell  stood  high  above  the  rocks.
But  Romanus  was  accustomed  to  let  down  the  bread  from  that
rock  tied  by  a very  long  cord  on  which  cord  he  put  a little  bell,
so  that  the  man  of  God  at  the  sound  of  the  bell  might  know  when
Romanus  was  offering  him  bread  and  go  and  get  it  ” (id.).

*“But  the  ancient  enemy,”  continues  St.  Gregory,  “envying
the  charity  of  the  one  and  the  refreshment  of  the  other,  when
upon  a certain  day  he  beheld  Romanus  letting  down  the  bread,
threw  a stone  and  broke  the  little  bell.  Romanus,  however,  did
not  cease  from  providing  for  St.  Benedict  in  appropriate  ways ' * (id).

* After  the  death  of  Romanus,  God  appeared  to  a certain  priest
who  was  making  ready  a meal  for  himself  for  the  Easter  festival
and  said,  “You  are  preparing  delicacies  for  yourself  while  my
servant  is  tormented  by  hunger.  * * So  the  priest  sought  St.  Bene-
dict and  found  him  in  his  cave;  and  after  prayer  and  holy  con-
versation the  priest  said,  “ Rise,  let  us  take  food,  for  to-day  is  Eas-

Digitized  by  Google

396

APPENDIX  III.

Eager  the  swineherds  bear  to  the  cave  the  food  that  is  grateful.
Coming  with  willing  hearts,  pleasant  the  food  they  bear.1

Fire  is  by  fire  overcome,  with  sharp  thorns  tearing  the  body.
Flesh  is  by  spirit  subdued,  fire  is  by  fire  overcome.*

Deadly  the  poison  concealed,  yet,  perceived  from  afar  by  the
shrewd  one,

Brooked  not  the  sign  of  the  cross — deadly  the  poison  con-
cealed.8

ter.**  Since  Benedict  lived  far  from  men  he  did  not  know  that
the  Easter  festival  was  on  that  day,  but  the  priest  again  affirmed
it,  saying,  “ Truly  to-day  is  the  day  of  Easter,  of  the  Resurrection
of  our  Lord.  It  is  not  at  all  fitting  for  thee  to  fast  and  I have
been  sent  for  this  purpose  that  we  may  partake  together  of  the
gifts  of  God  Almighty.**  Then  blessing  God,  they  took  food  (id).

1The  neighboring  shepherds  (or  swineherds),  discover  St.  Bene-
dict in  his  concealment  and  supply  the  meagre  food  required  by
the  hermit  (id).

* St.  Benedict  when  at  Sublacus  was  tempted  by  an  evil  spirit
(which  came  to  him  in  the  form  of  a blackbird)  with  the  recollec-
tion of  a beautiful  woman,  whereupon  he  rushed  from  his  cave
and  flung  himself  naked  into  a thicket  of  briers  and  nettles.  There-
upon the  fiends  left  him  and  he  was  never  again  beset  with  the
same  temptation.  St.  Gregory  says,  * * Since  he  burned  well  with-
out in  his  penances,  he  extinguished  what  was  burning  unlawfully
within  ’ ’ (id.  ch.  2).

•While  Benedict  was  at  Sublacus,  a neighboring  society  of
monks  sent  to  request  that  he  would  place  himself  at  their  head.
He  yielded  upon  great  persuasion  and  by  the  strictness  of  his  life
and  rule  filled  them  with  rage,  until  one  of  them  offered  him  poison
in  a cup  of  wine.  Benedict  blessed  it  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,
and  the  glass  vessel  in  which  it  was  contained  was  broken  as  if  by
a stone.  Benedict  then  returned  to  his  cave  (id.  ch.  3).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

POEMS.

397

Gentle  reproving  of  scourges  steadies  the  wandering  spirit,
Gently  the  blows  of  the  scourge  roaming  destruction  avert.1

Forth  from  the  native  rock,  flows  water  in  streams  never
failing,

Waters  the  hearts  that  are  dry — ever  unfailing  the  stream.*

*In  one  of  the  monasteries  in  the  neighborhood,  one  of  the
brothers  had  an  aversion  to  long  prayers,  and  with  a wandering
disposition  went  out  and  busied  himself  with  earthly  and  transi-
tory things.  After  he  had  been  admonished  by  the  abbot  he  was
brought  to  Benedict,  who  reproved  him  earnestly.  For  two  days
he  observed  the  injunctions  of  the  man  of  Gcd  but  on  the  third
day  he  went  back  to  his  old  habit  and  began  to  wander  at  the  time
of  prayer.  Benedict  came  to  the  monastery  and  noticed  that  a
little  black  boy  was  pulling  the  monk  by  the  border  of  his  garment.
•'  Then  he  said  secretly  to  Pompeianus  the  father  of  the  monastery
and  to  Maurus  the  servant  of  God — ‘ Do  you  not  see  who  it  is  that
is  drawing  the  monk  outside  ? * And  they  answered  and  said,
* No.*  And  he  said  to  them,  1 We  will  pray  that  you  also  may  see
whom  that  monk  is  following.  * And  when  they  had  prayed  for
two  days  the  monk  Maurus  saw,  but  Pompeianus,  the  father  of  that
monastery  could  not  see.  On  another  day  then  after  prayers,  the
man  of  God  went  forth  from  the  monastery  and  found  the  monk
standing  outside  and  struck  him  with  a switch  for  the  blindness
of  his  heart  and  he  from  that  day  submitted  to  no  further  per-
suasion from  the  black  boy,  but  remained  immovable  in  his  as-
siduity in  prayer.  ’ ’

* Many  came  to  Sublacus  to  serve  God,  drawn  by  the  fame  of
Benedict’s  sanctity  and  miracles.  He  directed  them  to  construct
twelve  monasteries  in  each  of  which  he  placed  twelve  disciples
with  a superior  (ch.  3).  On  one  occasion  certain  monks  came  to
complain  to  him  that  three  of  the  monasteries  were  in  want  of
water.  Benedict  by  his  prayers  procured  a fountain  which  gushed
forth  and  flowed  down  the  mountain  side  (ch.  5).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

398

APPENDIX  III.

Steel  from  the  handle  tom,  thou  seekest  the  deepest  abysses,
Steel,  thou  desertest  the  depths,  seeking  the  surface  again.1

Bearing  the  father’s  commands,  he  flees  and  lives  on  the  waters.
Borne  by  the  waters  he  runs,  bearing  the  father’s  commands.

Prompt  to  his  master’s  bidding,  the  waves  to  him  offered  a
pathway,

While  he  in  ignorance  ran,  offered  the  waters  a path.

Little  lad,  thou  too  art  seized  by  the  waves,  yet  perishest
never,

Truthful  witness  art  thou,  little  lad  ready  at  hand.*

1 At  another  time  says  Gregory,  a certain  Goth,  poor  in  spirit
came  for  conversion,  whom  Benedict  the  man  of  God  received
most  willingly.  On  a certain  day  indeed  he  ordered  that  an  iron
tool  be  given  to  him,  which  from  its  likeness  to  a sickle  (falx)
is  called  a brush-hook  (falcastrum ),  in  order  to  cut  away  the
briers  from  a certain  place  so  that  a garden  should  be  made
there.  But  the  place  which  the  Goth  had  undertaken  to  clear
lay  above  the  shore  of  a lake.  And  when  that  Goth  was  cutting
away  the  thicket  of  thorns  with  the  exertion  of  all  his  strength,
the  iron,  springing  forth  from  the  handle,  fell  into  the  lake  where
the  depth  of  the  water  was  so  great  that  there  was  no  hope  of
getting  back  the  tool.  * * * Then  Benedict  the  man  of  God
hearing  these  things  went  to  the  lake.  He  took  the  handle  from
the  hand  of  the  Goth  and  cast  it  into  the  lake  and  presendy  the
iron  came  back  from  the  bottom  and  went  into  the  handle,  and
straightway  he  returned  the  iron  tool  to  the  Goth  saying  * * See,
work  and  do  not  grieve”  (ch.  6).

* These  three  distichs  refer  to  Maurus  and  Placidius,  two  boys
who  were  brought  by  their  fathers,  Equitius  and  Tertullus,  to  Bene-
dict to  be  instructed  (ch.  3).  They  became  the  chief  disciples  of  St.
Benedict,  and  were  afterwards  canonized.  Placidius,  while  yet  a
child,  in  going  to  draw  water,  fell  into  a lake.  Benedict,  who
was  praying  in  his  cell,  had  a revelation  of  the  danger,  and  sent
Maurus  in  all  haste  to  help  him.  Maurus  rushed  to  his  assistance.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

POEMS.

399

Hearts  that  are  faithless  groan,  spurred  on  by  malignant  in-
centives ;

Flaming  with  torrents  of  hell,  hearts  that  are  faithless  groan.1

Beareth  the  raven  with  talons  obliging  the  food  that  is  offered ;
Bidden,  the  raven  bears  far  off  the  terrible  food.*

Holy  the  bosom  that  mourns  for  a foe  overthrown  by  destruc-
tion ;

Holy  the  bosom  that  mourns  when  his  disciple  exults.®

Seeking  the  Lins*  sweet  places,  full  splendid  the  train  that
attends  thee ;

Prompted  from  heaven  thou  art,  seeking  the  Lins*  fair  site.4

and  without  knowing  it,  trod  the  water  as  if  it  had  been  dry  land
(ch.  7).  Benedict  attributed  this  miracle  to  the  obedience  of
Maurus,  but  Maurus  disclaimed  all  merit.  The  boy  Placidius  as
the  “truthful  witness”  now  appeared  and  declared  that  he  had
seen  the  garb  of  the  saint  above  his  head  when  he  was  drawn
from  the  water  (id.)

1 The  wicked  priest  Florentius,  who  was  filled  with  jealousy  and
envy  at  the  superior  holiness  of  the  saint,  endeavored  to  blacken
his  reputation,  and  at  last  attempted  his  life  by  sending  him  a
poisoned  loaf  (ch.  8).

* Benedict,  when  the  poisoned  loaf  was  given  him,  being  aware
of  the  treachery,  threw  it  upon  the  ground  and  commanded  a tame
raven  to  carry  it  away  and  place  it  beyond  the  reach  of  any  living
creature,  which  was  done  (id.)

* After  the  attempt  was  made  upon  his  life,  the  saint  departed
from  Sublacus,  but  scarcely  had  he  left  the  place  when  Maurus,
his  faithful  disciple,  sent  a messenger  to  tell  him  that  his  enemy
Florentius  had  been  crushed  by  the  fall  of  a gallery  of  his  house.
Benedict  wept  for  Florentius,  and  imposed  a penance  on  Maurus
for  an  expression  of  triumph  at  the  judgment  which  had  overtaken
their  enemy  (ch.  8).

4 Benedict  at  last  left  Sublacus  and  proceeded  to  Monte  Cassino,

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

400

APPENDIX  III.

Serpent  accursed  ! thou  ravest,  despoiled  of  thy  grove  and  thy
altars  i

Banished  the  crowd  that  adored ! Curst  serpent,  how  dost
thou  rave  ! 1

Impious  sitter  ! Depart ! To  the  walls  let  marbles  be  given !
Thou  art  constrained  by  command  ! Impious  sitter  depart ! *

Greedy  the  fire  that  is  seen  arising  in  flashes  deceitful ;

Bright  jewel ! Not  by  thy  eyes — fire  that  consumeth  is  seen.3

a delightful  spot,  where  he  afterwards  established  the  parent  Bene-
dictine monastery  of  Italy.  At  the  foot  of  Monte  Cassino  flowed
the  river  Liris.  (ch.  8,  Waitz).  Paul  tells  us  (I,  26)  that  two
angels  in  the  shape  of  young  men  came  to  Benedict  at  the  cross-
roads and  pointed  out  the  way,  also  that  he  went  thither  by
divine  admonition.

1 A temple  to  Apollo  stood  in  a consecrated  grove  ndar  the
summit  of  Monte  Cassino,  where  a nest  of  idolaters  still  worshiped
the  god,  or,  as  he  was  then  regarded,  the  demon.  Benedict*  who
had  heard  of  this  abomination,  came  to  the  place,  preached
Christianity,  converted  the  worshipers,  broke  the  statue,  threw
down  the  altar,  burned  the  consecrated  grove,  and  built  /two
chapels,  one  to  St.  John  the  Baptist  and  the  other  to  St.  Martiin  of
Tours,  on  the  spot  where  the  god  was  worshiped.  The  ‘fold
enemy,”  as  Gregory  calls  him,  did  not  bear  this  in  silence,  \but
appeared  before  the  blessed  father  very  hideous  and  infuriated,  J
and  seemed  to  rave  against  him  with  flaming  eyes,  first  calling'
him  “Benedict”  (blessed),  and  when  he  would  not  answer
“Maledict”  (accursed)  (ch.  8).  ^

1 While  the  monks  were  building  their  monastery,  a stone  lay  <
in  the  midst  of  them  which  they  determined  to  lift  into  the  build-  N
ing,  but  if  was  so  immovable  that  it  seemed  evident  that  the  * 1 old  |

enemy”  was  sitting  upon  it.  The  “man  of  God”  was  sent  for,
and  when  he  had  come  and  prayed  and  given  his  benediction,  it
was  “ lifted  with  such  speed  as  if  it  had  no  weight  before  ” (ch.  9).

* In  digging  the  foundations  of  Monte  Cassino,  a bronze  idol  was

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

POEMS.  401

While  they  are  building  the  wall,  the  flesh  of  a brother  is
mangled,

But  his  preserver  is  there,  while  they  are  building  the  wall.1

Things  that  were  hid  are  revealed,  the  greedy  exposed  to  the
daylight ;

Gifts  that  are  secretly  ta’en,  quickly  to  him  are  revealed.*

discovered,  from  which  issued  a supernatural  fire  that  to  the
brothers  seemed  if  it  would  burn  up  the  kitchen.  They  threw
water  on  it  and  tried  to  put  it  out.  When  Benedict  came,
attracted  by  the  tumult,  he  found  that  this  fire  existed  only  in  the
eyes  of  the  monks,  and  was  not  visible  to  him.  Whereupon  he
delivered  them  from  the  illusion  of  the  fancied  fire  (ch.  10).

1 One  of  the  monks  who  was  assisting  in  building  the  monastery
was  crushed,  and  was  brought  to  St.  Benedict,  who  prayed  earn-
estly, restored  him,  and  sent  him  back  to  his  work  safe  and  sound
(ch.  II).

* It  was  the  custom  of  the  monastery  that  whenever  the  monks
went  out  on  any  business,  they  should  not  partake  of  food  and
drink  away  from  the  convent.  One  day  when  they  remained
later  than  usual,  they  took  refreshment  at  the  house  of  a nun,  and
when  they  returned  and  asked  the  blessing  of  the  saint,  he  in-
quired, “Where  did  you  eat?”  and  they  answered,  “Nowhere,”
and  he  said  to  them,  ‘ * Why  do  you  lie  ? Did  you  not  enter  the
dwelling  of  such  a woman  ? Did  you  not  take  this  and  that  food  ?
Did  you  not  drink  so  many  goblets  ?’  ’ and  when  they  saw  he  knew
all  they  fell  trembling  at  his  feet  and  confessed  (ch.  1 2).  Much
the  same  thing  occurred  to  the  brother  of  the  monk  Valentinian,
who  came  fasting  to  Benedict,  but  was  tempted  to  eat  on  the  way
by  a companion  accompanying  him  to  the  monastery  (ch.  13).
Also  on  one  occasion  St.  Benedict  sent  one  of  his  disciples  to  a
company  of  nuns  to  deliver  an  exhortation.  The  nuns  begged  the
monk  to  accept  some  handkerchiefs  they  had  made,  and  he  hid
them  in  his  bosom.  On  his  return  to  the  monastery  Benedict
asked  * 1 Why  have  you  suffered  iniquity  to  enter  into  your  bosom  ?*  *

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

402

APPENDIX  III.

Tyrant  cruel  and  fell ! the  snares  of  thy  fraud  are  defeated  ;l
Tyrant  stem  1 thou  receiv’st  bridle  and  curb  for  thy  life  ! 1

Towering  walls  of  Numa — never  shall  foe  overthrow  them ;
Whirlwinds  he  says  shall  destroy  Numa’s  towering  walls.®

The  monk  could  not  tell  what  the  saint  referred  to.  Benedict
added,  “Was  I not  with  you  when  you  received  the  handker-
chiefs from  the  nuns  and  hid  them  in  your  bosom  ?*'  The  monk
fell  at  the  feet  of  the  abbot,  repented  his  foolish  act  and  threw
away  the  handkerchiefs  (ch.  1 9).

1 Totila,  king  of  the  Goths,  hearing  that  Benedict  possessed  the
spirit  of  prophecy,  and  desiring  to  prove  him,  attired  Riggo,  his
armor-bearer,  in  the  royal  garments  and  sent  him  with  an  escort
to  the  monastery.  Benedict  seeing  him  coming  cried  out,  “ Put
off,  my  son,  those  borrowed  trappings  ; they  are  not  thine  own  * *
(ch.  14).

* Totila  thereupon  went  in  person  to  visit  the  saint,  who  chided
him  for  his  evil  deeds,  told  him  that  he  would  enter  Rome,  that
he  would  pass  across  the  sea  (to  Sicily),  and  would  reign  nine
years,  but  would  die  upon  the  tenth,  all  of  which  occurred  (ch.
1 5).  Totila  was  held  by  the  Romans  of  the  Eastern  empire  to  be
a usurper,  a cruel  tyrant,  etc.  His  actual  character  shines  brightly
in  contrast  with  that  of  Justinian,  against  whom  his  wars  were
waged.

8 This  prophecy  by  Benedict  was:  “Rome  shall  not  be  ex-
terminated by  the  heathen,  but,  worn  out  by  tempests  and  whirl-
winds and  an  earthquake,  shall  decay  of  itself”  (ch.  15).  The
prediction  relates  to  Totila’ s project  of  capturing  Rome.  Rome
was  in  fact  taken  by  Totila  in  546,  retaken  by  Belisarius  in  547,
taken  again  by  Totila  in  549,  and  retaken  by  Narses  in  552  (Gib-
bon, ch.  43).  On  the  occasion  of  its  first  capture  by  Totila  he
actually  demolished,  it  is  said,  one-third  of  the  walls,  and  issued  a
decree  that  Rome  should  be  changed  into  a pasture  for  cattle,  but
on  the  remonstrance  of  Belisarius  he  spared  the  city.  Gregory
insists  that  Benedict’s  prophecy  was  fulfilled  (ch.  1 j).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

POEMS.

403

Grievous  the  foe  to  chastise  thee  for  offering  gifts  at  the  altar ;
Gifts  to  the  altars  thou  bring ’st — grievous  the  foe  to  chastise.1

It  was  foreknown  that  the  sheepfolds  should  be  to  the  heathen
delivered ;

That  same  heathen  race  all  of  the  sheepfolds  restores.*

Servant,  friend  of  deceit,  thou  art  tempted  by  serpent  alluring ;
Not  by  the  serpent  entrapped,  servant  and  friend  of  deceit.8

Hush  ! spirit  swollen  with  pride  ! Be  silent ! carp  not,  for  he
sees  thee !

All  things  are  known  to  the  seer.  Hush  ! spirit  swollen  with
pride  ! 4

1 A certain  priest  possessed  of  a devil  was  brought  to  St.  Bene-
dict and  healed,  but  was  warned  never  to  exercise  the  duties  of
his  holy  office,  or  he  would  be  again  delivered  into  the  power  of
the  devil.  After  some  years,  he  neglected  the  warning  and
undertook  again  his  sacred  functions,  whereupon  the  devil  again
took  possession  of  him,  and  did  not  cease  to  torment  him  (ch.  16).

1 Benedict  predicted  that  his  convent  should  pass  into  the  hands
of  the  Arian  Langobards,  by  whom  (after  they  had  become  con-
verted to  the  Catholic  faith)  Monte  Cassino  was  restored  and  the
whole  Benedictine  order  was  greatly  favored  (ch.  17,  see  Waltz’ s
note).

* A man  of  high  condition  sent  St.  Benedict  two  flasks  of  wine
but  the  servant  who  carried  them  stole  one  and  hid  it.  When  he
delivered  the  other  at  the  monastery  the  saint  said  to  him  “See,
my  son,  that  you  don’t  drink  out  of  the  flask  you  have  hidden,  but
turn  it  over  carefully  and  you  will  find  what  it  has  inside.  ’ * The
man  did  so  and  a serpent  came  forth.  The  servant  afterwards
became  brother  “ Exhilaratus  ” (ch.  18).

4 Once  when  St.  Benedict  was  at  supper,  a monk  who  held  a
lamp  in  front  of  the  table  began  silently  to  reflect  in  a spirit  of
pride  and  to  say  to  himself  ' * Who  is  this  man  whom  I must  at-
tend while  he  eats  and  hold  his  lamp  and  render  him  service,  and

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

404

APPENDIX  III.

Famine  is  driven  away  by  nourishment  coming  from  heaven ;
Gloomy  hunger  of  mind  also  is  driven  away.1

Bodiless,  seen  by  the  spirit,  all  hearts  are  amazed  at  thy
presence ;

Counseling  things  thou  discem’st — hearts  with  amazement  are
dumb.*

who  am  I that  serve  him  ? * ’ And  the  saint  turned  to  him  at  once
and  began  to  reproach  him  earnestly  saying,  * * Cross  your  heart,
brother  ! What  is  it  you  are  saying  ? Cross  your  heart.”  And  he
called  the  brothers  together  and  directed  that  the  lamp  should  be
taken  from  his  hands  and  that  he  should  withdraw  from  this
service  and  sit  down  quietly.  And  when  the  man  was  asked
what  he  had  in  his  heart,  he  told  them  and  it  was  clear  to  all  that
nothing  could  be  hidden  from  St.  Benedict  (ch.  20).

1 At  another  time  there  was  a famine  in  Campania,  and  wheat
was  lacking  in  the  monastery  so  that  only  five  loaves  of  bread
could  be  found.  And  when  Benedict  saw  that  the  monks  were
troubled,  he  strove  by  modest  reproofs  to  remove  their  weak  fears
and  promised  that  on  the  following  day  they  should  have  an
abundance.  And  indeed  on  the  next  day  two  hundred  measures
of  flour  were  found  in  sacks  at  the  gates  of  the  monastery,  sent
from  God  Almighty  by  an  unknown  hand.  When  the  monks  saw
this,  they  gave  thanks  to  the  Lord  and  now  learned  that  even  when
in  want  they  should  not  doubt  of  abundance  (ch.  21).

* Benedict  had  been  asked  to  build  a monastery  near  the  city  of
Tarracina,  and  sending  certain  disciples  of  his  thither,  he  ap-
pointed over  them  a father  superior  and  one  second  in  authority,
and  promised  them  that  on  a certain  day  he  would  come  and  show
them  in  what  place  they  should  build  the  chapel,  in  what  place
the  refectory,  etc.  They  made  due  preparation  to  receive  him,
and  in  the  night  preceding  the  promised  day,  he  appeared  to  the
father  superior  and  to  his  superintendent  in  their  dreams  and  told
them  minutely  where  they  should  build  everything.  Still  they
looked  for  him  to  come,  and  when  he  did  not,  they  went  to  him  to

Digitized  by

Google

POEMS.

405

At  the  command  of  thy  voice  they  scorn  to  bridle  their  gossip.
Forth  from  the  tombs  they  flee  at  the  command  of  thy  voice.1

They  at  command  of  thy  voice  from  the  sacred  rites  are  for-
bidden ;

Present  they  are  at  these  rites  at  the  command  of  thy  voice.*

Earth  from  its  open  breast  drives  forth  the  sepulchered  body ;
Earth  when  commanded  by  thee , keeps  in  her  bosom  the  corpse.*

make  inquiry.  And  he  answered  “ Did  I not  come  as  I prom-
ised.*' And  they  said,  “When  did  you  come?”  and  he  replied,
“ Did  I not  come  to  each  of  you  in  your  dreams  and  point  out  to
you  each  of  the  places  ? Go  and  build  every  building  as  you  heard
in  your  vision.**  And  hearing  these  things  they  wondered  greatly
and  built  the  dwellings  as  they  had  been  taught  in  the  dream
(ch.  22).

*Two  certain  ladies  of  a religious  sisterhood  were  given  to
scandalous  talk,  and  Benedict  sent  them  word  that  if  they  did  not
keep  guard  over  their  tongues  he  would  excommunicate  them.
But  they  continued  in  their  evil  ways  and  died  and  were  buried  in
church.  Afterwards  when  mass  was  celebrated,  as  the  officiating
deacon,  uttered  the  usual  words,  “ Let  those  who  are  excommuni-
cated depart  * ’ they  were  seen  to  rise  from  their  graves  and  go  out
of  church  (ch.  23).

* That  is,  they  rose  from  their  graves  at  every  mass  until  St.
Benedict  offered  a sacrifice  for  them,  after  which  they  remained  in
the  tomb  (id.).

* A certain  novice  who  loved  his  parents  more  than  he  ought,
one  day  went  home  from  the  monastery  without  a benediction  and
died,  and  when  he  was  buried  on  the  following  day,  his  body  was
found  cast  forth  from  the  tomb,  and  he  was  buried  again.  This
occured  a second  time,  whereupon  they  besought  St.  Benedict  in
tears  that  he  would  deign  to  bestow  his  grace  upon  the  body.  He
gave  them  the  host  and  told  them  to  place  it  upon  the  corpse.
When  this  was  done  the  body  remained  in  the  tomb  (ch.  24).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

40  6

APPENDIX  III.

Faithless  the  heart  of  the  dragon  that  lures  the  truant  to  hasten  ,f
While  the  treacherous  fiend  stops  his  prohibited  way.

Deadly  the  foul  distemper  that  stripped  the  head  of  its  honor ;
At  his  command  it  departs — noisome  and  deadly  disease  ! *

Gold  has  the  holy  man  none,  yet  promises  all  to  the  needy,
Promises  all  and  draws  coins  of  bright  metal  from  heav’n  Is

Thou  to  be  pitied  ! With  skin  by  the  gall  of  a serpent  dis-
colored 1

Wretched  one  1 Sound  and  whole , quickly  thy  skin  is  restored.4

1 A certain  monk  of  restless  spirit  would  not  remain  in  the  com-
munity, and  St.  Benedict,  annoyed  and  offended  by  his  impor-
tunities, ordered  him  to  depart.  When  he  went  out  of  the  monas-
tery a dragon  with  open  mouth  stood  in  his  way  and  attempted
to  devour  him,  w hereupon  he  called  aloud  to  the  monks  to  run  to  his
assistance.  When  they  did  so  they  could  not  see  the  dragon,  but
they  led  the  monk  back  to  the  monastery  trembling  with  fear.
He  promised  never  to  depart  again  and  kept  his  promise  (ch.  25).

2 A boy  had  been  seized  with  a leprosy  so  that  his  hair  fell  off
and  his  skin  was  swollen  and  he  could  no  longer  conceal  his  di-
seased humors.  He  was  brought  by  his  father  to  Benedict  and
speadily  healed  (ch.  26).

8 A poor  man  owed  twelve  solidi  which  he  was  unable  to  pay
and  applied  in  his  distress  to  St.  Benedict  who  said  he  had  not  so
large  a sum,  but  asked  the  man  to  come  again  in  two  days.  The
man  returned  at  the  time  appointed  and  thirteen  solidi  were  found
on  a box  in  the  monastery  which  was  full  of  grain.  St.  Benedict
gave  the  whole  to  the  man  for  his  debt  and  his  present  needs
(ch.  27).

4 Poison  was  given  to  a certain  man  by  his  enemy  in  a potion,
and  although  he  did  not  die,  his  skin  changed  color  so  that  he
resembled  a leper.  He  was  brought  to  St.  Benedict  who  restored
him  and  removed  the  discoloration  (ch.  27).

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

POEMS.  40;

Glass  is  dashed  on  the  rocks  and  yet  they  are  powerless  to
break  it ;

Kept  by  the  rugged  rocks,  safely  the  glass  is  preserved.1

Cellarer,  why  dost  thou  fear  to  offer  a drop  from  the  oil  flask?
Look  1 the  great  jars  overflow  1 Cellarer  why  dost  thou  fear?*

Where  is  the  healing  for  thee , and  why  is  no  hope  of  salvation ;
Thou  who  dost  ever  destroy,  where  is  the  healing  for  thee?*

Old  man  worthy  of  tears  ! thou  fallest  by  blow  of  the  foeman,
But  by  a blow  thou  reviv’st — ancient  one  worthy  of  tears  ! 4

Barbarous  thongs  encircle  the  hands  that  are  guiltless  of  evil,
Hands  that  escape  of  themselves,  slipping  from  barbarous
thongs.6

1 During  a time  of  famine  Agapitus,  a sub-deacon  of  Monte  Cas-
sino,  applied  to  St.  Benedict  for  oil.  There  was  then  in  the  monas-
tery only  a few  dregs  at  the  bottom  of  a glass  bottle.  Benedict
commanded  the  cellarer  to  give  what  there  was,  but  the  latter  did
not  obey  the  order.  When  St.  Benedict  heard  this  he  ordered  the
bottle  thrown  out  of  the  window  upon  the  rocks,  but  the  bottle  was
not  broken  nor  the  oil  spilled  (ch.  28).

1 He  then  assembled  the  whole  house  in  full  chapter  and  re-
proved the  cellarer  and  when  the  chapter  broke  up,  a huge  jar
which  had  been  empty  began  to  overflow  with  oil  (ch.  29).

•This  probably  refers  to  the  “ old  enemy,”  whom  St.  Benedict
met  in  the  shape  of  a mule  doctor  with  his  horns  and  triple  foot-
fetters  (ch.  30).

4 This  evil  spirit  found  an  old  man  drawing  water,  attacked  him,
threw  him  upon  the  ground  and  tormented  him  bitterly.  When
St.  Benedict  saw  him  thus  cruelly  treated,  he  gave  him  merely  a
box  on  the  ear,  and  straightway  drove  out  the  evil  spirit  so  that
it  did  not  dare  to  return  to  him  (ch.  30).

6 A certain  Goth  named  Zalla  cruelly  tormented  a peasant  to
extort  money  from  him.  The  peasant  said  he  had  given  all  he

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

408

APPENDIX  III.

That  proud  man  on  the  horse  crying  with  threatening  clamor.
Stretched  on  the  ground  he  lies , arrogant  man  on  the  horse  1 1

Borne  on  the  neck  of  his  sire  was  the  corpse  of  a child  that
had  perished ;

Living,  the  child  was  borne  forth  on  the  neck  of  his  sire.*

possessed  to  the  keeping  of  St.  Benedict,  whereupon  the  Goth
bound  him  with  strong  cords  and  made  him  run  in  front  of  his
horse  to  the  monastery.  They  found  St.  Benedict  sitting  alone
reading,  and  the  Goth  in  a threatening  tone  cried  out,  “ Up  ! up  ! I
say,  give  this  peasant  the  money  you  took  from  him.*'  St.  Bene-
dict glanced  at  the  peasant,  whereupon  the  cords  broke  and  left
the  man  free,  and  the  Goth  threw  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  saint,
besought  his  prayers,  and  troubled  the  peasant  no  more  for  the
money  (ch.  31).

1 This  appears  to  the  same  miracle  as  the  preceding  distich.

* A certain  peasant  brought  to  the  monastery  the  body  of  his
dead  child,  and  when  he  found  St.  Benedict  was  absent  he  laid
the  corpse  down  at  the  gate  of  the  monastery  and  went  to  look
for  the  saint  and  when  he  saw  him  he  began  to  cry  out,  ‘ • Restore
my  son  ! Restore  my  son  !**  The  man  of  God  paused  upon  this
word  saying  * ‘ Did  I take  away  your  son  from  you  ? * ’ and  the
other  answered,  “ He  is  dead.  Come  bring  him  to  life,*’  Bene-
dict asked  “Why  do  you  impose  burdens  upon  us  which  we  can-
not bear  ? * ’ But  the  other,  whom  his  great  grief  overcame,  per-
sisted in  his  petition,  swearing  that  he  would  not  depart  unless  they
restored  his  son  to  life.  Presently  the  servant  of  God  asked  him
saying,  “ Where  is  he ?* ' and  he  answered  him,  “See,  his  body
lies  at  the  gate  of  the  monastery.’*  When  the  man  of  God  came
with  the  brethren,  he  bent  his  knees  and  lay  down  over  the  body
of  the  child  and  lifting  himself,  held  his  hands  to  Heaven  saying,
“Lord  consider  not  my  sins  but  the  faith  of  this  man  who  asks
that  his  son  should  be  brought  to  life,  and  do  Thou  restore  to  this
little  body  the  soul  which  Thou  hast  withdrawn.’*  Presently  he
had  finished  the  words  of  his  prayer  and  the  whole  body  of  the

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

POEMS.  409

Love  conquers  all.  By  a storm  the  sister  prevails  o’er  her
brother.1

Sleep  from  their  eyes  was  driven — love  ever  conquereth  all.

Lovely  with  innocent  charm  , the  form  of  a dove  flies  upward,
Enters  the  kingdom  of  heav’n — lovely  with  innocent  charm  I *

O thou  well  fitted  for  God  1 To  thee  the  whole  world  is
unfolded  ;•

Hidden  things  then  dost  prove,  O thou  well  fitted  for  God  I

Flaming  the  sphere  that  encircles  the  just  man  soaring  to
heaven,

Flaming  the  sphere  that  contains  him  who  with  love  is  con-
sumed.3

child  was  trembling,  and  under  the  eyes  of  all  who  were  present
it  appeared  to  throb  with  a wonderful  tremor  and  shaking,  and
presently  Benedict  held  the  boy  by  the  hand  and  gave  him,  living
and  whole  again,  to  his  father  (ch.  32).

1 This  refers  to  Benedict’s  sister  Scolastica  who  had  devoted  her-
self to  a religious  life.  Benedict  used  to  visit  her  once  a year  and
on  one  occasion  when  they  had  been  conversing  until  late  in  the
evening,  his  sister  entreated  him  to  remain  till  morning,  but  he
refused.  Scolastica  then  prayed  that  heaven  would  interfere
and  render  it  impossible  for  him  to  leave  her.  Immediately  a
furious  tempest  came  on  and  Benedict  was  obliged  to  delay  his
departure  and  they  held  holy  conversation  through  the  night.
Gregory  explains  that  the  sister’s  prayers  were  in  this  case  of
greater  power  than  the  brother’s  will  since  she  had  the  greater
love.  It  was  a last  meeting,  as  Scolastica  died  three  days  after-
wards (ch.  33  and  34).

* As  St.  Scolastica  died,  Benedict  was  praying  in  his  cell,  when
suddenly  her  soul  appeared  to  him  ascending  to  heaven  in  the
form  of  a dove  (ch.  34).

* On  the  night  that  St.  Germanus  died,  Benedict  opened  his  case-
ment to  look  at  the  starry  heavens,  and  beheld  a brilliant  light.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

410

APPENDIX  III.

Thrice  called,  he  is  at  hand,  to  be  counted  a witness  of  marvels ;
Thrice  called,  he  is  at  hand,  dear  in  the  love  of  the  saint.1

Brave  leader  1 warning  of  wars,  thou  confirmest  our  hearts  by
example  ;*

Rushing  the  first  to  arms  ! brave  leader  warning  of  wars  !

Suitable  tokens  he  gave,  life’s  fellowships  gladly  forsaking;
Hastening  to  life  in  heaven,  suitable  tokens  he  gave.8

Diligent  chanter  of  psalms,  to  his  lute  gave  he  never  a respite ;
Died  with  a song  on  his  lips,  diligent  chanter  of  psalms  !

Held  in  the  same  tomb  they  whose  minds  were  ever  united  ;4
Equal  the  fame  that  preserves  those  whose  spirits  were  one  1

brighter  than  at  midday,  and  the  whole  world  collected,  as  it  were,
under  a single  ray  of  the  sun,  and  the  soul  of  St.  Germanus,  bishop
of  Capua,  borne  by  angels  to  heaven  in  a sphere  of  fire  (ch.  35).

1 Servandus,  a deacon  and  abbot  of  a monastery  in  Campania,
was  visiting  Monte  Cassino  when  Benedict  saw  the  fiery  sphere,
and  was  in  a room  in  the  tower  of  the  monastery  just  below  that
occupied  by  the  saint.  When  Benedict  saw  the  vision,  he  called
Servandus  three  times  loudly  by  name,  so  that  the  latter  might  be
a witness  of  the  marvelous  sight.  Servandus  came,  but  saw  only
a little  part  of  the  great  light.  Benedict  sent  to  Capua  and  found
that  Germanus  had  died  at  the  moment  of  the  vision  (ch.  35).

* Gregory,  referring  to  the  establishment  by  Benedictine  of  the
Rule  of  the  Order,  says  that  in  this  Rule  may  be  found  the
model  of  his  own  life,  “because  he  could  not  teach  otherwise
than  he  lived**  (ch.  36).

• He  foretold  his  own  death,  and  told  the  absent  what  sign  he
would  give  them  when  his  soul  should  leave  his  body.  On  the
day  of  his  death  he  took  the  sacrament,  and  held  by  the  monks,
stood  with  hands  lifted  to  heaven,  and  breathed  his  last  in  prayer
(ch.  37).

4 St.  Benedict  and  St.  Scolastica  were  both  buried  at  Monte
Cassino.  St.  Gregory  says:  “ Their  bodies  were  not  separated  in
the  sepulcher  whose  minds  were  always  one  in  God**  (ch.  34).

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

POEMS.  41 1

Splendid  appeared  the  pathway  and  crowded  with  gleaming
torches,

Whereon  the  holy  one  rose — splendid  the  path  that  was  seen.1

Seeking  the  stony  enclosures,  it2  found  salvation  from  error,
Shunned  all  error  and  sin,  seeking  the  cloisters  of  stone.

Suppliant  for  a reward,  thy  servant  has  given  thee  verses,
Powerless,  an  exile,  weak,  meagre  the  verses  he  gives.

May  they  be  fitting  I pray,  O guide  to  the  paths  celestial.
Benedict,  father  1 I pray,  may  they  be  fitting  for  thee.8

1 On  the  day  St.  Benedict  died,  two  of  his  disciples  at  different
places  saw  the  same  vision,  a path  spread  with  draperies  and
bright  with  innumerable  torches,  which  began  at  the  cell  of  St.
Benedict  and  terminated  in  heaven,  and  a venerable  old  man,  all
glorious,  said  to  them,  **  By  this  pathway  St.  Benedict,  beloved  of
God,  ascends  to  heaven,”  so  that  they  knew  from  the  sign  what
had  been  predicted  (ch.  37).

* I.  e.t  the  pathway.

* The  versification  of  these  so-called  elegiac  epanaleptical  dis-
tichs  requires  that  the  words  composing  the  first  two  dactyls  and
the  following  long  syllable  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  line  (a  dac-
tylic hexameter)  shall  be  repeated  at  the  end  of  the  second  line  (a
dactylic  pentameter),  thus  composing  the  last  half  of  that  line.  I
have  not  been  able  to  reproduce  this  extremely  artificial  verse  in
every  case,  but  have  kept  as  near  to  it  as  possible.  This  form  of
versification  appears  to  have  been  first  used  in  jest  by  Martial  in
the  9th  Book  of  his  Epigrams,  98,  in  the  verses  beginning  :

Rumpitur  invidia  quidatn , carissima  Julit
Quod  me  Roma  legit,  rumpitur  invidia .

Bethmann  (p.  278)  remarks  that  it  was  afterwards  employed  by
Pentadius,  Sedulius,  Bede  and  Alcuin,  but  still  later  it  fell  into
disuse.

Ebert  suggests  (Litteratur  des  Mitteialters,  II,  55,  note  4)  that
perhaps  the  purpose  of  this  poem  was  to  impress  upon  the  memory
of  the  reader  a list  of  the  miracles  of  St.  Benedict.  A knowledge
of  each  particular  miracle  seems  to  have  been  presupposed.

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

412

APPENDIX  III.

We  have  also  composed  in  the  following  manner  a hymn  in
iambic  Archilochian  meter  containing  each  of  the  miracles  of
the  same  father :

O brothers  all,  with  eager  hearts
Come  ye,  with  fitting  melody,

Let  us  enjoy  the  pure  delights
Of  this  most  famous  festival.1

Now  Father  Benedict  the  guide
Who  pointed  out  the  narrow  way,

To  the  bright  realms  of  heaven  rose.

Winning  rewards  for  all  his  toils.

Like  a new  star  he  shone,  and  drove
Away  the  gloomy  clouds  of  earth.

He  from  the  very  dawn  of  life
Despised  the  pleasures  of  the  world.

Of  mighty  power  in  miracles,

Inspired  by  breath  of  the  Most  High,

He  shone  in  marvels,  and  foretold
The  future  happenings  of  his  age.

Since  he  to  many  food  would  bear,

The  small  bread  vessel  he  repairs ;

Sought  for  himself  a narrow  cell,

And  fires  by  fires  he  sternly  quenched.

The  goblet  which  the  poison  bore
He  broke  by  holy  sign  of  cross  ;

The  roaming  spirit  he  constrained
By  gentle  scourging  of  the  flesh.

lThe  festival  of  St  Benedict  occuring  March  21*

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

POEMS.

413

The  streams  gush  forth  from  out  the  rocks ;

The  steel  returns  from  out  the  depths,

Coursing  compliant  through  the  waves ;

The  boy  by  the  saint’s  garb  shuns  death.1 * *

The  hidden  poison  is  revealed ;

The  bird  fulfills  the  saint’s  commands ;
Destruction  overcomes  his  foe  ;

The  roaring  lion  perforce  departs.*

The  stubborn  mass  is  moved  with  ease  ; 1
The  fire  fantastic  disappears  ;

Unto  the  mangled,  health  returns ;

Sin  of  the  absent  stands  revealed.

O crafty  ruler,  thou  art  caught  1
Wicked  possessor,  thou  dost  flee  ! 4
Deeds  of  the  future , ye  are  known  !

Heart,  thou  dost  hide 5 no  secret  things  I

The  buildings  are  laid  out  in  dreams ; •

The  earth  casts  forth  the  buried  corpse ;

The  wand’rer  is  by  dragon  stayed ;

The  gold  coins  fall  in  rain  from  heaven.

1 When  Placidus  was  saved  from  drowing  in  the  lake  he  claimed
that  he  had  seen  the  melote  (monk’s  garb  of  skins)  of  St.  Bene-
dict (Dialogues  II,  ch.  7;  see  Du  Cange).

*This  probably  refers  to  the  heathen  worship  suppressed  by
Benedict  at  Monte  Cassino.

* This  refers  to  the  stone  which  the  devil  rendered  immovable
when  the  monks  were  building  the  monastery.

4Totila  departed  greatly  alarmed  at  Benedict’s  prophecies
(ch.  15).

5 Read  contegis  for  contigis.

•The  monastery  of  Tarracina.

Digitized  by

Google

414

APPENDIX  III.

The  glass  resists  the  rugged  rocks ;

The  great  jars  overflow  with  oil ;

Thy  glance  releases  one  in  bonds ;

Bodies  of  dead  recover  life.

The  power  of  such  a radiant  light
By  sister’s  prayer  is  overcome ;

And  who  loves  more  can  better  sail
His  bark  than  he  who  sees  the  pole.

A splendor  through  night’s  darkness  gleamed
To  former  ages  quite  unknown,

Wherein  a whole  globe  is  beheld,

And  upward  drawn  by  flames,  a saint.

Amid  these  wonders,  fame  he  won
With  the  soft  lute,  like  nectar  sweet ;

And  for  his  followers  he  sketched
Fitly  the  line  of  holy  life.1

To  thy  disciples,  leader  strong,

Be  present  now  ! we  sigh  for  thee.

Shunning  the  serpent,  we  would  grow
In  virtues  following  thy  steps  !

1 He  promulgated  the  famous  Rule  of  the  Order,  which  became
the  general  law  of  the  monks  of  the  Western  Empire,  and  gave  to
monasticism  its  definite  form  (see  ch.  36).

Digitized  by  Google

INDEX.

A.  EDEL.

The  authorities  cited  are  not  included  in  this  index , except  in  Appendix  II,  where
they  are  considered  as  the  sources  of  Paul’s  history.

The  notes  are  indexed  as  well  as  the  text.

Aaghe  (Aio),  5
Abbreviations  of  references,  ix
Abel,  references  explained,  ix
Ablative,  used  for  other  cases,
xxxiii,  xxxiv

Accusative,  used  for  other  cases,
xxxiii,  xxxiv,  xli

Acerenza,  Acerentia  (Agerentia),
77,  219,  382
Acqui  (Aquis),  72,  88
Actionarii , 164
Actor , Actores , 90,  Il6
“Acts  of  the  Langobards,”  by
Secundus,  325, 340,  342,  343, 352
Adalulf,  191

Adaloald,  135,  168,  170,  173,  190,
191,  194,  321,  353,  354
Adda,  Addua,  71,  245,  249
Adelchis,  xx
Adelheid,  xxvi
Adelperga,  xvii,  xxxv
Adeodatus,  395
Ad  Fontanas,  192
Adige  (Athesis),  126,  143,  144
Ado,  252,  266
Adrian  (abbot),  235
Adrian,  bishop  of  Pola,  133
Adrian,  church  of  the  martyr,  306
Adriatic  (Hadriatic),  10,  53,  65,
75.  76.  38'.  38*

Aelius  Bassus,  24

Aemilia  (Emilia),  74,  75,  77,  366,

370, 379. 380, 384

Aemilian  way,  232
Aenenas,  22

Africa,  46,  1 79,  224,  225,  258,  287,

371,  373.  374
Agapitus,  sub-deacon,  407
Agatho,  duke  of  Perugia,  2Q2,  298
Agatho,  pope,  253,  254
Agelmund,  Agilmund,  25  to  27,  29,
3*.  328,  333,  339
Agerentia  (Acerenza),  76,  219
Agilulf  (Ago),  71,  130,  141,  149  to
152,  154  to  160,  162,  163,  165,
167,  168  to  170,  173  to  175,
177,  189  to  193,  321,  342,  352  to
355.  358.  359

Agio,  Aggo  (see  Aio),  5,  327,  328,
347,  348
Agiprand,  302

Agnellus,  bishop  of  Acilum,  133
Agnellus,  bishop  of  Tridentum,  133,
144.151,  353,  356
Ago,  duke  of  Friuli,  87,  205,  227
Ago  (see  Agilulf),  151,  152,  190,
205

Aguntum  (Innichen),  58,  69,  189
Aio  (Agio,  Aggo,  Aaghe),  duke  of
the  Winnili,  5,  11,  15,  24  to  26,
327,  328

Aio,  duke  of  Benevento,  198,  199
Aistulf  (Ahistulf),  271,  295,  301,
302,310,311,312
Aix  (Aquae  Sextiae),  101
Alahis,  87,  239,  240,  241  to  249,
263

Alamanni,  54,  58,  72,  1 18,  126,
184,  359,  380
Alani,  328,  .373

(415)

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

4i  6

INDEX.

Alba  Pompeia,  88
Albis  (Elbe),  68

Alboin,  Albuin,  42  to  45,  49  to  53,
S3, 61  to  66,  68,  71,  80  to  84,  93,
1 12,  319,  329,  335,  336,  339,
340,  343.  35®.  357
Albsuinda  (Alpsuinda),  49,  84,  85,

329. 336

Alenin,  xxvi
Alderney  (Evodia),  10
Aldihoc  (Hildeoc),  son  of  Lethuc,
30,  328

A/dius,Aldiot  Aldii , the  “half  free,”
23,  89,  92,  1 15,  195,  196
Aldo,  241  to  245,  256,  257
Aldones , Aldottus , 23
Alexandria,  226,  279
Alichis,  duke  of  Brescia,  87
Alliteration  of  Origo,  344,  347
Alpsuinda  (Albsuinda),  49,  84,  85
Alsuca  (Val  Sugana),  143
Altino,  Chronicle  of,  356
Allinum  (Altino),  58,  133,  145
Alzeco,  duke  of  the  Bulgarians,  234
Amalafrid,  43
Amalong,  223
Amator,  bishop,  294
Amatus,  96

Amazons,  27,  28,  31,  334
Ambri,  leader  of  the  Wandals,  12,
332,  346,  347

Ambrose,  the  Confessor,  church  of,
236

Ambrosius,  xxxii
Ameria  (Amelia),  154,  299
Amingus,  54,  55,  373
Amitemum  (San  Vettorino),  76,  382
Amo,  100  to  102,  319
Amtalas,  xxx,  46,  373”374,  377
Anagnis,  102,  352
Anagratis,  192
Anaulf,  king  of  Persia,  323
Anastasius  II  (Artemius),  emperor,
277,  279,  280,  369,  372
Anastasius,  Arian,  bishop  of  Tici-
num,  195

Anastasius,  martyr,  304
Anastasius,  patriarch  Constantinople,
293*  371

An  a was,  330
Ancona,  75,  301
Andegavi  (Angers),  284
Andreas  (valet  of  Constans),  225
Andrew,  St.,  Monastery  of,  129
Angelram,  Angilram,  bishop  of
Metz,  xxvii,  263
Angels  of  pestilence,  255
Angels,  19,  128,  131,  235,  280,  372
Angers  (Andegavi),  284,  324
Anglo-Saxons,  18,  166,  240,  261
Similarities  to  Langobards,  316
Anna,  wife  of  Godescalc,  301
Annals,  xxxv,  xlii,  71
Annals  of  Ravenna,  376
Anschis  (Ansegis),  266,  324
Ansegranus,  18
Anselm,  87

Ansfrit,  duke  of  Friuli,  87,  252
Ansprand,  264,  265,  277,  279,  281
Ansul,  141,  357
Antae,  22

Anthaib  (Anthab),  22,  328,  339
Antistes>  175

Anthony,  trustee  of  church  of  Grado,

131

Aosta,  102

Aper,  abbot,  xxviii,  70
Apocrisarius,  128
Apollinaris,  bishop,  1 21
Appa,  180

Apennine  Alps,  73  to  75,  365,  379,
381  to  384,  386
Appian  Way,  146
Appianum  (Hoch  Eppan),  143
Apollo,  temple  of,  400
Apsimarus  (see  Tiberius  III),  367
Apulia,  76,  77,  219,  366,  379,  382
Aquae,  Aquae  Sextiae,  Aquinses,  101
Aquila  (Furcona),  76
Aquileia,  66,  67,  71,  1 12,  1 21,  124,
I3i>  *33>  176,227,260,  276,355,
372>  380

Aquileia,  Synod  of,  372  to  373
Aquis  (Acqui,  Aquae,  Statiellae),  72,
380

Aquitaine,  9,  104,  287
Aquo,  330.  See  Agilulf.

Arabia,  Arabs,  8,  369,  372

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

INDEX.

417

Arator,  poet,  47,  375
Arce  (Ajtx),  271
ArchUochian  meter,  48,  412
Arelate  (Arles),  101,  296
Arga,  267
Argait,  267  to  269
Ari  (prefix),  87
Arian  heresy,  125,  194,  195
Arichis  I (Arigis,  Arogis),  duke
of  Beneventum,  155,  163  to  165,
189, 198, 358, 362
Arichis  II,  duke  of  Beneventum,
xvii  to  xxviii,  313
Arichis,  son  of  Romuald,  232
Arichis,  Paul's  grandfather,  xvi,  186
Arichis,  Paul's  brother,  xvi,  xx,  186
Arigis  (see  Arichis  I),  163  to  165
Ariminum  (Rimini),  77,  297
Arioald  (Ariopah),  170,  188,  190
to  191,  193,  321,  323
Ari  pert  I,  202,  205,  209,  236,  240,
331

Aripert  II,  264  to  266,  272,  278  to
279.  3°5»  368

Aripert  (Charibert),  king  of  the
Franks,  66

Ariulf,  duke  of  Spoleto,  130,  155
to  156,  160  to  162,  358
Arles  (Arelate),  101,  296  to  297
Armenia,  217

Arminius  (Hermann),  12  to  14
Arne  frit,  230

Amulf,  St.,  xxii,  xxvi,  xxxii,  262
to  263,  323

Aroal,  330.  See  Arioald.

Arodus,  193,  331

Arogis  (see  Arichis,  Arigis),  164
to  165

Arrow,  symbol  of  emancipation,
333

Artemius  (Anastasius  II),  277
Artenia  (Artegna),  180
Arverni  (Clermont),  99
Aix  (Arce),  271
Arx  (Monte  Cassino),  48
Asculus  (Ascoli),  75,  381
Asfeld,  44
Asse,  19

Assi,  12,  332,  346  to  347

Assipiti,  19,  333,  338

Asta  (Asti),  87,  189,  213,  217

Atemus,  364

Athanagild,  104

Athens,  218

Athesis  (Adige),  126

Atli  (Attila,  Etzel),  105

Ato,  264

“At  the  Poles,”  238,  300
Atto,  205,  227

Audoachari  (see  Odoacar),  328
Audoin  (Auduin,  Eadwin),  41  to

43.  49.  S3.  84.  329.  33 S
Auduald,  142

Aufidena  (Aufidianum),  76,  382
Aufusus,  305
Augusta  (Augsburg),  70
Augustine,  St.,  129,  288,  369,372
Augustus,  11,  12,  13
Aurelia,  72,  75,  380
Aureliani  (Aurelianenses,  Orleans),
67,251,279
Aureus,  142
Aurona,  266,  293
Ausonia  (Italy),  70,  79,  365
Ausonus,  79

Austrasia,  103  to  104,  106,  136  to
137

Austria,  90,  199,  245  to  246
Austrigusa,  40,  328,  335
Autari,  Authari,  71,  113  to  114,  117,
119.  134,  I36  to  *4*.  MS  to  150,
170,  32°.  330.  34*.  357  to  358
Autpert,  abbot  of  St.  Vincent,  xxxii,
283, 363

Auximun  (Osimo),  293
Avars,  xv,  50,  62,  65,  67,  120,
152,  158,  159,  165,  167  to  168,
170  to  184,  207,  209,  228  to  229,
308.  323.  335.  336>  354  355.

.358

Avignon,  100,  297
Avisio,  143

Badrinus  (Padoreno?),  120
Baduarius,  112

Bagnarea  (Balneus  Regis),  174
Baian,  50

Baias  (Baiohaim),  19

Digitized  by  Google

41 8 INDEX.

Bainaib  (Banthaib),  22,  328
Balneus  Regis  (Bagnarea),  174
Bam berg-Oxford  manuscript  of  Origo
Gentis  Langobardorum,  383  to
387

Bandum  (vando),  37,  328,  349
Banthaib  (Bainaib,  Banthab),  22,
328,  339

Baodolinus,  304  to  305
Baptism  of  Cesara,  204
Barbarisms,  in  Paul’s  works,  xxxii
to  xxxiv,  xli

Bardanis  (Filippicus),  275,  276,  372
Bardengau,  4,  11,  22  to  24,  120
Bardi  (Langobards),  120
Bardo’s  Alp  (Bardi),  233,  304
Bardowick,  II,  120
“Bards,”  18
Barta , 18
Bauch,  373

Bauzanum  (Botzen),  239
Bavaria,  Bavarians,  52,  58,  65,  105,
137  to  140,  150,  154,  158,  184-
189,  239,  252,  265,  277,  285,

308,  353  to  355,  357

Bebius  (Vesuvius),  258
Bede’s  Chronicle,  xxxvii,  320,  360,
367  to  370,  372  to  373,  376  to  379
Beleo,  Beleos,  race  of,  86,  330
Belgic  Gaul,  8

Belisarius,  39,  41,  45  to  46,  54,  56,

366,  3 7G  373  to  374.  402

Bellinzona  (Bilitio),  142
Belluno,  Bellunum,  88,  133,  270
Benacus,  Lake,  55,  71,  365
Benedict,  archbishop  of  Milan,  261,
272  to  273,  370

Benedict  I,  pope,  67, 108,  121,  124,
128,  367

Benedict,  St.,  xix,  xxi,  xxix,  xxxv,
47  to  49,  162  to  163,  251,  282,
283,  361  to  362,  367,  387
Benedict,  St.,  poems  in  honor  of,
vi,  393-414
Benedictio,  24a
Benedicius , 393

Beneventum,  Benevento,  Bene*
ventincs,  66,  76,  79,  88  to  00,

JI2,  145  to  146,  155,  163,  188,

198  to  200,  207,  209,  219  to  220,
222  tO  223,  226  tO  227,  232,  234,
237.  250,  283,  292,  293,  300  to
30I>  3°3»  3°8*  35  G 382
Bercetum,  304

Bergamus,  Bergamo  (Bergoma,
Pergamus),  71,  78,  87  to  88,  1 52,
257,  265,  373
Berich,  30

Berre,  battle  of  river,  324
Bersello  (Brescello,  Brexillus),  1 71
Berthari  (see  Perctarit),  331
Berto,  302
Bertrada,  313

Bethmann,  v,  ix,  xv,  337,  339,  351,
377

Bieda  (Blera),  299
Bilitio  (Bellinzona),  142
Billo,  270
Biorgor,  373
Birten  (Vetera),  2
Bleckede,  II
Blera  (Bieda),  299
Blues,  in  the  circus  (Veneti),  178,
366,  37 7
Bluhme,  351

Bobbio  (Bobium,  Bovium),  72,  74,
192,  363>  379  to  380
Bodigisil,  14 1 to  142
Bohemia,  Boii,  12,  22
Bojano  (Boviamum),  234
Bologna  (Bononia),  74,  292  to  293,

298. 379

Bomarzo  ( Polimartiune),  154,  299
Boniface,  notary,  173
Boniface  III,  pope,  177
Boniface  IV,  pope,  178,  193
Bonitus,  Abbot,  163
Bononia  (Bologna),  74,  292  to  293,
298

Book  of  the  Popes  (see  Liber
Pontificalis),  xxvii
Boonia  (Bononia),  381
Bord,  18

Borgo  Bressana  (Broxas?),  231
Botzen  (Bauzanum),  143  to  144,  239
Bovianum  (Bojano),  234
Bovium  (see  Bobbio),  381
Bremtonicum,  Brentonico,  143

Digitized  by  Google

INDEX.

419

Brenner  (see  Breones,  Briones,
Brenti),  55,  153
Brennus,  77,  364
Brentonico,  Brentonicum,  143
Brescello  (Brearillus,  Bresello),  87,
118,  171

Brescia,  Brexia,  78,  87  to  88,  240,
282,  294
Brexillum,  357

Brexillus  (Brescello,  Bresello),  87,
118,  171

Briones  (Breones,  Brenti),  55,  153
Brischis  (Broxas),  230  to  231
Britain,  9,  131,  235  to  237,  262,
280,  368,  370

Briltia  (Bruttium),  73,  366,  381
Britti,  164

Brixia  (see  Brexia),  78
Brook  of  the  Franks,  217
Broxas,  230

Bruckner,  iv,  x,  344,  351
Brundisium,  Brindisi,  77,  250,  382
Brunhild,  105  to  106
Brunihild  ( Brunicheldis,  Bruni-
childis),  68,  103  to  106,  136,
1 5G  159.  192,319
Bruttium  (see  Brittia,  the  present
Calabria,  73,  366,  379
Buccellinus,  xxx,  54,  319,  373  to  374
Buffaloes,  354
Bug,  22

Bulgarians,  22,  29  to  31,  80,  234,
273,  288,  334,  369

Burgundaib  (Vurgundaib),  22  to

23.  328,  339

Burgundians,  22  to  23,  96  to  97
Burgundy,  103
Busseto,  Buxeta,  293
Butilin  (see  Buccelinus),  54
Byrrus  (Rienz),  69

CabiHonum,  148
Cacco,  87,  180  to  181,  187,  233
Cagan  (Chagan,  Khan)  of  Avars,
50,  158  to  159,  165,  167,  170,
179,  181,  183,  207,  209  to  210,
228  to  229,  353  to  354
Calabria  (Bruttium,  Brittia),  73,  164,
224,  379,  382

Calabria  (modern  Apulia),  76
Calixtus  (Calistus),  90,  232,  276,
286,  294,  367

Callinicus  (Gallicinus),  134,  156,
159,  165,  168,  274,  368
Calliopas,  218
Calore  (Calor),  146,  222
Camerinum,  Camerino,  160
Campania,  55,  60,  68,  73,  75  to  76,
225,  271,  364,  365,  370,  379,  381
to  382,  384,  404
Candidianus,  175  to  176
Candidus,  24
Cantiano  (Luceolis),  154
Cantor , 174

Canusium  (Carrosa),  76,  382
Capua,  54  to  55,  73,  206,  222,  227,
381,  384,  410
Capulanus,  246

Carantanum  (Camuntum,  Carin-
thia),  230
Carellus,  202

Carloman,  son  of  Pipin,  312  to  313
Carlovingians,  xxvii
Carniola  (KrainJ,  295
Camuntum  (Carinthia),  230
Carthage,  126,  141  to  142,  258,
371

Camic  Alps,  65
Carsiloli,  76,  382
Carpathians,  22
Casilinum  (Voltumus),  55
Cassianum,  Cassano,  Cassanus,  73,

381

Cassinum  (see  Monte  Cassino),  48
to  49,  162,  251,  282
Cassiodorus,  47,  375
Catalogue  of  the  provinces  of  Italy,
360,  379  to  387
Caupus  (race  of),  330
Cavallonum  (Cabillonum,  Chftlon*
sur-Sadne),  148
Cedinus,  142  to  143,  145
Cedoal  (Ceadwalla),  261,  373
Celano  (Fucinus),  76
Celestine,  pope,  122
Celmanici  (Le  Mans),  251
Cembra  (Cimbra),  143
Ceneda,  Ceneta,  63,  69,  87,  233

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

420

INDEX.

Cenomannid  (Celmanid,  Le  Mans),

251

Ceuta  (Septem),  287
CenUnarii , 90
Centarium , 109
Cesena,  379

Cesara,  203  to  204,  322  to  323
Chalcedon,  Council  of,  121,  123,
I25»  132,  352

ChfUon-sur-Sa6ne  (Cabillonum,  Cav-
allonum),  148

Charibert  (see  Aripert),  66,  67,  103
Charlemagne,  Charles  the  Great,  xviii
to  xx,  xxii  to  xxix,  xxxix,  8,  105,
31210313,385

Charles  Martel,  187,  281,  284  to
285,  287,  296  to  297,  299,  308,
310,  324  to  325
Charybdis,  9,  IO
Cherson,  275
Cberuscans,  12,  14,  15
Chiavenna  (Clavenna),  265
Chieti  (Theate),  76
Childebert  II,  Childepert,  68,  103,
104,  117,  118,  122,  125,  126,
136  to  138,  140  to  142,  145,  147,
149,  152,  154,  I59»  319,  320,

322,  353. 359

Childeric,  235

Cbilperic  (see  Hilperic),  67,  103  to
105

Chiusi,  88

Chlotar  I,  49,  51,  61,  66,  67
Chlotar  II  (Qothar),  49,  160,  173,
322

Chlotochar  (Loth air),  103,  105
Chlotsuinda,  49,  51,  140,  335
Chosroes  II,  205
Chramnichls,  102,  103
Christe  Pater , poem  by  Charle-
magne, xxix

Christian  chronology  established,  47
Chronicles,  xxxv

Chronicon  Gothanum,  3,  331  to

333.  335  “>  338.  34*i  344.  357
Chronology  of  Paul  defective,
xxxvi,  xxxvii,  31
Chur  (Curia),  265
Ciborium , 148

Circus,  factions,  178
Cimbra  (Cembra),  1 43
Cisalpine  Gaul,  77,  78
City  Forest,  241,  244,  305
Cividale  (see  Forum  Julii),  xv  to
xvi,  65,  71,  87,  163,  180,  205,
228,  232,  233,  245,  276,  286,
294,  356
Civitas , 89
Claffo,  33,  334
Clarissimus,  133

Classis,  112,  1 19,  120,  285,  289,

358

Claudius,  14

Clavenna  (Chiavenna),  265
Cleph,  86,  113,  330,  357
Clermont,  99

Clitorius  (Lago  di  Bolsena),  73,  381

Qothar  II,  160,  173,  191,  322

Qothar  III,  235

Qovis,  54

Qovis  II,  193

Code  of  Justinian,  46,  366

Coinage,  242  to  243

Col  de  Gendvre,  97

Colonia  Julia  Carnia,  65

Colonus , 92

Columban,  St.,  xxxii,  192,  193
Column  of  Authari,  146
Comacina  (Commacina),  135,  152,
264,  265

Comacinus,  (lake  Como),  244
Comet,  158,  175,  354  to  355,  370
Commacchio,  292,  310,  313
Compsa,  Consia,  Conza,  176
Comum,  Como,  87,  241,  244
Concordia,  65

Consentia,  Cosentia,  Cosenza,  73,
381

Consia,  Conza,  176
Constans  II  (Constantine  IV),  217
to  219,  221,  223  to  226,  234,
33*.  368,  369,  371,  376
Constantine  III,  son  of  Heradius,
203,371,376

Constantine,  son  of  Constantine  III
(see  Constans  II),  203,  371,  372
Constantine  Pogonatus,  234,  253,
254,  258

Digitized  by

Google

INDEX.

421

Constantine,  son  of  Maurice,  168
Constantine,  abbot,  31,  163
Constantine  I,  pope,  274,  276,  277,
368  to  370

Constantinople,  46,  47,  55,  58,  59,
68,  85,  106,  no,  1 12,  124,  126,
141,  142,  155,  161,  172,  176,
177,  203,  204,  218,  224,  225,
252,  254,  258  to  260,  274,  279,
288  to  290,  292,  293,  303,  330,
367.  3^9.  371,  372*  377
Constantinople,  Council  of,  123  to
125,  132,  260,  367
Constans,  bishop  of  Milan,  134
Constitutum%  123
Consular  lists,  xxxv
Conza  (Consia),  176
Copenhagen,  376

Copenhagen  continuer  of  Prosper.
See  Langobard  Chronicle,  376,
378

Cormones,  Cormons,  180,  276,  294
Coronate  (Komate),  246,  247,  263
Corsica,  77,  365,  379,  382,  386
Corsus,  101
Corvulus,  87,  270

Cosenza  Cosentia  (Consentia),  73,

381

Cottian  Alps,  54,  72.  74,  192,  272,
285,  365,  368,  379  to  381,  383
to  384, 386

“Cottian  and  Apennine  Alps,”  384
Cottius,  72,  36$

“ Council  picture,”  369
Cremona,  87,  170
Crimea,  218
Cubicularius , 89
Cumae,  283,  370
Cunimund,  49  to  51,  81,  329
Cusupald  (Theodobald),  king  of
Franks,  40
Cvenas,  28

Cyclus  Paschalis  of  Dionisius,  47

Cynocephali,  20

Cynthius  occiduas  Poem,  xxiv

Cyriacus,  130

Cyril,  St.,  122,  125

Cyrus,  abbot,  274,  276,  368,  372

Dacia,  19
Dagipert,  235
Dagistheus,  56,  373
Dahn,  Felix,  v,  x

Damianus,  bishop  of  Tidnum,  241,
254,  255»  370
Danes,  19

Danube,  24,  32,  33,  38
Dative  case,  use  of,  xxxv
Dea  (Die),  101
Decius,  6

Defensor  eeclesiae , 132
Dertona  (Tortona),  72,  380
Desiderius,  xvii,  xx,  312  to  313
Dialogues  of  Gregory  the  Great,  vii,
*53.  361
Die  (Dea),  101
Dietenhofen,  xxviii,  8
Dietrich  of  Berne,  105
Digests  of  Justinian,  46,  266
Diocletian,  379
Dionisius,  abbot,  47,  73,  375
Dnieper,  22
Dniester,  22
Doge,  291,  298
Dog-headed  men,  20
Domnus  (Donus),  253
Don  (Tanais),  1
Donatus,  Aelinus,  77,  364
Dragon -hoard,  106,  147  to  148
Drave,  69

Droctulft,  Droctulf,  Drocton,  112,
1 18  to  1 19,  358
Drome,  101
Drought,  151
Droysen,  375
Druentia  (Durance),  100
Duces , see  dukes,  86
Duino,  294

Dukes,  25,  65,  85  to  89,  91,  115

Duplabilis,  69

Durance  (Druentia),  100

Eadwin  (Andoin),  84
Ealfwin  (Alboin),  84
Earthquake,  200,  369
Esister  Reckoning,  47
Eutule  (Italy),  84
Ebbo,  Ebbe,  5

Digitized  by  CaOOQle

422

INDEX.

Ebert,  342,  359

Ebredunum  (Embrun),  97, 98,  100,
101

Eclipse  of  the  moon,  254,  368,  370
Eclipse  of  the  sun,  254,  255,  368
Ecumenical  patriarch,  130
Edda,  105

Edict  of  Rothari,  xxxii,  27,  39,  40,
63,  88,  92,  195  to  197,  236,  342
Edwin  (Audoin),  41
Egbert,  240

Egypt,  8,  108,  179,  226,  258,  367,
3^9

Elba- canton,  23
Eiferingen,  32

Elbe  (AlbisJ,  4,  11,  13,  19,  24,  68,

358

Elder  Edda,  105

Elegiac  epaneleptical  distichs,  41 1
Elemund,  42

Eleutherius,  176, 177,  190,  191,  290,

369

Elias  (Helias),  112,  121,  124,  131,
356,  362
Elmigisilus,  83

Emancipation,  by  arrow,  20,  21,  30,
333

Em  brum  (Ebredunum),  97,  98,  100,
101

Emilia  (Aemilia),  74,  75,  77,  366,

381,  385

Eneti  (Veneti),  71
Ennemase,  143
Ennodius,  xxxv
Eormengild,  240
Eormenred,  240
Epic  song,  340,  34s,  351
Ephesus,  Seven  Sleepers  of,  6
Ephesus,  Council  of,  122,  125
Epiphanius,  175,  355
Equilium,  298
Equitius,  398
Establon  (Stablo),  97
Ethelbert,  129
Etruria,  75,  365
Etzel,  105

Eudo,  prince  of  Aquitaine,  287,  288,

324

Eugenios,  218

Eugippius,  xxxii,  334,  360
Euin,  87,  103,  135,  138,  151,  158,

„ 352  to  354,  359
Euna,  87

Eunius  (Mummulus),  96
Eusebius,  Legend  of,  190
Eusebius,  St.,  Church  of,  195
Eusebius,  xxxii
Euthicius,  iii,  371
Eutropius,  xvii,  xxxii,  xlii
Eutyches,  iii,  122
Eutychius,  exarch,  291,  298,  371
Euxine,  22
Evantius,  1 42
Evodia  (Alderney),  10
Exarch,  168,  169
Exhilaratus,  403
Ezekiel,  362

Faedo  (Fagitana),  143
Faenza,  313
Falcastrum,  falx,  398
Famine,  15 1*

Fanum,  Fano,  75,  301
Farao,  264
Faras,  66

Fariqaidus,  fargeetum,  329,  335,
344

Faroald  I,  Faruald  I,  112,  120,  160,
162,  358

Faroald  II,  Faruald  II,  273,  285
Fastrada,  xxvii
Feld,  33

Feletheus  (Feva,  Theuvane),  31,
360

Felix,  archbishop  of  Ravenna,  276
Felix,  bishop  of  Tarvisium  (Treviso),
68,  69,  356

Felix,  grammarian,  257
Feltre,  Feltria,  88,  133
Female  succession  to  the  throne,  29
Ferdulf,  87,  266,  267,  269,  270
Fermo  (Firmus),  75
Feronianum,  Ferronianus  (Frig-
nano),  74,  381
Ferrara,  310,  313
Ferrugio  (Verruca),  144
Festus,  Sextus  Pompeius,  xxvi,  xxvii,

3«s.  387

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

INDEX.  42*

Fetilus , 44

Feva,  Fewa  (Theuvane,  Feletheus),
31,  328,  366
Fidentius,  294
Fifth  Synod,  260,  372
Filippicus  (Bardanis),  274  to  276,
280,  369,  372

Filippicus  the  Monothelete,  372
Firmus  (Fenno),  75,  381
Fisud,  328

Flaminia,  Flamminia,  74  to  75,  77,
366.  379*  380,  381,  384,  385
Flavianus,  xvi

Flavian,  bishop  of  Constantinople,
122

Flavius , 113,  136  to  137,  357
Flax,  mistaken  for  water,  37
Floods,  357
Florentinus,  priest,  399
Floras,  xxxii

Flothar  fsee  Clothar),  329
Flovius  (Fluvius  Frigidus),  228
Flutsuinda  (see  Chlotsuinda),  329
Focas  (Phocas),  168,  172,  177,  179
Focinus,  382
Folk- thing,  196
Fonteius  of  Feltria,  133
Forconis,  382
Forinus  (Forino),  222
Foro  di  Fulvia,  Forum,  304
Fortunatus  Venantius,  xxviii,  xxxii,
xxxv,  362  to  363
Fortunatus,  69  to  70,  1 76
Forum  (Foro  di  Fulvia),  304
Forum  of  Cornelius,  381
Forum  Julii  (Cividale),  65,  71,  87,
163,  180,  i8x,  184,  200,  205,
227,  228,  230,  231,  232,  233,
245,  246,  249,  266,  276,  286,
294,  356*  363.  365,  380
Forum  Julii,  Friuli,  Friulans,  66,  87,
88,  90,  163,  170,  179,  181,  188,
199.  205.  22 7,  229,  230,  232,
245,  249,  266,  267,  269,  270,
286,  287,  295,  355,  367
Forum  Popnli  (Forlimpopuli),  232
Forum  Simphronii  (Fossombrone),
301

Francio,  135,  136

Frankish  sources,  of  Paul’s  history,
318  to  325

Franks,  40,  49,  54,  55,  61,  66,  68,
102,  103,  105,  108,  in,  1 17,
126,  137,  140,  142,  143  to  145.
147*  i5*>  152,  I54>  I59»  167,
173,  189,  216,  251,  262,  284  to
287,  296,  308,  352,  354,  355,
359»  385  N

Frea  (Freja),  16,  316,  327,  332,

339,  345,  348
Fredegarius,  321,  322,  323
Fredegundis,  104

Frignano  Ferronianus,  74,  379,  380
Friuli,  Friulans,  see  Forum  Juki.
Fucinus,  Focinus  (Celanus),  76,  382
Furcona  Aquila,  76,  see  Forconis.

Gaidoald,  Gaiduald,  duke  of  Brescia,
294

Gaidoald,  duke  of  Trent,  87,  158,

169. 353

Gaidulf,  152,  160,  330,  337,  353,
354

Gaila,  180

Gail-thal  (Zellia),  189.

Gairethinx , 196
Galatia,  Galatians,  78,  364
Galicia,  9

Gallicinus,  Callinicus,  patrician,  159,
165,  168,  354

Gallicinus,  Callinicus,  patriarch  of
Constantinople,  273  to  274,  368
Gallogreci,  78
Galswintha,  104,  105
Gambar , strenuus , 5
Gambara,  3,  5,  15,  16,  327,  347,
348,  349

Garganus,  Gargano,  Mount,  200
Garipald,  duke  of  Bavaria,  40,  105,
137,  138,  140,  329,  330,  352
Garibald  II,  189,  353
Garibald,  son  of  Grimuald,  236  to
237

Garipald,  duke  of  Turin,  205  to  208
Ga St,  89,  see  Guests.

Gastaldus , Gastaldiusf  GastcUdi , 88
to  91,  116,  165
Gate  of  St.  John,  80

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

424

INDEX.

Gaul,  Gauls,  2,  8,  9,  13,  72,  77,
94  to  98,  100,  105,  125,  151,  159,
167,  192,  236,  262,  266,  296,

364,  365

Gaul,  boundaries  of,  380
Gausus,  41,  329
Gelismer,  46
Gemona,  Glemona,  180
Genders,  interchanged  by  Paul,
xxxiii

Genitive,  irregular  forms,  xxxii
Genoa,  Genua,  72,  79,  380
Georgius  of  Ravenna,  276,  290
Georgius,  patriarch  of  Constanti-
nople, 252  to  253

Gepidse,  Gepidan,  38  to  45,  50  to
52,  80,  84,  385,  see  Gippidi
Germanicus,  13
Germanus,  patriarch,  293,  371
Germanus,  St.,  409  to  410
Germany,  Germans,  1,  2,  4 to  5,  11
to  15,  19,  28
Giansevero,  ix,  152
Gippidi,  328,  329,  350,  see  Gepidae.
Gisa,  wife  of  Feletheus,  32,  360
Gisa,  daughter  of  Grimoald,  221,
226  to  227
Giselperga,  300

Gisulf  I,  son  of  Romuald  I,  232,
250,  271,  282,  370
Gisulf  II,  duke  of  Eeneventum,  271,
282,  294,  300,  303
Gisulf,  duke  of  Forum  Julii,  65  to
66,  87,  163  to  164,  169,  175,  179
to  180,  187

Glemona,  Gemona,  180
Godan,  16  to  18,  327,  345,  346,
see  also  Wodan  (Wotan).
Godehoc,  Godeoc,  Gudeoc,  33,  328,
334

Godepert,  205  to  209,  264
Godescalc  (Gottschalk),  301,  303,
354

Golaida,  Golanda,  22,  328,  338  to
339

Golden  Age,  357
Golden  Heaven,  304
Gotha  Chronicle,  see  Chronicon
Gothanum.

Gothic  War  of  Buccellinus,  xxx,  374,

378

Gothland,  22

Goth,  Goths,  2,  15,  22,  30,  31,  46,
53 1 55>  56,  58>  59>  108, 166,  398,
407,  408

Goths,  Spanish,  126,  136
Gottschalk  (Godescalc),  165,  170  to
171

Grado,  Gradus,  67,  124,  13 1,  132,
135*  !52>  1 75*  J76,  227,  276,  356
Grammatical  irregularities  in  Paul’s
works,  xxxii  to  xxxiv
Grasulf,  87,  164,  188,  205,  227
Gratianopolis,  Grenoble,  101
Grauso,  241,  244,  245,  256,  257
Greece,  Greeks,  19,  59,  76,  78,  200,
220,  223,  225,  226,  303,  364
Greek,  language,  xv  to  xxvi,  xxxi
Greens  (of  the  circus),  Frasini,  178,

366,  377

Gregory  the  Great,  48,  III,  121,
124,  127  to  131,  134,  153,  155  to
157,  161,  164,  165,  172,  289,  290,
352  to  354,  356,  357,  361,  362,
368,  371,  3g7.  393  to  396.  398,
402,  409.  Dialogues  of,  vii.,  48,
153.  353.  361,  387.  393.  394-
Morals,  hi,  128,  361, 371.  Life,
written  by  Paul,  128
Gregory  II,  pope,  276,  282,  283,
290,  292,  367,  370,  371
Gregory  III,  pope,  292,  299,  302
Gregory,  duke  of  Beneventum,  300,

301

Gregory  the  patrician,  187,  188
Gregory  of  Tours,  xxxii,  6,  94,  318  to
320,  353.  357  to  359,  375,  376
Grenoble,  Gratianapolis,  10 1
Grimuald,  180,  182,  183, 188, 198  to
200,  205  to  2i6,  219,  220,  222,
226,  228  to  230,  232  to  237,  243,
264,  322,  331,  369
Grimuald  II,  son  of  Romuald,  232,
243,  250
Grippo,  141,  142
Gudeoc,  see  Godehoc.

Gudescalc,  son-in-law  of  King  Agi-
lulf,  165,  170,  171,  354

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

INDEX.

425

Guests , hospes,  90,  91,  114,  1 15
Gugingus,  race  of,  27,  328,  339,  343
Guido,  of  Arezzo,  xviii.

Gumperga,  293
Gumpert,  279

Gundiperga,  wife  of  Arioald,  190,
191,  193,  201,  202,  321
Gunduald,  Gundoald,  140,  189,  202,
32«.  330.  337.  358.359
Gungingi,  25,  26,  see  Gugingus,  race
of.

Gunthram,  67,  96,  97,  100,  102  to
106,  125,  147,  148,  159,  320,  322
Guntrut,  285

Guodan  (Godan,  Wotan),  18
Gypidis,  328,  see  also  Gepidae.

Hadria,  Adria,  75,  381
Hadrian  (Adrian),  235,  370
Hadrian,  pope,  313
Hagelmund,  25,  see  Agelmund.
Hagia  Sophia  (church  of  St.  Sophia),
46

Hannibal,  74

Hartmann,  References  explained,  x
Headhobards  (Langobards?),  19
Helias  (Elias),  112,  121,  131
Helmechis,  Helmegis,  Helmigis,
Hilmichis,  82  to  85,  329,  330, 336,
340,  344
Hera,  345

Heraclea  (City),  298
Heracleones,  Heraclones,  203,  371
Heraclian,  governor  of  Africa,  179,
378

Heraclius,  emperor,  176,  179,  203,
217,  359.  37G  376
succession  of  his  sons,  371,  376
Here  toga,  87
Herfemar,  295
Hermann  (Arminius),  12
Hermelinda,  240
Herminigild,  125
Hermiones,  315
Hermunduri,  12
Herodotus,  iii,  iv

Heroli,  2,  32-38,  40,  42,  55,  334,

„ 349
Herolia,  36

Hilarius,  St.,  cloister  of,  xxviii
Hildechis,  39,  42,  43,  335
Hildegard,  queen,  xxvi
Hildegard,  daughter  of  queen  Ililde-
gard,  xxvi

Hildeoc  (Aldihoc),  30,  328
Hildeprand,  297,  298,  30c,  301,  310
Hilderic,  duke  of  Spoleto,  299,  301
Hilderic,  Paul’s  pupil,  xxix
Hilmichis,  329,  330,  see  Helmechis.
Hilperic,  6 7,  103,  III,  153
Hippodrome  of  Constantinople,  178,
218

Hirpinum  (Arpino),  271
Hisernia  (lsernia),  76,  234,  382
Hister,  71

“ History  of  the  Langobards,”  xxix,
xxx,  xxxii-iv,  xl,  xli,  332,  373, 374.
See  Origo.

Hister  (river),  71
Histria  (Istria),  71,  365
Hoch  Eppan  (Appianum),  143
Hodgkin,  vi,  vii,  x
Holder-Egger,  373
Holstein,  19
“ Holy  See,”  368

“ Homilies  of  the  fathers  ” collected
and  revised  by  Paul,  xxvi,  xxvii
Honoratus,  79,  356
Ilonorius  I,  pope,  191,  217,  253
Horontius  of  Vicentia,  133
Horrea,  271
Horta  (Orte),  1 54,  299
Hospes , hospites , hospitalitas  (guests ),

9i.  “5

Hospitius,  St.,  94  to  96,  319
Hrodgaud,  xx
HucfcSrt,  285

Huns,  50,  52,  62,  67,  158, 159,  168,
180

Ibas  of  Edessa,  121,  123,  135

Ibligis  (Iplis),  180

Ibor,  Iborea,  5,  II,  15,  24  to  26,

347. 348

Iconoclasm,  290  to  292
Ides,  79

Udichis,  son  of  Tato,  328,  350
Iliad,  345

Digitized  by  Google

4 26

INDEX.

Illyria,  IUyricum,  2,  12
Imola,  Imolas,  74,  381,  see  Forum
of  Cornelius.

Indiction,  62

Infinitive,  irregularities  in,  xxxi
Ingenuinus  of  Savio  (Seben),  133,

144

Ingundis,  125,  126
Ingvaeones,  315,  317
Innichen  (Aguntum),  58,  69,  189
“ Institutes  ” of  Justinian,  46,  366
Inundation,  127,  129,  200
Iplis  (Ibligis),  180
Isaac,  exarch,  188,  191
IsSre  (Isemia),  101,  234,  see  His-
ernia.

Isidore,  Chronicle  of,  xxxii,  1,  333,
365.  366,  376  to  378,  386,  387
Istaevones,  315

Istria  (Histria),  10,  124,  131,  134,
. I35»  I52»  i67»  189,  225,  252,
354>  355*  359.  379J  Istrian

bishops,  124,  176
Ita,  200
Italicus,  14
Italus,  78

Italy,  Italia,  vii,  60,  61,  63  to  65,  78
to  81,  92, 98,  101,  102,  105,  1 12,
126,  130, 136,  140, 142,  184,  186,
192,  213,  216,  225,  234,  237,
364  to  367,  369,  374,  380  to  386
Italy,  boundaries  of,  366
Italy,  government  of,  168,  169
Italy,  provinces  of,  379-387
Ivrea,  88

Jacobi,  v,  ix,  xl-xli,  332,  333,  335  to
337.  34i.  3S>»  3SS.  357. 358.  360.
365.  367.  373.  374
Jerome,  376
Jerusalem,  179,  377
Joannes,  ex-consul,  46,  373
Jocundus,  192

John  the  Baptist,  xviii,  Church  of,
166,  170,  201,  202,  219,  400
John  III,  pope,  124,  367
John  VI,  pope,  271
John,  Patriarch  of  Aquileia,  169,
175,  176

John,  bishop  of  Bergoma  (Bergamo),
257

John  of  Celeia,  133
John  of  Parentium  (Parenzo),  131,
133

John,  bishop  of  Portus,  253
John  III,  bishop  of  Ravenna,  120,
132,  158,  3S4
John,  the  patriarch,  176
John  the  Deacon,  253  .

John,  exarch,  177
John,  the  ex-consul,  46
John  of  Compsa  (Consia),  176,  190,
369

John  of  Constantinople,  130
John  of  Corippus,  378
Jonas,  a monk  of  Bobbio,  363
Jordanes,  Jordan  is,  xxxii,  334,  366,

387

Joseph,  Benedictine  monk,  xxix
Judge,  judges,  89,  90
Judicatum,  123

Julian  Alps,  65,  69;  see  Camic  Alps.
Julian,  St.,  Island  of,  152
Julianus,  master  of  soldiery,  298
Julium  Camicum,  Julian  fortress,  294
Julius  Caesar,  380
Justin,  historian,  364
Justinian  I,  xxx,  38,  41  to  43,  45  to
47,  58,  108,  1 19,  121,  123,  124,
178,  259,  260,  366,  374  to  378.
Laws  of,  xxx,  46,  196,  366
Justinian  II,  258,  259,  273  to  275,
368,  371,  372

Justin  II,  51,  58, 59, 106  to  108,  no,
320,  367,  375

Justinian  the  nephew  of  Justin,  no,
in

Kalenberg,  32
Khazars,  Cagan  of  the,  274
King,  ordained,  25;  powers  of,  114
“King’s  Mountain”  (Monte  Mag-
giore),  64
Koegel,  vi,  x,  344
Koran,  6

Komate,  246;  see  Coronate.

Krain,  295
Kratin,  6

Digitized  by  Google

INDEX.

427

Kraus,  vi,  344,  345  Lech  (Lecha),  70

Kriemhild,  106  Lectisternia , 212

Le  Mans,  251

La  Cava,  manuscript,  27,  326,  327,  Leo  the  Great,  pope,  122,  125.

335*  337.  339  “Tome”  of  Leo,  122

Lagaris  L&gerthal,  102,  352  Leo  (Leontius),  emperor,  259,  273,

Lago  di  Garda  (Lake  Benacus),  55,  275,  368,  372

71,  140,  144  Leo  III,  the  Isaurian,  emperor,  284,

Lagodi  Bolsena  (Lake  Clitorius),  73  289,  290,  293,  371,  372

Lago  d*  Orta,  152
Laiamicho,  Lamicho,  27,  328,  334,
343;  see  Lamissio.

Lainus,  Laynus  (Lao),  73,  381

Lama- fishpond,  27

Lamissio,  king  of  the  Langobards,

2&-30, 339. 340, 363

Land  of  women,  28
Landari,  87,  232

Langobards:  Indexed  only  as  fol-
lows: Chronicle,  used  by  Paul,
xxxii,  376;  see  Copenhagen  Con-
tinuer of  Prosper.  Costumes,  166;
Ethnological  status,  315  10317;
Lombard  history,  332;  see  His-
tory of  the  Langobards;  see
Origo;  Immigration  into  Italy,
I°5,  375;  Boundaries  of  kingdom,
285,  380;  fall  of  kingdom,  309  to
31 1 ; Language,  xxxi,  268,  316;
Laws,  195,  196,331,337;  Origin
of  the  Langobards  and  of  their
name,  3,  4,  16  to  18,  327,328,
332»  330, 345. 347  to  349J  Lango-
bard  sources,  325  to  359,  377
Langobardenmauer,  23
Lao,  73;  see  Lainus.

Larius,  lake  (Lago  di  Como),  241
Latebra — hiding  place,  79
Latin  language,  xxxi-xxxiv,  xli,  268
Latin  Way,  146
Latium,  79

Lauda  (Lodi  Vecchio),  210,  265
Laumellum,  Laumello,  1 49
Lauriana,  286

Lauren tius  of  Bellunuhn  (Belluno),
133

Laus  Pompeia  (Lauda),  210
Laynus,  381;  see  Lainus.

Leander,  bishop  of  Hispalis,  125

Lethinges,  Le  thing  1,  Lithingi,  140,
329.  350

Lethu,  Lethuc,  king  of  the  Lango-
bards, 30,  328,  334
Leupchis,  Paul’s  ancestor  from  Pan-
onia,  xv,  184,  186
Leutharius,  54,  55,  373
Levigild,  125

Liber  Pontificalis,  67,  200,  225,  336,
354.  360,  367  to  370,  373,  375,
378,  379

Liguria,  54,  56,  72,  74,  77,  79,  80,
126,  356,  357,  366,  379,  381,  383
Linz,  33

Liquentia  (Livenza) , 65,  246
Liris,  399

Lithingi,  41;  see  Lethingi.

Liutpert,  264,  265
Liutprand,  90,  117,  187,  197,  265,
266,  276,  279, 281, 285, 286,288,
289,  291  to  293,  295  to  297,  299,
300  to  306,  308,  310,  368,  372.
Laws  of,  306,  307
Livenza  (Tagliamento),  65,  69,  246
Locopositi , 90
Loci  servaior , 252
Locusts,  151

Lodi  Vecchio  (Lauda),  210
Lodi,  Lauda,  87,  265
Long-beards,  16,  349;  see  Lango-
bards.

Longinus,  59,  84,  85,  1 12,  1 19,  329,
33°

Lopichis,  xv,  184  to  186
“ Lost  Chronicle,”  360,  367
Lothair  (Chlotochar),  103
Lucania,  73,  76,  364,  365,  379.381
Lucca,  88

Luceoli,  Luceolis,  Luciuolo,  154,
176,  369

Digitized  by  Google

428

INDEX.

Lucera,  Luceria,  76,  219,  382
Lumello  (Laumellum),  149
44  Lumine  purpureo,”  xxiv
Luna,  Luni  (City  of),  199,  331
Lupus,  87,  227-230,  232
Luxeuil,  Luxovinum,  192,  363
Lycia,  217

Macharius,  bishop  of  Antioch,  252
Machoavilla,  Manosque,  100
Madrid,  Library,  380
Madrid  manuscript  of  Origo,  27,  326,
327. 337.  339.  35'.  383.  385.  387
Magias  (Mais),  285
A1  agister  militum  (Master  of  sol-
diers), 56,  169
Malchus,  bishop,  1 72,  1 73
Male,  Maletum,  143
Malvitus,  381

Manosque  (Machoavilla),  100
Mansuetus,  archbishop  of  Medio-
lanum, 254

Mantua,  71,  77,  88,  145,  171,  365,
380

Mar,  mare , 66
Marano,  Mariano,  133,  356
Marcellus,  St.,  148
Marcianus,  patriarch,  175,  356
Marcomanni,  12,  13,  24,  150
Marcomannic  War,  24,  25
Marcus  Aurelius,  22,  24
Marcus  Casinensis,  xxxii,  49
Marenca,  203
Mariana,  88

Marianum  (Marano),  Council  of,

133. 156

Marianus,  Marinianus,  archbishop
of  Ravenna,  158,  352,  354
Marius  of  Avenches,  373
Marobod,  12  to  14,  315
Marpahis%  256
Marseilles  (Massillia),  101
Marsians,  76,  382,  384
Martial,  41 1

Martin  I,  pope,  217,  218,  290
Martin,  St.,  the  Confessor,  69,  70,
400

Martina,  371
Masane,  86

Massilia  (Marseilles),  101
Master(s)  of  soldiery.  Af agister

militum , 56,  10 1,  298
Maurice,  113,  117,  118,  126,  128,
130, 134, 136, 141,  156,  168,  172,
177-  290*  320,  359>  376
Mauringa  (Maurungani),  19,  21,  22,

333. 338. 339. 364

Maurisio,  155
Maurus,  397  to  399
Mayence,  Mogontiacum,  2
Maxentius  of  Julium,  133
Mecetius,  Mezetius,  Mezezius,  225,

369

Med  aria  (Windisch  Matrei),  187
Mediolanum  (Milan),  72,  78,  70,
142,  159,  170,  173,  205,  207,  380
Mellitus,  129,  130
Melote , 413
Menander,  33$

Menia,  335
Mercurius,  St. , xxxv
Mercury,  9,  363
Merovech,  104
Metamaucus,  298
Metres  used  by  Paul,  xxxiv
Mettis,  67

Metz,  xxvii,  xxviii,  xxxix,  67,  104
Mezetius,  Mecetius,  234,  368
Michael,  St. , patron  of  Langobards,

249

Milan,  72,  78,  88,  124,  142,  159,
170,  I73»  192*  356,  357;  see
Mediolanum.

Milan,  Catalogue  of  the  bishops  of,

377

Mimulf,  I $2,  330,  336,  353
Mincio  (Mincius),  71
Miracles  of  St.  Benedict,  393  to  414
Missus,  90

Mitola,  Count  of  Capua,  222
Modena,  145

Modena,  MS.  of  Origo,  326,  327,

329. 336. 337. 339. 35 «

Modicia  (Monza),  166,  168,  1 70,
201,  219
Moesia,  38

Mogontiacum  (Mayence),  2
Mohammed,  6

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

INDEX.

429

Molvian  bridge,  (PonsMulvius),  280
Mommsen,  iii,  v,  ix,  xxvi,  xl,  xli,

332»  337  to  341,  343.  350,  35i.
360,  363  to  365,  374,  376  to  380,
383  to  386

Monothelctes,  21 7, 252, 253, 257,277
Monotheleie  controversy,  224,  290
Montembellium  (Monteveglio,  Mon-
tebellium),  74,  293,  381
Monselice,  Mons  SiUds,  71,  167,
168,  354

Monstrous  births,  26
Monte  Cassino,  xix  xxi,  xxvii,  xxix,
48,  162,  251,  310,  361,  362,  367,
399,  400,407,410,  413
Monte  Maggiore  (King’s  Mountain),
64

Monteveglio  (MonsBellius),  74,  293,
379,  38°

Monza  (Modicia),  166,  168,  201,
202,  219, 354
Moors,  46,  378
Moravia,  33
Moselle,  xx,  xxiii,  2,  8
“ Mother  of  God,”  260
Moutiers  (Mustiascalmes),  97
Much,  344
Miillenhoff,  344
Mummulus,  96  to  1 02,  319
Munichis,  270
Muratori,  v,  xxxviii,  367
Musical  notes,  xviii
Mustiascalmes  (Moutiers),  97
Myrginge,  19
Nano,  Anagnis,  102
Naples,  Neapolis,  32,  60,  73,  176,
220, 222  to  224, 361, 367, 369, 381
Naples,  duke  of,  283
Narbo  (Narbonne),  296,  297,  324
Narnia  (Narni),  289,  369
Narses,  xxx,  53  to  56,  58  to  60,  68,
80,  108,  109,  124,  136,  321,  329,
336,  367,  373  to  375,  378
Natisio  (Natisone),  231
Nemae,  Nemas  (Nimis),  180,  230
Nestorius,  122

Neumarkt,  Ennemase,  87,  143
Neustria,  90,  103,  199,  245
Nice,  Nizza,  94,  98

Nicea,  279,  369
Niebelungen  Lied,  105,  106
Nikat  178

Nominative,  used  for  other  cases,
xxxiii,  xxxxiv
Nones , 79,  149

Norica,  Noricum,  22,  32,  55,  64
Noricans,  139,  194
Norican  villages,  80
Northmen,  xxiv

“ Nos  dicamus  ” (Peter  of  Pisa),  xxv
“ Notitia  Provinciarum,”  387;  see
Catalogue  of  the  provinces  of
Italy,  360,  379“387
Novara,  Novariae,  88,  264
Novels  of  Justinian,  46,  378
Numa,  walls  of,  402
NumeruSy  169

Nursia,  74,  75,  381,  384,  385,  393

Obii,  24
Ochon,  38

Oderzo,  Opitergium,  187,  200,  233,
331

Odoacar,  xl,  31,  32,  55,  93,  114,
328,  340,  349,  360,  366
Old-High-German,  316
Old-Saxon,  316
Olo,  142
Olonna,  304

Olympius,  exarch,  217,  290
Opitergium  (Oderzo),  65,  187,  200,
233

Orbinum  (Urbinum),  381
Origo  Gentis  Langobardorum,  Origin
of  the  Nation  of  the  Langobards,
vi,  xlii,  3,  16,  1 7,  2 7>  39»  40,  63,
325,  327  to  331,  333  to  341,  343,
345. 347, 350  to  354,  356, 357, 360
Oritia,  381

Orleans  (Aureliani),  67,  251,  279
Orosius,  xxxii,  xlii
Orte  (Horta),  154,  299
Orthography,  mistakes  and  varia-
tions, xxxii

Orvieto  (Urbs  Vetus),  174
Osimo  (Auximun),  293
Osopo,  Osopus,  Ossopo,  Osupus,  65,
69,  180

Digitized  by  Google

430

INDEX.

Ostrogoths,  91
Otranto  (Ydrontum),  77

Pabst,  references  explained,  x,  89,

90.  3*«>  332-334.  336.  357
Paderborn  ( Patespruna),  23
Padoreno  (Badrinus),  120
Padua,  Patavium,  167,  354
Padus  (Po),  74,  220,  381
Paestum  (Pestus),  73
Paqus,  23
Paizan , 66
Paldo,  283

Panaro  (Scultenna),  200
Pandects  of  Justinian,  46,  366
Pannonia,  22,  24,  38,  41,  54,  60,
62-65, 139, 159, 181, 184, 329,

335-337

Pannonians,  80,  194
Pantheon,  178,  224,  369,  371
Papacy,  growth  of,  289  to  292
Papia  ( Pavia,  Ticinum),  72,  380
Paris,  67

Parma,  74,  87,  171,  354
“ Parvula  rex  Carolus,’ * poem  by
Charlemagne,  xxix
Patavium  (Padua),  167,  380
Patera,  51

Patespruna  (Paderborn),  23
Patriarchs  of  Aquileia,  chronicle  of
the,  356

Patricius  of  Aemona,  133
Patrimony  of  St.  Peter,  129
Patron , 91

Paul  the  Deacon:  Biography  and
estimate  of  his  works,  iii  to  xlii;
Genealogy,  184  to  186;  Roman
History,  xvii,  xviii,  xxx,  373  to
379.  Further  references  omitted.
Paul,  patriarch  of  Aquileia,  67,  69,
355

Paul,  patriarch  of  Constantinople,
252

Paul  the  patrician;  exarch,  289,
291,  370
Paul,  pope,  313
“ Paule  sub  umbrosa,”  xxiii
Paulinus,  bishop  of  Aquileia,  67, 124
(called  Paul  in  the  text).

Pavia  (Papia,  Ticinum),  xvi,  xx,  72,
78,  80,  87,  88,  135,  145,  149,
152,  174,  202,  312,  313,  357,  370
Pelagian  heresy,  107
Pelagius  I,  pope,  1 24,  132
Pelagius  II,  pope,  121,  124,  127  to

129,  356,  362,  367
Pemmo,  87,  90,  270,  286,  287,  294,
295*  367

Penne  (Pennis),  see  Pinnis,  75,  381
Pentapolis,  75,  293,  297,  301,  313,
37°> 381

Pepin,  see  Pippin.

Perctarit,  205,  207,  209  to  216,  235
to  240

Peredeo,  murderer  of  Alboin,  82,  83,

85,  86,  340,  344

Peredeo,  duke  of  Vicenza,  297,  298
Pergamus  (Bergamo),  71,  78,  152,
373

Peritheo,  329;  see  also  Peredeo.

Persian  war,  xxx,  373

Persians,  45,  III,  1 79,  203,  204,

366. 371. 377

Persiceta,  293

Perugia,  Perusia,  Perusium,  73,  88,
154  to  156,  354,  362,  381
Pesaro,  city  of,  75

Pestilence,  56  to  58,  127,  235,  255,
288,  369,  370
Pestus  (Paestum),  73,  381
Peter  of  Altinum,  133
Peter,  patriarch  of  Aquileia,  276
Peter,  director  of  the  choir,  174,  354
Peter,  duke  of  Friuli,  87,  270
Peter  of  Pisa,  xxiv,  xxv
Peter,  bishop  of  Ticinum,  305
Peter,  St.,  church  of,  370
Petilus  ( Fetilus ),  44
Petronax,  282,  283,  367
Phocas,  Focas,  130,  168,  169,  172,
355>  359>  366,  371,  376,  378
Piacenza  (Placentia),  74,  87,  206,
245

Piave,  Plavis,  68

Picenum,  Picenus,  75,  365,37910381
Picenum  Annonarium,  379
Picenum  Suburbicarium,  379
Pictavi  (Poictiers),  70

Digitized  by  Google

INDEX.

431

Pflleum,  village  of,  297
Pinnis  (Penne),  75
Pippin,  father  of  Charles  Martel,  33,
280,  296

Pippin  II,  father  of  Charlemagne,
296,  310  to  313,  324,  325
Pise  aria,  Piscafium,  75,  76,  364,  38 1,
382

Placentia,  Plagentia  (Piacenza),  74,
206,  245,  381

Placidius,  Placidus,  398,  399,  413
Plague,  xxxix,  56  to  58,  129,  160,
200,  354,  369

Plinv  the  Elder,  3,  26,  363,  364
Po  (Padus',  74,  1 18,  220,  250
Poictiers,  Poitiers,  Pictavi,  xxviii,  70,

287,  370

Poictiers,  battle  of,  324
Polemius  Silvius,  Calendar  of,  379
Polimartium,  Bomarzo,  1 54,  299
Pompeianus,  397

Pompeius  Festus  “ On  the  significa-
tion of  words,”  xxvi
Pons  Mulvius,  Ponte  Mollo,  280
Pontus,  273,  274,  276
Potium,  294

Prasini  (Greens  of  the  Circus  fac-
tion), 178
Predil  pass,  64

Priscian,  the  grammarian,  47,  375
Priscus,  the  patrician,  168
Probinus,  79,  112,  124
Probus,  156

Procopius,  373,  376,  378
Prosascus,  231

Prosper,  chronicle  of,  xxxii,  376
Provence,  Provincia,  96,  216,  296,
3*9

Ptolemy,  12
Pugna,  222
Purgessimus,  230
Pyrrus,  patriarch,  252

Quinisextan  Council,  259,  274

Raduald  (Radoald),  son  of  Gisulf,
164,  181,  188,  198  to  200
Raetia  (Rhaetia),  379,  382,  383,
385;  seeReti,

Ragilo,  102,  352

Ragimpert,  207,  264,  278,  279

Raginfrid,  284,  324

Ragogna  (Reuna),  69,  180,  252

Raicunda,  daughter  of  Fisud,  328

Rain  storms,  226

Ranicunda,  40,  335

Ransom,  144

Ratchait,  son  of  Pemmo,  271,  295
Ratchis,  son  *»f  Pemmo,  xvi,  xix,  81,
90, 91, 187, 271, 295.301, 302,
310, 312, 313, 335
Ratgaud,  87
Ratperga,  270

Ratpot,  king  of  the  Frisians,  280
Rauhes  Alp,  23

Ravenna,  75,  80,  84,  85,  112,  118
to  120, 131  to  133,  154,  160,  165,
167,  168,  1 71,  176, 188, 191, 218,
252,  275,  276, 289, 290, 292,  297,
298, 310, 312, 313, 328, 330, 354,
356,  37°.  373.  377.  381,  384.
Annals  of,  376.  Cosmographer
of,  364,  373

Reate,  Rieti,  76,  382,  384
Recared,  114

Reggio,  Regio,  Regium  in  Bruttium,
73,  145,  224,  381

Regium,  Reggio  in  Emilia,  74,  88,
1 71,  381  [the  ancient  Regium
Lepidi,  74,  145]

Reno,  Renus  (Rhine),  153,  322
Reti,  Retia,  Reptia,  72,  380
Reuna,  Reunia  (Ragogna j,  69,  180,
252

Rhaetia  (Raetia),  72,  265
Rhine  (Reno),  2,  II,  13,  23
Rhodes,  217

Rhone  (Rodanus),  99,  IOI

Rhyme,  xxxv

Rieti  (Reate),  76

Rimini  (Ariminum),  75,  77,  297

Ring*  33

Risulf,  39

Rivoli,  “Brook  of  the  Franks,”
217,  322

Rizokopus,  John,  exarch,  276
“Robber  Synod, ” 122,  123
i Rodanus  (Rhone),  99

Digitized  by

Google

432

INDEX.

Rodanus,  duke  of  the  Langobards,
1 00—102,  319

Rodelinda,  Kodelenda,  wife  of  King
Audoin,  49,  329,  335
Rodelinda,  wife  of  Perctarit,  207,
237

Rodoald,  son  of  Rothari,  20T,  202
Rod  11  aid,  duke  of  the  Friulans,  87,
232,  251,  252

Rodolf,  King  of  the  Heroli,  33-37,
328,  334.  349

Roman  empire,  provinces  of,  383
Roman  histories  of  Paul’s  time,  xxxv
Roman  History,  Paul’s,  xvii,  xviii,
xxx,  373-379
Roman  law,  197

Roman  laws  and  institutions,  307
Roman  liturgy,  129
Roman  See,  primacy  of,  169,  177,
178

Roman  sources,  359-387
Romanus,  patrician  and  exarch,  145,
154  to  156,  159,  161,  354,  362,
369

Romanus,  monk,  394,  395
Romanus,  St.,  church  of,  256
Roman  population,  91,  92,  1 14  to
1 16,  195,  196

Romilda,  180,  181,  183,  355
Romoald  (Romuald)  II,  son  of
Gisulf  I,  293

Romuald  I,  duke  of  Beneventum,
200,  206,  219  to  223,  232,  234,
250

Romuald  II,  son  of  Gisulf  I,  251,
282,  293,  299

Rosemund,  50,  51,  81  to  85,  329,

330.335.336.33910341

Rotaidis,  Faul’s  epitaph  to,  xxvi
Rotalian,  102,  103,  143
Rotcari,  298

Rothari,  king  of  the  Langobards,
I93>  *95> *98, 199. 201,  268,  321,
33 1,  337.  Edict  and  Laws  of,
xxxii,  27,  39,  40,  63,  88,  92,  195
to  197,  236,  342

Rothari,  relative  of  Liutprand,  281
Roth  an  t,  duke  of  the  Bergamascans,
264,  265

Rotrud,  Charlemagne’s  daughter,
xxv

Roveredo,  144
Kuena  ( Ragogna),  69
RUgen,  22

Rugians,  Rugii,  xl,  2,  32,  33,  328,
340,  349

Rugiland,  Rugulanda,  22,  32,  33,

38, 328, 334. 349

Rule  of  the  Order  of  the  Benedic-
tines, xxix,  283,  414
Rumetruda,  34,  35
Rusticus  of  Tarvisium,  133

Sabato,  146
S a bat  us  (Sabato),  222
Sabbato  paschali , 233
Saburrus,  222,  223
Sacred  plain,  181
Sagittarius,  97
Salarian  bridge,  289
Salentine  territory,  76
Salerno,  Monk  of,  xxx
Salerno,  Salernum,  73,  381
Salinga,  40
Salurnis,  Salum,  103
Samnium,  Sampnium,  54,  76,  379,
382

Samnites,  75,  146,  198
San  Giovanni  in  Persiceto,  293
San  Quirino,  231
San  Pietro  dei  Schiavi,  231
San  Vettorino  (Amiternum),  76
Sangro,  Sangrus,  221
Saona,  Savona,  72,  380
Saracens,  217,  218,  224,  226,  258,
279,  287,  288,  290,  296,  297,
369,  370

Sardinia,  77,  225,  288,  365,  369,

379,  382,  386

Sardis,  Serdis,  the  son  of  Hercules,
77

Sardis,  held  of,  140
Sarmatian,  80
Sarugiensis,  Jacobus,  6
Savinianus,  pope,  172,  363
Savinus,  martyr,  161,  162,  305,  306
Savinus,  sub-deacon,  164
Savona  (Saona),  72

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

INDEX.

433

Saxons,  52,  61,  64,  97,  98,  100,
237,  3*9

Saxons,  King  of,  236
Sayttia,  76

Scadan,  Scadanan, 3,327, 332> 338>
339,  343;  see  Scadinavia.
Scadinavia,  3,  4,  II,  24,  332,  337,

339>  343,  363
Sea  la  ( skaal),  51
Scab  disease,  200

Scandanan,  3,  327,  363;  see  Sca-
dinavia.

Scandinavia,  4,  38

Scatenauge,  3;  see  Scadan.

Scandza,  7,  30

Scauniperga,  300

Scaurus,  M.  iEmilius,  280

Sceaf,  Skeaf,  28,  316

Schieringen  (Scoringa),  II

Schmidt,  vi,  x,  344,  351,  377

ScilpOTy  82

Sclabi  (Slavs),  154

Scolastica,  St.,  xix,  xxxv,  251,  409,

410

Scolasticus,  patrician,  277
Scoringa  (Schieringen),  11,  19,

33*.  333. 338*  339. 343

Scridefinni,  Scridefinnen,  7,  364;

see  Scritobini,  7
Sculdahis,  90,  267
Scultenna,  river,  Panaro,  200,  331,

Scusuald,  king  of  the  Franks,  329;

see  Cusupald.

Scylja,  9
Scythia,  209
Sebastian,  St.,  255,  370
Secundus  of  Trent,  abbot,  135,  137,
I7°>  i89>  323»  325»  336,  340  to
34|,  3S1  t0  359.  361,  375.  377.

Secusium  (Susa),  101
Seine,  9,  10
Sele  (Siler),  73
Semnones,  12,  14
Senogallia,  Senonian  Gauls,  78
Senonse,  Slens,  77,  78
Seno,  deacon,  247  to  249
“Send  cujus,”  xxv

Sepinum  (Sepino),  234
Sepontum  (Siponto),  76,  199,  382
Septem  (Ceuta),  287
Serenus,  276,  286
Sergius,  pope,  252,  259  to  261,
372

Sermiana  (Sirmian),  143
Servandus,  deacon,  410
Sessionse  (Soissons),  67
Sesuald,  220,  221
Seven-fold  litany,  128
Seven  Sleepers,  5 to  7
Severinus,  St.,  32,  334,  360
Severus,  of  Tergeste,  1 31,  133,  135
Severus,  patriarch,  131,  133,  175,
*79

Shadows,  length  of,  8
Sicily,  58,  77,  126,  224  to  226,  365,
368  to  370,  379,  382,  386,  402
Sicilian  strait,  381
Sicuald,  286
Siculi,  78,

Siculus,  77
Siegfried,  105,  106
Sigambri,  23

Sigfrid,  king  of  the  Northmen,  xxiv
Sigiprand,  265

Sigisbert,  Sigispert,  61,  67,  68,  98,
99,  103  to  106,  192,  319,  323,

358. 359

Sigurd,  105

Siler  (Sele),  73,  364,  381
Silesia,  33

Silinga,  third  wife  of  Scusuald,  329
Simplicius,  163
Sin du aid,  55,  373
Sinigaglia  (Senogallia),  75,  78
Siponto,  Sipontum  (Sepontum),  76,
*99.  38*

Sirmian,  Sirmium  (Sermiana),  43,

#5I».I43
Sisinnius,  101

Six  Ages  of  the  World,  xxxv
Sixth  General  Council,  or  Sixth
Oecumenical  Council,  253,  254,

27 7*  370,  372

Skaal  {skoal),  51

Skaitigan , to  injure,  327
Slavonians,  65

Digitized  by  Google

434

INDEX.

Slavs  (Sclabi),  64,  154,  158,  167,

170,  185,  187,  189,  199,  230  to
232,  266  to  269,  286,  287,  296,
355.  359

Smaragdus,  119, 13 1,  132,  168,  169,

171.  174.  354  to  357
Soissons,  Sessions,  67
Solidus,  solidi,  117,  118,  243
Sophia,  wife  of  Justin  II,  59,  60,

107,110,113

Sophia,  St.,  church  of  (Hagia
Sophia),  xxx,  46,  47,  374
Sources  of  Paul’s  History;  see  Ap-
pendix II,  318  to  392
Spain,  Spaniards,  68,  125, 136,  287,

370

Speier  (Speyer)  manuscript  of  the
Origo,  383  to  387
Spider  webs,  253
Spital,  village  of,  286
Spoleto,  Spoletum,  Spoletium,  Spo-
letans,  66,  73, 88  to  90,  112,  130,
145.  *55. 160. 161,  205,  206,  227,
291,  292,  299,  302, 308,  313, 367,

371

Stablicianus,  177
Stablo,  Establon,  97
Stephan,  pope,  31 1,  312
Siolesaz , 89
Stony  Field,  101
Strabo,  II,  12

Suabia,  Suabian,  Suabians,  see
Suavi.

Suanahild,  285
Suartuas,  38

Suavi,  Suavia,  Suevi  (Suabians),  12
to  14,  39, 61,  72, 80, 99, 100, 11S,

139.  3,5>  3*9»  32S.  328.  33S
Sublacus,  Subiaco,  47, 48,  394,  396,

397.  399
Subo,  281

Sundrar,  Langobard  general,  190
Sura,  Sora,  271
Susa,  101,  102
Sutri,  Sutrium,  154,  293,  370
Swabia  (Suavia),  139;  see  also
Suavi.

Swan  maidens,  27
Syracuse,  224  to  226,  369,  382

Tacitus,  I,  11,  15
Tagliamento  (Livenza),  65,  69
Tameity  irregular  use  of  the  word,
116

Tanais  (Don),  1
Tanaro  (Tanarus),  304
Tannetum,  55

Taranto,  Tarentum,  77,  218,  219,
250,  382
Tarik,  287

Tarracina,  monastery  of,  404,  413
Tarvisium  (Treviso),  233,  245,  286
Taso,  abbot  of  St.  Vincent,  283,  363
Taso,  son  of  Gisulf,  87,  180,  181,
187,  188,  191,  233,  323
Tassilo,  duke  of  Bavarians,  154, 189,
322,  353

Tato,  abbot  of  St.  Vincent,  283, 349,

363

Tato,  son  of  Oaffo,  33,  35,  37  to
40, 3*8, 334
Tatzo,  264
Taurini  (Turin),  141
Teia,  373

Terebellus,  king  of  the  Bulgarians,
273.  274
Temi,  303
Tertullus,  398
Tesana  (Tiseno),  143
Teudelapius  of  Verona,  305
Teudelapius  (Theudelapius),  duke
of  Spoletum,  162

Teudo  (Theudo),  duke  of  the  Ba-
varians, 285,  286

Teutoburg  Forest,  battle  of,  12,  13
Teutpert,  duke  of  the  Bavarians;

see  Theutpert.

Theate  (Chieti),  76,  382
Theodora,  119,  123
Theodorada,  wife  of  Ansprand,  266
Theodore,  archbishop,  235,  370
Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  121,  123,
135.260,  372

Theodore,  the  patrician,  275
Theodoret  of  Cyrrhus,  121, 123,  135
Theodoric  II,  354;  see  Theuderic,
king  of  the  Franks.

Theodoric,  king  of  the  Goths,  31,
56,81,91,93,105,166

Digitized  by  Google

INDEX.

435

Theodosius,  son  of  Maurice,  168
Theodosius  II,  6

Theodosius  111,  emperor,  279,  284,

369

Theodote,  240,  241
Theudehald,  54,  103
Theudelapius,  Theudelaupus  (Teude-
lapius),  duke  of  Spoletum,  162,

2°5.  358

Thcudelinda,  Tneudelenda,  Queen
of  Langobards,  134,  138  to  140,
149,  150,  153  to  156,  159,  1O6,

173,  190  to  194,  321,  330,  352  to

354.  357.  358.  36*

Thcudelinda,  mother  of  Paul,  xvi,
186

Theudemar,  abbot  of  Monte  Cassino,
letter  to,  xx  to  xxiii,  xxix
Theudepert  I,  king  of  the  Franks,
40,  54,  103,  329

Theudepert  II,  king  of  the  Franks,

159,  160,  171,  189,  322,359
Theudepert  II,  of  Austrasia,  1 73,

174,  192

Theuderada,  Theuderata,  232,  250
Theuderic,  king  of  the  Franks,  159,

160,  192,  322

Tbeudo,  Teudo,  duke  of  the  Bavar-
ians, 285,  370

Theutpert,  Teutpert,  duke  of  the
Bavarians,  265,  277,  285
Theuvane,  31,  328;  see  also  Feva.
Thingare , 196
Thing , 196

Thionville  (Dietenhofen),  8
Third  General  Council,  372
Thomas,  deacon,  241,  242
Thonar,  Thor,  xxiv
Three  Chapters,  the,  121,  123,  124,
129,  132  to  135,  176,  193,  253,
260

Thurgau,  23

Thuringia  (Turingia),  50,  159
Thuringians  (Tunngi),  40,  41
Tiber,  127,  280,  369
Tiberius,  11  to  13

Tiberius  II,  107  to  1 1 1, 1 13, 320, 375
Tiberius  III  (Apsimar),  259,  273,
368

Tiberius,  son  of  Justinian  II,  275
Tiberius,  son  of  Maurice,  168
11  bur  (Tivoli),  76,  382
Ticinus,  Ticinum  ( Fa  via,  Papia),  72,
78,  80,  86,87, 145*  <49,  >52.  <54,
>55,  >74,  194,  198,201  to  203,

205,  206,  209,  210,  227,  236  to
238,  244,  252,  278,  304,  356,  369,
380

Ticino  (Ticinum,  Ticinus)  river,  213,
238,  278

Tiliamentum  (Tagliamento),  69

Timave,  xv

Tiseno  (Tesano),  143

Titus,  1 13

Tivoli  (Tibur),  76

Torlasius,  38

Todi  (Tuder),  1 54

Tome  of  Fee,  122

Tortona,  87

Totila,  xxx,  53,  373,  374,  402,  413
Toulouse,  287
Tours  (Turones),  69,  70
Transamund,  Transemund,  of  Capua,

206,  227,  273

Transamund  II,  285,  299,  301,  302,
310

Transalpine  Gaul,  78
Traveler’s  song  ( YVidsith),  19, 22, 84
Tremisses,  242,  243
Trent,  Tridentum,  55,  66,  87,  88,
102  to  104,  143,  151,  169,  199,

239,  352

Tieviso  (Tarvisium),68,  69,  87,  152,
200,  233,  245,  286
Tuder  (Todi),  154
Tuptrium,  20 8
Tungrians,  I
Turcilingi,  2,  32

Turin  (Taurini),  88,  141,  149,  213
Turingi  (Thuringians),  40
Turingia  (Thuringia),  67
Turingus,  330

Turisind,  42,  44,  45,  49,  335
Turismod,  42,  44,  45,  335
Turones  (Tours),  69,  70
Tusy  72

Tuscia,  Tuscany,  72,  74, 80, 90, 199,
206,  245*  3^5 > 379  10  381,  384

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

436

INDEX.

Type>  290

Tyrrenian,  Tirrenian  Sea,  65,  72,
73*  38°  10  3$3

Ubitergium,  331;  see  Opitergium.
Ukraine,  22
Ulfari,  152,  353
Ulpiana,  43

Umbria,  72  to  75,  365,  379  to  381,
384

Unulf,  210  to  213,  215
Unichis,  38

Urbino,  Urbinum  (Orbino),  74,  379
Urbs  Vetus  (Orvieto),  174
Ursicinus,  St.,  119
Ursusof  Ceneta  (Ceneda),  270
Urugundi,  22;  see  Burgundaib.
Usipetes,  19;  see  Assipitti.
Ustrigotthus,  42,  43

Val  di  Cembra,  143
Val  di  Sole,  143
Val  Sugano  (Alsuca),  143
Valdoria  (Vulturina),  1 71
Valence,  Valentia,  101
Valentinian,  monk,  401
Valenza,  formerly  “ Bercetum,”  304
Valeria,  74  to  76,  379,  381,  384,  385
Vallomar,  king  of  the  Marcomanni,
24

Valtellina,  171

Vandals,  Vandal  kingdom,  2,  31,
333,  371 » 376;  see  Wandals.
Vandals,  Procopius  history  of,  378
Vanis,  12  to  14

Velleius  Paterculus,  historian,  11
Vendemius  of  Cissa,  131,  133
Veneti  (Blues  of  the  Circus  Faction ),
178

Venetia,  Venice,  10,  54,  71,  77,  80,
126,  134, 179,  289,  292,  356,  357,
365*  366,  373>  379,  380,  382.
Venetians,  297,  298.  Venetian
lagoons,  291
Vercelli,  87

Verona.  55,  71,  74,  81,  83,  87,  127,
140,  143  to  145,  160,  336,  354,
35 7>  361,  379  to  381

Verruca  (Ferrugio),  144
Versification,  forms  used  by  Paul,
xxxiv,  v
Vespasian,  1 13
Vestiarius , 212
Vesuvius  (Bebius),  258,  370
Vefera  (Birten),  2
Vettach,  Giuseppi,  vi
Vezzano  (Vitianum),  143
Via  Flamminia,  154
Vicenza  (Vincentia),  71,  87
Victor,  Sextus  Aurelius,  74,  386
Vigilius,  123,  260
Vienna,  32,  33

Villa  Totonis  (Dietenhofen,  Thion-
ville),  8
Villach,  286
Vincent,  martyr,  283
Vincentia  (Vicenza),  71,  230,  245,
297, 380

Vinciacum  (Vincy),  284,  324
Vindex,  24

Vinoviloth,  30;  see  also  Winnili.
Virdo  (Wertach),  70
Virgil,  9,  77,  364,  365
Virgilius,  pope,  125,  132
Vistula,  22,  33

Vitalian,  pope,  218,  223,  235
Vitalis,  St.,  1 19,  120
Vilalis,  bishop  of  Altinum,  58,  373
Vitalis,  bishop  of  Monte  Casisino,

163

Vitiges,  the  Ostrogoth,  39;  see
W itichis,  46

Vitianum  (Vezzano),  143
Vitulus>  78

Viviers,  in  Bruttium,  47
Vocative  irregular  forms,  xxxii
Volaenes,  Volano,  143
Volsungs,  Saga  of  the,  105
Volturno,  Vuliurnus,  river  (Casil*
inum),  55,  283
“ Vulgar  ta  verba”  268
Vulturina  (Valdoria),  171
Vurgundaib  (Burgundaib),  22,  328,
333)  339

Wachilapus,  273

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

INDEX.

437

Wacho,  Waccho,  king  of  the  Lango-
barris,  38  to  40,  140,  1 50,  325,
328.  33S.  35°

Wager  of  battle,  307
Wait*,  v,  vi,  ix,  324,  326,  343,  344,
350  to  352,  360,  376,  378,  380,
3«i»  383.  385»  387»  388
Walcari,  298
Walderada,  40,  329,  330
Wallari  of  Bergamus,  87
Waltari,  king  of  the  Langobards,  40,

4i»  335

Wandals  (Vandals),  13,  15  to  17,

19.  46,  327»  332>  345  347

Warnecautius,  160,  354
Wamefried  (Wamefrit),  Paul’s
father,  xv,  xvi,  186
Wami,  39

Waten  (Wotan),  xxiv
Wechtari,  87,  231,  232
Wends,  15
Wendsyssel,  4
Wertach  (Virdo),  70
Wesel,  2
Weser,  11
Westphalia,  23
Whirlpool,  8 to  10
Widin,  55

Widsith  (Traveler’s  Song),  68,  84,
316

Wiese,  x
Wigilinda,  250

Windisch  Matrei,  Medaria,  187

Winiperga,  251

Winniles,  Winnili,  Winnilis,  3,  11,
is  to  19,  30,  327,  328,  335s,  346
to  349;  see  also  Vinoviloth,  30
Wippach,  228

Wisegarda,  Wisigarda,  40,  328
Witichis,  46

Witterich,  king  of  the  Visigoths,  173
Wolfenbtittel,  19

Wotan,  Wodan,  Wddan,  xxiv,  16,
18,  316,  33*.  338.  345.  347.  348,
363;  see  God  an.

Ybor,  son  of  Gambara,  327;  see  also
Ibor.

Vdrontum,  77,  382

Zaban,  87,  100  to  102,  319
Zacharias,  pope,  283,  299,  302,  303,
308,  31 1

Zacharias,  protospatarius>  259
Zalla,  407

Zangrulf,  Zangrolf,  160,  330,  337,
354

Zealand,  19
Zellia  (Gail-thal),  187
Zeno,  St.,  church  of,  127
Zeus,  345
Zeuss,  x

Zotto,  1 12,  146,  163,  358
Zuchilo,  38,  328,  335
Zuglio,  294;  the  old  Julium  Cami-
cum.

Digitized  by  Google

Digitized  by

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

Digitized  by

Digitized  by

I

Digitized  by  v^ooQle

JUL  * *1  -

l

3 33  RENEWED  JUL24’68

<^~)  . 5«6 Cc  eLa-*-+-'>

3W  S-4J^^

FEB  2 » 1QR<?

321

D 101

.pU

ser.  2
vol«  3

UNIVERSITY  OF  PENNSYLVANIA
TRANSLATIONS  AND  REPRINT J-J5.
History  of  Langobards^^

Digitized  by

Google

20807741
